

m jr -w% *$
My Daily




MY DAILY MESSAGE




MY DAILY MESSAGE
M. PRESTON STANLEY
AUSTRALIA
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
88 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


. U TH NAT, Q
4* *V
O I Uni*.
matter in this volume is reprinted by permission
from the Daily Telegraph (Sydney).
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
The Eagle Press, Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo
for
The Cornstalk Publishing Company
89 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the post as a book.


f: ; / ,fy.
If i : ± b
INTRODUCTION
In this little book there is set out, in words as
clear as a voice on a frosty night, a simple yet
sufficient philosophy of life. It deals with life
not as it is portrayed on the film, but as it is
lived by the multitude. It helps us to fight
life’s battles, gives us cheer when we are cast
down, and saves us from being arrogant and
ridiculous when good fortune has come our way.
Some books talk over our heads, and others are
as the twitterings of sparrows, but this book
speaks direct to our hearts, yet is full of common
sense. It points out the way we should go, not
as a preacher from the pulpit, but as a friend
talking quietly at our side with his hand upon
our shoulder. It is a book for the morning when
we awaken, a book to read on the trams and
trains as we go to our work, and a book for the
evening when the day’s work is done. It is a
book not for the few but for the many, its mes-
sage is written to all, and all may receive it
with pleasure and profit. Those who buy this
book buy a good thing.


CONTENTS
THIS MINUTE!
BE YOURSELF!
LITTLENESS ..
OUR LIVES FOLLOW OUR THOUGHTS!
CHARACTER IS THE TRUE HALLMARK
HOLD A LANTERN ! ..
THE FRIENDLIEST CHURCH IN TOWN
DON’T GET SOURED!
DESIRE
LIFE’S BROKEN MELODIES!
A HUMAN SPARK ..
THE HUMAN EXTINGUISHER
THE LAUGHTER OF A LITTLE CHILD
THINGS CAN BE WORSE ..
THOUGHT IS POWER!
YOUR OPPORTUNITY
GUARD YOUR WORDS!
YOU ARE A MAGNET
DON’T SIT ON THE FENCE .
VIRTUE IS A VICTORY
WHAT ARE YOU BUILDING?
THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS
GET AHEAD AND STAY AHEAD ! . .
YOUR BEST FRIEND
START CLIMBING TO-DAY
THE THINGS THAT WE NEVER TELL
YOU!
HELP HIM TO KEEP SQUARE!


viii CONTENTS
THE REMNANTS OF LIFE . .
BE AN OPTIMIST! ..
EXPECT THE BEST!
BE A SELF-STARTER!
THINK ABOUT IT, FATHER!
PURPOSE
THE NEUTRAL
YOU CAN! ..
A HUMAN EXTINGUISHER CALLS ON ME
A HUMAN SPARK CALLS
UNDERSTANDING IS EDUCATION
HUMAN WASPS
DESIRE IS PRAYER . .
WHY YOU ARE A MAGNET
FAME?
THE "HAS BEENS”
HOLD ON! ..
TRUE SUCCESS
WHICH IS YOUR SET?
THE CROAKER
BELIEVE !
MISFITS
DO NOT EXAGGERATE THE SMALL THINGS!
CHARACTER
DON’T WORRY!
CLIMB !
THERE IS NOTHING COMMON
KEEP SQUARE WITH YOURSELF!
LIFE IS A MIRROR! . .
WHO CAN HURT ME?
IF ! . .
THE ARMOUR OP TRUTH!
THE DIFFERENCE ..


KNOW THYSELF !
GET TO KNOW HIM!
THINK!
GIVE HIM A START!
WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF YOURSELF?
WHAT ARE YOU WORKING FOR? ..
THE AVERAGE MAN
FORGET IT !
DON'T PRETEND!
I WILL!
NOT EASE—BUT STRENGTH
A NATIONAL ASSET
DON’T LOOK FOR THE FLAWS!
MEMORY!
THE WOMAN WHO LIFTS
POVERTY NEED NOT KEEP YOU DOWN
DO YOU “DO” OR ONLY CACKLE? ..
BE POSITIVE !
IS THE WIFE AN INSPIRATION, OR. . . ?
IS THE HUSBAND AN INSPIRATION, 0R...?
BE CHEERFULLY UNCONTENTED ..
THE GREATEST ART
DON’T LOSE THAT FRIEND!
THE SHADOWS WILL PASS ..
"THEY SAT”
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE QUESTION
THE DEAD WHO LIVE
DON'T DWELL ON TOUR FAILURES!
SLANDER
DON’T LET GO!
THE GIRL WHO USED TO BE YOU ..
TO AN UNGENEROUS CRITIC !
THE “DEAD" LIVING!


THE STINGING BEE
PLAY THE GAME! .
WILL IT!
WHAT DOES IT COST?
WHICH CHURCH? . .
DON’T SCRUB THE LOVE OUT!
COMPENSATION
THE SPIRIT OF MOTHER’S DAY
THE LOG-BOOK OF LIFE . .
MONEY CANNOT BUY THE BEST THINGS
I AM GLAD IT WAS A WOMAN! ..
DON’T DRIFT!
THE GREAT ARE THOSE WHO SERVE
THE CELL-BUILDER
A WOMAN’S PRAYER


MY DAILY MESSAGE


MY DAILY MESSAGE
THIS MINUTE!
Catch this minute.
It is passing—even now
Sixty precious seconds! They come—they are
gone.
Only a minute —yes, and yet momentous
things may happen in a minute.
A man may die. A child may be born. A star
may fall.
A minute is a little thing, of great conse-
quence.
You may catch a minute, but you cannot hold
Yet it is yours—while it stays.
But soon it goes—and, once gone, is never to
be recalled.
Every minute something is happening to you—
and through you. You are the true result of how
you have spent your past minutes.
Your future is being shaped by the manner in
which you are spending this minute.
Each minute is an opportunity.
Take it—build with it; it is yours while it stays.
But soon it goes.
Use This Minute!


BE YOURSELF!
You may fight hard for a great cause—you
may fight long for a great faith —you may fight
fearlessly for a great ideal —but one of the
longest, grimmest fights in this life is the fight
to be yourself. It’s a stiff fight to find yourself.
It’s a stiffer fight to hold on to yourself when
you are found —hard to be yourself—to be just
what you are —to live just what you believe—
to say just what you think—to follow what you
know to be true —to pursue the ideal which to
you makes life worth living. It’s a long fight
—and uphill all the way. Great are the influ-
ences arrayed against you who wish to be your-
selves.
The living make it difficult for any of us to
be ourselves, but the dead make it wellnigh
impossible—certainly impossible to any but the
strongest.
T radition Law Custom these are the
weapons by which the dead mould the living.
So strong is the power which the dead wield,
so subtle its influence, that few are able to re-
sist—and to be themselves.
We are expected to conform, and we find our-
selves—in spite of ourselves—being surely
woven into the pattern of the past. It ds only
a little while, and we move in a world which is
not ours.
We worship the correct gods—we conform
to the correct ideals—we say the correct thing
—we read the correct literature—we make the


correct comments —we seek the correct amuse-
ments —we dress in the correct way —we furnish
our homes in the correct fashion. Only in our
thoughts do we remain ourselves, and even then
only some of us.
Your most precious possession is yourself; the
greatest gift which you can give to the world
can only be given by the unfolding of your-
self. So why submerge yourself? Why conceal
yourself? Why disguise yourself? We should
fight against standardization as we would
against suffocation. Why surrender ourselves
—our ideals—our beliefs —our sincerities—our
purpose—just from the fear of criticism or to
gain the approval of society?
Hold on to yourself, and leave your own
footprints on the sands of time. Few of us have
the strength to resist the influences of the living,
who would fashion us, and of the dead, who
would mould us. But the few who can, and do,
resist, and who hold on to themselves —who fight
for their own expression—do the things they be-
lieve in—stand for the things which to them are
true—follow an ideal which, like a perfect pearl,
is a thing of such compelling beauty and power
in their lives that all else conforms to it. They
who resist to-day are those whom the world
will follow to-morrow.


LITTLENESS
The human family is divided into the “little”
and the “big.” There are no others.
If you’re not big, you’re little; there are no
between sizes in humans.
It is not a matter of sex. There are big wo-
men and little women, just as there are big and
little men.
Neither is it a matter of height or weight;
nor of money, position, or education.
It’s just a matter of soul, heart, and faith.
The humble little woman in the poorest,
meanest house may be entitled to rank with the
big ones of the world.
But the wealthiest man in the largest mansion
may be only a “little” fellow.
The creed of the little fellow is Littleness.
The little fellow disbelieves in everything, in-
cluding himself.
The world has more to fear from littleness
than from anything in the make-up of man.
For Littleness is the mother of Unbelief and
Hatred, Envy and Suspicion, Persecution and
Cruelty.
Littleness is the big destroyer of achievement.
Littleness endeavours to pull down every
great structure which the big fellows seek to
build.
Littleness laughs at every great dream. It
mocks at every great emotion; it sneers at every
great endeavour; it always hates, it never for-
gives.


Littleness always doubts, it never commends.
Littleness always persecutes the big, the
noble, the good. It crucified Christ; it handed
the hemlock to Socrates.
Littleness mocked Galileo; it derided Colum-
bus; it jeered at Lincoln.
Oh, yes! Littleness has always seen to it, and
always will, that, wherever the great walk, there
are thorns.
The creed of Littleness demands not only
the crucifixion of the great living, but the pro-
faning of the great dead.
Littleness is the posthumous destroyer of the
Gladstones and Woodrow Wilsons of the world.
Gladstone is dead, but Littleness is alive; and,
for fear the world might believe Gladstone to
have been as “white” as his day and generation
believed him to be, Littleness denounces him,
after thirty years of hallowed memory, as a gross
sensualist, a whited sepulchre. Proof to the
contrary can never be produced; Gladstone is
dead; and all the little fellows, men and women,
rejoice.
Truly Littleness is the parent of those who
love to spit on statues.
But the influence of the big fellows who raised
those statues, and who raise all the other
great monuments in life—monuments which are
greater than those wrought in bronze or stone
—will always sweep the human race forward
and upward on the tide of their own great faith,
in spite of all the little fellows in this world.


OUR LIVES FOLLOW OUR THOUGHTS!
A negative, doubting, fearful, vacillating mind
can no more create, produce, or achieve any-
thing of real or lasting value that an apple can
violate the law of gravitation by falling up-
ward.
We may turn over all the pages of history,
and not one example shall we find of success
achieved by those who did not expect it.
As well expect a planet to reverse the move-
ment in its orbit as expect thought to create
produce, or attract things or conditions unlike
itself.
Show me one who has achieved, created, or
produced something of real and lasting value,
and you will show me one whose thoughts are
affinities with the things he has produced or
achieved.
We build as we think; our lives follow our
thoughts.
All men gravitate towards the visions which
they hold in their minds.
Doubt your future success, and you will need
to. Visualize your success, believe in it posi-
tively, pursue it steadfastly, plan for it, never
doubt it, and you will never need to; it will be
yours. Only death can stop it.


CHARACTER IS THE TRUE HALLMARK
There are many persons of the male sex whom
society calls “gentlemen” who certainly are not
men.
Likewise, there are many of the female sex
whom society calls “gentlewomen” who certainly
are not women —in the true sense of the word.
And how many there are whom society does
not call “gentlemen” who certainly are—in the
finest sense of the word—men!
And how many others whom she does not call
“gentlewomen” who are—in every sense of the
word—women.
Poor old Society! What an old humbug she
is!
So long as a man or a woman takes soup in
the approved fashion —wears the right cut in
clothes —knows the “best” people—gives evid-
ence of a substantial bank balance, no matter how
acquired, she dubs that person “gentleman” or
“gentlewomen.” Of the real man and woman she
knows little and cares less.
Manners to her are much more important than
morals; clean linen is much more vital than a
clean mind.
To plain men and women it may seem in-
finitely more important that a man should be
distinguished by his character than by the
correct crease in his trousers; that a woman’s
claim to distinction should rest on what is in her
heart and head, rather than what is on her back
or in her bank. But not to “Society”—the old


snob! Many a male bounder passes for gentle-
man and many a female vampire for gentle-
woman because Society, with reckless impartial-
ity, stamps her hall-mark upon clothes—man-
ners—money. Sometimes one wonders why the
sterling men and women one knows are not
accepted as being quite “the thing” (whatever
“the thing” may be).
And then perhaps we find that So-and-So’s
mother was an office-cleaner years ago. And one
wonders whether the brave little woman who
started work at five o’clock every morning clean-
ing offices, to keep her young brood from eating
the bread of charity (or worse), was not infinitely
more entitled to be termed “gentlewoman” than
Mrs. , who capitalized her beauty by marry-
ing for his money, as a form of social insur-
ance.
Or Mrs , who smokes hard, drinks hard,
gambles hard, swears hard—but all in the right
style, don’t you know, and with the right people.
Or Mrs. , the shuddering little harpy, who
tells unsavoury stories so smartly, but who moves
in the “best” circles.
Whatever “Society” has to say about it, no
man can be a gentleman—in the best sense—
who is not first a man—in the best sense. And
no woman can be a gentlewoman—in the best
sense—who is not first a true woman.


HOLD A LANTERN!
Perhaps you are not the kind of fellow who
bothers to step out of his way to hold a lantern
for another or to be of some service to the
stranger who is trying in the darkness to pick
up the home trail.
Well, it takes all sorts to make a world,
brother! But the stranger will be glad that
they’re not all your sort.
Perhaps when you are older you will realize
that all men are strangers sometimes—some-
where; and when you are looking for a fellow
with a friendly lantern, you’ll remember the
lantern you did not show.
It’s a long road that doesn’t lead back to your
own door.
THE FRIENDLIEST CHURCH IN TOWN
A church should be a sanctuary for the friend-
less, the fallen, and the hungry. I know a
church which comes very near to my conception
of what a church should be, and it is in our own
city.
It is a friendly church. It combines the offices
of an employment bureau, a restaurant, a bar-
bering establishment, a boot-mending business,
a mental workshop, a Christian fellowship.
This church somehow has a personality. You
would expect it to have.


There is something living, warm, and human
about it; it seems to hold out arms to all who
pass, and what this means to the lonely, friend-
less, and hungry, only they can tell.
You may pass it in the tram. You may be
thinking of other things, but you just cannot
pass it without a queer little formal acknow-
ledgment of the friendliest church in town.
The first thing which strikes one about that
church is the definite question posted at the
gate, “Do you want a job? You may find one
here.” And immediately underneath these
words the “positions vacant” columns of the
daily papers are posted, where everybody who
wants may see them.
Another notice, too, stands out big and bold:
“Are you lonely? Then come inside.” And many
a drifting, rudderless derelict has responded to
the magic of that friendly church, and gone
“inside.”
In that friendly church is a friendly man, who
does not care whether those who come inside
are of his religion—or of none.
It is enough that they have stumbled, fallen,
failed —that they are lonely, or that they have
been mired.
It is enough that they are in need—any kind
of need. Some are not in need of food or
shelter, but in dire need of the hand clasp of a
radiant, friendly fellow. They are in need of
the touch of a man whose ear is attuned to
the sweet, sad music of humanity—and this
strengthening touch, with all its re-vivifying


power, they get from the friendly fellow at the
friendliest church in town.
He is the friend of prisoners, drunkards, clods,
fools, misfits, scholars, and illiterates; they all
belong to his church —if they are down—for his
church is the Church of Humanity.
His religion is not a matter of painted win-
dows, but of bound-up hearts and reconstructed
lives.
He does not show forth the piety of virtue,
but the virtue of piety. He believes that we are
punished by our sins—not for them.
He does not start his work of re-building with
a sermon; he starts with a clean handkerchief,
a hair-cut, maybe a shaving brush, or a mew
pair of soles on an old pair of shoes.
You see, he is wise, this friendly man, and
he knows that a clean pocket-handkerchief
means recovered self-respect—the first step in
reconstruction. ,
He knows that a man who is down at heel is
also down at heart; that a new pair of heels on
an old pair of boots makes all the difference.
How many who have gone inside that church
have expected that the man inside would begin
the work or reformation with a prayer! Instead,
he has begun with a bath. And only when that
man’s boots are mended, his shaggy beard
trimmed, his untidy hair cut, a good bath
negotiated, a good meal accommodated, does
that wise and friendly fellow inside pray, and
his prayer is that together they may be given
strength, courage, and tenacity of purpose suf-


ficient to make a good citizen out of the broken
fabric of manhood who went inside.
Thousands have gone inside—hopeless, help-
less, human driftwood; thousands have come
out beginning to be men.
Oh, the power of a friendly man! The magic
of a friendly church! The dynamic message of
a friendly hand-clasp!
You may meet them all—if you need them—
at the friendliest church in town.
DON’T GET SOURED!
Years are not the things that make men old.
Young men are often old at thirty. Old men
are sometimes young at sixty, and some men
grow younger as the years go by.
No! It is not years that make men old.
Men grow old as their ideals grow dim —as
the fires of ambition die away —as fears crowd
in—as hopes fade out; for age is a thing of the
spirit, not of the hour-glass, or of the calendar.
The man who is “soured on life” is an old, old
man, even though his heart be sound, his nerves
strong, his years but twenty.
The man who has deserted his ideals leaves
his youth with them.
The “get even” men get old while they’re
getting even.
Time may show few wrinkles on the brow of
the fellow who is always sneaking round to pay


off a score; but, could we see it, there are deep
furrows in his soul.
Time spent in paying off old scores doesn’t
pay, but it does bankrupt the spirit of the fellow
who tries to get even, and the spiritual bankrupt
is always old; it is not a matter of years.
Keep those ideals that you started out with—
keep the fires of your ambition banked.
Keep sweet —don’t set soured on life.
It isn’t years that makes men old.
DESIRE
Science tells us that the eagle’s wings developed
in response to the eagle’s efforts to fly.
The desire which possessed the eagle was
more than a mere longing—it was an “urge.”
An “urge” is a desire—“plus”—and it is the
plus which makes the desire achieve.
Desire is the real dynamic of progress—all
great achievements are desires come true. De-
sire has moulded civilization—built cities, towns,
and homes. But it was desire plus.
Desire is just longing, but desire “plus”
is desire made invincible by faith, courage, and
determination.
Then, desire becomes an urge, which pos-
sesses its possessor and will carry him upward
on the wings of aspiration, as truly as the eagle
soars away into the ether on the wings which
grew out of its desire to fly.
Encourage your longings—dreams—and de-
sires—but just add that “Plus.”


LIFE’S BROKEN MELODIES!
Some days life seems like broken melody, when
all the beautiful whispers of our hearts are dumb,
and the spirit grieves and sighs like some frac-
tured violin lamenting over its lost art.
No material cause can bring such grief to
the spirit; only a spiritual hurt can do that.
When one we trust betrays—when one we
love forgets—or when we say “Good-bye” to
some once dear friend, whom Life, not Death,
has severed from us—then the spirit mourns,
the music in us dies away, the melody of life is
broken, we are sad.
Death robs us of our friends all too soon;
but it is better to be robbed of friends by Death
than by Life, for Death cannot carry a friend
so far away from us as Life can and does.
One of the saddest things in life is a broken
friendship. One still more sad is the profane
fashion in which many a broken friendship is
ended. If our friendships must end, let us bury
them deeply—sadly—reverently; they are en-
titled to this at least.
Never let us desecrate a place that has once
been sacred; that is holy ground.
A friendship is a sacred thing, even a broken
friendship; but a broken friendship leaves a
broken melody in our lives, silences the beauti-
ful whispers in our hearts, and leaves us sad.
Guard your friendships; you will be poorer
without them; they will keep the melodies in
your life.


A HUMAN SPARK!
A spark from a passing train may start a fire
which travels for miles and lasts for days. We
may see the fire in all its power, but we do not
see the spark, and yet the spark kindled the
fire.
So a spark from one personality may kindle
in another a great fire which sets the heart and
intellect in motion and inspires it to great deeds
and great works.
We may see an intellectual fire in all its
majesty and fruitfulness, but we may never
hear of the spark.
You have heard of Louis Pasteur —master of
the microscope—one of the greatest scientists
of the age. Do you know the name of the stu-
dent who first allowed Pasteur, when he was
only an usher, to look through his microscope,
and by so doing lit such a fire in the intellect
of Pasteur that it became the overmastering
passion of his life? Again we have seen the
flame, but not the spark which caused the flame.
You have heard of Spurgeon—the great
preacher—but do you know the name of the
obscure minister who inspired him? Again we
see the flame but not the spark; yet the spark
in the person of the obscure minister kindled
the flame.
Nature intended some of us to be sparks and
some of us to be fires. If you can’t be a fire,
be a spark, but be the best kind of spark—one
that starts a fire in somebody’s spirit or intellect


—a fire that cannot be put out —one that will
be a fire as long as life lasts, producing a
blaze of beauty in art, science, literature, or
service. If you cannot be great, help somebody
else to be great. Everybody can be either a
fire or a spark. A mother can be the spark
which kindles the fire of ambition in her son or
daughter. A wife can be the spark to light the
fires of energy, purpose, and power in the heart
of her striving husband, and if the world is
warmed by the fires you have kindled you are
a live spark, and that is what nature intended
you to be.
And if you are one of the fires which warm
and illumine the world, you will be always in
debt to the unknown and unseen influence which
roused you out of your inertia, crystallized
your dreams, and impelled you to harness your
powers and dedicate your life and intellect to a
great and splendid purpose.
THE HUMAN EXTINGUISHER
Just as there are human sparks, who kindle
fires in the hearts and minds of other men, set-
ting up a great flame of hope, ambition, and
idealism which enhances everything it touches,
so there are human extinguishers, who put out
those new-born fires of hope and ambition on
every possible occasion.
As fire-quenchers, the professional discouragers
are busier than the professional fire-brigades,


and more effective; they are more dangerous
than professional burglars.
The professional burglar steals only your
material assets, but the professional discourager
filches away your most priceless assets of char-
acter.
He steals your vision—your purpose—your
confidence—your ambition—he extinguishes the
light of your intellect. He is more contagious
than small-pox, more deadly than plague.
The human being who inoculates another
with the virus of failure via the doubt thought
—the can’t thought—the fear thought—the
“why bother” thought—is an extinguisher, a dis-
courager, a depressor, a devitalizer, one who
eats the eyes out of the face of hope and the
fingers from the hands of opportunity.
We can never tell how much richer the world
would have been if so many fires had not been
extinguished by the professional discourager—
the human extinguisher.
There are all kinds of extinguishers. It makes
no difference which kind puts out the light of
your intellect, if it goes out; but for every suc-
cess which the discourager achieves the world
is immeasurably poorer.
Shun the human extinguisher.


THE LAUGHTER OF A LITTLE CHILD
Music is the very pinnacle of human achieve-
ment in the world of art.
Yet there is no music in the world like the
laughter of a little child.
Every note as it sounds is like some ethereal
finger rustling magically over the deep chords
of our being, finding its own harmonics in our
souls.
Every cadence is like some beautiful whisper
in our ears, telling us that the laughter of a little
child is the imperishable symbol of the ultimate
good of all Nature’s children.
Life sometimes kills the laugh of her grown-
up children all too soon.
Many of us have lost our laugh somewhere in
the dark folds of Life. Life could not take from
us anything half so precious.
Life itself is not hard to surrender when Life
has robbed us of our laugh.
Laughing helps us wonderfully on our little
daily journeys, and on our journey through life.
“A merry heart goes all the day; your sad
tires in a mile,” says Shakesoeare.
So let us treasure our laugh; it is a precious
possession.
Laughing lightens our burdens—shortens our
journey—sweetens our tempers—strengthens our
powers.
If we have lost it, let us find it again. But
if we go out after our lost laugh we need to
be sure that we get back the laugh we have


lost—the laugh of the little child —who once
was ourselves.
Do not let us come back with the laugh of the
cynic, which curses the heart of the man who
finds it and chills the hearts of those who hear
Such is the laugh of Mephistopheles, who,
when he sees Faust yielding, sends out his
triumphant, sardonic, mirthless Ha! Hal That
is the laugh of the lost soul.
Better never to find your laugh than to find
the laugh of the cynic, which blights and withers.
Find your old laugh—with the music in it.
It levels things; it promotes understanding; it
cements friendship; it is power.
THINGS “CAN” BE WORSE!
Fancy having the nerve to find fault with Life
while one can see, hear, feel, taste, smell, and
move around and see a bit of the world on two
perfectly sound legs, with two perfectly good
arms thrown in!
Yet, knowing myself, and how much ado I can
make about nothing, I know you sufficiently to
say that a twinge in your big toe, or a bruise
on your little finger, makes you sour towards
the whole world. That is, unless you are one
of the real big boys—and they’re rare.
Ever thought of the fellow who can’t see?
Ever thought of the chap who can’t hear or


speak? Ever been brought into contact with a
man who can’t move?
Ever seen a strong man stricken down in a
day with paralysis?
Ever got to know one of those cheerful suf-
ferers who remain cheerful even after a life-
time spent in an invalid chair?
Have you? You have!
And yet you dare to go sour on the whole
world because you have a pain in your big toe.
What a nerve!
THOUGHT IS POWER!
Do you think Peary found the North Pole by
accident?
Do you think Lincoln found the White House
by accident?
Do you think Wilberforce liberated British
slaves by accident?
Do you think Columbus found a new world
by accident?
The thought of the North Pole haunted Peary
until he found it.
The thought of a republic resting upon the
free consent of a free people haunted Lincoln
until he fashioned it.
The thought of suffering slaves preyed upon
the sensitive mind of Wilberforce until he
freed them.
The thought of a new world haunted Columbus
until he reached it


Thought was the power which led to the
North Pole; to the White House; to the New
World; to freedom for British slaves.
Thought was the power out of which each
man fashioned his dream into a reality. For the
enthusiasm of a high purpose calls into being
the agencies by means of which it will be
accomplished.
Great powers attend on great thoughts;
the most creative of all creative forces is the
power of a great faith. It moves men inevitably
towards their goal. The history-makers of the
past —and those who are now making the history
of the future —have always had overmastering
convictions in regard to their goal. And the
world makes way for the man who knows his
goal.
When he reaches it, it is no accident and no
mystery. Read history!
YOUR OPPORTUNITY
Looking for an opportunity? Well, don’t dress
up for a long journey.
Many a fellow sets out for the foot of the
rainbow while his lump of gold is hidden under
his own front door.
The only man who never has an opportunity
is a dead one—but many a live one died before
he found his, because he wandered too far.


You don’t have to go far afield for your
chance, but if you stay around you must be ready
to dig.
GUARD YOUR WORDS!
How careless we are with our words! How
careful we should be if we knew that every
word we utter is a living force, mighty and
indestructible —a force which never ceases, nor
can cease, from exercising its power.
We may speak but a word or two, but the
force we have liberated goes on for ever,
expressing itself in the universal energy: “So
shall my word be that goeth forth out of my
mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but
it shall accomplish that which I please, and it
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.”
How many of us grasp the significance of
this truth? And yet our words do literally
and actually accomplish that whereto they are
sent. Charge your words with hate, and they
gather hate as they speed onward, and, thus
strengthened, they return like a poisoned javelin
to rankle in the heart of the sender.
How many of us grasp the significance of the
Biblical words: “And the word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us”? How few of us ever
think that our words —our spoken thoughts—
are made flesh and continue to dwell with us
long after they are uttered —long after they are
forgotten—and yet it is just so, for the force
of the word is indestructible.


The word is powerful only because it affirms
the thought, and thought is the power which
shapes our lives—character, fortunes, health,
happiness—for we are what we think.
There is a mighty power in the spoken word,
mightier than in the unspoken, for the spoken
word registers a profound impression on the
unconscious mind, and the silent intelligent
forces within us proceed to make the word
“flesh,” to give it form, to give it power—power
to make the things we affirm a reality. You
can choose what shall be registered in your
unconscious mind; but once you have allowed
ugly, destructive, and evil thoughts to pass the
bar of your scrutiny, the wonderful, mysterious,
unceasing forces within you proceed to make
your word “flesh,” and build in you, and around
you, the things which your spoken word has
built into a reality.
Every word you speak is mighty in its con-
sequences. You can be a destructive force to
all around you; but, most of all, can you des-
troy yourself. Guard your thoughts, for they will
accomplish that whereto they are sent.
YOU ARE A MAGNET!
You are a human magnet, attracting the things
and conditions with which you are in affinity as
surely as if you were that little piece of metal
which is known as a steel magnet.
The steel magnet will attract only those things


which are like itself. The human magnet is
governed by the same law. The steel magnet
attracts only the products of iron ore. Apply
it to wood, rubber, copper, bone—it is de-mag-
netized. The human magnet attracts things
which are like itself, and no others. It is the
law! Apply it to things unlike itself; it is de-
magnetized.
The steel magnet derives its peculiar power
from the laws of the universe. These same uni-
versal laws apply with the same force to the
human magnet, and you alone have the power
to give your magnet its quality.
Charge it with earnestness, enthusiasm, help-
fulness, friendliness, bigness, truth, and courage,
and you will become a magnetic centre of at-
traction, drawing the affinities of these qualities
to you, in abundant and ever-increasing full-
ness.
Charge it with hate, fear, envy, jealousy, sus-
picion, and littleness, and you will draw to
you the affinities of this black and ugly brood
—more hateful hate, more fearful fear, and more
envious envy will come to live with you, and
these dark forces will weave their evil magic
into the fabric of your being, for your magnet
cannot pull true and beautiful things to you
if you have magnetized it to attract only the
ugly, destructive, and bad. It is the law!


DON’T SIT ON THE FENCE
All dogs bark—have tails —and wag ’em—but
it isn’t normal for a dog to bark and wag his
tail at one and the same time. It simply isn’t
done; that’s not dogology.
We once had a little dog, and it barked while
it wagged its tail. That dog had no sense; we
never knew which end to believe. So in time we
came to believe neither. We had lost confidence
in both ends.
When a dog barks and wags his tail at the
same time, you know he lacks stability. He is
a bluffer—he is two-faced—he is easily put off
-he is easily led on—he is not sure of himself
■he has no decision of character.
There are many humans just like this little
dog. They don’t know what they want; they’re
not sure where they’re going; they are easily
led on; they’re easily put off. Sometimes they
bark feebly against things with which they do
not agree; but for fear you might bank on that
bark, and expect them to follow it up with a
bite, they hasten to assure you that they really
didn’t mean it —far be it from them to want to
be in any fuss or fight about anything. If they
had really thought you’d take notice, they
wouldn’t have barked at all.
These are the human equivalents of the little
dogs who bark and wag their tails at one and
the same time. Nobody knows where they
stand —what they stand for—what they believe


in. They are cyphers in the scheme of things,
who could die to-morrow and the world would
lose precisely —nothing.
You meet them in social life, where they are
all things to all men, and deceive none but them-
selves. They want to please everybody.
They are a prey to the last word, pitiful drift-
wood. Determined to be in perfect agreement
with everybody, they are in real agreement with
nobody. They never take sides, for that would
involve decision. If unhappily there should be a
conflict of opinions, they slip away unnoticed until
the going is easier and the way more smooth. All
through life they refuse to declare themselves on
anything. They shift, shuffle, and side-step—
they avoid, avert, and evade every issue. They
walk in the middle of the road, and keep an
eye on each side of the street, ready to support
the stronger side. They run with the hare,
and hunt with the hounds. If society emits a
few snappy barks, they bark too, but it is only
a “pack” bark—nothing individual about it—
quite friendly—with no bite to follow.
And in the end what are they? Just the human
equivalent of the amiable little dog who had no
character, who barked and wagged his tail at
one and the same time.
If you believe in a thing, fight for it. If you
don’t believe in it, fight against it. But don’t
sit on the fence.


VIRTUE IS A VICTORY
There’s nothing in this world so easy as to have
resisted the temptations you never had, and
don’t forget that, when you are patting your-
self on the back for being such a good fellow.
Virtue is a victory; it is the quality which is
left after a successful struggle between desire
and duty.
Yet many a man’s reputation for virtue rests
merely upon his resistance to the temptations he
never had.
The sober fellow who never had an appetite
for alcohol isn’t virtuous; he’s just fortunate—
and there’s no virtue in being fortunate. The rec-
titude of a fellow who was born without a moral
limp isn’t so much a subject for pride as for
thankfulness.
But the man who was born with a moral
limp, and who is painfully groping his way up-
ward, is the fellow who deserves that pat on the
back.
For victory over temptation is virtue —and
virtue is a victory.
The people who are most entitled to our con-
gratulations are not those who have resisted
temptations they never had, but those who
resisted the temptations they did have, or those
who, having gone down to them, have got up
again, looked the world in the eye, and made
good.


WHAT ARE YOU BUILDING?
Science tells us that there is but one Universal
Substance.
It is all things small, and all things great,
for it is all things.
This universal substance consists of atoms,
and these atoms form centres which attract
other atoms, and these, in their turn, grow into
form.
You are one—l am one—for Man is the
highest form of centralized atoms. He is a pivotal
point of attraction. His thoughts are the power
with which he attracts other atoms. His will is
the force which compels them into form —and he,
his place in life, and his environment, are the
result.
If you believe you lack the power to attract the
things you want, your will drives that conviction
through your entire system, and the atoms which
form “You” begin to arrange themselves in
accordance with your conviction, which is their
direction, for “You” are the architect.
Every thought, uttered or unuttered, makes
its impression on the atoms, and is a command
which they can only obey. Your thoughts are
creators; they create and build what you direct
them to build and create.
You may not be satisfied with what they
build, but they work to plan and specifications,
and you have supplied both.
You may not be conscious of having prepared
those plans and specifications, but that makes no


difference —the building progresses from founda-
tion- to coping-stone in accordance with your
conscious or unconscious direction, for you are
the architect.
So train your mind to hold only such thoughts
as will build the kind of house you wish to
dwell in for ever.
You can do it; you are doing it now; so why
not build a temple so fair and stately that all
men shall take note of it and many shall build
after your plan.
THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS
“Thou shalt not bear false witness.”
What a wonderful world it would be if we did
not! But most of us do—not always maliciously,
but just as falsely as if maliciously.
When we hear something derogatory of our
neighbour, do we stop to learn whether it is
true?
Not a bit of it! We run off and peddle the
“hearsay” up and down the street, and, by the
time it has reached the end of the road, twenty
persons are slandering one who may be innocent
because we have borne false witness against our
neighbour.
“Thou shalt not bear false witness.”
Yet the moment we hear some ugly rumour,
off we go.
“Have you heard the news about ? Isn't


it terrible? I feel sorry for her husband and the
children, etc.”
You wretched old humbug! If you felt sorry
you’d have kept your wicked old mouth shut.
“Thou shalt not bear false witness.” Oh, yes,
we all subscribe to the principle, but not one in
ten has made it a part of his working creed.
“Thou shalt not bear false witness.”
GET AHEAD AND STAY AHEAD!
When a member of the human pack steps out
a pace or two ahead of the rest of the pack, he
becomes a target for the envious. And so he
will remain, just as long as he keeps ahead.
Let him fall back into the pack, and he will
soon be forgiven and forgotten, for the envious
are concerned only with the successful —the
fellows who are marching ahead of the crowd.
The leader, the doer, the fellow ahead, gets
both prizes and punishments.
But if he is made of the right stuff the punish-
ments only cause him to increase his pace and
get farther ahead of the pack.
Let any man or woman write a great book,
discover a great truth, paint a great picture,
fight a great fight, lead a great movement, run
a great enterprise successfully, and such a person
will have earned the undying enmity of the
envious.


Let him get ready for the shrugs and slurs,
the backbiters and the detractors, and the poison-
ous darts and arrows which will pour upon him
from the pack in the rear. For the envious
always attack from behind. Somehow they seem
to know their proper place and to keep it.
The leader is assailed because he has done
something worth while, and the worth-while
thing within him, which made it possible for
him to do that worth-while thing that put him
ahead of the crowd, also renders him immune
to the attacks of the envious, for worth-while
things have affinity only with worth-while
things, and envy is not one of them.
Jealousy wags its long yellow tongue, and
mendacity uses its sting, continually from the
moment when anybody rises above mediocrity.
Every leader in the world’s history has been
assailed by the envious. But the works of the
leaders and their fame endure, and will endure
through all the ages, while every backbiter in
the world’s history lies forgotten in an un-
honoured grave.
So get ahead of the crowd, and stay ahead.
Increase your pace; never mind the backbiters.
They cannot hurt you or pull you back, unless
you let them.


YOUR BEST FRIENDI
The best friend any fellow can have is his own
conscience. You may not believe that now,
but some of us grow wiser as we grow older,
and you, at least, have to grow older.
The fellow who isn’t friendly with his con-
science isn’t friendly with himself. He may be
as happy as a sand boy in company, but watch
him when he’s alone; that’s the real test.
Some people say that the best friend a fellow
can have is a well-filled purse. Don’t you be-
lieve it.
There comes a time when a man’s conscience
won’t let him forget how he filled that purse,
and, when that time comes, “how” matters more
than “how full.”
Money alone never did and never will spell
happiness, for genuine happiness is a by-product
of a friendly conscience.
START CLIMBING TO-DAY
The cabin-boy who does not see himself on the
captain’s bridge will never have occasion to
trouble about the size of the captain’s cap.
The office-boy who does not see himself in
the manager’s chair will never have his legs under
the manager’s desk—at any rate, to stay.
The men and women who have climbed up in
this old world are those who have kept their
eye on the top rung of the ladder, even when


they were down at the very bottom rung. They
have climbed up because they have felt them-
selves climbing—seen themselves climbing—pic-
tured themselves climbing up—up into the posi-
tion they desire.
In other words, they have thought themselves
up—climbed up mentally before they climbed up
actually.
They have continually and persistently fixed
it in their minds that they could reach a certain
position, and the moment of so fixing was the
moment when they began to climb.
Belief in your ability to climb is a condition
precedent to climbing; those who have climbed
must have believed they could. They knew they
could —otherwise they could not —and they did.
If you are more or less a failure, a half-
success —if you are not doing the things you
want to do —there is something wrong. No
doubt about that. But what is wrong is wrong
with the climber, not with the ladder. The
ladder is there; if you’re not climbing, it is
because your thoughts are not climbers’ thoughts.
They hold you down to that bottom rung.
You are the true result of your past thinking.
What you have thought, said, done, and sup-
ported makes you just what you are. Why not
start climbing to-day?


THE THINGS THAT WE NEVER TELL!
The things that we never tell about ourselves
are the things most worth telling.
The things that we never tell are the only
things that would ever explain us to our friends.
The things that we never tell are the things
that really differentiate us from our fellows.
The things that we never tell are the most
precious, intimate, wonderful things we know.
The things we never tell are the sacred things
written in our hearts.
All the things we have ever really lived
through are written there —and they are the
things we never tell.
Deep in our hearts our dreams have left their
exquisite tracings. Our loves have left their gold.
Our sorrows have brushed the gold with many
shadows.
And like a trail of radiant star-dust gleam the
silver footprints of our friendships—among the
things deep buried in our hearts—the things that
we never tell.
Then let us see to it that no things that we
would be ashamed to tell creep in beside the sacred
things that none of us ever tell.


YOUI
You are a remarkable creature—more remark-
able than anything else in the world.
You are composed of billions of tiny micros-
copical cells, each one endowed with intelligence,
each one possessing its own separate conscious-
ness. Yet all are working together for the federa-
tion of the whole you in the most orderly and
scientific manner—each little group building,
repairing, renewing, and maintaining you.
These conscious little cells are always at work,
under your direction adapting themselves to your
requirements and responding to your commands.
So, you see, your brain is not the only part
of you that thinks; every cell in your body
thinks. Your cells are like a billion members of a
great orchestra which instantly responds to the
keynote given them by their leader. Whatever
note your mind sounds, they play. Every sug-
gestion you give them, they act upon. Every
motive that moves you, they conform to. Every
passion that sways you, sweeps over them.
Every cell in your body does your will.
You think masterfulness or weakness; they
thrill and respond with positive or negative re-
actions.
You think success or failure; at once they
begin to build in what you command.
You think harmony or discord; instantly they
work to your keynote.
You think fear or courage; they answer and
follow your directions.


You can set them vibrating with hope or
despair, love or hate, or you can set them thrill-
ing with the triumphant vibrations of success
and power.
Oh! the mighty strength of your weakest
thought—the positive power of even your most
negative sensation!
Every moment your thoughts are impressing
themselves upon every cell in your body, and
they are building into the fabric of your being
your secret impulses, aspirations, longings,
desires, and thoughts. Watch your thoughts,
even if they are never put into words, for they are
building the house in which you must live.
HELP HIM TO KEEP SQUARE 1
When a man errs—and pays—he’s square. And
if you are square, you will help him to keep
square.
In any case, who are you to shrug shoulders
as he goes by?
Try to remember that he has done his “time,”
and you have not done yours .... yet.
Anyhow, why should you judge? There’s
only one Judge—and when He sits in judgment
there may be a heavy penalty waiting for you.
The law-courts—down here— do not deal with
some of the very worst crimes. Maybe there is a
place where “success,” achieved by knavery, will
meet a heavy penalty; where treachery will be
counted one of the blackest offences against the


law; where the destruction of human character
by defamation will receive as heavy a penalty as
the destruction of human life by violence; where
the man who has “squared up” will find a higher
seat than many a fellow who missed his penalty
down here.
Don’t shrug your shoulders— you are not
through yet. When the other fellow errs —pays—
and squares —why not help him to keep square?
THE REMNANTS OF LIFE
Go into any of our great city stores at sale
time, and you will find hundreds of remnants of
material, of varying length and quality, at bar-
gain prices.
The reason why these are offered at bargain
prices is that, being remnants, their value has
depreciated. They comprise small pieces—odd
lengths—difficult colours for matching—ends of
rolls, etc. —so they go cheap.
If they are purchased by one who knows their
possibilities, creations of great beauty may be
evolved; if not, they remain rags, serviceable it
may be, but still only rags.
Go to the great Store of Life. There, too, you
will find hundreds of remnants; only they are
human—remnants of men and women of vary-
ing ages, types, and powers, who feel cheap—
who have marked themselves down and, in
their discouragement, have put themselves on
the bargain counter of life. They feel that they


are very small pieces in the great mosaic of life—
odd lengths. They are convinced that their
market value is low.
So long as they are possessed by that con-
viction, so long will they remain upon the bar-
gain counter —remnants —each year more soiled,
frayed, bedraggled—just broken fabrics of man-
hood and womanhood.
Get off that bargain counter. You shouldn’t
consider yourself a remnant. Never mind what
failure you have had in the past, you’re a full-
length woman, a full-size man.
Nothing has the power to keep you on the
remnant counter but the thought in your own
mind, and nothing can lift you off, when once you
are there, so long as you are convinced it’s your
proper place.
Root out that thought which tells you that you
are a human remnant —a down-and-out—a misfit
—a failure—as you would root out a poisonous
weed from your garden. It is the deadly night-
shade of doubt. Give room to it, and you must
make romo for something deadlier still—darker
doubt, darker fear, deeper despair, surer failure—
for whatever you hold in your mind has a power
of attraction which is absolute.
If you have put yourself on the bargain
counter of life, you cannot get off until you
believe you can. Begin believing it now, and
determine to place yourself amongst the highest-
priced goods in the great Store of Life.


BE AN OPTIMIST!
Optimism helps. Let it help you.
Optimism is a doer and a goer; it goes and
Pessimism is a doer, too, but an undoer. The
first person it undoes is the pessimist himself.
The optimist is the fellow who speeds up the
chariot of progress and prosperity. The pessimist
is the chap who puts the brake on—hard.
The optimist is the fellow who laughs—lifts
—loves. He is a dynamic force of incalculable
voltage. Wherever he is, he is an inspiration,
and the world needs inspirers.
Be an optimist—and put the world in your
debt!
EXPECT THE BESTI
There is one sure way of being cheated in this
life —and that is to expect to be cheated.
There is no occasion for a trustful man to go
about with blinkers on; but even if he does, he’ll
lose less than the untrustful man without them.
The fellow who is always on guard against
short weight and over-charges will get less and
pay more for it in the long run, however
shrewdly he checks up.
The man who is certain that he is being
robbed by his workmen communicates his expec-
tation—and will not be disappointed.


The fellow who thinks everybody is trying to
get the better of him will for all his watchfulness
get the worst of it.
The man who is blighted with chronic mis-
trust of his fellow-man will be robbed of both
peace and pence.
The thing he fears will come upon him—in-
evitably. Men will cheat him because he ex-
pects to be cheated.
He, like every other human being, is a magnet,
drawing to himself things and conditions like
his thoughts.
Don’t befoul the springs of good faith in the
hearts of your fellows. Believe that good faith
is there, and thereby set it flowing.
BE A SELF-STARTER!
The world offers its big prizes to men and wo-
men of initiative because they are self-starters.
They don’t need to be cranked up to get
going.
Nor do they need to be directed, urged,
pushed, coaxed, or ordered —they move.
The men with initiative initiate—they origin-
ate, carry on, carry through, without being told,
because they have within them the power of self-
starting.
The other kind —and they are in the majority
—not only need to be told what to do, how to
do it, when to do it, where to do it, but they


even need to be told when to stop doing it, and
when they do stop they stay stopped—until
somebody cranks them up again.
Human self-starters are valuable, but they are
comparatively rare. Many are called, but few are
found.
I don’t know what business you’re engaged
in, but, whatever it is, it needs a few more self-
starters about the place.
Every business has too many of the other
sort.
Be a self-starter! And start out after some of
the big prizes of life.
THINK ABOUT IT, FATHER!
Many of the advantages which parents plan to
give their children are in reality disadvantages.
For proof of this, have a talk with some of
the young people who have had “the best educa-
tion that money can buy.” Their education
“is finished,” we are told. Certainly they are
finished, but they are not educated. Educa-
tion is one of the things money cannot buy.
Money can merely open the doors; the rest de-
pends upon what the child takes through the
door in addition to clothes, books, and pocket-
money. That constitutes his real chance.
Much depends upon a parent’s idea of a
chance. Many a parent’s “chance of success” is a
sure passport to failure. Many a child would


have a better chance if there were no mother or
father to see that it got the wrong kind of chance.
Don’t you think, father, that Tom might have
been more the sort of fellow you’ve always
pictured your son would be if you had not for-
gotten how you became strong, and if you had
not, in giving him a chance, robbed him of
his birthright—the chance to struggle up from
the bottom rung and become strong through
struggling, overcoming, and serving as you did?
No boy can start where you left off and become
as good a man as you are.
And if you expect him to do that, there’s a
lesson waiting for you, sir!
You only became what you are because you
started where you did, and all your money will
not buy education for your boy or your girl.
Every youth has to get it for himself.
You cannot get it for him, and he cannot
get it for himself, unless you have protected his
character from the enervating effects of the
prosperity which he did not help to make. Your
prosperity will not hurt you—you made it. Enjoy
it! But it may hurt your boy if he learns to
enjoy too well the things he did not earn—
that is, if you do not see to it that he under-
stands that all the good things of life have a
price.
Nine out of ten rich men were poor boys,
but the proportion of poor men who were the
sons of rich men is quite as high.
Here’s a lesson. Think about it, father!


PURPOSE
Do not fear being misunderstood; that is inevit-
able.
When you’re defamed, why worry? You have
time on your side. Let time vindicate you.
Don’t waste energy getting even with your
enemies—you haven’t it to spare. Life is short.
In any case, the best way to get even is to
forget.
Don’t estimate your friends by their words,
or by their gifts, but count every man a friend
who recognizes the good in you.
Don’t stop to think who is with you, who
against you; it matters little in the long run.
Don’t be afraid of life; face its trials bravely.
You can only die once, and no matter how fearful
you are, you’ve no chance of getting out of it
alive.
Make up your mind what you want to be—
to do —before you “go out.” And keep it made
up. The thought you hold will daily transform
you into what you wish to be.
We become like that on which our hearts are
set, and we move towards it inexorably, inevit-
ably.
It is the law!


THE NEUTRAL!
It was Aristotle who said: “The most powerful
foes of an army are those within its own camp.”
He meant the neutrals. For an avowed enemy
is less dangerous than a neutral, any time and
anywhere.
There are at least three things about a neu-
tral which make him more dangerous than an
enemy. You trust him, you depend upon him,
you are able to estimate his danger only after
he has done so much damage that it doesn’t
matter any more.
But, however it may be with armies, certain
it is that the most powerful foes of any business
are the neutrals whose names appear on the pay-
sheet.
A neutral is only another name for a loose
screw or a weak link, and, when there are more
loose screws and weak links than tight screws
and strong links, the machinery of any business,
however powerful, must collapse.
The man who has no pride in his business
is a neutral; the man who isn’t vigilant is a
neutral; the man who isn’t alert is a neutral;
the man who measures his output is a neutral;
the man who can’t carry a message to Garcia
is a neutral; the man who doesn’t prepare for
the job higher up is a neutral; the man who
doesn’t make himself indispensable is a neutral;
the man who isn’t loyal is a neutral; the man


who has no enthusiasm is a neutral; the man
who keeps his eye on the clock is a neutral.
No bundy clock or other mechanical device
will ever neutralize a neutral. He may come in
before nine and leave after six, but what does
that matter, if he’s asleep from the feet up be-
tween nine and six?
No business system or other human device
will neutralize him. Things may be all right
at the top, but if there are too many neutrals
beneath the “top,” the business will soon be
“top-heavy,” and the neutrals will beat the
“top.” ' For morale in any business is as im-
portant as management.
Field-Marshal Oyama once said, “Give every
honourable neutral you meet in our line the
honourable ju-jitsuhikerino.”
Why not try it on the neutrals on your pay-
sheet? It will help the business.
YOU CAN!
I have just received a letter from a young man
who says he never expects to accomplish any-
thing worth while.
He writes:—“l have always been unlucky,
and everything I touch fails; every step I take
is a blunder. I cannot get confidence in myself,
and I feel I am bound to be a complete failure.
Can you help me?”
No power in the world can help this young


man to the success which he is certain will never
be his.
While he remains certain of failure, failure is
equally certain of him, for what he seeks seeks
him. Early, late, and always, the things we
seek are seeking us—and finding us.
There is only one person who can put this
young man on the right track, and that is him-
self.
There is only one way he can get there, and
that is by a changed mental attitude.
He must see himself a success and not a
failure. He must see himself doing worthwhile
things before he can do them. He must step
up that ladder mentally before he climbs up
actually. He must banish the “can’t” thought,
and feed the “can” thought.
It isn’t easy; but it is possible, and it is a
sure cure for the failure complex.
A HUMAN EXTINGUISHER CALLS ON ME
A human extinguisher came into my office to-
day. Ugh!
She has wealth, education, social position, and
•many a beggar is more to be envied.
Her opening remark was an extinguisher.
“How can you work in such sordid surround-
ings?” she asked. “I should simply die.”
Now, my office is neither better nor worse
than a thousand others in the city; but she only


saw what she brought with her, and apparently
that was sordid.
I asked about her health. “Oh, I shall never
be well —I’m quite sure of that,” she added—
and, being sure, she never will.
I then asked her how her husband was. “Oh,
he’s most difficult, most trying. If ever I want
to be out, that man wants to be in, and if I want
to be in, he wants to be out.”
I think you and I too, would want to be in
when she was out, and out when she was in, if
the Fates had been unkind enough to tie us for
life to an extinguisher.
“How is your son?” I asked next. “Oh, he
wants to study medicine, and I’ve told him it’s
ridiculous. He’ll never get through a five-year
course; he’ll get tired of it and throw it up,
so what’s the use of beginning? I’ve warned
his father not to encourage him.” Poor chap,
to have an extinguisher for a mother!
Anxious to change the subject. “Well, what
do you think of the political situation?” I asked.
“Oh, it’s all one to me. I’m not interested. I’m
sure they’re all making as much as they can
at the game.”
I then asked about her other son’s beautiful
children. “Oh, they’re all right, but their
mother is a nasty little cat. I never could stand
her. I’ve told my son so again and again.”
Doubtless she had. That’s the way with the
discourager; she always tells.
“How can that be?” I asked. “Isn’t she
bringing' her children up excellently?” “Well,”


I shouldn’t say so,” she replied. “Little J
is the best of them. She’s very much like our
family. She takes after me.” Heaven forbid
that the winsome little girl I remember should
“take after” the family extinguisher.
“I believe your husband is taking over larger
responsibilities,” I ventured. “Oh, yes; but not
with my approval. I’ve told him how foolish
he is, and he knows I don’t approve.”
I thought she might have added: “If he wants
to do anything in this life he’ll have to do it
without my approval, for it isn’t in my nature
to approve of anything or anybody.”
Wondering why she had called, I asked her
whether she would join a committee which is
doing wonderful work for homeless children.
“No! my dear. No! Those women on committees
never do any good. They’re all on the make.”
When I expressed resentment at this statement,
she said: “Oh, well, if not, they’re just after the
limelight, and it amounts to the same thing.
I’ve no sympathy with organized charity. What
I do, I do privately.” And she might have
added, “And that is precisely nothing.”
My patience becoming visibly extinguished,
she rose to go; but, with her hand on the door,
said in sepulchral tones: “You are looking ter-
ribly overdone. You’ll be in hospital soon, with
nobody to blame but yourself.”
She went; and I thought, “There goes a
woman whom the world calls rich, and yet she is
poorer than a beggar—more to be pitied than
she who begs her daily bread; a human extin-


guisher, whose chief claim to be remembered
will be that she quenched hope, discouraged
aspiration, and extinguished ambition in many
hearts, minds, and lives.
And —just as I was feeling like a snuffed-out
candle—in blew a human spark, and lit my wick
again.
A HUMAN SPARK CALLS
A few minutes after the Human Extinguisher
left me I was feeling as if my light had gone
out. Then a real live and vital human spark blew
in, and I felt as if she had struck a match and
lit me up again.
I can see her now—eager, active, warm, bright,
brave, magnetic. Her opening words kindled
something within me, and I felt faith in my
kind again. “I just looked in to say I’d like
to help you with . I can’t do much, but
count on me to distribute a couple of hundred
notices.”
That little woman is poor —or the world
would say so. She has five children, a delicate,
unskilled husband, and all her worldly wealth
is comprised in a few sticks of furniture.
Yet compared with the extinguisher who had
just gone out —and who, for all her wealth, is a
beggar—she is as rich as Croesus.
Knowing that both she and her family had
been ill, I asked her how she was.


“Splendid,” came the reply, and she meant it.
“The family has had the measles, but, thank
goodness, they are all on the mend now. Yes;
and my old man has now got work. He doesn’t
get too much pay, certainly, to keep the whole
of us, but we shall pull through with a little
management. I have taken a little shop. We
have to be up and open by 6.30 in the morning.
It’s a bit awkward getting the youngsters off to
school, but we have health and strength, and
that’s something to be thankful for. The old
man is good; I help him as much as I can, and
when the youngsters grow up they’ll lift a bit
of the burden off him. There are plenty worse
off than we are, although we have our hard
times.
“I am going to keep my eldest boy at school,
though it isn’t easy—he could be so useful in
the shop—but I am determined not to spoil his
life. I want him to win a bursary, and if I can
help him he won’t miss it, I can tell you.”
And they call this woman poor! Why, she is
Human Radium! What a spark! What an in-
spiration ! What a live wire! What a mate!
What a mother! What a neighbour! What a
friend! What a citizen!
She will kindle and foster the fires of ambition
in the hearts of her children, and keep them
glowing in the heart of her over-burdened hus-
band.
Wherever she goes she will carry a message
of sympathy—hope—help—courage.
Don’t be a depresser—a discourager—an ex-
tinguisher—you’ll be happier if you are a spark 1


UNDERSTANDING IS EDUCATION!
If you have sympathy with the common cause
and are eager to espouse it —
If those weaker than yourself can call upon
you in your strength—
If you can make friends of those who need
friends —and be a friend—
If self-interest has not become your god—
If you can love a little child—even the child
of nobody—
If the lonely dog will follow you home—
If you see “yourself” in every human tragedy—
If you are good for something in this life—
and prove it—
If you can look into the face of a criminal and
see there something that moves you to infinite
pity—
If, behind the mask of the painted jezebel, you
can see the woman she was meant to be—
If you can look at the self-righteous man with
sorrow—
If you are not dependent upon others for
your happiness—and can hold on to yourself to
the end—
If you have strong and positive convictions
-and express them—
If you can see a sermon in a flower, a brook,
or a tree —
You are a well-educated person in the best
sense of the word, even though you may never
have spent a day in any school.


HUMAN WASPS I
I don’t believe that women gossip more than
men, but I do believe that women gossip as
much as men.
I don’t believe that the great majority of
women are gossips; but I do believe there are
enough—and to spare.
I don’t believe all gossips realize the harm
they do; but I do believe no gossip ever had a
pure motive.
I don’t believe the gossip always means to
destroy; but I do believe she is more dangerous
than dynamite.
I don’t believe that the poison from the tongue
of the gossip will kill as promptly as the poison
from the death adder; but I do believe it is just
as deadly.
I don’t believe the gossip realizes that there
is the outside, the inside, the right side, and the
wrong side of every story; but I do believe she
gravitates to the wrong side by natural selection
and instinct.
I don’t believe the gossip would shoot down
an unarmed adversary; but I do believe she
would shoot her adversary by a cowardly lie,
which is the weapon of the assassin; and, as the
gossip always attacks only the absent, it amounts
to the same thing.
I don’t believe gossips know how many hearts
they have broken, how many altars they have
desecrated, how many beautiful things they have
defamed, how many ambitions they have des-


troyed, how many careers they have blasted, or
what innocence they have besmirched; but I do
believe that gossips are the meanest people on
earth, more untruthful than liars, more cowardly
than cowards; they are the carrion creatures of
the human race.
DESIRE IS PRAYER
Emerson has taught us that all men are always
praying, and that prayers are always answered.
I can see the hard-headed business man smile,
as he says: “I gave up the praying business long
ago—when I gave up going to Sunday-school.”
But Emerson was right, Mr. Business Man.
You never gave up praying. As a matter of
fact, no living creature can give up praying and
remain sane. Your prayers are answered—
sometimes for good, sometimes for evil.
A plan is a prayer. An aspiration is a prayer.
A desire is a prayer. A purpose is a prayer. A
campaign is a prayer—even an advertising
campaign.
And plans, desires, and purposes achieve
themselves if they are persistent enough—which
is only another way of saying: “All men are
always praying, and prayers are always
answered.”
What you earnestly seek is your prayer; what
your heart is set upon is your prayer. If you


want it enough you will get it—sure enough—
whether it is for good or evil.
Be careful what you pray for. Prayers are
heard—and wise men know they are answered.
WHY YOU ARE A MAGNET
If somebody came, in some excitement, to tell
you that they had just seen an apple fall to the
ground, you would say “What’s the point?
Where else could it fall?” An apple could not
fall upwards; it has to fall downwards, because
everything in the universe, including the apple,
is governed by gravitation—that’s the law.
You believe in the law —that an apple must
fall downwards—though you may not consider
the reason; you merely take it for granted; no-
thing can shake your faith in it; it is a con-
viction.
But if somebody came along and told you that
a law as absolute as gravitation, with rules as
rigid as those of mathematics, makes you and
me a “magnet,” with a positive power to attract
things like our thoughts, and with an equal power
to resist any other kind of things, you might be
doubtful; and yet a magnet you are, drawing to
you every hour and every day things like your
thoughts, by a law which is inexorable.
You are a magnet because there is an affinity
existing between similar things, on all planes
of activity—physical, mental, spiritual.
You are a magnet because all living things


attract other things in harmonic vibration with
themselves.
Everything that exists is what it is because it
vibrates at a certain rate; and, as everything
includes you and your neighbour, me and my
neighbour, our rate of vibration matters.
We make our own rate of vibration by every
action of our mind, for every idea is a vibration
—every thought is a vibration —and every idea
and thought that we hold has the power to pro-
duce a certain condition in our body, because
every condition is a group of vibrations.
Begin to be right at the centre —the centre of
yourself —the place where you think your
thoughts and dream your dreams. Set those mil-
lions of cells which are you vibrating with power;
thrill them with confidence and hope; give them
faith in their strength.
Do this, and they will build in you a faith
in glorious things. Impress the triumphant
thought on every cell, and you must triumph.
Your thoughts and their vibrations will reach
the remotest cell in your body; they will respond,
and those million intelligences which are you,
vibrating as one, will draw to you beautiful,
glorious, and radiant things, for you are a mag-
net, attracting things like your thoughts.


FAME?
A cynic once defined Fame as “the privilege of
being slandered by people one has never seen;”
and one need be neither cynical nor famous to
recognize the truth of this definition.
One of the most extraordinary phenomena in
life is the way in which public persons are slan-
dered and maligned by private persons whom
they have never seen or met, and who have never
seen or met them.
A reason for anything so utterly unreasonable
would be hard to find; but it is easy enough to
find the prejudice which prompts it.
A difference in point of view upon public
questions is all that is necessary to set the
private slanderer of public persons slandering.
Why it seems so seldom possible to disagree
with a man’s views without maligning the man
himself, is difficult indeed to understand. But to
those whose prejudices are so strong that they
supplant reason and judgment and all sense of
fair play, it is quite impossible.
It is, therefore, not to be wondered at that
some people prefer obscurity, with the privilege
of slandering the famous, to Fame, which is so
often slandered by the infamous.


THE “HAS BEENS”
I was standing in the throng at a charity ball
a few nights ago, when an old gentleman, with
an old lady on his arm, passed by.
“I wonder what those old ‘Has Beens’ are
doing here?” said one of a youthful party.
“Yes, you might wonder—look at the Old
Girl! Ha! Ha! Ha!” came in a chorus.
How arrogantly Youth and Ignorance take
the place of honour on the stage of life, and
how ruthlessly Age and Wisdom are pushed
and jostled to the rear!
Yet the “Has Beens” and the “Once Weres”
are entitled to the place of honour in the world
they have made, for they are the wisest amongst
us.
Come along, old “Has Beens” and “Once
Weres!” Your place is not at the rear; the place
of honour in life is yours; and here’s our toast
to you!
Here’s to the “Has Beens,” rich and poor,
known and unknown, women and men—
The brave old “Has Beens,” who organized
the world—who helped to conquer earth, sea,
and sky—
Who laid down the highway where we now
walk in safety, and who cleared that highway
of its morasses and quagmires, ruts and holes,
so that the stream of youth following after them
should neither stumble nor fall —


Who poured their life blood into the channels
of the public prosperity—
Who imbedded their ideals in the foundations
of their country —
Whose backs are bent by burdens bravely
borne for us—
Whose hairs are whitened and whose faces
are furrowed, not alone by the kiss of Time, but
by the anguish and the tears wrung from their
souls by many a youth.
For Youth often leaves a sad requiem sighing
in the heart of Age.
Here’s to the “Has Beens” and the “Once
Weres,” to whom we owe everything—life, pro-
tection, character, education, progress, liberty,
country!
May life for them be a glorious ending, not
a sad retreat!
None of us are insensible to the beauty which
old age lends to things which are not human.
Who has not felt the charm of an old house?
The romance of an old masterpiece?
The glory of an old cathedral?
The nobility of a grand old tree?
Is Nature’s masterpiece—Man—the only thing
in which old age is unromantic, inglorious, ig-
noble?
No! Age is not inglorious; but Youth is in-
glorious when Youth forgets the glory of Age.
May Australia’s sons and daughters never
forget the debt they owe to the “Has Beens”
and the “Once Weres,” whom Youth so care-
lessly and so ruthlessly jostles to the rear!


HOLD ON!
Hard times? Accounts pressing? Hope gone
out?
Well, brother, don’t let go; that’s just the mo-
ment to hold on.
Difficult? Of course, it’s difficult—don’t I
know!
A fellow knows how to encourage only when
he knows how it feels to be discouraged.
Most of the brave fellows you know weren’t
born that way, but they learned to be brave by
holding on just when things seemed hopeless.
Every man who has made good in the world’s
history held on after the giving-up point had ar-
rived. That’s why he made good.
Some of your days may seem darker than
night, but “the sun has not gone out of busi-
ness;” it will gladden your way to-morrow.
If you let go, you’ll snap, and sink swiftly.
If you hold on, you’ll get a grip on that chap
inside you, and he wasn’t born with a yellow
streak. Hold On!
TRUE SUCCESS
What is your conception of a successful man?
If this question were addressed to fifty per-
sons, I have no doubt that forty-five of them
would reply very much in these terms: “A suc-
cessful man is one who has attained fame—
wealth—or power.”


Yet a man may have attained fame, wealth,
and power, and not be in the true sense a suc-
cessful man.
Success is not what one has, nor what one does,
but what one is.
Would you call a man successful who has ac-
cumulated a fortune by putting self before service
—who has ground the last ounce out of his fel-
low-man in the making of that fortune—to whom
“self interest” has become a god?
Would you call a man successful, however
famous, if the love instinct in his heart had
withered to ashes?
Would you call a man successful, however
powerful, if that power were used to crush and
not to bless?
Would you call a man successful who had
gained a world and lost a soul?
Success is not necessarily accompanied by
wealth, fame, or power. Their presence does not
make it; their absence does not take it away.
A man may be wealthy, famous, and power-
ful, and yet remain unsuccessful.
And many a man may remain poor and un-
known to fame who is still a successful man.
Success has nothing to do with selfishness,
but everything to do with sympathy; nothing
to do with taking, but everything to do with
giving; nothing to do with having, but every-
thing to do with being.
It is just as surely success to be brave under
fire, unflinching in adversity, strong under temp-
tation, radiant in sympathy, kindly, true, and just


to friends and strangers, as it is to write a book,
or lead an army, or make a fortune.
No life is successful unless it is radiant with
human sympathy. No man in the world’s his-
tory was ever wealthy enough, famous enough,
or powerful enough, to be truly successful with-
out it.
WHICH IS YOUR SET?
Exclusiveness is supposed to be one of the
highest and choicest of human pretensions.
And yet you should be genuinely sorry for all
exclusive men and women —they miss so much.
Those who are born that way stir our pity;
those who become that way earn our contempt.
Smugly they enwrap themselves in the mantle
of a fondly-fancied superiority, believing that
they comprehend within themselves all the
graces of mind, heart, and person which go to
make the world’s elect.
As a matter of fact they are usually the most
useless members of society. How could it be
otherwise? Have they not excluded themselves
from the common cause, from fellowship, sym-
pathy, experience, knowledge, and the common
touch “which makes the whole world kin.”
No man can be of any real value to society
who cuts himself deliberately off from contact
with his fellow-man.
Exclusiveness is not a sign of gentle breed-
ing—indeed, it is generally a sign of the other


kind —but it is a sure sign of limited intelligence,
colossal conceit, defective social sympathy, and
a pitiful lack of humour.
Fancy you and me being convinced that we
and about a dozen other fellows were the only
people in the world worth knowing. Ha! Ha!
Ha ! What an oblique sense of humour we should
have!
The truth of the matter is that anybody who is
small enough can be exclusive; but you must
have a small, cold heart, a petty little mind, a
mean, narrow outlook, very little sympathy, and
an altogether exaggerated sense of your own
importance.
If you have these, you are qualified for the
exclusive set.
But it takes men and women with warm
hearts, big minds, and fine sympathies to take
a place in the ranks of the inclusive set —the
set which shares the world’s joys and sorrows—
and, after all, they are the only people who help
this old world on its way.
THE CROAKER
It has been said that “it takes all sorts to make
a world.”
I wonder if this is true.
Would not the world and all of us get along
better without the croakers, whose evil words,
weaving evilly as they go, travel faster than the
birds?


A human croaker called on me to-day —-ugh!
What a baleful, malevolent influence!
Croak —croak —croak. Something sad to say
about everything and everybody.
I combated her hideous philosophy with
every power I possessed; but, oh! she nearly
spoiled my day.
First we spoke of a mutual friend who had
lost husband and home, and who had, unaided,
put up a grand struggle for her children.
“Oh, I don’t give her much credit for that, my
dear. After all, what we call goodness is only
selfishness. She wouldn’t be happy if she hadn’t
struggled for them. So you see she was only
doing that which brought herself the greatest
happiness. All goodness is only selfishness,” she
croaked, “only selfishness.”
Next, we spoke of a girl friend, recently mar-
ried, who had made a very beautiful bride.
“Oh, yes,” she croaked, “she is pretty enough
—but beauty soon passes. See her in ten years’
time, and you won’t know her, my dear. They
look all right in their veils and orange-blossoms,
and all the rest of it, but that doesn’t last; beauty
soon fades. Oh, yes—soon fades,” she croaked.
I then referred to the almost incredible diffi-
culties through which her own nephew had
passed in realizing his ambition at Oxford.
“Oh, yes, no doubt he did it all himself.
But is fame worth while? He is only chasing a
phantom—he will strive after it all his life—
and, even if it does not prove a phantom, what’s


the use? It is all forgotten when he dies—all
forgotten when he dies,” she croaked.
Somehow we drifted on to Cobham and his
world flight.
“I have no patience with such men. Glory,
indeed!” she sneered; “all they get in the end is
six feet of ground.”
“Where is Ross Smith now?” she croaked. “In
his grave, where all the other famous ones are,
too. Nothing lasts—nothing lasts,” she said
triumphantly, “except death. Nothing lasts ex-
cept death,” she croaked.
When she left me, the flowers on my table
seemed shrivelled up. All the things around
me looked like weeds —willows —cypresses.
The day seemed suddenly to have draped
itself in endless trappings of mournful crape.
What a blight a croaker leaves in her trail!
I simply had to go out; and it was there that
I saw the sun—the blue skies—the flowers in
the florist’s window —the young mother bustl-
ing over the road with three youngsters and
carrying a baby in her arms, and I knew that
life is worth living—every hour—evety minute
of it—every struggle, every trial of it—every
day, blue or grey —notwithstanding all the
croakers in this world.


BELIEVE!
Believe! In whom? Yourself, and you will
compel belief in others. Be afraid of yourself,
afraid to trust your own judgment, and every-
body else will be afraid to trust it too.
You know yourself better than your neigh-
bour does, and if what you know doesn’t in-
spire you with confidence, how can you hope
to inspire confidence in the person next door?
It isn’t entirely a matter of brains. Large
confidence and moderate capacity will travel
faster and farther than great capacity and little
confidence.
The man of brilliant powers without purpose
and a goal—is often outpaced by the dull man
with purpose and a goal. But it is the power
of the plus that makes the pace.
The world makes way for the person who
knows his goal, but Life is an obstacle race for
the man who is uncertain of his destination, and
the obstacles will beat him.
Men succeed in proportion to the reality of
their vision and the strength of their purpose.
All the great leaders have clung to their
course through incredible difficulties and obsta-
cles, unmindful whether the goal was in sight
or in blackest obscurity. They moved ever
forward to their goal as did Columbus, when,
even in the face of mutiny and threats, he per-
sisted in going on with his search for a New
World, and when he wrote daily in his log-book:


“This day we sailed west, because it was our
course.” This way lay his goal, and only death
could daunt his purpose or deviate his course.
Columbus reached his goal: and so will you,
if you have one —plus a purpose!
“MISFITS”
“Brutes find out where their talents lie;
A bear will not attempt to fly,
A foundered horse will oft debate
Before he tries a five-barred gate.
A dog by instinct turns aside
Who sees the ditch too deep and wide.
But man we find the only creature
Who, led by folly, combats Nature,
And where his genius least inclines,
Absurdly bends his whole designs.”
—Swift.
More intelligent than horse or dog, man fre-
quently shows less intelligence than they, in
persistently working along the lines of his weak-
ness instead of his strength.
“I do not forbid you to preach,” said his
bishop to a young clergyman, “but Nature does.”
The young cleric persisted. He preached, but
failed. He blamed “Fate;” he should have
blamed “Folly.” He was a misfit. His purpose
was not in harmony with his powers; therefore
his powers could not be in harmony with his
purpose. How could he succeed?


While nothing will take the place of an all-
absorbing purpose as a goal-reacher, that pur-
pose must follow the line of destiny, which is
that of ability and character, if it is to reach
its goal. And if it does not follow the line of
destiny, even though it be an all-absorbing pur-
pose, it will be as useless as a boat on land.
Lowell says, “No man is born into the world
unless his work is born with him,” and yet how
many fail to find their work! How many misfits
are there in your acquaintance and mine!
Success can come only to those whose purpose
is in harmony with their powers, and whose
powers are in harmony with their purpose.
Do you think that Turner, the great nature-
painter, whose genius placed on canvas some of
the most glorious masterpieces of art, would
have made a good barber? Yet such his parents
intended him to be. He would have dreamed
his dreams while disfiguring his patrons’ shingle,
for at best he would have been a bad barber,
since he would have been perpetually struggling
along the lines of his weakness, not of his
strength.
Just as the aeroplane is strong in the air and
weak everywhere else, the steamer strong on
the water and weak everywhere else, the loco-
motive strong on the track and weak every-
where else, so man is strong and capable of
reaching any goal when his purpose is along
the line of his strength, and not of his weak-
ness—when his purpose is in harmony with his
powers.


DO NOT EXAGGERATE THE SMALL THINGS!
A sense of proportion is expressed as a sense
—it means so much in every sphere of life.
A sense of proportion is expressed as a sense
of the fitness of things, which is a condition
precedent to a successful friendship or a success-
ful business relationship.
Those possessed of a sense of the fitness of
things are comfortable to work with, to live
with, to do business with.
That is because they see life in proper per-
spective. They see the large things large and
the small things small.
The other kind see the small things large and
the large things small, and it is just this dif-
ference which causes them to put the emphasis
in the wrong place, to condemn the big fellows
of the world for their little faults, to wreck big
causes for little prejudices, to break big hearts
for little frailties.
The people who lack a sense of fitness of
things are to be pitied. But so are their friends
and the movements they support, only more so.
If they are church-workers, they will not help
the building fund because they do not like the
minister’s wife.
If they are political workers, they will not help
their party because they do not like the candi-
date.
The cause is obscured by the croak.
Men and women with a sense of proportion
see large things large and small things small.


So cultivate a sense of proportion; get hold
of the big idea in men and in movements;
visualize the goal—the objective—and do not
let the little things obscure your vision of the
big things.
CHARACTER
The only thing that really matters about any
human being is his character.
The only thing he can take with him when he
dies is his character. The only thing of his
that can live on when he is dead is his character.
The man of character is the truly successful
man.
He may not be successful according to
popular ideas; he may not have amassed wealth
or achieved fame; but if he has constructed
a better character by the end of life than the
one he began life with, he has achieved success—
for character is eternal.
DON’T WORRY!
If worry and depression would do any good,
then “worry and depress to your heart’s con-
tent” would be the advice of the sage to the
man in trouble.
But worry and depression only make more
worry for the worried man.


Worry and depression depress and worry,
using up the energy which should be used to
scurry the worry, and befogging the wit neces-
sary to outwit it.
Worry and depression make a man afraid to
face his difficulties, and so long as he doesn’t face
them they’ll continue to make faces at him.
Worry and depression make a coward of the
worried man, and a coward will never make the
pace in disposing of his difficulties.
Worry and depression unfit a man; they
paralyse his nerve and brain, and derange his
whole economy.
Worry and depression are poisons, as deadly
as the deadliest, poisoning every cell in his
body, causing the whole being—physical and
mental —to be peculiarly liable to catastrophe
and foolish action. Worry and depression are
infectious diseases. All those who are brought
into contact with a depressed and worried per-
son react in one way or another.
Men say, “But how can I help worrying, with
things as they are?”
Well, worrying won’t help them to make
things better than they are. But worrying will
help to make things worse than they are. For
the things we concentrate upon concentrate upon
us.
So, worry, and you’ll need to]


CLIMB!
If you find a man or a woman occupying a high
position in life, you may make up your mind
that such a person didn’t fall there from above,
but climbed up, rung by rung, from below. He
was once down on the dead level, with you and
me.
A man cannot climb without a ladder—granted
—but a man cannot climb high, even when
the ladder is there, unless he has something in
addition to a ladder.
The first thing he needs is the desire to climb.
The second thing is the determination to climb.
The third thing is to begin, and to keep on
climbing.
Somebody said to an expert skater: “How did
you learn to skate so well?”
“By getting up every time I fell down,” was
the reply.
And the man who keeps moving up the ladder,
in spite of all obstacles to-day, is the man who
will sit securely at the top of the ladder to-mor-
row.
Cyrus Field, who laid the first Atlantic cable,
was asked, “How did you accomplish the gigan-
tic task?” “By paying no attention to the people
who said ‘it can’t be done,’ ” he answered.
It can be done, only it must be begun; set
your foot on the bottom rung and your eye on the
top rung, and don’t measure your progress by


the distance you have travelled from the bottom,
but by the distance you have to go to the top.
The top can be reached only from the bottom
—rung by rung.
THERE IS NOTHING COMMON
When we know little, we condemn much; when
we know much, we condemn little; when we
know all, we condemn not at all.
When we understand little, we see much that
is common in life; when we understand much,
we know that there is nothing common, but
that there is much that is unique in what is called
“common.” It is a difference in “seeing.”
Look at that man on the dray that is passing.
To those who look but do not see he is but
a grimy, unskilled labourer —a “common” man.
But to those who look and do see—the “seers”
—he is unique. To them he is an uncommon
man occupying a niche in life which only he
can fill. He is a magnetic centre of a sphere
of influence which cannot be radiated by any
other man.
That man has an influence in his work, in his
home, in his union, in his Church, in his lodge,
in his street, in his town —an influence which no
other human being can exercise; it is his. How
can he be common?
Look at him! See how he handles those
horses, going up that steep hill. He does not
whip and curse; he sits forward to lighten his


weight, finds the easiest grade in the road,
speaks to his horses in a low, encouraging tone,
and when they reach the top of the hill says to
them, “Well done!” and they know, those
horses. You see, he has an influence upon them.
He is kind.
That man is married; he has four children;
and as husband to that wife, father to those
children, bread-winner to that home, he bears
a unique relationship to those five persons. No
one else in the world could discharge that man’s
obligation to that relationship. He is not a
common man; he is unique; he is a man with
an influence, and that influence is his alone.
That man has also his own peculiar relation-
ship with his employer. Something exists be-
tween them, intangible and yet so real, born of
the interaction of their personalities, which can
never exist between any other two persons in
that business, or, for the matter of that, between
any other two persons in the world.
He stamps his own individuality upon his
work, too. He exercises his own influence upon
all whom he meets. Even his influence upon his
horses is individual. Nobody else will handle
them in exactly the same manner, nor get
exactly the same response from them. He is
not a “common” man; he is a man with an in-
fluence.
There is nobody in the world who could
exactly fill his place. And the same is true of
you, me, and every other person in this world.
You are the only person who can do your work.


Oh, yes, the world will go on after you are dead,
but it will be just that much poorer if you fail
in the work assigned to you. You are not a
common person. You have an influence. Choose
well what kind of influence yours will be; for
your influence does not end with this life, but
the things and forces you set in motion influence
other things and forces which will continue to
be centres of further influence right down the
corridors of Time.
KEEP SQUARE WITH YOURSELF!
The safe running of your business, or your
home, depends upon keeping your business or
domestic account “square.”
The safe running of your life, and the security
of your character, depend upon keeping your
life account “square.”
Keeping “square” with ourselves is more im-
portant than keeping “square” with anything
or anybody else in the world—and also more
difficult. We are so specious with ourselves;
we find such ready excuses for our own defec-
tions.
When we evade, when we mislead, when we
procrastinate, when we shuffle, when we do any
dishonourable thing, we are placing a debit
against ourselves which has to be squared some
day, and we are slowly, but surely, undermin-
ing our best asset —our character —by the de-


struction of our own self-respect. The man
who is conscious that he does not deserve his
own respect cannot long command the respect
of his fellow-men.
Men who wouldn’t dream of breaking faith
with their fellow-men do not hesitate to break
faith with themselves, forgetful of the fact that
you can’t keep on breaking faith with yourself
and keep on keeping faith with others.
Break faith with yourself long enough, and
you will soon break faith with all men; for the
man who doesn’t keep square with himself can-
not keep square with others —and it won’t be
long before everybody knows it.
Begin keeping square with yourself by balanc-
ing up each night.
When you can truly say at the end of each
day “I owe myself nothing,” you are pretty
square —that is, if you are honest (and very few
of us are with ourselves).
And even if you’re not quite “square” in your
balancing up, the fact that you are taking stock
each night, and that you know where you failed
—broke faith —let yourself or somebody else
down —helps you to get nearer to the day when
you can square up with yourself and tell your-
self honestly: “I’m square—l owe myself no-
thing.”
Have a daily stocktaking and balance up each
night !


LIFE IS A MIRROR!
The side we show to life is the side of life we
see; the side of life we see is the side we show.
The kind of men we meet are the kind we seek.
The kind we seek are the kind we meet.
What is in your mind, you will find each day
in those you meet.
The man who is animated by base motives
looks for baseness in others—and he finds it;
for he believes in the reality of baseness, and
what he seeks he must find.
The man with a mean heart believes in the
reality of meanness; he look for it in others;
he sees himself reflected in everyone else—and
he finds what he seeks.
The man who is animated by generous im-
pulses believes in the reality of generosity; he
believes men are generous; he looks for generous
men —and he meets them.
That the man with a smile, with the warm
hand-clasp—the man who gives out a genuine
note of human sympathy—will meet smiles,
good fellowship, and sympathy all the way
along is not an opinion—it is a fact.
Life is a mirror which shows you back your
own face.
Life is a great whispering gallery which sends
you back the echo of your own voice.
Life is the great intelligence, which sends to


you things and people like your thoughts and
yourself.
So, show life the side you want life to show
you, for the side you show is the side you will
see.
WHO CAN HURT ME?
I hurt myself as you can never hurt me;
More mean to me than you can ever be;
I’ve many foes, but out of all who pass me,
I’m the most dangerous enemy to “me.”
Why stay to fight the foes upon my pathway,
While fighting “me” each hour of every day;
The foes I meet are powerless to hurt “me,”
But I can tear “me” down and “me” destroy.
I need more courage every day to fight “me;”
For many a battle I have lost with “me.”
I need more strength at every hour to stay me,
In struggling for the mastery of “me.”
I need to fight “me” early, late, and always,
With every power and every form of wit;
I am to “me” so trait’rous and disloyal,
Foes cause no thought, but I must outwit “me.”
Foes are unkind, but e’en the worst among them
Is far more kind to “me” than “I” have been;
I shirk on “me,” I spoil my work and slacken—
I am my own most deadly enemy.


I learned something to-day that I shall never
forget, and that is, that the little word “if” is
one of the mightiest words in our language.
Eighteen interviews have crowded themselves
into my day, and, as the last one closes, there
comes the realization that If has been the key-
note of every story.
“If,” “if,” “if,”—all day long “if!” How it
seems to have woven itself into the very fabric
of human destiny.
“If I had only understood,” said the young
widow this morning—
“If only mother had lived,” said the youth
a little later—
“If I could only get work,” was the cry of
half a dozen—
“If I had only taken the old man’s advice,”
said another—
“If I had only fitted myself for a better job”—
“If I hadn’t squandered my youth”—
“If I could only get another chance”—
“If you would only help me”—
“If I could only tell him that I understand”—
“If she only understood”—
“Oh ! If only it was not too late!”
If — if — if —magical, momentous, mighty IF.
How it winds itself around human lives!
“If” speaks in the voice of hope, in the cry of
despair, in the anguish of regret.


“If” is embosomed in success and entwined
about failure.
“If” hides the secret of life.
"If” is a little word with a mighty task.
THE ARMOUR OF TRUTH!
If you are wearing the armour of Truth, no lie
can really hurt you, but if you are sheltering
behind a mask of lies, the Truth does really hurt.
Don’t waste time trying to catch up with the
lies that are told about you—you won’t catch
them up, anyhow.
But spend time girding an armour of Truth
about you, and then the lies that are told about
you will never catch up with you.
You are not the only fellow who has been
lied about. If ever you entertained that fallacy,
dismiss it.
The smaller the man the bigger the lies, for
lying is the only thing the little fellows of life
do in a big, bold way.
But don’t worry about the little fellows who
tell the big lies!
There are only two things in the world to
worry over —the things you can control and the
things you can’t.
You can’t control the little fellows who tell
big lies about you. But you can control the
influence which those lies shall have over you.
You can determine how they shall affect your
happiness, success, and power.


You can curb the power of the lie by the
power of the Truth. So, make Truth a great
and positive reality in your life, and thus van-
quish the little fellows who tell the big lies.
THE DIFFERENCE
High mentality minus faith in itself has less
chance of achieving success than mediocre men-
tality plus faith in itself.
A strong statement, but nevertheless a true
one, because faith has more to do with success
than mentality has.
Many a man who is not particularly brainy
is successful.
Many a man who is particularly brainy is un-
successful.
The explanation given by the man in the street
is that “A’s” success is due to good luck and
“B’s” success is due to bad luck.
But how much have “A” and “B” to do with
making their own luck?
A man of strong mentality can hold himself
down and back by his own strong faith in his
inability to rise.
The stronger his mind, the stronger the chain
with which he can bind himself down.
A man of mediocre mentality can push him-
self up and on by his own strong faith in his
power to rise.


It is faith that keeps men down, faith that
pushes men up.
It is the same cause producing equal effect,
but not the same result. For faith in success
produces success, and faith in failure produces
failure.
Between success and failure there is a dif-
ference—and the difference is Faith.
KNOW THYSELF!
The wisest thought of the seven wise men of
Greece was expressed in the two words “Know
thyself.”
The wisest thought of all the wise men who
have lived since their day is still expressed in
the same two words.
Ask the wisest amongst us to-day for a two-
word suggestion for practical success, and he
will reply, “Know thyself.”
“Know thyself” are the wisest words ever
spoken by mortal man, ancient or modern.
Yet, few men in ancient times did —and few
men in modern times do —know themselves.
That is why there were so few wise men, then,
and why there are so few wise ones now.
Many of us know many other persons well,
but few of us know well the one person whom
it is our chief business in life to know.
If you do not know the possibilities of the
fellow within you—


If you do not know of the power which may
be slumbering within him—
If you do not know how he will behave under
the hammer of adversity—how he is likely to
react in an emergency—
If you do not know just where he cannot be
trusted —where he has to be buttressed and sup-
ported—
How do you know what to set him to, how
to unfold his powers, how to strengthen him,
how to brace him up, how to sustain him under
fire, how to transmute his yellow streaks, how
to sublimate his fierce desires, how to make a
success of him, and, more important still, how
to make a man of him?
To know thyself is to help thyself.
GET TO KNOW HIM!
A famous wit once said, upon being asked to
meet a man against whose views he was
strongly prejudiced: “No, thank you; I refuse
to meet him, for I want to hate him —and I
never could hate a man I knew.”
This probably was meant to be only a half-
serious reflection upon the way in which per-
sonal prejudices are formed and perpetuated.
Yet, how true it is!
We do not hate the people we know —and we
do not know the people we hate, though we
may think we do.
“What nonsense!” some of you will say.


“Take So-and-So. I see him every day, work
beside him, know him through and through, and
hate him through and through, too. Fancy
telling me I don’t ‘know’ him.”
Well, there’s the proof—the fact that you
hate him so thoroughly is conclusive evidence
that you do not “know” him, even though you
talk to him every day in the week.
To “know” a fellow means to know more
about him than the way he talks or walks, or
even where he works or shirks.
To “know” him is to know his dreams and his
inner conflict, mental and physical—the struggle
between inborn desire and duty—the battle to
curb inherited appetites which may be fierce and
strong —the courage with which he goes on when
there is nothing in him, and every hope has fled
—his aspirations, his hopes and fears, his failures
and his victories.
Do you think you could hate a fellow—any
fellow—if you knew all this about him?
Surely you would say, with Maclaren, “Be
pitiful! Every man you meet is fighting a hard
battle.”
No! You cannot really hate a man when you
really know him.


THINK!
Think! Can you? Do you? Dare you?
Are you sure your opinion is your own on
religion, politics, or morals? Or are you merely
keeping step with the regiment?
Perhaps you don’t think that it takes courage
to think. But think about it, and you will. You
will find, too, that it takes greater courage to
keep on thinking when you begin, and that to
live what you think takes a real measure of
heroism, for there are thousands of foes lying
in wait to crush the thinker —foes both without
and within.
The foes without are powerful, the foes with-
in are wellnigh invincible —unless you have
courage.
Stored away in our minds are accumulations
of fallacies concerning ourselves and concerning
the people and things we know.
The moment we begin to think honestly,
frankly, clearly, all these wraiths from the past
—the beliefs of our parents, teachers, friends,
and associates—arise and say to us, “Only as
you think as we thought can you be right. De-
part from our conclusions and you are in dan-
gerous waters. You are like a mariner on an
uncharted course, and you will surely strike the
rocks and be engulfed!”
It takes courage to think yourself out of all
this. Do you dare? This is where courage is


necessary—real courage —and this is where you
come in—or ought to.
Do you dare to doubt the infallibility of your
past guides, parents, and teachers?
Are you brave enough to examine the world
and all that’s in it without reference to what
anybody thinks, or has thought, about it?
Do you dare to abandon what you think is
false for that which you think is true —for an
opinion which is really your own?
Don’t think your opinion is of no value; every
man’s opinion is worth something, if it is really
his opinion.
All those who have done a really worth-while
service in this world have dared to cast aside
prejudice for principle, and to be considered
“queer,” if need be, for the sake of an idea.
Dare to have your own opinions about every
matter of human importance, and for your sake
and our sake see to it that your opinion is really
based on your own thinking.
The independent thinkers are the bridge-
builders of this world. They build the bridges
over which the generations pass onward and
forward and upward to nobler concepts of life,
for thinking lights up the dark abyss where
ignorance gropes and stumbles, and it reveals to
us beauties before unguessed.
So when you begin to think your own
thoughts, get ready for a grim fight—a worth-
while fight—a fight against the foes within you
holding you down, and the foes without you
holding you back, and all the other foes sur-


rounding you, which challenge you to do your
own thinking.
Think your own thoughts, even if you stand
alone. All the great ones did.
Dare to think !
GIVE HIM A START I
You don’t need to worry because you haven’t
much money to start your boy out with.
Of course, it’s “up to you” to give him a
start; but you can do that; it isn’t a matter of
money.
Give him a start by being the kind of father
or mother that a boy has a right to have—that
will make him a man when all other influences
fail.
Give him a start by giving him a character,
a purpose, a fine faith, a high ideal.
Give him a start by building into his con-
sciousness the fact that a man can’t do wrong
and feel right about it—or do right and feel
wrong about it—for long.
Give him a start by convincing him that real
success is not a matter of a well-filled purse,
but of a healthy conscience.
Give him, besides, a sound mind in a sound
body, and you have given him a start which
money alone could never give him.
See to it, you fathers and mothers, that he
gets that start.


WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF YOURSELF?
You are hemmed in by your own opinion of
yourself.
You cannot do anything bigger than you
think you can.
You cannot climb any higher than your
mental ladder will carry you.
You cannot get the world to believe in you
unless you believe in yourself.
You cannot expect the world to believe in
you if what you know about yourself doesn’t
give you confidence.
You are regarded as the man with the inside
information concerning yourself. If you regard
yourself as a “risk,” and are not prepared to in-
vest all your faith in your own stock, you can-
not wonder if men who take you as an indicator
of your soundness as an investment don’t invest
their faith in your stock either.
Give the world reason to invest its faith in
you by investing your own faith in yourself.
WHAT ARE YOU WORKING FOR?
Are you working to have more or to be more?
Are you working for fame, or for knowledge?
Are you working for a higher place, or for
higher worth?
Are you working to build a character, or are


you building yourself into a mausoleum of gold
and silver?
Do you count your gains in silver or in ser-
vice ?
Many there be who work feverishly through
many years to acquire wealth enough to enjo/
life, but to whom enjoyment never comes.
In the process of coining money they coin
their souls. They become living mummies, in
whom the milk of human kindness has quite
dried up —in whom the love instinct has
withered to ashes —to whom flowers, poetry,
music, laughter, friendship, have no meaning.
Oh, pity these, the work of whose lives has
built them only a tomb!
THE AVERAGE MAN
“God,” said the puffed-up Pharisee, “I thank
Thee I am not as other men are.”
He then recounted the vices of the average
man, and, by way of contrast, supplied an ex-
tensive inventory of his own virtues. But the
Lord was not deceived.
It is easy enough to speak slightingly of the
average man —and the man who is less than
average, and thinks he is more than average,
always does.
But, for all that, the average man is the man
who keeps things going and keeps the world
sane.


He is the real thing; Nature prefers him; she
fashions him perpetually.
In him she has stored up her deepest secret
—Life. We cannot, therefore, think slightingly
of him.
The real secret of life lies in the common-
place—which is not common.
The real secret of beauty lies hidden in com-
monplace things—the brown earth, the green
bush, the golden sunlight.
What greater beauty has life to offer than
“those little, nameless, unremembered acts of
kindness and of love’’ which hourly distinguish
the lives of average men?
Only this morning I saw a little child fall
heavily in the street. Her cries attracted an old
man who was passing by. Though old, he picked
the little one up and soothed her —gently as any
mother —and, taking her to a near-by waggon,
patted the old horse’s head till the tears were
stopped and the smile appeared.
And he was just an average man, but there was
something in his heart which was not just aver-
age.
Oh yes, the genuine sanctities of Life are
found in average minds and hearts.
Not by travelling to the ends of the earth
shall we find God, but in the hearts of average
men—in the hallowing of commonplace things
■which are not common.


FORGET IT!
A good memory is good; but there are times
when something is better forgotten.
If some fellow you know is struggling hard
to live down a past that is shadowed and blurred,
it is better for you to forget it.
If you know of some story, the telling of
which would bring pain and shame with the
telling of it, it is better for you to forget it.
Oh, yes; a good memory is good; but there
are times when forgetting is better and kinder.
DON’T PRETEND I
Why pretend? It never deceives anybody—least
of all yourself.
To be what you pretend to be may be diffi-
cult, but it’s easier than pretending to be what
you are not.
It is more troublesome to support the pretence
of a quality than to support the quality itself.
And if you have enough in you to admire a
quality sufficiently to pretend it, you have enough
in you to make that quality your own.
If it is good enough to pretend a quality for
the look of it, it is far better to possess that
quality for the good of it.
Pretending is difficult and unprofitable; sincer-
ity is profitable and easy.
Pretending is a business which becomes


more troublesome as it grows, for the arts of
pretence and deceit continually grow less effec-
tual to those who employ them.
“Liars have need of good memories,” and
hypocrites are soon uncovered.
A pretender is a dissembler, an adept at
shuffling and side-stepping, one who has so
many things to explain and adjust that he makes
his life a very complex and intricate concern.
A sincere man is a convincing man—any-
where and everywhere; for sincerity creates
confidence, and the man who earns the confid-
ence of his fellow-men has spent his life pro-
fitably.
Pretending never deceived anybody—but there
are those who pretend to be deceived. These
are the hypocrites—and the world knows them
as well as it knows the pretenders whom they
pretend to believe.
So don’t pretend! Be what you pretend you
are! It’s easier!
Don’t pretend to be what you are not, for
everybody knows you for what you are.
I WILL!
“Will you hold the fort?” said a colonel to a
subordinate officer at Stone River.
“I will try, sir,” was the reply.
“Will you hold the fort?” was again asked.
“I will, or die in the attempt, sir,” was the
response.


“Will you hold the fort?” was asked a third
time, more peremptorily.
“I will, sir,” was the reply.
The fort was held.
The colonel did not trust the “I will try” nor
the “I will attempt,” but he relied completely
upon the “I will.”
The mild aspiration to do big things in life is
not the “I will do big things in life” which does
them.
It is the “I will” which holds the forts of
life. “I will” is the bridge over which men pass
to victory.
The “I will —I can—l do —I dare” men win
every time and everywhere.
They may be just average men, built on no
particular plan, blest with no particular luck,
but they have what is commonly known as
“pluck,” and pluck is better than all your luck.
The plucky man is the “I will—l can —I dare
■I do” man— and he always doesl
NOT EASE—BUT STRENGTH
No life can be trouble-free—yours, mine, or the
other fellow’s.
As a matter of fact the fellow you envy often
has much more trouble than you have.
All of us have our conflicts, sorrows, adver-
sities; for life is a discipline, not a joy-ride—
at least until we have cheerfully accepted its dis-
cipline.


What you make of your troubles determines
what they will make of you.
“Do not pray for easier lives,” said the sage.
“Pray to be stronger men.”
A NATIONAL ASSET
Australia produces many forms of wealth—
mighty iron and dusky coal; fleecy wool and
golden grain; fiery opal and precious gold—yet
all of these combined do not represent Austra-
lia’s real wealth, for the real wealth of any
nation is the character assets of her people.
Sheep and cattle, bricks and mortar, great
bridges, great estates, will never make a nation
great.
But if noble impulses stir fine ideals into
grand purposes in the hearts of her people, no
nation can miss greatness, for character is the
line of human evolution. According to its
quality, nations rise and fall.
The character of the people determines the
character of the institutions of any country.
Therefore it is better to be busy raising the
character of our citizens than the height of our
public buildings. Tall buildings have been
known to collapse, but the first man to set about
rebuilding them will be a fellow with a tall
character.
A man’s chief business in life is his own
character, but it is also the chief business of
the nation.


DON’T LOOK FOR THE FLAWS!
If your friend has ten good qualities and one
bad one, why not look at the ten, and forget the
one?
If he has ten bad qualities and one good one,
why not look at the one and forget the ten?
It’s difficult, but it’s possible—and it’s worth
while.
When a fellow knows that you are conscious
of the good in him, you help him to be his best.
But when he knows that you are conscious only
of what is bad in him, you help him to be his
worst.
Both good and bad are probably there to be
seen; but it greatly depends on you whether
the thing you love or the thing you hate will
spring to light in your friend or neighbour.
Martin Luther once said, “If you treat a man
as a dog, he may be forced to act as one”—
which was only another way of saying that we
usually see what we look for, and that we
generally get back what we give out.
Looking for flaws in friends is a very perni-
cious practice and also a very general one.
The man who said, “Where two or three are
gathered together there is scandal in the midst
of them” was certainly a cynic; but he knew
what was going on in his home town, and he
wouldn’t have been far wrong had he applied
his remarks to your friends or mine.
Yet looking for flaws in friends is only a


habit, and, like all other habits, it grows by what
it feeds on.
Why not cultivate the habit of looking for the
good even in the meanest types you meet? It
will help them a little—it will help you a lot.
MEMORY!
Memory may be a blessing, but memory may
also be a curse; it depends upon the memories.
The memory that is stored with treasures is
a precious possession.
The memory that has nothing of real beauty
to remember is little better than a blank.
The memory that is stored with vain and
bitter regrets is a torture chamber.
Happily we can choose our memories—we
are doing so now!
We may make of memory a treasury, a blank,
or a chamber of horrors which we shrink from
entering.
Memory may be full of beautiful associations
—of love and fellowship—of help given and
received—of dear cherished recollections which
time can only make more dear.
Or it may be filled with bitter, sordid thoughts
of unkind words and acts, of hearts wounded
in moments of passion, of irrecoverable wrongs,
committed in hours of temptation.
Day by day we are creating indelible records


—memories—which will live with us right to
the end, producing in our souls either the won-
drous music of a thousand harmonies or a pan-
demonium of discords.
THE WOMAN WHO LIFTS
In every street in this great city dwells a
woman who “lifts,” a woman whom Nature has
planned to be a friend, a woman whose rare capa-
city to feel, and whose radiant sympathy have
lifted her up into the big road of life where the
lifters and helpers lift.
Sometimes she lives in the meanest house in
the meanest street; but it matters not. Wher-
ever she is, the feet of friends and strangers will
find her in their hour of need; for the woman
who lifts is the embodiment of the universal
mother; she is Isis; she is Hathor; she is Mary.
Where sorrows’ troubled plumes wave, where
crooked shapes of terror crouch, where’er the
Lord of Death comes—there is found the woman
who lifts.
Are you the woman who lifts in your street?
If not, why not begin to be? You will find
nothing lifts you like lifting.
You will find that the love you give away is
the only love you keep, and that the happiest
woman in your street is the woman who lifts.


POVERTY NEED NOT KEEP YOU DOWN
Poverty outside will not keep any man down.
Poverty inside will not let any man rise.
Riches are of two kinds—material and
spiritual. Material riches are gold, houses, car-
riages, and clothes.
Spiritual riches are will, ambition, energy,
and faith. Many a man who comes into the
world richly dowered with material things has
died a beggar, while many another, born into
direst poverty but richly dowered with spiritual
things, becomes a prince.
The world is full of illustrations of men who
rose from dire poverty to the highest pinnacle
of fame.
During the years in which Isaac Newton
made his greatest contributions to science he
found it very difficult to pay his subscription of
two shillings weekly to the Royal Society, of
which he was a member. Linnaeus was so poor
when getting his education that he had to mend
his boots with folded paper.
Samuel Johnson’s bare feet showed through
the great holes in his shoes at Oxford. Yet so
rich was he in independence that he threw out
of the window the new pair left at his door.
During all this time he lived on fourpence-half-
penny a day.
Emerson, as a boy, nearly broke his heart
when he could not purchase the second volume
of a book, the cost of which was twopence-half-
penny.


It is not outside poverty that any man has to
fear in the march to fame; it is inside poverty
alone that can keep him down.
Don’t be kept down! Use your will—courage
—energy —ambition—faith—and rise!
Others have. You canl
“DO YOU ‘DO’ OR ONLY CACKLE?”
The cackle of a hen and the laying of an egg
are supposed to be terms synonymous.
Yet there are hens that cackle when they do
not lay.
Not a nice habit, and one not approved by
the more dependable hens who make no an-
nouncements until the goods are actually
delivered.
Although the hen that cackles when she does
not lay is an exception, still the folly of an
occasional fussy shirker lays all other hens
under suspicion.
This explains why the human doubter asks,
when he hears the cackle of a hen: “Has she
been laying or is she only lying—?”
How many humans there are who are just like
that hen! Folk who make much ado about
nothing!
If you have had much to do with committees,
you will be familiar with them.
Most committees are made up of the workers,
who “do,” and do not talk, and the shirkers,
who “do not,” and do talk.


The former want no credit for anything, and
are entitled to the credit of everything.
The latter want credit for everything, and are
entitled to credit for nothing, for they never
do anything—or, at least, they never do any-
thing that amounts to anything.
But they do make a noise, which would be
very misleading if we failed to remember how
like some humans are to those hens that cackle
though they may have produced nothing.
The other kind are so busy doing the next
thing that has to be done that they have no
time to cackle even when they have completed
a thoroughly creditable job.
BE POSITIVE!
“Be thou the true man thou dost seek,” said the
poet.
If you find inspiration in the lives of great
men living, or of good men dead, why not your-
self inspire others to find in you what you have
found in “them?” Admiration for the deeds of
the great and good will bring a glow to your
own heart; emulation of those deeds may light
warm fires in the hearts of many men.
Admiration and emulation are closely related;
they spring from the same root.
One cannot emulate without admiring; but
one can admire without emulating—and many
do.


The difference between admiration and emula-
tion is the difference between the passive and
the positive.
The passive Oliver Cromwell was the man
who wrote: “I am sure that I shall never earn
the least mite.” The positive Cromwell was the
man who shortly afterwards hurled the King
from his throne, dismissed Parliament, and re-
constituted England.
Oh, yes! there’s a world of difference between
the passive and the positive, and it is just this
difference which has made “great” the men and
women whose achievements and character we
admire.
The men who can admire great qualities, great
powers, great achievements in others are capable
of emulating them; but only when they exchange
the passive for the positive mood. Be positive!
And be thou the true man thou dost seek!
IS THE WIFE AN INSPIRATION, OR ... ?
John has a wife and three children, a home, and
a job; so has James, but there’s a difference.
James is a happy, healthy man and a success;
John is unhappy, nervy, and a failure. A big
difference. John and James earn about the
same salary; so it isn’t a matter of money. They
are employed in the same office; so it isn’t a
difference in business anxieties—
It’s a difference in wives, and they can make
all the difference in the world.


James’s wife is a human spark; John’s is a
human extinguisher.
James’s wife is an encourager; John’s is a
discourager.
James’s cottage is a home and a nest; John’s
is a house and a bear garden.
James’s wife is a manager; John’s is a muddler.
James’s wife is a good cook; John’s is a bad
James’s dinner is always done to a turn, hot
and ready; John’s is always raw or burnt or
cold, and never ready.
James’s wife has the children bathed and off
to bed before he comes home; John’s has three
screaming, dirty, sticky, grimy children waiting
up for him.
James’s wife is cheerful, careful, hopeful,
helpful, thankful; John’s wife is tearful, care-
less, hopeless, helpless, thankless.
James’s wife is a great mate for James, and
his inspiration; John’s is the shrill shrew of the
street, and his despair.
Mrs. James has a lot to do with James’s suc-
cess, in health and in business; Mrs. John has
a lot to do with John’s failure, in health and in
business.
Look into a man’s life and background; take
a peep into his home; see Mrs. before you
blame him. She may be the “nigger in the
woodpile.”


IS THE HUSBAND AN INSPIRATION, OR ... ?
Ruth and Rona were friends; their lives had
run on fairly parallel lines. They went to the
same school, married about the same time, and
married men in about the some position—but
not the same kind of men.
Ruth’s husband is a clerk in a lawyer’s office;
Rona’s is a clerk in a wool broker’s. Socially
there is little to choose between them; but per-
sonally they are as unlike as starlight and sun-
light. They represent the North and South
Poles—in husbands.
Ruth’s husband is a genuine helpmate; Rona’s
is a swaggering domestic swashbuckler, a
bounce, and a bully. Ruth’s husband regards
marriage as a partnership, and Ruth as a part-
ner; Rona’s regards marriage as a union of two
with one head, one voice, one will—and they are
his.
Ruth’s husband regards her as an individual
with a right to self-expression; Rona’s regards
her as a cipher, with no self to express.
Ruth’s husband seeks her point of view, and
respects it; Rona’s demands that she shall seek
and respect his point of view only, and always.
Ruth’s husband comes home sober and
sensible; Rona’s comes home inebriated and irri-
tated.
Ruth’s husband lends a hand when the children
are tired and peevish; Rona’s beats, bullies, and
bawls at them.


Ruth’s husband sympathizes with the
drudgery, monotony, and loneliness of her
domestic life; Rona’s says: “You women have
the luck of it; not a jolly thing to do all day
long”—and he believes it.
Ruth’s husband realizes that, with home,
children, cooking, mending, and the eternal
struggle to make ends meet, her cares are al-
ready heavy enough, and he helps to make them
lighter; Rona’s increases her cares a thousand-
fold by relating and magnifying his business
anxieties, both real and imaginary.
Ruth’s husband is a helpful, hopeful, happy
fellow; Rona’s is a wrangling, jangling, nagging
fellow.
Ruth’s husband is peaceful and patient,
thoughtful and tranquil, and brings concord to
his home every evening; Rona’s is restless and
impatient, thoughtless and troublous, and brings
discord whenever he comes home.
Ruth’s husband has a lot to do with Ruth’s
happiness and outlook. Her life with him has
been a stretch of calm and peaceful years; Rona’s
has a lot to do with Rona’s unhappiness and
outlook. Her life with him has been one long
tempestuous squall.
Peaceful years and squally years do not yield
the same results in character, temper, health,
or happiness. Ruth and Rona are proofs of
this.
Ruth is a healthful, happy, peaceful, repose-
ful, good-tempered woman, and ever so much


better-looking than she used to be. Everybody
appreciates Ruth.
Rona is a nervy, unhappy, restless, distracted,
and bad-tempered woman, and not nearly so
good-looking as she used to be. Everybody
depreciates Rona.
Yet between Ruth and Rona there was little
to choose when they were married. They were
both good types. Ruth had not a better
character, a better temper, a better nervous
system, a better appearance then. Now, a
gulf is fixed, but that gulf is not due to any
inherent superiority of Ruth over Rona; it is
due to a superiority in Ruth’s husband over
Rona’s husband. Ruth’s husband was a helper
to Ruth, Rona’s was a hinderer to Rona.
So, when you meet these tired, anxious, dis-
tracted, over-wrought, restless, unhappy, neuro-
tic women, do not be too harsh or too hasty.
Pull up the blinds; take a peep into the home;
see Mr. ; perhaps he deserves all the con-
tempt which you are so generously bestowing
upon his unhappy victim.
BE CHEERFULLY UNCONTENTED
Don’t be too satisfied, however pleasant your
environment; you may be stagnating.
Don’t be too contented, however great your
popularity; contentment can put you to sleep,
and popularity is not always a compliment.
Don’t be too sure that your opinions are the


last word on every subject; there are other points
of view, and they may be right.
Don’t be too comfortable, however beauti-
ful your home; many an upward aspiration has
been suffocated by too much comfort. And, in
any case, how can you? Other humans are
living in hovels.
Don’t allow tapestries, carpets, and bric-a-
brac, however rare and lovely, to lull you into
slothful ease; it is the tug of inertia. Beware!
Don’t be a slave to fashion, authority, or
precedent. Make precedent! Be your own
authority! You were meant to be more than an
animated mannequin at a fashion parade, any-
how.
Don’t be just a “well-bred sheep!” A cattle dog
has more character, and gets more fun.
Don’t be a follower all the time. Leaders are
still popular, and there’s always room at the
top.
Don’t cling to outworn ideas and methods;
yesterday’s standards are obsolete; to-day’s are
better; to-morrow’s will be better still. Keep up !
Help the old world on its way!
The germ of great achievement may slumber
on within you because you are too contented.
That kind of contentment will kill your
enthusiasm; every man’s strong point is his
enthusiasm. The enthusiast vaccinates every-
body in his vicinity. Wake up, brother! Be un-
contented, unsatisfied—but hopefully, cheer-
fully, intelligently, enthusiastically so. Strangle
the tug of inertia—or it will strangle you!


THE GREATEST ART
The greatest artist the world has ever known
left behind him no sculptured masterpiece, no
work of art in bronze or marble, music, canvas,
book, or stone. But he left behind a Life, which,
as a work of art, stands, and will stand, as the
peerless treasure of the ages.
The hearts of men were the canvas on which
the Master Artist painted his pictures—pictures
which will outlast time and endure through all
eternity.
The souls of men were the chords upon which
the Great Composer played the grand symphony
of Life.
The minds of men were the marble in which
the Master Sculptor chiselled his ideals into
forms of exquisite symmetry and beauty.
In the spirit of man He wrote His majestic
epic.
He left behind no book or picture. He left
behind a Life.
How many there are in this world who feel
that their highest expression can only be found
in the fine arts; who yearn to express the glow-
ing vision of their souls in canvas, in music, or
in poetry; and who, if they are denied this op-
portunity, produce nothing of beauty, unmind-
ful of the fact that the greatest of all the arts
is the art of life, and the greatest artist is he who
can transmute the light of his vision into the
lamp of Wisdom in his soul, the lamp of Justice


in his heart, the lamp of Strength in his mind,
the lamp of Understanding in his spirit; for he
who builds out of his vision a great character is
a great artist, if the light of his vision shines
out in his life.
True, it is the office of art to educate the per-
ception of beauty in words, in colours, in nature;
but there is a greater work for art. As every
true artist knows, art is the need to create, and
nothing less than the creation of the work of
art in human character is the true and essential
aim of art.
How much more important that we should
plan a character than that we should plan a
Temple; that we should live our poetry than that
we should write it; that our lives should be
filled with the grandeur and harmonies of music
than that we should compose music which never
touches our inner chords of being! How much
more important that we should conduct the com-
plex harmonies and jangling discords of our
own nature to a grand and compelling unity,
than that we should conduct an orchestra of
players to a great ensemble!
It is more important that we should leave
behind a life than a book, for our book will not
be great unless our character be greater; for the
mind cannot conceive, nor the heart interpret,
nor the hand execute, anything higher than the
character can inspire.
And yet there are those who ask continually
what is the relationship between art and life,
when life itself may be lyric, epic, poem, or


romance. Art is inseparable from life, for life
is art.
To learn the art of life is open to all of us,
educated and uneducated, rich and poor, exalted
or humble. We need not be poet, sculptor,
painter, musician, or orator, to be a true artist.
Our inner vision is not any less beautiful or
powerful because we have not the power or the
opportunity to express it in colour, bronze,
song, or speech. Everyone of us may express it
in our character, and each of us may become a
great artist by transmuting the glory of our
inner vision into our character and our lives.
For there are greater artists than those who
leave us pictures to hang on our walls; they are
those who leave the great lives, which are
pictures we may hang in our souls.
DON’T LOSE THAT FRIEND!
Have you ever been a friend into whose heart,
when the storms of life beat too heavily over
them, those who trusted you could creep and
there find strength to go on?
Have you ever had a friend within whose
heart, should sorrow, disgrace, calamity, over-
whelm you you knew you could shelter, and
there find understanding and peace?
Unless you have been that kind of friend—
and have known that kind of friend—you know


nothing of friendship, with its wondrous sym-
pathy. God has forgotten you.
When Death takes such a friend from us,
Fate deals us a bitter blow. But when Life
robs us of such a friend, the plummet has
sounded the very depths of human grief. Life
holds no greater sorrow.
And yet Life more often than Death destroys
our friendships. Life—the perpetual struggle—
compels us to search for our material needs, to
jostle each other, to compete with each other.
Our paths diverge, we grow apart, cares cor-
rode, time and change play their part, disillusion-
ment enters; and, ere we know it, the light of
a great friendship is dimmed—sometimes for
ever—and the beautiful voice which has chanted
a perpetual communion in our soul is dead.
Keep watch for the dimming influences. Don’t
let the light of any great friendship go out;
fight to keep it flickering; then let the radiance
of your own sympathy strengthen it, until the
flicker becomes a flame so warm and steady, that
it lights again the fires of that wondrous sym-
pathy, which is the heart of every great human
friendship.
Don’t let friends slip!
Don’t let small things destroy great friend-
ships ! Don’t let the gulf widen between you and
that friend upon whom a shadow has already
fallen. Bridge it if you can.
It may be hard to take the first strong step
to bridge it, but the hardest thing in life is to


look back upon a dead friendship, and know
that you could have kept it alive.
Don’t let Life sever your friendships. Keep
them chanting a deep communion in your soul.
Death severs them all too soon!
THE SHADOWS WILL PASS
The study of men and their mottoes is an in
tensely interesting one.
It is surprising how many great men have
derived comfort, strength, and inspiration from
a motto —a motto which, by their own selection,
became the mainspring of their lives.
Sir Walter Scott, we are told, set his whole
life by those prophetic words: “The night cometh
when no man can work.”
Abraham Lincoln, it is said, found rare com-
fort in the words: “This, too, shall pass away.”
That motto he had placed in such a position that
in moments of stress or anxiety it was constantly
within his line of vision to steady and tranquilize
his mind.
If we may judge the merit of these mottoes
by the calibre of the men they influenced so
depely, their merit is indeed great.
If we may judge their power to comfort and
inspire by the fruits of the lives of the men
who lived by them, their power to comfort and
inspire is very real.
Nothing is truer than that “The night cometh


when no man can work,” unless it be “Every-
thing in life passeth.”
If we could keep the former before our minds
it would teach us the preciousness of time, the
danger of procrastination, the value of now.
If we could keep the latter before us in times
of trouble, it would help us to bear our burdens
and get our proportions right.
We should realize that no sorrow will last, no
pain or situation endure for ever.
If there’s a darkening shadow round you now,
this, too, shall pass.
"THEY SAY”
There are two little words in the English
language which have much to answer for, and
they are “They say ”
Cowards, liars, gossips, slanderers, detractors,
and reputation-wreckers are particularly devoted
to this form.
When you hear “they say” used destructively,
measure your man, and take care.
“They say” may be said of some other fellow
to-day—but they may be saying it of you to-
morrow.
“They say” is a cover behind which the rep-
tilian branch of the human family creep, and
from which they attack —always the absent and
generally the innocent, whom they envy.
The fact that they are well dressed or in


society makes no difference; many a well-
dressed human reptile is to be found there, look-
ing very much like other people.
As a matter of fact, some of the most promi-
nent members of the “they say” club are to be
found in “good” society.
But who are “they who say,” anyway? The
main point about “they say” is that they don’t
say.
“They” is generally the fellow who is talking
to you, and, being one of the reptile order—a
sinuous, tortuous, devious, shuffling creature —
by Nature quite incapable of fair fighting, he
employs the cover of the mysterious “they say.”
The members of the “they say” club are too
cowardly for the “I say—l think—l believe —I
know-of”—clean, honourable, and upright men
and women—men and women who never make
a charge without evidence or listen to one—and
who scorn innuendo, insinuation, suggestion as
tools worthy only of the social footpad and as-
sassin.
“They say” has caused untold misery. “They
say” has besmirched honour, destroyed trust,
blighted hopes, severed friendship, killed love,
broken hearts, put out the fires of ambition.
And the tragedy of it is that many a thought-
less, foolish, kindly person has helped to pro-
duce this misery, because he has listened to, and
passed on the sinister suggestions of the mem-
bers of the “they say” club.
Never mind who says “they say.” Ask who


are they who “say,” before you say that which
may be a wicked calumny perhaps bringing un-
told misery in its train.
Be careful what you say, and never mind what
they say.
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE QUESTION
There is always the other side to every ques-
tion. Yet how many of us act as if the side we
know —or the side we wish to believe —is the
only side!
How few of us ever attempt to verify the
rumour that we pass on so readily! How few
of us ever ask that judgment be postponed until
we hear “the other side”—which frequently
happens to be the right side.
Even when “the other side” is not the right
side, it may, when known, so illumine the side
we thought we knew, that it may cause us to
pause before we deliver sentence.
The longer I live, the more convinced I am
that the great misunderstandings in life are fre-
quently due to impetuous judgments—to our
failure to make ourselves acquainted with “the
other side.”
Yet no Briton in a court of justice would
convict even a felon until he had been heard in
his own defence.
Why, then, should we be so ready to convict
our friends and acquaintances without even


raising our voices to ask “What is the other
side?”
None of us should come to conclusions re-
garding the honour —the reputation—the vera-
city—the sincerity—the actions of another, un-
til we know both sides of the question.
What a wonderful world it would be if no
man or woman ever delivered judgment upon
another until both sides of the question were
known!
One greater than we said: “Judge not, that
ye be not judged.”
THE DEAD WHO LIVE
To die may be the end of existence, to those who
never really lived; but to die is not the end of
existence to the men and women who have
wrought, out of their ideals, the very founda-
tions of human liberty—
Who have breathed their aspirations into the
institutions of their country —
Who have stamped their characters upon the
character of every age—
Who have poured their life blood into streams
of public prosperity—
These men and women never die.
Tell me, is Livingstone dead?
Those who have eyes to see can see him still.
Not as he stood, racked with anguish, before
Mary Livingstone’s sad and lonely grave; nor
.kneeling on that last morning, stiff and cold,


beside his own death-bed, where his boys found
their Great White Master still; but, moving
superbly in solitary splendour, across thirty
thousand miles of darkest Africa, by tortuous
slave-tracks, through swamps and deserts, for-
ests and marshes, where none had crossed be-
fore. See him, then, with the flush of fame upon
his cheek, the flame of faith within his eye, the
oriflamme of glory in his hand! Livingstone
though dead, will never die.
Tell me, is Edith Cavell dead?
Can you not see her, too, in those last mo-
ments, and hear her, as she says: “I have faced
death so often that it has no terrors for me. I
am ready now.”
The immortals have kissed her ere her match-
less spirit speeds on to join the deathless army.
Yes; many are dead who will never die.
The hands that traced the Great Charter, and
all the other great instruments which have
secured our liberties, are, indeed, motionless; the
lips which pleaded the cause of liberty are silent;
the voices which stirred the listening crowds are
hushed. But the spirits which framed these in-
struments will live for ever.
However lowly your sphere of life may be, you,
too, may leave indelible footprints on the sands
of Time.
A mother may breathe her spirit into the
institutions of her country by unfolding the
character of her children.
A father may stamp his character upon his
times by implanting courage, steadfastness,
strength, and honour in his sons.


Every good citizen raises monuments which
will endure longer than those of bronze or
brass.
And the humblest man in the community who
does his duty is every day enhancing the national
prosperity in a thousand avenues, undreamed
of by himself.
These are the men and women to whom to
die is not the end of existence.
DON’T DWELL ON YOUR FAILURESI
Disraeli, who began at such a modest height
and ended at one so lofty, attributed his success
to never dwelling on a failure.
He failed often, but he resolutely refused to
dwell on his failures, because he did not wish
to give the habit a hold.
Men who make mistakes acknowledge them,
learn from them, build on them, and then forget
them; they face the East, go forward, and rise.
But men who make mistakes and brood over
them encourage them, dwell on them, become
morally enfeebled by them; they go backward,
and fall.
Don’t dwell on your mistakes! Yesterday is
dead. To-day is here, and to-day is making to-
morrow.
Many a dead past is holding a living man
back.
Bury it, and go forward.


SLANDER
The murderer may kill but one—and we hang
him. The slanderer may destroy many—and go
scot free.
The man who kills another with a weapon
usually does so under the pressure of some great
abnormal compulsion.
The man who kills—or tries to kill—with the
weapon of slander needs no such compulsion; he
proceeds deliberately to destroy.
Skilled by a touch to deepen scandal’s tints
With all the kind mendacity of hints,
While mingling truth with falsehood, sneers with
smiles,
A thread of candour with a web of wiles.
The slanderer, though among the lowest of
human creatures, generally directs his poisoned
darts at the highest members of the human
family.
Every great man in the world’s history—every
reformer, every leader—has been aimed at by the
slanderer.
As Lord Brougham, speaking on the “Fate
of the Reformer,” said: “It has been the lot of
all men, in all ages, who have aspired to the
honour of guiding, instructing, or mending man-
kind to have their paths beset by every perse-
cution from enemies—by every misconstruction
from friends—by no quarter from the one—no
charitable construction from the other. To be
misconstrued and misrepresented has ever been
their fate.”


We have only to ponder over this for a mo-
ment, and there appears before us a great pro-
cession of immortal figures whose greatness
did not save them from the attacks of the
slanderers.
Christ —Socrates —Bruno—Wilberforce—Lin-
coln—Gladstone—Livingstone—all were aimed
at in their turn.
If you are doing useful work in any sphere,
prepare to be aimed at, too.
How can you expect to escape the sneers,
the shrugs, the insinuations and innuendos with
which the human reptile has, from time im-
memorial, besmirched honour, character, chas-
tity, and worth.
“Woe unto you,” said the sage, “when all
men shall speak well of you.”
DON’T LET GO!
The power to hold on, after the “giving-up point”
has arrived, is the power which has distinguished
all men who have done anything great.
It is easy enough to give up—at the “giving-up
point.” It’s holding on that takes pluck.
The “giving-up point” had surely arrived for
Carlyle, when the servant girl used his precious
manuscript—the first volume of the “French
Revolution”—with which to kindle the fire.
But he didn’t give up, though it took him
many weary, toiling months to reproduce what
had been burned to ashes in a few minutes.


The “giving-up point” had also surely come
to Audubon, the great artist who, after years
of forest life, had two hundred of his priceless
drawings destroyed by mice.
It was his “giving-up point.” His own words
tell us how near he came to giving up. “A
poignant flame,” he said, “pierced my brain like
an arrow of fire; but at length moral strength
woke within me.”
Ah! that was it—“moral strength,” which pre-
vented him giving up at the “giving-up point.”
It was moral strength which sent him plung-
ing into the forest once more after the “giving-
up point” of his life had come.
The “giving-up point” is the danger point in
the lives of men. Weak men give up, and fail.
Strong men hold on—and win.
THE GIRL WHO USED TO BE YOU
Behind the woman you are is the girl you were,
The girl who believed in you;
The girl who was white, and good, and true,
Who had faith and honour and dreams for you,
The girl who used to be You.
Can you face that girl who used to be You,
With unflinching eyes and heart that’s true?
Can you claim to have played the game she
knew—
The game of a woman, through and through—


Can the woman you are tell the girl that you
That you never a love betrayed—
Nor a faith destroyed —nor a friend deceived—
Nor even a foe belied?
That you never failed in a cause that was right,
Nor used a lie to advance your fight;
That you are not lost in the make-believe throng
Who have sunk all sense of right and wrong;
Who lie and scheme for ends that are mean,
And wear strange masks, ’fear their faces be
seen?
That in joy or pain, it was just the same,
You played your part in a woman’s game?
Or must you tell that girl that used to be
That the woman she dreamed of is dead?
That—caught like a cork in the popular swirl—
For the kiss of the crowd —and the joy of the
whirl—
For the favour of fools—you have buried that
That girl who used to be You ?
TO AN UNGENEROUS CRITIC!
In a previous message I referred to William
Wilberforce as “the man who liberated British
slaves.”
A correspondent contested this claim, basing
his contention upon the fact that “Wilberforce


was dead before the Emancipation Act became
effective.”
As my correspondent has covered himself with
the dark mantle of anonymity it is impossible
to reply to him personally—hence this message
to an ungenerous critic.
William Wilberforce, author and champion of
the Emancipation Act, died, it is true, thirty-one
days before the passage of the measure by which
slavery was abolished throughout the British
Dominions; but it is also true that, but for the
fifty years during which he waged one of the
most glorious campaigns in all history, there
would have been no Emancipation Act, perhaps,
for a century.
The fifty years’ emancipation campaign covered
two sections of one great movement.
The earlier struggle, inaugurated, conducted,
and led by Wilberforce, lasted nearly a quarter
of a century, when, after incredible difficulties,
it was enacted that the exportation of slaves
from Africa should cease, but no relief was pro-
posed to those already in bondage.
The later struggle, also inaugurated and led
by Wilberforce, lasted another quarter of a cen-
tury, during which period he tirelessly pursued
his great ideal, but .... Wilberforce was dying
when they came to tell him that the bill for
which he had spent his life had passed the Com-
mons, and British slaves were almost free.
Like Nelson at Trafalgar—like Franklin away
in the North-west Passage —like Wolfe in Canada
■and others—he died in the flush of triumph—


the crown of glory being placed upon his brow
by other than human hands.
Oh! Ungenerous Critic, who—because Wilber-
force was called hence thirty-one days before
the legislative completion of his life-work —would
rob him of his incontestable claim to be regarded
as the man who put an end to British slavery!
But there are others who know better, and
in the quiet shades of Westminster Abbey there
is proof of that, for there it is recorded of him
that “he had removed from England the guilt
of the Slave Trade, and prepared the way for
the abolition of slavery in every colony in the
Empire.”
Wilberforce, the hunchback, has raised to
himself a greater monument than any which the
hands of men can tear down, and one which will
withstand the calumnies of all the ungenerous
critics in this world.
THE "DEAD” LIVING!
When anybody dies, it’s the proper thing to
call up the undertaker.
Yet thousands of men and women persist in
walking around long after they are dead. True,
they sleep and wake, wear clothes, and respond
to the dinner gong. But for all that, they are
extinct —something has “gone out” in them, and
that something is the vital difference between
a dead man and a living one.
The “dead” living should not be confused with


the “living” dead. The “living” dead are the
august company who lived so radiantly while
they were alive and left an influence so vital
that it can truly be said they “live” still, though
they are dead.
But the “dead” living are that company of
animated human husks in whom the real “self”
died long ago—who are so dead while they live
that they may truly be said to be dead long be-
fore they die.
The “living” dead influence us even after
their bodies are dead, but the “dead” living in-
fluence us neither living nor dead.
Why do so many men and women die before
they are dead? Perhaps it is because they have
too small a heart for the great business of living
—too faint a spirit to fight their way out to the
light. So they just “die” as a way of escape—
to avoid the struggle. And what do they achieve
by dying? They certainly do not achieve happi-
ness, for that means a struggle over obstacles
and over self—and they have died to avoid the
struggle. Nor do they achieve failure—and
failure to achieve is an achievement compared
with dying as a way of escape—it means at
least a struggle, and is often the key to profound
wisdom.
They do not achieve love, for we must he a
magnet drawing love by the power of attrac-
tion before it can find us. And as they give
no love out none comes back to them. The love
instinct in the “dead” living has withered to
ashes.


They do not achieve power, for there is no
power without life —and they are dead. They
move about the busy haunts of men—“in” but
not “of” them. Sometimes they are mistaken
for the living, but when they are asked to lend a
hand to this or that—then we find that they are
dead. They take no part in any struggle; that’s
what they died to avoid.
Oh, yes—they may look like other men, but
there’s a difference—they’re dead.
They may be shingled—dingled—tailored—
manicured, but at best they are animated tailors’
dummies—perambulating fashion-plates—moving
amongst the throngs of living men, impervious to
every interest except self-interest.
Oh, don’t die until you have to!
Don’t let your heart die until your body dies.
“You” don’t really need to die at all.
Whatever your position in life may be, you
can live so that your influence will live on long
after your body is dead.
A “living” dead man means more to the
world than a “dead” living one.
Don’t die while you’re alive—it’s a tragedy!
THE STINGING BEE!
Human wasps are those humans “in whom the
will to sting” is found in its most active mood
and positive form.
As Nature never intended humans to compete
with wasps, she left out the “stinger” when


assembling the human. But the human wasp
felt as unfinished without a “stinger” as a cat
would feel without claws.
What would life be to a wasp without a stinger?
And so, in obedience to his notion of what the
complete equipment of a human wasp should be,
the human wasp has evolved a “stinger” out of
what was intended for a tongue.
And the tongue of the “human” wasp has
become a deadlier “stinger” than the deadliest
“stinger” of the other kind of wasp.
The other kind of wasp merely stings—but
the “stinger” of the human wasp wounds, poi-
sons, scarifies, mortifies, and crucifies.
If you must be a busy bee, don’t be a hornet;
be the other kind of bee—the honey bee.
You can be just as busy gathering honey as
you can be delivering stings.
PLAY THE GAME!
Hitting a ball with a bat —up and down a
cricket pitch—isn’t “real” cricket; it’s just a
game of bat and ball, unless the fellow who
handles the bat plays fair, loses cheerfully, and
wins without bragging.
A good cricketer is a good man to meet any-
where, for he plays the same kind of game on
the field of life, and he never blames the other
fellow when he misses the ball or is bowled
out.


A good cricketer never begs the question; he
never dodges responsibility; he never refuses to
shoulder the blame.
You try to find out which of your employees
left the safe open; left the gas on; left the tap
running. You will have a busy morning, but
by lunch-time you will know how many real
cricketers you have on your paysheet.
Two men are rarely responsible for one error
—but there will be 200 errors in your business
before you will find one man who is prepared
to acknowledge his responsibility for one.
And when a fellow does come forward, looks
you squarely in the eye, and says, “I’m the man,”
he’s a cricketer—cultivate him.
You haven’t too many of his sort in your
business—and, what is more, you can’t get them,
either.
Many a man who plays bat and ball in the
great game of life would like to be mistaken for
a cricketer.
WILL IT!
It takes all sorts of people to make a world,
we are told; but I believe they could all be
classified under the heading of the Wills, the
Won’ts, and the Can’ts.
The Wills catch up with everything they go
after; the Won’ts oppose everything they meet;
the Can’ts fail in everything they touch. It is
not superior ability which makes the Wills win.


They win because they are “superior” in the
will to win.
It is not “inferior” ability which makes the
Wont’s oppose everything; it is that, in doing so,
they work against the forces which would work
with them for success.
It is not ability, but decision, which is lack-
ing in the Can’ts; and, as the Can’ts never try,
they never win.
He who aims may sometimes hit the mark;
but he who never aims can never get near it.
Indecision is worse than rashness. The man
who is forever backing and filling, chopping
and changing, hesitating and shuffling, weigh-
ing and balancing, will never accomplish any-
thing.
But the resolute man—the man who “wills”
—is a power anywhere and everywhere. He
achieves.
WHAT DOES IT COST?
The average man is sometimes envious of the
great, the powerful, and the famous.
And, if we may judge by the efforts men put
forth to join the ranks of the powerful or the
famous, very few are in any doubt that high place
means great happiness.
But the experience of great men—the experi-
ence of highly-placed men —does not justify this
conclusion. Promotion to the great, or the re-


sponsible, means promotion to a post which car-
ries still greater responsibilities. As they climb,
life becomes harder, not easier.
How often the envious man forgets the cost
of greatness, power, fame, high place, success!
He forgets the sleepless nights, the days of
nervous unrest, the life-long tension of those who
compose the great symphonies, create the great
masterpieces, write the great books, build the
great bridges, control the great enterprises.
Perhaps, if he did know, he might conclude
that the game was not worth the candle, and
would be happy though neither great nor famous,
realizing that the franchise of the obscure is
wider far than the franchise of the great.
WHICH CHURCH?
If you were a minister, and had a church, would
you prefer that church to be known as the most
“exclusive,” or the most “inclusive,” church in
the whole country?
Before you answer, consider. An “exclusive”
church would be easier to run than an “inclusive”
church.
Its congregation would be wealthier and more
complacent; its problems would be fewer and
less difficult. An “exclusive” church has nothing
to do with the manifestly, and avowedly sinful
and immoral, and very little to do with the ill-
clad, ill-bred, or ill-fed.
If you were its minister you would probably


after a few years die spiritually, but you would
at least have the assurance that your congre-
gation would never notice that —and you would
be more popular after you were dead, anyway.
An “exclusive” church excludes so many of
the living that finally it is inclusive only of the
spiritually dead.
An “inclusive” church, on the other hand,
would include rich and poor, good and bad, up-
right and fallen, well-bred and ill-bred, well-clad
and ill-clad, the well-fed and the hungry.
An “inclusive” church would “include” and
share the sorrows, burdens, problems, needs of
all its members, and anyone might be a member.
An “inclusive” church would never have
enough money for its plans.
If you were its minister you would always
be begging and struggling for money enough to
relieve the pressing necessities of someone upon
whom the shadow of want or care had fallen.
Yes, it would be much more difficult to run an
“inclusive” church than an “exclusive” one, and
you could not die spiritually in an “inclusive”
church without the fact being noted by the con-
gregation.
For an “inclusive” church includes interest in
the whole realm of human endeavour, interest
in every living creature, interest in the great and
common daily currents of life. An “inclusive”
church implies service, sympathy, sacrifice; it
implies, too, aggression against social evils,
moral iniquities, national wrongs, and you could
not be the minister of the most “inclusive”


church in the whole country and be spiritually
dead.
Ecclesiastical robes and symbols may be re-
tained long after the spiritual flame is extin-
guished ; but he in whom the spirit shines forth
needs neither robes nor symbols to distinguish
one who excludes no living creature from his
ministry.
The true ideal of the Church is “inclusive,”
not “exclusive.” The lowly Galilean excluded
none—not even the most debased—from His care.
DON’T SCRUB THE LOVE OUT!
You know the sort,
I know you do,
For everybody’s met ’em;
They rub and scrub,
And scold and drub,
And fuss, and fume, and fret ’em.
They find no joy
Within their homes,
And yet, they never leave ’em;
They polish knobs
And doors and floors,
And scour, and dust, and grieve ’em.
When home the old man
Comes from work,
They creak, and croak, and peeve ’em;
“This is the proper place for that,
And that’s the place to leave ’em.”


“Don’t drop that ash
Upon those mats,
Remember I’ve to brush ’em.
Don’t sit, don’t stand,
Don’t this, don’t that,”
Till everybody fears ’em.
They scour the house,
And sour the heart,
They’re always tired and cranky;
And “Don’t” is hung on every wall,
From sitting-room to pantry.
But one day soon they’ll find—too late
Broom, mop, and scrubbing-brush shaped their
Love has been scrubbed from the home they
knew,
And peace has been dusted out of view,
And Joy has been tidied out of the way,
And Sweetness swept out ten times a day.
COMPENSATION
The fellow who was born wealthy, and upon
whom fortune has never frowned, isn’t as lucky
as some people think—not by a long way.
He never has heard, and never will hear, the
deep tones, the tender notes, which we have
heard, nor will the grand organ of Life ever
reveal its richest harmonies to him.


It’s our old friend “compensation” at work
again.
The man who has never longed for anything,
or wanted for anything, and for whom every-
thing in life has been provided and planned, isn’t
lucky.
He doesn’t realize it, but we have him hope-
lessly beaten when it comes to real life.
We’ve graduated in the school of hard knocks
—you and I—haven’t we? And that’s the school
which confers the degrees for real life.
We’ve known both shadow and sunshine in
our time. We’ve heard the sigh of the tired
and discouraged who were ready to let go, and
we’ve helped them to hold on; and we have
ourselves been discouraged and glad of the
friendly fellow who said to us, “Hold on.”
We’ve had experience, and old “compensation”
has made every hour of it worth while.
So don’t envy the man on whom fortune has
never frowned—life never yields her best to him.
THE SPIRIT OF MOTHER’S DAY
Somewhere deep in the heart of Australia is an
Altar, upon which burns with splendid radiance
a Great White Light—a Light which illumines
all the land and which is a beacon to far-off
coasts and a pledge to all her sons.
It is the steadfast light of Mother Love—the
radium of human emotion—shining down through
all the ages to our own.


To-day Australia lays upon the Altar of
Motherhood a sprig of rosemary in remem-
brance.
To-day a thousand mother’s sons, good and bad,
proud and humble, wise and foolish, turn to her
shrine, for it is Her day.
The memories which cluster around this day
are the most tender and exquisite in the human
treasury of remembrance.
No poem, no discourse, no eloquence can ex-
press mother love. No artist can tell it; but all
humanity has climbed upward upon it, and has
learnt from her love its richest lessons.
The world owes much to love of every type
and kind, to love of brother for brother, sister
for sister, father for child, man for his fellow
man, patriot for the land of his birth.
But what the world owes to that idealized,
spiritualized, radiant force which we call mother
love, no tongue can ever tell.
Some of you may say that, after all, it is just
love. But what kind of love?
Love sublimated by suffering, enriched by
sacrifice, ennobled by sorrow, combining the
song of the tenderest nestling with the wondrous
music of the most majestic organ.
It is the most potent, evergreen, irresistible
force in this world.
The mothers of the world have written great
and enduring things on the tablets of human
character. The best the world has known, they
have taught.
And yet can it be claimed that the mother


who bears and rears her child and sends it forth
into a world so full of evils, dangers, pitfalls,
and man-traps that one or two out of every
ten of her children become criminals, drunkards,
or derelicts, ending their lives in gaol, gutter, or
asylum—can it be claimed that that mother has
done her whole duty?
The homes of the world have failed and
mothers have failed, too, while the lives and
characters of thousands of their children are
wrecked and devastated by social evils which
are preventable, and which it is their duty to
prevent.
It is as much the duty of a mother to sweep
evil from the path her children must tread as it
is to cure their colds and rub away their pains.
A mother should not only be a love-architect,
but a life-architect, building for each generation
of her sons the safety-devices over which they
shall pass in security to nobler conceptions of
life and duty.
Who but she, seeing and “fearing” as she does
the morasses, the quagmires, the quicksands,
the holes and traps on the Highway of Life,
should get them filled in, cleaned out, or bridged,
so that her sons shall not sink in their infamies
■so that they shall walk in safety?
Until she has done this, she has not done her
whole duty.
Somebody has said: “God could not be every-
where, and so He gave us mothers”—a very
beautiful conception of the ideal role of the
human mother.


But would God consider that a mother had
done her duty when she had reared a beautiful
boy to eighteen years of age and had neglected
to fight for the removal of the evil which sub-
sequently brought him to the prison, the scrap-
heap, or the dishonoured grave?
Would He hold you guiltless? Would you be
guiltless?
Dare you bear sons for the prison, the mad-
house, the human scrap-heap, the dishonoured
grave ?
You mothers, to whom Nature has entrusted
the lamp of life, the round planet is in your
hands.
The road where your sons and daughters walk
must be made safe by you. Else has mother-
hood, for all its beauty and wondrous sacrifice,
failed!
You mothers may know the evils of the road;
you may know every hole and every trap in
it, but what of the stream of youth behind you?
Perhaps your own sons are grown and safe,
perhaps they have passed away, and are silent,
perhaps they have done their duty gloriously
and have gone “west.”
But every boy and every girl in that great
stream behind you is the son or daughter
of some mother. And no mother’s son is safe
until every mother’s son is safe.
It is the supreme duty of the mothers of the
race to clean up the road where their boys and
girls must walk.
There is a miracle of fighting ability in


motherhood, but —is motherhood ready for the
fight? Is motherhood armed? Is motherhood
mobilized ?
One generation of great mothers would make
a great new world, for the cradle-rockers have
power enough, in their great wise hearts, to rock
the world into a great spiritual renaissance, if
only they were conscious of their power.
Great mothers are those who would fight for
peace, so that to-day’s cradles should not fill
to-morrow’s trenches.
Great mothers are those who would fight for
the national teaching of mothercraft, so that the
priceless lives of thousands of their own little
ones, which now are wasted, should be saved.
To-day we do not conserve the human asset;
we bury it; and graves are not a good invest-
ment for a nation.
Great mothers are those who would fight for
the segregation of the mentally defective and
thus prevent the propagation of degenerate
human stocks, from which are recruited, with
each generation, a new army of paupers and
criminal descendants, destined to fill our hos-
pitals, gaols, and asylums, and irresponsible for
their actions by reason of their mental defect.
If the mothers of the community would, with-
out regard to party, class, or creed, mobilize and
build these safety devices, making the highway
of civilization safe for their sons, what a won-
derful new world it would be!
Around me on every hand I see noble and
enduring types of mothers—mothers on the


rungs of whose souls their sons have climbed
upwards. To them, and others like them, and
to millions long silent, Mother’s Day is dedi-
cated.
Sacred, indeed, are the memories which will
ever surround it.
A white flower is the symbol of remembrance
for Mother’s Day.
But many there be who will bring to her
shrine this day a flower which will not be a white
flower.
Her sons come bearing flowers of many
colours; some are white, some are red, some are
purple, and some are black.
The bearers of the white flowers are those
into whose heart she crept and hid so long ago
that her spirit lives within them and will live
with them while life lasts.
The red are brought by those who have wan-
dered long among life’s scarlet passion flowers;
the purple by those who have eaten of the husks;
the black by those who have played with the
flowers of death, the deadly nightshades of life.
Pity—oh, pity!—that the sons of woman could
not all lay a white flower, the symbol of a blame-
less life, upon her shrine to-day!
But black or white, red or purple, she reaches
out to take them, for are they not hers, the offer-
ing of her erring sons?
Has she not ever embosomed them —hero—
ingrate—recreant ?


Has she not always faced anguish, crucifixion,
death, for the least of them? Has she not worn
sorrow’s crown of sorrow for the worst of them?
And now, enfolding her blossoms of many
colours, she bends to tend the light which has
burned through all the ages upon her Altar—
a beacon to her sons, and a pledge which will
outlast time.
And silently she takes her place above the
shrine—deep-eyed, deep-bosomed, vigilant, the
embodiment of eternity, Love, and power, ark
and cradle of the race, the spirit of Mother’s
Day.
THE LOG-BOOK OF LIFE
It is not what people think you do, or say you
do, that matters to you.
It’s what you think, say, and do that matters.
Your record is being written now in the great
Log-Book of Life. But neither friend nor enemy
can write a line of that record. The thing which
makes or breaks you is the record you write.
The friends who love you pass on their way
•the enemies who hate you too.
Their love cr condemnation matters little in
the last analysis, for when the great accounting
comes you will stand alone.
What you think, and say, and do —not what
people say you think and do, is the record you


are writing in the Log-Book of Life. You are
writing it now.
Are you sure it is a record of which you will
not be ashamed when the day is done?
MONEY CANNOT BUY THE BEST THINGS
Money represents to many the best in life;
yet many learn that money never buys the things
for which they yearn.
Pleasure represents to many the best in life
—and many learn that some pleasures never
please.
How few of the beautiful things of life are
bought with money!
We cannot buy Love with money, though
many a fine imitation has been bought and sold.
We cannot buy Friendship with money,
though money can—while it lasts —buy the flat-
tery of fawning sycophants; but self-interest can
never be mistaken for the pure selflessness of
friendship.
We cannot buy Honour with money, though
there are those who honour money more than
anything else in the world.
We cannot buy Happiness with money, for
happiness rests upon love, friendship, and hon-
our, which all the wealth of the Indies cannot
buy.
And money cannot buy Peace at the dusk of
life; for at the setting of the sun Peace rests


not upon what we have, but upon what we’ve
done.
There are beautiful things within reach of us
all —but they cannot be bought or sold.
I AM GLAD IT WAS A WOMAN!
Elbert Hubbard once told a story, founded on
a fact. It was about a fellow named Rowan,
who carried a letter to Garcia.
The whole world took notice of that story.
America was at war; Garcia was a soldier,
hidden away in the mountain fastnesses of a hos-
tile country.
Neither mail nor cable could reach him.
America needed his co-operation; he had to
be reached—but how?
And it came about that a fellow named Rowan
was told by the President to take a letter to
Garcia.
The President had no idea where Garcia was;
neither had Rowan; but he didn’t ask; he set
out to deliver that letter —and only death could
stop him.
In three weeks and four days he crossed a con-
tinent, an ocean, a jungle. He pressed through
a hostile country, telling no man of his mission
■—but he delivered that letter to Garcia.
The intrepid daring—matchless initiative—
peerless courage —amazing endurance which dis-
tinguished every moment of those three weeks


and four days of incredible hardship constitute
an epic of heroism.
Rowan did a great thing —but Hubbard told
the world about it.
Rowan delivered the letter to Garcia —but
Hubbard’s telling of it has inspired thousands
of other Rowans to carry a letter to Garcia.
Rowan did a great deed gloriously—but Hub-
bard, inspired by its glory, immortalized it.
When Hubbard wrote that story the gods
were very near him.
He produced an inimitable gem, the first great
modern Sermon on Efficiency.
But this story is of Rowan. Hubbard is dead.
Garcia is dead. Did I dare to say “dead?” Only
those are dead who can no longer influence the
living, and, while one man lives who can read
his story of the letter to Garcia, Hubbard will
not be dead.
And Garcia cannot die, because Hubbard and
Rowan lived; between them they have given him
immortality.
Rowan is living, but not as the man who
carried a nation’s message to Garcia should be
living.
And I am glad it was a woman who reminded
America that, just as Rowan cut away the jungle
from his pathway to get America’s letter to
Garcia, so America should cut away the jungle
from Rowan’s pathway as his years decline to-
wards the West.
It was a woman member of Congress who
pointed out that Rowan had furnished America


her greatest moral lesson, and who reminded
America of her moral obligation.
It was she who presented a bill to Congress
by which Major Rowan was promoted to the
honour and emolument of a Major-General for
valiant service.
All honour to Representative Florence Kahn!
A warm heart is as necessary as a cool head in
politics.
And it is good for a great nation to remember
those who have made her greatness.
As for you and me, let us, too, remember
Rowan, when we are called upon to carry a
Message to Garcia!
DON’T DRIFTI
Some humans emulate the snail in their pace
through life —
Some amble and ramble through—
Some walk, others run—
Some dream, others make the pace—and the
pacers are the darers and the doers.
Even if your pace be a snail’s pace, keep mov-
ing! Have a sense of direction and goal.
Don’t drift —for a drifter is doomed. He’s on
the toboggan, headed for nowhere, and he will
arrive—on time —right there.
The drifter is always a failure. Drifting is
always fatal; fatal in national life, fatal in social
life, fatal to business, fatal to character, fatal to
success, fatal to health.


You cannot develop your country by drift;
you cannot develop your business by drift; you
cannot realize your ideals or your hopes by
drift; you cannot overcome obstacles or make
your goal by drift.
Drift is doom.
Creep amble ramble—walk—run—rush—
dream —dare—do, but don’t drift.
There are many now of my acquaintances who
are capable of great deeds, blessed with great
powers; but those deeds will never be done;
those powers will never be revealed. They are
drifters.
They are like the man who was going “to
bleach the moon and freeze the sun, but when
he died there was nothing done”—he was a
drifter.
Don’t drift!
THE GREAT ARE THOSE WHO SERVE
I do not know in whose brain first dawned the
idea of the great printing press which turns out
this paper to-day.
I do not know the names of all those who
helped to improve it and bring it to perfection.
But I do know that the man who tends it
and the man who cleans it are just as great as
the greatest of those whose ideas it converts
into newsprint, if they are doing their work with
the same honesty, faithfulness, and capacity.
We must look farther than our History Books,


our Halls of Fame, our “Who’s Who” for a list
of the great people of the community.
To find the great people of the community
you must find those who are serving faithfully
in home and school, farm and workshop, engine-
room and factory, mine and office, on sea and
on land.
“For he is greatest who serveth best.”
The great people of a community are those
who use to-day for a better to-morrow.
They work in those movements which take us
upward, onward, forward.
They are the people who start things—run
things—inspire things—which spell human pro-
gress.
They are the people who transform forlorn
hopes into successful ventures by their enthusi-
asm and service.
Their highest pay comes from doing the things
they are not paid to do, and from doing faith-
fully the things they are paid to do.
They are rarely thanked, but more rarely still
do they think they deserve thanks.
Sometimes their faithfulness is referred to in
obituary notices, but not always—and they don’t
care.
They don’t work for the “gate” money but
for the game, not for the glory, but for the goal,
and the goal is the good of the whole team—the
Community.


THE CELL-BUILDER
Your brain is the acknowledged commander of
the commonwealth of cells which compose you.
But your brain is not the only part of “you”
that thinks. Every one of the billions of cells
which go to make up the rest of “you” think,
too.
But they don’t only think; they act, and most
efficiently. If only those humans we depend upon
to carry out our plans, in business and in the
affairs of life generally, were half as prompt,
as dependable, and as efficient as the cells of
our body are to execute commands, how much
more satisfactory life would be!
In each of the cells of our body we find an
intelligence, a planner, a builder, a repairer.
These busy litle cell citizens adjust themselves
to our needs and to our protection; and, being
no respecter of persons, they do the same for
other forms of life.
It is told of the primitive giraffe that, being
forced to rely for its food less and less on grass,
and more and more on the leaves of the trees, in
obedience to its needs the intelligent cells of its
body began by subdividing themselves to stretch
out its neck.
The process of lengthening a giraffe’s neck and
the finger-tips of the blind may at first appear
to have no connection; but let us consider. Have
you ever been brought into contact with the
blind or the deaf and dumb ? Have you watched


their wonderful efforts at self-expression? If
so, you have realized to what an amazing extent
they have developed the intelligence of the tips
of the fingers.
It is said that actual grey-matter cells, similar
to those in the brain, have been found in the tips
of the fingers of the blind. It is the same cell-
intelligence which stretched the giraffe’s neck so
that it might reach its food that is adjusting
itself to human needs in the case of the blind.
The cells of the body are simply an extension
of the brain; that is why every sensation which
is registered in the brain is registered in every
cell in the body also.
Mental suggestion can reduce the cell-life of
the body to the verge of collapse.
When once the profound significance of the
intelligence of cell-life is grasped, together with
the fact of the power of our thoughts upon the
activities of the cells of the body, many things
which otherwise remain a mystery will become
clear to us.
That mental causes produce physical diseases
is no longer a matter of doubt or speculation.
Chronic hatred, jealousy, suspicion, and envy
are now known to poison the blood stream, and
to work black havoc physically.
The reason why thought is such a mighty
power becomes clear. Ponder over it, and you
will see why our mental attitudes —hopes, fears,
joys, sorrows—have such a far-reaching influ-
ence over our lives; it is because every cell in
you thinks.


You are more than one, you are a million
intelligences—and the million intelligences which
are you, vibrating as one, attract those things,
forces, and conditions which are at their rate of
vibration.
It is the law which you can neither cheat nor
evade, but which you can employ.
A WOMAN’S PRAYER
Teach me the value of a minute—the power of
an hour—the opportunity of a day.
Awaken within me a great understanding —a
great Truth—and a great Trust.
Teach me how to become radiant in Life
—Love and Work.
Above all keep me from growing cold, mean,
and bitter.
Give me the power to resist false gods and
false loves, and make me insensible to the lure
of tainted riches.
Guide me, so that from those I love I shall
have nothing to conceal.
Help me to be always kind, and to know that
it is often harder to be kind in feeling, thinking,
and judging, than it is in giving.
Make me able and willing to lend the helping
hand.
Make me as merciful and generous in my
judgment of others as I should like others to
be, in their judgment of me.


Help me ever to remember that even my
enemy is still my fellow man; that within me
lies as much of frailty as in him; that my hand,
raised against him unjustly, is raised against
myself.
Let no thought of mine go forth on an err a
of destruction—no, not even to my enemy.
Grant that I may earn what I enjoy, and that
in earning it I do unto others as I would they
should do unto rrfe.
Keep me strong enough to be simple, young
enough to enjoy the laughter of children, gentle
enough to be thoughtful of age.
Then, when the shadow falls on me, may
there be some one soul who knows me, and
who yet would write above me: “Here lies a
Woman.” Amen.
The Eagle Press, Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo




