

My Early Days
Ellen Shephard Tripp.




$ £><xc\(i boy. !A\n> 3> c? |


ELLEN SHEPHARD HARPER - AGED 21.


My Early Days.
Ellen Shephard Tripp.
y, .l HR following simple narrative of my childhood in
England and experiences during the early days of the
mm Canterbury Settlement in New Zealand, I have written
at the request of my children, thinking that, in years
to come, it may be of interest to them and to old friends.
To begin I must go back a few generations when in 1754
Edmund Harper married Susannah Strachey. Their son,
Tristram, married Mary, daughter of Adam Jellicoe and
Elizabeth Chitty, and became in the year 1804, the parents
of my father, Henry John Chitty Harper. (The famous
Lawyer, Joseph Chitty, was a cousin).
My Father married, December i2th> 1829, Emily, daughter
of Charles Wooldridge (a Solicitor, living in Winchester)
and his wife Kezia, n6e Weddell. I was their third daughter,
and was born on the nth December, 1834, at Willowbrook,
a house standing on the borders of Slough and Eton. My
Father at that time being Chaplain, I was baptized in the
Chapel of Eton College. My Godparents were an Uncle,
Leonard Wooldridge; a cousin, Miss Jellicoe (afterwards
Mrs. Malthy); and Aunt Harriet Shephard (Father’s sister).
We lived in Eton until 1840, when my Father was given
the living of Stratfield Mortimer, in Berkshire. There was
a good roomy vicarage, which enabled him to take pupils, -
very necessary, as at that time we were eleven in family,
and by the year 1847 there were nine sons and six daughters.
Mortimer was a pretty home in a good neighbourhood; —
the parish joined Stratfield-Saye, the Duke of Wellington’s
estate. We constantly saw the famous old Duke, and he
sometimes let us go into his garden and eat the straw-
berries. I remember, once when we were children, we were
waiting at Mortimer railway station to see Queen Victoria’s
train pass —the Duke was amongst the crowd, and when my


small sister Sarah (now Mrs. Percy Cox) cried with the
cold, he came and rubbed her hands to warm them, which
of course, much impressed the rest of us.
Looking' back to the many acts of kindness received from
neighbours, being driven to church in Lady Hunter’s yellow
coach remains in my memory as a great treat. Sir Claudius
Hunter was our Squire, and with kindly thought for the
needs of my Father’s large family, he gave instructions
that, when he died, instead of the usual cheap material it
was then the custom to use, the church was to be hung
with the best black cloth, which after the funeral was to be
presented to the Vicar. My brothers had many Eton
jackets, and years after, in New Zealand, we still wore
riding habits made from this cloth.
; We lived at Mortimer, for sixteen years until 1836, when
my father was made first Bishop of Christchurch, New Zea-
land. He was consecrated on August 10th in the chapel at
Lambeth.
Two years previously, my brothers Leonard and Charlie
had gone to the Colony with my Father’s old school friend,
Bishop Selwyn. The rest of the family, Father, Mother, and
ten children, left for New Zealand in the sailing vessel
Egmont, ” of 787 tons, on the 10th September, 1856,
leaving my two l brothers, George and Paul, at Eton.
Bishop Wilberforce (known as “ Soapy Sam ”) came to see
us off. Avery fine old man and a great friend of the family,
and who had confirmed me earlier.
We had a splendid passage, and landed in Lyttelton on
December 23rd. Bishop Selwyn, the Rev. L. Williams
(afterwards Bishop of Waiapu), and our brother Leonard,
met us; Charlie at the time being ill'in Auckland and unable
to travel. On arrival we attended a thanksgiving service,
held in the Emigration Barracks, after which we went back
to the ship to pack, and then Bishop Selwyn took us all on
board his little schooner, “ The Southern Cross ”, which we
were told had been given for the use of the Melanesian
Mission by Miss Charlotte Young, the authoress, out of the
proceeds of her book, “ The Daisy Chain ”.
We finally landed on Christmas Eve, and walked over
the Port Hills by the Bridle Track, 1,000 feet high, as the
road to Sumner had not then been cut. We girls each
carried small bundles containing our best bonnets and
finery, to appear in next day. My Mother and Janet, the
youngest girl (now Mrs. Tom Douglas), aged ten, rode the
same horse, led by Mr. Willock; my father, Bishop Selwyn,




—Photo by Dr. Barker.
BISHOP HARPER 1 859.


by Dr. Barker.
OLD ST. MICHAEL'S CHURCH AND BELL.


CHRISTCHURCH, 1856.
Photo from Sketch by Dr. Barker,




VIEW FROM WORCESTER STREET BRIDGE, CHRISTCHURCH, 1915.


Mr. Williams and my brothers walked, pushing- and pullings
a hand-cart on which was our beddings etc. On arrival at
the Cookson’s, Heathcote Valley, we were given, I so well
remember, a delightful lunch of strawberries and cream,
and then were driven into Christchurch 0} Archdeacon
Mathias, and Mr. Fitzgerald the first Superintendent of
Canterbury. The Archdeacon took some of the party, and
Mr. Fitzgerald drove Father, Mother, Emily, Mary and
myself, in a wonderful dog-cart of his own make, with
enormous wheels like a spring dray and which he called
his “ Circulating Medium ” —he drove a Tandem of
unbroken horses and the road was very rough. But, in spite
of all, we arrived safely, and were deposited at a small
cottage in Cambridge Terrace which was to be our future
home. (The house is still standing next to the Public
Library 1915). Our new neighbours had been most kind
and thoughtful, and had supplied our kitchen with flour,
sugar, bacon, and mutton, in fact, every necessary.
Christchurch then consisted of a few odd houses; part of
the present Colombo and Cashel Streets; old St. Michael’s
Church; a few shops; one bridge across the Avon, near the
Royal Hotel; and a very shaky footbridge near our house,
—the rest, just wooden pegs where future streets were to be.
On Christmas Day we were ready early, in our best
clothes. I remember my sister Rosa and myself wearing
buff-coloured dresses with three flounces, and little black silk
capes, and close-fitting straw bonnets trimmed with forget-
me-nots. We assembled at Mrs. Jacobs’, and from there
Bishop Selwyn marshalled us in pairs to St. Michael’s, —we
were followed by the Bishop and Clergy, who were to inau-
gurate my Father. All the country-side had come to Christ-
church for the ceremony, Charles Tripp and Barton Acland
all the eighty miles from Mt. Peel. The former, my future
husband, noticed me coming into church, holding a small
brother’s hand (Walter, afterwards Dean of Christchurch),
who' behaved very badly !
After the service and lunch we were very tired and hot,
so went and sat among the flax (8 ft. high) on the banks of
the river, and were much amused at the way the people of
Christchurch came and stared at us, new arrivals being a
great novelty.
Our house being very small, when visitors came to see
my Father, some of us had to go out to the hospitable neigh-
bours to make room. Three of us slept in an attic bedroom
which we reached by a step ladder. On beams over the


beds our saddles hung-, and on top of them our ball dresses,
pinned up in sheets.
Christchurch was a delightful settlement, and we were
fortunate in having- such friends as the Gressons, Barkers,
Bowens, Wilsons, Westenras, Studholmes, Fitzgeralds, and
many other charming people. The two years I lived there
were full of fun, and we young people enjoyed life thor-
oughly , picnics, riding parties, and, every fortnight, dances,
either in the Royal Hotel or in private Houses. We often
walked through mud wearing our brother’s top-boots, and
to the first dance at Halswell (Mr. John Bealey’s) we went
in a bullock dray.
My sisters met Mr. Tripp before I did, and often spoke
of him and his good dancing, etc. When at last we were
introduced a very short time elapsed before we became
engaged. Of course he had to return to his sheep-run in
South Canterbury, in those days a week’s ride from Christ-
church; and during our eleven months’ engagement he was
only able to be in Christchurch three or four times for a few
days. How well I remember our walks together, where the
Domain is now —then only flax and rough tussocks, —not
very private for lovers. Mary and Charles Blakiston were
also engaged, and we sisters were so much alike at that
time, amusing mistakes often happened.
Charles George Tripp, who was a son of Rev. Charles
Tripp, D.D., Rector of Silverton, Devon, had arrived with
his friend John Barton Acland in Canterbury on the 4th of
January, 1855, and had worked as cadet to Mr. Burke ‘n
North Canterbury—the following September he undertook
to drive a bullock dray 100 miles to Raincliff. On reaching
the Rangitata river they found it in flood and camped on
the bank for a week —during that week Mr. Tripp made
enquiries as to the capacity of the hill country near and was
told it was only fit for wild pigs to live on —he thought
sheep would probably live there also and with characteristic
enterprise on his return to Christchurch decided to take up
150,000 acres with Barton Acland as partner (this tract of
country is now divided into Mt. Somers, Mt. Possession, Mt.
Peel and Orari Gorge runs).
On May noth, 1856, they both camped in a tent at the foot
of Mt. Peel and for six months they lived entirely on wild
pork and wekas —they built a small hut and one of their
first jobs was to burn many miles of scrubb and fern, and
my husband often spoke of the wonderful sight of these fires
on the slopes of the mountain by night.




ATTIC BEDROOM, SKETCHED BY E. S. TRIPP, 1856.


Life for these two young men was full of romance, and
the intense interest of the pioneer work appealed to them
both. Dr. and Mrs. Moorhouse were their only neighbours
near the hills, and towards the sea there were then only two
houses, Mr. Hayhurst at Ashburton, and the Chapmans, at
Rangitata.
Not long after a curious coincidence happened, Bishop
Selwyn, riding across Canterbury Plains, met these two
young men, and told them he found the enormous diocese
in his charge was too large for one man, and he wished to
get up a petition for a Bishop to have charge of the South
Island, and that his school friend Harper was the man for
the work. Both Mr. Acland and Mr. Tripp were among the
first to sign this petition, and as they both afterwards
married the new Bishop’s daughters, they often said, “We
Imported our wives ’’.
Mary had become engaged some months before, which
gave time to send to England for her things, but my trous-
seau was a very simple affair; my father, going to Welling-
ton about that time, bought me three dresses, —a white
muslin with pink sprays on it, a black and white striped
thin silk, with blue silk flounces, and a brown barege,
unmade; a riding habit was made in Christchurch, and I had
■one pair of boots and one pair of shoes. Everything else I
made myself,—rather different to the trousseau of a girl of
the present day, —and I know I had to buy boots a few
months after my marriage, the rough country walking soon
wearing out anything but the strongest.
Our wedding day was the 23rd September, 1858, Mary
and Charles Blakiston being married the same day. My
wedding gown of white silk and the bridesmaids’ white
tarletan and little straw bonnets trimmed with ribbon, were
all bought at Miss Skillikorn’s general stores, also the
wedding ring. Though my future husband had a large
property, ready money was not plentiful, and he always
said he had to borrow £8 for wedding expenses, and I only
had eight shillings of my own.
I had to come down the step ladder from our bedroom
backwards in my wedding finery, and Mary’s room down-
stairs was so small that she stood on her bed to be dressed.
We walked to St. Michael’s and both couples returned from
church together in a new omnibus, the only other vehicle
being a hansom cab without wheels, so not much use. Old
Mrs. Westenra made us pretty little bouquets of white


primroses, these and a bunch of gorse being the only flowers
to be had.
We went to Akaroa for our honeymoon, riding the first
day to Sumner, and staying there until the 25th then to
Lyttelton, and by a little steamer to Pigeon Bay. We
walked to the Head of the Bay, where we stayed the night,
spending most of the day eating delicious oysters off the
rocks. From there we started for Akaroa, but lost our way
in the bush, not reaching our destination until 8 p.m., a
number of people having come some way to search for us.
We had a delightful week, amongst lovely scenery and such
nice people who entertained us with picnics, etc. I always
repiember Wainui as a very beautiful spot. On October
2nd, we arrived back in Christchurch, and the same hour the
Blakistons appeared (they had been at Weedons), which in
those days of no mails was curious as we neither knew each
other’s plans.
After a week with my people, on October 27th, we began
our journey on horseback to our future home at Mt. Peel *
the first day brought us to Parlby’s accommodation house,
on the Selwyn ; then we stayed with Mr. Chapman, Rakaia,
for two or three days; the next day’s ride took us to Hay-
hurst’s at Ashburton, and the following day we reached
Shepherd’s Bush (Dr. Ben Moorhouse’s).
From there we crossed the Rangitata, and soon arrived
at our home, a little newly built cottage, consisting of a
small sitting-room, a bedroom, a lean-to behind divided into
kitchen and servant’s room, and two small verandah rooms,
Bft. by 7ft. each. Mr. Tripp had purchased six chairs from
a ship, and as most people only had boxes to sit on in their
houses, we thought we were very grand ; we also had a
piano, which was one of the first to be brought to Canter-
bury, and must have been a good one, as it is still in use after
many vicissitudes. In 1867, we were moving house and
when crossing the Orari River, the dray broke down, and
the piano had to remain on the shingle bed for six weeks,
covered with a tarpaulin, as the stream rose too high for it
to be brought over. Another time, after a fire, it was on a
verandah for six winter months, with blankets over it. Years
after, it travelled to Richmond, in the Mackenzie Country;
since then to Silverton; and now is in Tinaru, used by my
grandchildren; so its life has been a useful one.
To return to my first year at Mt. Peel —My husband,
being very energetic and full of enterprise in his work, was
very busy, and out most of the day from a very early hour,




SKETCH BY C. G. TRIPP, SHOWING BUILDINGS AT MT. PEEL BEFORE HIS MARRIAGE, 1 858.


-Photo by Dr. Barker.
OUR FIRST HOUSE, MT. PEEL, 1861.




PRESENT HOUSE BELONGING TO HON. J. B. ACLAND, 1890.


—Photo by Dr. Barker.
GROUP AT bishop's COURT, iB6O,


so, ol course, at first I was very lonely, and as, unluckily,,
the first maid we had was very uncongenial to talk to, I usfed
sometimes to be afraid I should forget my own language,
and so set myself to learn the whole of Keble’s Christian
Year, and read the few books that my husband had brought
from England, among them a life of Livingstone, and a
History ol India, over and over again. I was thankful when
Mrs. Smith (the wife of one of our men) came to cook for the
station hands; she was a very kind, and wonderfully strong
woman, able to work like a man, digging, fencing, etc.,
and enjoyed teaching her little children and taking them
for walks. After a few months the Smiths moved to Orari
Gorge, which run they had on terms, and the Chapmans
took their place as married couple.
I was afraid to walk far from home, alone, as wild pigs
were numerous. 1 remember a great deal of damage had
been done by a wild boar, which the men were trying to
find, and one day a friend, Parson Andrew, a very clever,
but eccentric man, who was staying with us, and on Sunday
holding a service in a tent, suddenly, in the middle of his
sermon, shouted, “ There goes the pig ! ”, and the whole
congregation disappeared from the tent, led by the parson
to give chase. Whether it was caught or not I forget.
An interesting neighbour, Samuel Butler, and afterwards
the celebrated author of “Erewhon,” then owned the
Mesopotamia run, up the gorge of the Rangitata, and was
a constant visitor during our life at Mt. Peel, and afterwards
at Mt Somers. His was a peculiar nature, and full of wild
theories. My husband enjoyed talking to him, but I thought
his views very upsetting, and we did not like it when he
tried to convert our maid to his ideas. He played the piano
beautifully and would do so for hours, which was a delight-
ful treat so far away from any pleasures of that kind.
After four months at Mt. Peel, we rode to Christchurch,
aind stayed there six weeks. On our return journey we spent
some days with Mrs. bereday, near Selwyn, who gave me
a present of silver save-alls which I still have. We were
caught in a storm near the Hinds, and Mr. Rogers kindly
took us in, and turned out of his own bedroom for me, —it
was a lean-to with clay floor, straw in bunks, red blankets,
but nothing to wash in, so I suppose he had always used the
river for the purpose. We reached Mt. Peel the next day,
very glad to get safely home.
The following January, Leonard and Rosa (afterwards
Mrs. Maling) rode from Christchurch to stav with us. When


leaving the town it was a fine morning, and my brother was
sure he could find his way, guided by the mountains, and
did not take a compass; but later a mist covered everything,
and after wandering about until io p.m. without finding the
homestead they had meant to reach at 5 o ’clock, they decided
to sleep, if possible, among the wet tussocks. After arrang-
ing the saddles as pillows, Leonard made Rosa put on a
flannel shirt of his own over her habit, and with a rug she
had in her swag over both of them, they rested as best they
•could. About 4 a.m. Rosa heard dogs barking, and woke
Leonard, who went to see where Ihe sound came from and
found Mr. Aylmer’s house only half a mile away. Mrs.
Aylmer was alone, but they managed to rouse her, and she
kindly called to them to come in, and after explaining to
Leonard, who had been there before, where to find food,
insisted on my sister sharing her room for the rest of the
night The next day they were able to continue their journey
ns the weather had cleared.
Rosa was with me at Mt. Peel for some time, luckily, as
my husband was obliged to go to Christchurch on business,
and be away five weeks. Of course, the intense loneliness
was much worse for her than for me, and to pass the time
we made a thick mattress of grass that w r e could sit on, on
the verandah, and read the few dry books we possessed;
Rosa always remembers “ Paley’s Natural Theology ” and
the surroundings she read it in, and how constantly we were
watching the river bank opposite the house, hoping to see
a human figure on the horizon; and oh, how often we
looked at the clock and wondered how to pass the day !
Later on, my eldest sister Emily came, also mv brother
Herbert. During their visit my first child was born, on
October Ist, 1859. My Mother had not told me I should
have a nurse* but good Mrs. Chapman looked after me, and
I was fortunate in having a clever man like Dr. Moorhouse.
In those days we had to make do with all sorts of contriv-
ances, and no glass bottle being available, I remember
making my child’s first feeding bottle out of a tin,
which I bent into shape, and the finger of a kid glove,
and having no cow, until the baby Howard was a year old,
he lived on water gruel and arrowroot. My Father arrived
a few days after the child’s birth, on his way to the Bluff
with Canon Stack, and on his return journey he christened
his first grandchild, on All Saints’ Day, the godparents
being Emily and Barton Acland, who had just become


—Photo by Dr. Barker.
MR. AND MRS. TRIPP, 1 86 1.




engaged to be married, and Henry (afterwards Archdeacon
of Westland).
Early in January, iB6O, we drove to Christchurch, my
husband, baby and I, in a cart with no springs, Miss Moor-
house (the late Mrs. Barnie Rhodes) riding beside us. We
wished to be present at the wedding of Emily and Barton,
also of Sarah and Percy Cox, —the second double wedding"
in the family. After the family festivities, Rosa returned
with us to Mt. Peel; we took a long time on the journey,,
as our cart stuck several times in the flooded rivers, and it
took three hours to cross the Ashburton. The Aclands came
South soon after, and lived in a small hut behind our cottage,,
and had their meals with us, but they were not there very
long, as they decided to go to England that year. Before
they left we decided it was best to dissolve partnership, and
Barton and Charles drew lots; Mt. Peel falling to the former,
and Orari Gorge to us; and as we were to live later at Mt.
Somers, we let the other run to Robert Smith, on terms, for
some time, and afterwards put Mr. Hudson (son of the
“ Railway King ”) in as Manager.
Janet was the next of the sisters to pay me a visit, and
while with us had a very severe illness, and Mother came
from Christchurch to help nurse her. Our little house was.
indeed full, and to make a room for my Mother, we hung
as a curtain a red blanket over part of our sitting-room, and
then the bed had to be against the door, —such a tiny space
that she could not make her bed until the door was shut
and the rest had all retired for the night.
Amongst our men, we had working for us an Australian
black, “ Andy,” who was a very well known character. He
had, before coming to us, been mail carrier between Timaru
and Christchurch, running at a quick trot all the way, and
would do anything for a glass of rum, which he was always
given at the end of his journey. After many times falling
into the hands of the police, through intemperance, he got
into the habit of running straight to the prison, where he
was locked up until ready to leave with the mail next morn-
ing. Andy was very good with children, and on Sundays, if
he thought I was tired, would take Howard, aged one year,
away for hours, carrying food and taking the greatest care
of the child, who loved him : and I felt perfectly happy i f
Andy had charge. He was most useful in the house, too,
and would make toys very cleverly for the children. As with
many natives, his tracking powers were wonderful. I remem-
ber an instance, when on a very cold wet day, a man came


to the station who had lost a letter on his way across the
trackless plains from Ashburton and had been obliged to
swim, on horseback, the Rangitata River. Andy heard of
the loss, and immediately started off, saying, “ Me find
letter He swam the river where the horseman had
crossed, picked up the track on the Shepherd’s Bush side,
and went off over the tussock plain, found the letter near
the Hinds, and was back at Mt. Peel in less than four hours,
and, of course was given the rum he had bargained for
before starting.
Another time Mr. Tripp was anxious a letter should reach
Christchurch as early as possible, the rivers were in flood,
but Andy offered to take it; he left at sunrise on foot, and,
in spite of, to most men, uncrossable rivers, he arrived in
Christchurch and was in his usual abode (the prison) before
dark. He was an invaluable man, but, unfortunately, when
under the influence of drink behaved like a madman. One
day, because my husband had refused to let him have more
•of his favourite rum, Andy threatened to kill him. The on’y
thing to do (as we did not want him shut up) was to send
him back to Australia. There poor Andy came to a trag c
end; he went back to Swan River, where he had lived as a
child, and soon afterwards killed the man who had murdered
his mother. He was tried, and hanged for it, which seemed
a very hard sentence, as he had great provocation, and we
and all his friends were most indignant about: it. This must
have been about the year 1862, as he had been some years
in New Zealand, having come as servant to Sir George
Grey.
In February, 1861, the year before poor Andy left us, we
were on our way to Christchurch, and had an awful journey,
which I shall never forget, and how very thankful I was to
have Rosa with me. In the only accommodation house then
in Ashburton I felt very ill, and spent a miserable night,
having damp sheets on the bed, in a small room leading
out of the kitchen, in which, until early morning, were a
number of very rough, noisy men. However, in spite of
feeling the journey would never end, we arrived safely at
Bishopscourt, and there, on March 24th, a little daughter
was born. When he heard of the new arrival, faithful Andy
ran all the way from Mt. Peel (80 miles) “to see new
baby ” ! When she was six weeks old, and Howard 19
months, we travelled home, to find rivers again high, and
the Rakaia took us nearly three hours to cross, as a boat
had to be sent for, and while waiting for it, I and the


children sat sheltered by flax bushes from the tearing,
nor-wester. After crossing we came to our kind friends, the
Chapmans, and rested there a week; we also spent a night
at Mr. Thompson’s, on the Hinds.
The following October I had a great adventure. As we
had decided to leave Mt. Peel and make our home at Mt.
Somers, we wished to say good-bye to the Moorhouses, and
tried to cross the river by boat, when in flood. On reaching
mid-stream, my husband, Jim Pithie, and Chapman, who
were rowing, felt they had no power against the rapids, so
returned to the shore, but when they jumped out with the
rope, the force of the stream pulled it from their hands, and
off I went alone, down three rapids, travelling four miles
in about twenty minutes, my terrified husband and the two
men running as fast as they could on the bank. Luckily, the
boat slowed down near an island, and I managed with the
one remaining oar to work with it until I got near enough
to the shore to get out (the water was above my waist), and
safely landed ; while some men on horseback, who saw what
had happened, were able to gallop along and report to my
husband that I was safe. My fear of wild pigs, which I
thought were there, was almost as bad as the terror ot
drowning so I quickly climbed a tree, and gradually took
off my clothes, drying them one by one in the bright sun-
shine. I was four hours on the island, and cheered by the
Misses Moorhouse sitting on the bank opposite; even at that
distance, I felt they were company, and that help would be
sent.
In the meantime Dr. Moorhouse with a team of bullocks,
that was some distance away, had to drag his boat from a
sort of back water, where it had been used for sheep dipping,
and his man Huffy had at once to set to work to make two
■oars; when these were finished the Doctor and Huffy rowed
across for me, having great difficulty in avoiding being
upset just near the island, where the river was very swift.
If they had not been able to come for me Black Andy had
offered to swim over and carry me on his back; which I must
say I was thankful did not happen.
My husband was at Shepherd’s Bush, having ridden at a
great pace round by the ferry, five miles further down; poor
man, he did look so ghastly from anxiety, and had suffered
more than I had. Dr. Moorhouse would not let me talk at
all, he was afraid of the effects of the shock, and insisted on
my going to bed, after having a strong glass of whiskey
and water. I had a bad headache and sickness, which soon


passed off, leaving no ill effects; but ever since I have dis-
likeo rivers, and crossing when at all discoloured,
We moved to Mt. .Somers in November, only living there
eleven months, when it was sold to my brother-in-law, Percy
Cox. I had never cared for the place and always felt over-
shadowed by the mountain, which depressed me, so I was
glad when it was sold and we were able to go to England.
Sailing in the s.s. Gottenburg (458 tons), on the nth of
October, 1862, for Melbourne, we took fourteen days to
reach our port. On landing we went into rooms in Retreat
Villa, Acland Street, St. Kilda, in there my second son was
born I found the heat very trying, but I was fortunate in
having near me my husband’s cousins, Mrs. William Upton
Tripp and her daughters, a remarkably clever, interesting
family, with whom we became great friends. Mrs. Tripp
(nee Leigh) with her husband had arrived in Melbourne in
the early days of the gold rush, when Melbourne was com-
posed chiefly of tents. Mr. Tripp was a lawyer, but h ; s
business not being very successful, his wife had a girl’s
school, the first of the sort in Melbourne, which she managed
wonderfully, it is still spoken of w*th admiration, and was
afterwards carried on by her daughters as Toorak College,
and has been a great influence for good in the young colony.
My brother Charlie, who was travelling with us, joined
my husband for a few weeks’ trip to Tasmania and on
December 17th, we all sailed for England in “ The Norfolk,’ *
with Capt. Tonkin, and had a passage of 72 days, considered
in those days very quick. There were many pleasant people
on board, amongst others a Mr. Macready, of whom I have
grateful remembrances, he was so good to my little girt
(Girlie, as she was called). We landed at Weymouth in an
open boat, and went from there to Silverton, near Exeter,
the home of Dr. Tripp, my father-in-law, who, during h's
son’s eight years absence had become blind, and it w*as a
great shock to my husband to find that at first his father
did not recognise him, and also could not believe his stores
of success. So my husband wrote to New Zealand, and sold
the Orari Gorge run, just to prove the truth of his state-
ments; but he again bought it, after two years, from his
cousin, John Enys.
We arrived in England about the time of the arrival in
London of Princess Alexandra, to be married to the Prince
of Wales; my husband and brother were able to go to
town to see the wonderful illuminations, and getting separ-
ated in the crowd', tried the Colonial “ Coo-ee ”, and soon
found each other.


After thirteen months at Silverton, we both went to
London for some weeks; also to Mortimer, and stayed with,
many old friends—anyone coming from New Zealand was
considered wonderful in those days, and I was amused to
find many expected my children to be black. Villagers in
Silverton still remember a lecture my husband gave on the'
Colony. He showed them a blue serge shirt he had worked
in during his first six months, when he and Barton Acland,
slept in a tent at Mt. Peel. His enthusiasm persuaded three
young men from Silvertcn to return with us, namely, George
Hammond, who is now Churchwarden in Woodbury, and
who married Eva Dean, nurse to my eighth child; Hopkins,
who became a butcher in Christchurch; and Jim Radford,
a mason, who, after working for us for many years, lives
now in Temuka; —the latter was married to Betsy Chapman,
and the wedding took place in the stockyard of a cottage
at Orari Gorge; Katie, my second daughter, being brides-
maid, Radford had been very good to her and had often
looked after her as a tiny child.
But I must go back two years, when we left England in
February, 1864, by the Shaw Savill sailing vessel “ Ivan-
hoe,” Captain E. Dunn. Before leaving Silverton, Mr.
Tripp had arranged (as he was travelling with three small
children) to take a cow, and luckily had a written agreement
with the Company that the animal should be put on board
at the London Docks. On arrival at Plymouth we found
this had not been done, and he at once telegraphed, —very
indignant at the broken contract, —“ Will stay at hotel your
expense until cow put on board ”. The ship was ‘delayed,
and the cow, which afterwards saved many lives, was put on
the “ Ivanhoe ”.
But troubles were only beginning, as directly we left Ply-
mouth, a passenger, who had paid a pound for the passage
of his dog, found that, by the Captain’s orders, the poor
thing was thrown over-board. It was no use doing anything,
so fny husband advised the man to wait until New Zealand
was reached, and then go to law. We had a number of
prize Spanish fowls also on board, and after a few days the
Captain had the necks of all the cocks wrung, because their
crowing in the morning awoke him. We soon saw that he
was drinking heavily, and the ship in a shocking condition;
the pigs, being allowed in the saloon at night, very soon
causing fever. The Captain at times was quite mad with
drink, and would have good food thrown overboard before
us, while sitting on deck, while that which came to tab’e


was seldom good to eat and in very small quantities. There
was plenty of good sugar on board, but we were only allowed
almost black stuff, except when sometimes the second mate
gave us a little white sugar; and we had some we had
brought from England with us, it made the Captain very
angry, if I shared with the other ladies at table. One day
twenty-eight passengers were expected to dine off one
sheep’s head, and Mr. Charles Enys would often come to
table, and, seeing how little there was for the women and
children, would walk away, eating nothing himself. Once
the meat was quite bad and my husband was so angry, he
took it to the Captain’s cabin and asked him if it was fit
to eat, which made him furiotis, as his own meals were
served in his cabin whenever the food was not good.
Luckily he had the cow well cared for, as the Doctor had
advised him to drink milk. Beingy a splendid animal, and
good milker, and I was able to take milk every day to the
poor typhoid patients in the steerage. We were also very
grateful to old Dr. Tripp for the stores he had given us,
such as port wine, champagne, white sugar, and also quanti-
ties of strong beef jelly, a present from Sir Thomas Acland,
which he had especially made for us at Killerton; these
comforts mehnt everything to those who were ill, but for all
we could do, twenty-six died of starvation and typhoid. A
passenger, Mr. Williams, lost his wife, and I took charge
of her four little children ; —My eldest child was delirious-
for three weeks; and the nurse was very ill for some time,
also George Hammond, so those that were well were very
busy and anxious. a ■ ■
We were nearly wrecked on the Crozets, and after such
a trying time, it was with great thankfulness we sighted 1
New Zealand, on June nth, but, to our horror, the Captain
declared Timaru was Lyttelton, and making for it, was
going direct for the rocks. My husband got desperate, as
he knew the coast and the great danger, and said, if the
Captain was not put in irons, he would shoot him, before
he would see women and children drowned by a madman.
So this man, who had ali our lives in his hands, was drugged
and got below, and the first mate being also intoxicated,
the second mate took command, and brought us safely to
Lyttelton, where to our distress, but quite rightly, we were
put in quarantine for three weeks. When Dr. Donald, the
health officer, came on board and saw the state of the ship,
he turned up his trousers, the dirt was so terrible.
' Mr. Tripp, who had been a barrister before leaving Eng-


—Photo by Dr. Barker.
ORARI GORGE STATION, 1864.




land, had, during the voyage, written all that the Captain
had done—complaints covering fourteen sheets of foolscap
paper. The day after landing he was summoned, first, for
causing the death of the dog, and for that offence fined
and many other cases were to follow, but, on leaving the
court that day, he shook his fist at my husband, saying'
“You are at the bottom of this ! ” and went off into Lyttel-
ton, where, after drinking brandy, he fell off the pier and
was drowned. The trouble and suffering he caused were
► so appalling that one could not be surprised, when Mr.
Tripp came to Bishopscourt with the news, that Mr. Enys
who had nearly starved himself so as to leave food for
others, exclaimed, “ I could dance on that man’s grave ! ”
It was a dreadful ending to our wretched voyage.
We stayed at Bishopscourt for a month, then moved into
a small house in Worcester Street, where, on August 24th,
our second daughter was born. We lived there two years,
and then decided to go to Oran Gorge, the run which,
except for two years, during our visit to England, had
belonged to us since 1855, and where a four-roomed cottage
had been built for the Manager, which : s still part of the
present house. We added some larger rooms, and, on
September 23rd, 1866, we arrived from Christchurch, in a
wagonette which had been the first express to run betweefl
Christchurch and Sumner, it was still existing in 1910, and
was sold at the Orari Gorge Clearing Sale for ten shillings,
causing great interest and amusement as so many looked
upon it as an old friend from its long use
To return to our arrival at the Station; John Irvine had
been the driver, and our party consisted of Mr. Tripp,,
myself, four children and nurse, also the cat. We found the
drays with luggage had broken down, so the first night we
slept on matting, using as covering the very few blankets
already in the house. 1867 was the year of the bad snow-
storm, which Lady Barker describes in her “ Station L : fe
in New Zealand,” and the day before was so warm the
children and nurse had been sitting out of doors. When
the storm was at its worst, on August 6th, our third
daughter was born. That was a season of events, as the
following February what has always been spoken of as
“ The Flood ” occurred, and at the end of the two days’
hard rain, the creek running through our newly made
garden overflowed its banks, and at ten p.m. the water was
up to the nursery window, and we had to leave the house
and carry the children to the men’s whare, on higher ground^.


where kind Mrs. McLean (she and her husband were work-
ing- for us) took me and the baby into her room, and the rest
slept on bunks. The next day we beheld a great scene of
desolation, the house standing in a bed of boulders and
shingle, everything, including a new fowl-house and the
garden, washed away. Afterwards Mr. Tripp had to bui 1 d
a concrete wall to keep the creek in its place.
I he making of a new home was a keen interest to my
husband and myself, and his great energy and forethought
resulted in many improvements and much planting, of which
future generations will reap the benefit. The hard work and
democratic ways of a colony always appealed to him, and
his interest in all subjects connected with Church or State
in Canterbury, and his thorough enjoyment of life in a young
country, enabled him to help many others through the ups
and downs which came to us all.
Three more children were born at Orari Gorge, and I
was fortunate in having as governess for nine years, Miss
Jane Andrews, a splendid woman, and like a second mother
to my children, to whose goodness and affection we owe a
great deal.
There were near neighbours, but we soon became very
friendly with all who lived in the district—at Peel Forest
Mr. and Mrs. Jollie and the two Misses Cooper ; the Alfred
Coxes at Raukapulka Angus Macdonalds at Waitui; our
A icar, Parson Brown, who lived in Geraldine, and Dr.
Rayner, twenty miles away, at Temuka.
Capt. Clogstoun owned Four Peaks Run, and William
Macdonald was at Orari. Mr. Hewlings and his Maori wife
lived in a little bark hut on the main street in Geraldine—a
picturesque little place, and onlv destroyed by fire a few years
ago. There was no road to Geraldine until 1872, in the
meantime we drove gaily across the tussocks, and about
once a month were able to attend service at St. Mary’s. The
Rev. James Preston came about 1869, and the parish he took
charge of then reached from the Rangitata to Mt. Cook —a
■distance of over 120 miles. Luckily he was a good horse-
man, as he had many exciting experiences in swollen rivers
and quicksands. He held services wherever he could get
a few people together, in wool-sheds, pubfic houses, and any
building available, and was a great favourite. He used to
tell us how, at a temperance meeting in Geraldine, when
the movement first began, he was unexpectedly asked to
speak; but, as he said, he knew little about the subject, as
Tais only experience of hotels had been on his long rides,


-Photo by Dr. Barker.
ORARI GORGE, 1868.




—Photo by Dr. Barker.
MRS. TRIPP AND TWO ELDEST CHILDREN, 1867.




when directly he left one in the morning- his one wish was to
reach another before dark, so he could scarcely speak against
them ; which remarks caused amusement, but did not help
the Temperance party. It was a great loss to us all when,
aftei twenty-eight years in the parish, Mr. Preston died
suddenly, when fishing with some friends on the bank of
the Rangitata, a simple broad-minded man, beloved and
mourned by all denominations.
Dr. Fish came to the district about the same time as the
Prestons, and both families were very intimate with us.
Mrs. Fish and the Doctor were both very clever, cultured,
and musical. We spent many happy hours together. Not
long after our arrival at Orari Gorge the two Misses Coopers
married, —the eldest to Mr. Mellish and the youngest to Mr.
Slack. The wedding of the latter took place in the Peel
Forest drawing room.
She lived afterwards at Woodside, and until her death was
a great friend of mine and a most amusing companion.
Then Selby Tancred bought Raukapuka, and again we had
a charming neighbour in his wife, who was a grand-daughter
of Felicia Hemans, the poetess. Their children and ours
were of the same ages, and were good friends as long as
they stayed in the district.
Woodbury, or Waihi Bush, consisted of Flatman’s Store
on the north bank of the Waihi river (where Mr. Burdon
now lives). Wedd and Penny’s sawmill was in the bush-
opposite, a mile from the present and a few other
settlers. The hotel owned by Bird stood half-way between
Geraldine and Woodbury. A few years later Sir Thomas
Tancred, who lived a short time at Peel Forest, purchased'
Flatman’s Store, with the land now owned by Messrs.
Burdon, Turton, Barker, Major Spencer and many others..
The Tancreds a party of six, stayed with us while moving
house, and during their visit most of them, and all my eight
children, developed measles. In spite of being ill, the
“ Measley ” holidays were always looked back to as a time-
of joy, the Tancreds being so entertaining and giving much
pleasure arranging charades, etc., among those who wert
convalescent.
After Flatman’s store had been added to for them to live
in it was a most quaint building, —one large room, and many
small ones all round, “like Brussels sprouts’’, we used to
say.
Very eccentric but charming people, there are many stories
told of them. Sir Thomas, who was like a picture of one of
the Apostles, with his snow-white hair and beard, was a


■quick tempered and \ery short-sighted man, and one evening
mistook a sunflower for a man looking in at the window,
and fired his gun at it. Another time he saw, what he
thought was a swagger, creeping round the garden, and
went towards the figure, which he saw move slightly when
he called, but would not go away; he rushed at it and hit out
with his stick; but afterwards found it to be a skirt of Lady
Tancred’s, hanging on a clothes-line, he had torn it in half.
Sir Thomas read the Church service in the village school-
room, and often chose sermons written for the East End of
London, and quite unsuitable in New Zealand. Being deaf,
he raised his voice in the wrong part of a sentence, making
the words often most ridiculous, and members of the con-
gregation had often to' leave the room to prevent laughing
aloud. Sometimes the money-bag could not be found, and
after much hunting and whispering amongst her family,
Lady Tancred would lend her glove, which, being a very
untidy person, was generally in so many holes, the fingers
had to be held to prevent the money falling out.
They lived at Waihi for some years, and then the old
people sold their property to their son Clement, and came
to us for a fortnight, meaning to go home to> pack each day.
The visit spread out for five months. Every day they drove
off with a quiet old horse, but never seemed to get their
work finished. At last we heard the reason; a shepherd
told my husband he often saw them on the road, Sir Thomas,
Lady Tancred, and the horse, —all three sound asleep; so
no wonder the packing took some months.
Lady Tancred was most good-natured, and very musical,
and even in her old age had a wonderful voice. She would
play by the hour, on a comb, for the children to dance to.
She was also a great gardener, and could dig like a man,
constantly losing and finding the beautiful rings she wore on
her ungloved hands. We were very sorry to lose such
original neighbours, when they left for the North Island.
Before that date St. Thomas’s Church was built in Wood-
bury, on land given by Mr. Flatman, and opened October,
1879, generous help beino- given to our old friends: the
alter was presented by Sir Thomas, and all the neighbour-
hood helped with gifts. Mr. Joseph Deans, who lived in the
village, was the builder, and his family gave most of the
fine trees now in the ground. One gift deserves special
mention, —the Communion plate presented by Miss Brown,
daughter of a former Vicar of Geraldine, as to do so she
was obliged to sell her most valued possession,—her riding
horse. There is at present in the Church a piece of work


FROM GARDEN GATE 1913.




ORARI GORGE — 1913.




CHARLES GEORGE TRIPP -1889.




dohe by my Mother in 1844; h was originally the centre-
piece of an altar frontal for the Church at Mortimer, in,
Berkshire, and when we left to come to New Zealand, it was
brought out, and for many years used in Christ’s College
Chapel; but when a new one was given there, 1 was asked
if Woodbury could find a place for it, and we now use the
work as a dossal, and so far both silk and velvet are good.
The first Sunday after the Church was consecrated, with
my daughter’s help, I began Sunday School an hour before
service. As our horse, Tommy by name, was very slow, it
meant leaving home punctually at 9 a.m., the horse was
tied up to a rail outside the Church grounds, and after some
years of this training, if left by the post he knew, the patient
animal stood for two hours every Sunday (doubtless thinking
he was tied) as if put by another post after a short time he
turned round and went trotting home.
The district about the year 1879 was altering very much*
and the land often changing hands. My husband took a very
active part in all public matters, he was a member of the
Vestry, and for ten years chairman of the County Council
and member of the Mt. Peel road board, and only the
distance and time he would have been obliged to be from
home, prevented him standing as he was constantly being
urged to 1 for the Provincial Council and Diocesan Synod in
Christchurch.
This brings me to a date after which new neighbours came
to the district, —a change from the real early days of South
Canterbury, with its life of great simplicity and often hard-
ships but a time of many happy days, and the forming of
life long friendships.
. Orari Gorge, 1915.
EXTRACT FROM THE LEADING ARTICLE IN THE
" CHRISTCHURCH EVENING NEWS,” DECEMBER
16 TH, ANNIVERSARY DAY, 1916.
One is specially reminded of these early settlers who laid
the foundation of Canterbury’s prosperity by the death this
week of Mrs. Charles George Tripp, a member of that
family whose descendants are to be found all over Canter-
bury and in most parts of the dominion. She bore both
before and after her marriage a well known name and her
home at Orari Gorge was for a generation or more a house-
hold word throughout Canterbury for the hospitality to be


found there by all who visited it. Mrs. Tripp's life covered
a very large portion of the period that has elapsed sirlce
Canterbury was first settled. She landed here two days
before Christmas, 62 years ago, being then twenty-two
years of age, she married Mr. Tripp two years later and
fifty years ago last September she and her husband went
to live at Orari Gorge which Mr. Tripp had owned since
1855, And for fifty years Mrs. Tripp lived there, undergoing
hardships and inconveniences, such as few but the wives
of early settlers can realise, but bearing all with cheerfulness
and a quiet courage which at times was not far from heroism.
In her last days she did what we wish more of the founders
of the province had done—she wrote, for private circulation
an account of her early days as girl, wife and mother.
We have been privileged to read it, and can testify that
in that slim little volume lies more of the true romance of
life than is found in most novels. Apart from its interest to
all who love Canterbury. and reverence its early settlers, it
is of historical value, for it is to such records that the future
historian of New Zealand must go for the human interest that
will lighten his pages. The book deals with the writer’s life
up to 1879 a date which ended “ the real early days of South
Canterbury with its life of great simplicity, often hardships,
but a time of many happy days and the forming of lifelong
friendships. ”
It is the lives and works of such people that Anniversary
Day really commemorates. .....


ELLEN SHEPHARD TRIPP — 1906.






