

Revelations of the
Last German Ambassador
in England
MY MISSION
TO LONDON
1912-1914
by
PRINCE LICHNOWSKY
with a preface by
PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY
PRICE SIXPENCE NET
CASSELL AND COMPANY LIMITED
London New York Toronto & Melbourne
1 91 8




MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-14




MY MISSION
TO
LONDON
1912-1914
BY
PRINCE LICHNOWSKY
Late German Ambassador in England
With a Preface by
Professor Gilbert Murray
Author of “ The Policy of
Sir Edward Grey,” etc.
CASSELL AND COMPANY LIMITED
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO & MELBOURNE
1918




BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.
''PHE author of the following pages, Karl Max,
A Prince Lichnowsky, is a member of a family
which holds estates both in German and Austrian
Silesia, and has an hereditary seat in the Upper House
of the Prussian Diet. The father of the present
Prince and his predecessor in the title was a Prussian
cavalry general, who, at the end of his life, sat for
some years in the Reichstag as a member of the Free
Conservative Party.
His uncle, Prince Felix, was elected in 1848 to
represent Ratibor in the German National Assembly
at Frankfort-on-Main ; he was an active member of
the Conservative wing, and during the September
rising, while riding with General Auerswald in the
neighbourhood of the city, was attacked and
murdered by the mob.
The present Prince, after serving in the Prussian
army, in which he holds the rank of Major, entered
the diplomatic service. He was in 1885 for a short
time attached to the German Embassy in London,
and afterwards became Councillor of Embassy in
Vienna. From 1899 to 1904 he was employed in
the German Foreign Office, and received the rank
and title of Minister Plenipotentiary.


In 1904 he retired to his Silesian estates, and,
as he states, lived for eight years the life of a coun-
try gentleman, but read industriously and published
occasional political articles. He himself recounts
the circumstances in which he was appointed
Ambassador in London on the death of Baron
Marschall von Bieberstein.
Baron Marschall, who had been Secretary for
Foreign Affairs under the Chancellorships of Count
Caprivi and for a time under Prince Hohenlohe, had
achieved great success as Ambassador at Constan-
tinople, and also, from the German point of view, as
chief German Plenipotentiary at the Second Hague
Conference in 1907. Baron Marschall was, to use
an expression of Bismarck’s, “ the best horse in
Germany’s diplomatic stable.” And great things were
expected of him in London. But he lived only a few
months after his appointment.
Prince Lichnowsky’s high social rank, his agreeable
manners, and the generous hospitality which he showed
in Carlton House Terrace gave him a position in
English society which facilitated the negotiations
between England and Germany, and did much to
diminish the friction that had arisen during the
time that Prince Biilow held the post of German
Chancellor.
The pamphlet which is here translated gives an
account of his London mission ; after his return to
Germany he has lived in retirement in the country, Tut
has contributed occasional articles to the Press. The
pamphlet, which was written in August, 1916, was
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.


not intended for. publication, but was distributed
confidentially to a few friends. The existence of
it had long been known, but it was only in March
of this year that for the first time extracts from
it were published in the Swedish paper Politiken.
Longer extracts have since appeared in the London
Press; for the first time a complete translation made
from the German original is now placed before the
public.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.




PREFACE.
AT EVER perhaps in history has the world seen
IN s 0 great an exhibition, as at the outbreak o this
war, of the murderous and corrupting power o t e
organised he. All Germany outside the governraenta
circles was induced to believe that the war was a
treacherous attack, plotted in the dark by “ revengeful
France, barbaric Russia, and envious England
against the innocent and peace-loving Fatherland.
And the centre of the plot was the Machiavellian
Grey who for long years had been encircling and
strangling Germany in order at the chosen moment
to deal her a death-blow from behind. The
Emperor, the princes, the ministers, the is ops
and chaplains, the historians and theologians, m part
consciously and in part innocently, vied with one
another in solemn attestations and ingenious forgeries
‘of evidence ; and the people, docile by training and
long indoctrinated to the hatred of England, mevitab >
believed and passionately exaggerated what they were
told From this belief, in large part, came the
strange brutalities and ferocities of the common people
of Germany at the opening of the war, whether towards
persons who had a right to courtesy, like the Ambas-
sadors or a claim on common human sympathy, like
the wounded and the prisoners. The German masses
could show no mercy towards people guilty of so
hideous a world-crime.


And now comes evidence, which in normal times
would convince even the German nation, that the
whole basis of their belief was a structure of deliberate
falsehood ; which shows that it was the Kaiser and his
Ministers who plotted the war; while it was England,
and especially Sir Edward Grey, who strove hardest
for the preservation of peace.
It is the evidence of the German Ambassador in
London during the years 1912-1914, Prince Lichnowsky,
corroborated rather than confuted by the comments of
Herr von Jagow, who was Foreign Minister at the
time, and carried further by the recently published
Memoranda of Herr Miihlon, one of the directors of
the Krupp armament factory at Essen. One could
hardly imagine more convincing testimony. Will the
German people believe it? Would they believe now if
one rose from the dead?
We cannot yet guess at the answer. Indeed, there
is another question which must be answered first:
For what motive, and with what possible change of
policy in view, has the German Government permitted
the publication of these papers and the circulation
of Lichnowsky’s Memorandum as a pamphlet at
30 pfennig ? Do the militarists think their triumph is
safe, and the time come for them to throw off the
mask ? Or have the opponents of militarism, who
seemed so crushed, succeeded in asserting their
power ? Is it a plan to induce the ever docile German
populace to hate England less ?
It must be a startling story for the Germans, but
for us it contains little that is new. It is an absolute
PREFACE.


confirmation, in spirit and in letter, of the British Blue
Book and of English books such as Mr. Headlam’s
“ History of Twelve Days” and Mr. Archer’s “Thirteen
Days/’ Prince Lichnowsky’s summing-up agrees
exactly with the British conclusions : The Germans
encouraged Count Berchtold to attack Serbia, well
knowing the consequences to expect ; between the 23rd
and 30th July they rejected all forms of mediation ; and
on the 30th July, when Austria wished to withdraw, they
hastily sent an ultimatum to Russia so as to make
withdrawal impossible (pp. 39-40). A ghastly story
of blindness and crime ; but we knew it all before.
Equally interesting is Prince Lichnowsky’s account
of the policy of Germany and England before the war.
He confirms our knowledge of the “sinister vagueness”
of German policy in Morocco, the steady desire of
England to come to an understanding and of Germany
to elude an understanding. As for our alleged envy
of Gerimn trade, it was in English commercial
circles that the desire for an understanding with
Germany was strongest. As for our “ policy of
encirclement,” it was the deliberate aim of our
policy, continuing the line of Lord Salisbury and
Mr. Chamberlain, to facilitate rather than hinder the
legitimate and peaceful expansion of a great force,
which would become dangerous if suppressed and
confined.
The test cases were the Bagdad Railway and
the Portuguese Colonies. We agreed to make no
objection to Germany’s buying them when Portugal
was willing to sell ; we agreed in the meantime to'
PREPACK.


treat them as a German sphere of interest and
not to compete for influence there. We agreed,
subject to the conservation of existing British
rights and to certain other safeguards, to the
completion of the great railway from the Bosphorus
to Basra, and to the recognition of the whole
district tapped by the railway as a German sphere
of interest. The two treaties, though completed,
were never signed ; why ? Because Grey would sign
no secret treaty. He insisted that they must be
published. And the German Government would not
allow them to be published! To Lichnowsky this
seemed like mere spite on the part of rivals who grudged
his success, but we see now that it was a deliberate
policy. The war-makers could not afford to let their
people know the proof of England’s goodwill.
Lichnowsky was a friend of England, but he was
no pacifist or “little German.” His policy was to
favour the peaceful expansion of Germany, in good
understanding with England and France, on the seas
and in the colonies. He aimed at “ imperial develop-
ment ” on British lines; he abhorred the “Triple
Alliance policy” of espousing Austria’s quarrels,
backing Turkey against the Balkan States, intriguing
against Russia, and seeing all politics in the terms of
European rivalries with a background of war. His
own policy was one which, if followed loyally by the
German Government, would have avoided the war and
saved Europe.
There are one or two traits m Lichnows y s
language which show that, with all his liberality of


thought, he is still a German. He accepts at once,
on the report of a German secret agent, the false
statement that Grey had concluded a secret treaty with
France. He mentions, as if it were a natural thing,
the strange opinion that the Standard was “apparently
bought by Austria.” He describes Mr. Asquith as a
pacifist and Sir Edward Grey as both a pacifist and,
ideally and practically, a Socialist. One must remember
the sort of views he was accustomed to at Potsdam.
There can be no doubt that- Lichnowsky was
deliberately deceived by his Government, and not much
that he was chosen for his post in London with a view
to deceiving us. These things are all in the gospel
according to Bernhardi. Lichnowsky himself was
both an honest and an able diplomatist, and there is
the ring of sincerity in his words of self-reproach : “ I
had to support in London a policy the heresy of which
I recognised. That brought down vengeance on me,
for it was a sin against the Holy Ghost.”
If Grey, in the tangle of terrific problems that
surrounded him, ever erred, his sin was not against the
Holy Ghost. The attack made on him at the outset
of the war by Radical idealists was easy to confute.
If ever a statesman strove, with due prudence, for
peace, for friendship between nations, for a transforma-
tion of armed rivalries into cordial and democratic
understandings, our great English Minister was that
man. He was accused as a maker of secret treaties ;
and we find him all through the times of peace, and
through all times when choice was still possible, a
steady refuser of secret treaties. He was accused as
PREFACE.


a seeker for territory ; and we find him, both in war and
peace, steadily opposing all territorial aggrandisement.
Such was the policy approved by the leaders of both
English parties before the war.
It is an attack from the other side that now reaches
him. If the war had been short and successful, this
would not have occurred. But a long and bitter and
dangerous war of necessity creates its own atmosphere,
and the policy that was wisdom in 1913, when the
world was at peace and our relations with Germany
were improving, strikes us now perhaps as strangely
trustful and generous. Yet, if we try to recover
that mental calm without which the nations will never
till the end of time be able to restore their wasted
wealth and rebuild the shattered hopes of civilisation,
I think most Englishmen will agree that Grey’s policy
was, as we all thought it at the time, the right and
the wise policy. To let all the world know that we
would never join in any attack on Germany, but would
never permit any attack on France ; to seek to remove
all causes of friction between England and Germany,
as they had been removed between England and France
and between England and Russia; to extend the
“ Entente Cordiale ” by gradual steps to all nations
who would come into it, and to “ bring the two groups
of Europe nearer.” This was the right policy, whether
it succeeded or failed ; and it will, in spirit at least,
some day be the right policy again.
No Englishman, I think, will regret the generous
courtesy which sent off the German Ambassador with
a guard of honour, “like a departing sovereign.” No
PREFACE.


one will regret our Prime Minister’s silent tears when
the war became inevitable, or Grey’s conviction that
it would be “the greatest catastrophe in history” —
not even if mad German militarists drew the conclusion
that the only motive for such grief must be the fear
of defeat. For my own part I am glad that, at the
last interview with Lichnowsky, Grey assured him that,
if ever a chance came of mediation between the com-
batants, he would take it, and that “ we have never
wished to crush Germany.”
Surely, even now in the crisis of the war, it is well
to remember these things. The cleaner our national
conscience the keener surely will be our will to victory.
The slower we were to give up the traditions of
generosity and trustfulness that came from our long
security the firmer will be our resolution to hold out,
through whatever martyrdom may be yet in store for
us, until we or our children can afford once more to
live generously and to trust our neighbours. In the
long run no other life is worth living.
G M
PREFACE




MY MISSION TO LONDON
19 12-14
MY APPOINTMENT.
TN September, 1912, Baron Marschall died after he had
A only been at his post in London for a few months. His
appointment, which no doubt was principally due to his age
and the desire of his junior officer to go to London, was
one of the many mistakes of our policy.
In spite of his striking personality and great reputation, he
was too old and too tired to adjust himself to the Anglo-Saxon
world, which was completely alien to him ; he was rather an
official and a lawyer than a diplomat and statesman. From the
very beginning he was at great pains to convince the English
of the .harmlessness of our fleet, and naturally this only
produced the contrary effect.
Much to my surprise, I was offered the post in October.
I had retired to the country as a “ Personalreferent ” after
many years of activity, there being then no suitable post
available for me. I passed my time between flax and turnips,
among horses and meadows, read extensively, and occasionally
published, political essays.
Thus I had spent eight years, and it was thirteen
since I had left the Embassy at Vienna with the rank
of Envoy. That had been my last real sphere of political
activity, as in those days such activity was impossible unless
one was prepared to help a half-crazy chief in drafting his
crotchety orders with their crabbed instructions.


I do not know who was responsible for my being
appointed to London. It was certainly not due to H.M.
alone —I was not one of his intimates, though he was at all
times gracious to me. I also know by experience that his
nominees generally met with successful opposition. Herr
von Kiderlen had really wanted to send Herr von Stumm to
London ! He immediately manifested unmistakable ill-will
towards me, and endeavoured to intimidate me by his
incivility. Herr von Bethmann Hollweg was at that time
kindly disposed towards me, and had paid me a visit at Gratz
only a short time before. lam therefore inclined to think
that they all agreed on me because no other candidate was
available at the moment. But for Baron Marschall’s
unexpected death, I should no more have been called out
of retirement then than at any other time during all those
previous years.
MOROCCO POLICY.
It was certainly the right moment for a new effort to
establish better relations with England, Our enigmatic
\lorocc9 policy had repeatedly shaken confidence in our pacific
intentions. At the very least, it had given rise to the suspicion
that we did not quite know what we wanted, or that it was
our object to keep Europe on the qui vive, and, when
opportunity offered, to humiliate France. An Austrian col-
league, who had been in Paris for a long time, said to me ;
<< Whenever the French begin to forget about revanche, you
always remind them of it with a jack-boot.”
After we had repulsed M. efforts to arrive at
an understanding with us about Morocco, and prior to that
had formally declared that we had no political interests there
which conformed to the traditions of the Bismarckian
policy —we suddenly discovered a second Kruger in Abdul
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


Aziz. We assured him also, like the Boers, of the protection
of the mighty German Empire, with the same display and the
same result; both demonstrations terminated with our retreat,
as they were bound to do, if we had not already made up
our minds to embark on the world-war. The distressing
congress at Algebras could not change this in any way, still
less the fall of M. Delcass6.
Our attitude promoted the Russo-Japanese and later the
Anglo-Japanese rapprochement . In face of “ the German
Peril ” all other differences faded into the background. The
possibility of a new Franco-German war had become
apparent, and such a war could not, as in 1870, leave
either Russia or England unaffected.
The uselessness of the Triple Alliance had been shown at
Algebras, while that of the agreements arrived at there
was demonstrated shortly afterwards by the collapse of the
Sultanate, which, of course, could not be prevented. Among
the German people, however, the belief gained ground that
our foreign policy was feeble and was giving way before
the “ Encirclement ” —that high-sounding phrases were
succeeded by pusillanimous surrender.
It is to the credit of Herr von Kiderlen, who is otherwise
overrated as a statesman, that he wound up our Moroccan
inheritance and accepted as they were the facts that could no
longer be altered. Whether, indeed, it was necessary to
alarm the world by the Agadir incident I will leave others to
say. It was jubilantly acclaimed in Germany, but it had
caused all the more disquiet in England because the Govern-
ment were kept waiting for three weeks for an explanation
of our intentions. Lloyd George’s speech, which was meant
as a warning to us, was the consequence. Before
fall, and before Algebras, we might have had a harbour and
territory on the West Coast, but after those events it was
impossible.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


SIR EDWARD GREY’S PROGRAMME.
When I came to London in November, 1912, the excite-
ment over Morocco had subsided, as an agreement with France
had been reached in Berlin. It is true that Haldane’s mission
had failed, as we had required the assurance of neutrality,
instead of being content with a treaty securing us against
British attacks and attacks with British support. Yet Sir
Edward Grey had not relinquished the idea of arriving at an
agreement with us, and in the first place tried to do this in
colonial and economic questions. Conversations were in
progress with the capable and business-like Envoy von
KQhlmann concerning the renewal of the Portuguese colonial
agreement and Mesopotamia (Bagdad Railway), the unavowed
object of which was to divide both the colonies and Asia
Minor into spheres of influence.
The British statesman, after having settled all outstanding
points of difference with France and Russia, wished to make
similar agreements with us. It was not his object to isolate
us, but to the best of his power to make us partners in the
existing association. As he had succeeded in overcoming
Anglo-French and Anglo-Russian differences, so he also
wished to do his best to eliminate the Anglo-German, and by
a network of treaties, which would in the end no doubt have led
to an agreement about the troublesome question of naval arma-
ments, to ensure the peace of the world, after our previous
policy had led to an association —the Entente —which
represented a mutual insurance against the risk of war.
This was Sir E. Grey’s plan. In his own words : Without
interfering with our existing friendship with France and
Russia, which has no aggressive aims and does not entail
any binding obligations on England, to arrive at a friendly
rapprochement and understanding with Germany, “to bring
the two groups nearer."
MY MISSION TO I ONDON 1912-1914.


As with us, there were two parties in England at that
lime—the Optimists, who believed in an understanding, and
the Pessimists, who thought that sooner or later war was
inevitable.
The former embraced Messrs. Asquith, Grey, Lord Haldane,
and most of the Ministers in the Radical Cabinet; also
the leading Liberal papers, such as the Westminster Gazette ,
Manchester Guardian , Daily Chronicle. The Pessimists
were mainly Conservative politicians like Mr. Balfour, who
repeatedly made this clear to me ; also leading Army men,
like Lord Roberts, who pointed out the necessity of universal
military service ("The Writing on the Wall"); further, the
Northcliffe Press and the eminent English journalist Mr.
Garvin, of The Observer. During my period of office, how-
ever, they abstained from all attacks, and maintained both
personally and politically a friendly attitude. But our naval
policy and our attitude in 1905, 1908, and 19 11 had aroused
in them the conviction that after all it would some day
come to war. Just as it is with us, the former are now
being accused in England of short-sightedness and simplicity,
whereas the latter are looked on as the true prophets.
THE ALBANIAN QUESTION.
The first Balkan War had led to the collapse of Turkey
and thus to a defeat for our policy, which had been identified
with Turkey for a number of years. Since Turkey in Europe
could no longer be saved, there were two ways in which we
could deal with the inheritance: either we could declare our
complete disinterestedness with regard to the frontier delimita-
tions and leave the Balkan Powers to settle them, or we could
support our "Allies ” and carry on a Triple Alliance policy in
the Near East, thus giving up the r6le of mediator.
From the very beginning I advocated the former course,
but the Foreign Office emphatically favoured the latter.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


The vital point was the Albanian question. Our Allies
desired the establishment of an independent Albanian state,
as the Austrians did not want the Serbs to obtain access to
the Adriatic, and the Italians did not want the Greeks to get
to Valona or even to the north of Corfu. As opposed to this,
Russia, as is known, was backing Serbia’s wishes and France
those of Greece.
My advice was to treat this question as outside the scope
of the Alliance, and to support neither the Austrian nor
the Italian claims. Without our aid it would have been
impossible to set up an independent Albania, which, as any-
one could foresee, had no prospect of surviving; Serbia would
have extended to the sea, and the present world-war would
have been avoided. France and Italy would have quarrelled
over Greece, and if the Italians had not wanted to fight France
unaided they would have been compelled to acquiesce in
Greece’s expansion to the north of Durazzo. The greater
part of Albania is Hellenic. The towns in the south are
entirely so; and during the Conference of Ambassadors
delegations from principal towns arrived in London to obtain
annexation to Greece. Even in present-day Greece there are
Albanian elements and the so-called Greek national dress is
of Albanian origin. The inclusion of the Albanians, who are
principally Orthodox and Moslem, in the body of the Greek
state was therefore the best and most natural solution, if
you left Scutari and the north to the Serbs and Montene-
grins. For dynastic reasons H.M. was also in favour of this
solution. When I supported this view in a letter to the
monarch 1 received agitated reproaches from the Chancellor;
he said that I had the reputation of being‘‘an opponent of
Austria,” and I was to abstain from such interference and
direct correspondence.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


THE NEAR EAST AND THE POLICY OF THE
TRIPLE ALLIANCE.
We ought at last to have broken with the fatal tradition of
pursuing a Triple Alliance policy in the Near East also, and
have recognised our mistake, which lay in identifying ourselves
in the south with the Turks and in the north with the Austro-
Magyars. For the continuance of this policy, upon which
we had entered at the Berlin Congress, and which we had
actively pursued ever since, was bound to lead in time to a
conflict with Russia and to the world-war. more especially if
the requisite cleverness were lacking in high places. Instead
of coming to terms with Russia on a basis of the independence
of the Sultan, whom even Petrograd did not wish to
eject from Constantinople, and of confining ourselves to
our economic interests in the Near East and to the par-
titioning of Asia Minor into spheres of influence while
renouncing any intention of military or political inter-
ference, it was our political ambition to dominate on the
Bosphorus. In Russia they began to think that the road
to Constantinople and the Mediterranean lay via Berlin.
Instead of supporting the active development of the Balkan
States —which, once liberated, are anything rather than
Russian, and with which our experiences had been very
satisfactory —we took sides with the Turkish and Magyar
oppressors.
The fatal mistake of our Triple Alliance and Near East
policy —which had forced Russia, our natural best friend and
neighbour, into the arms of France and England and away
from its policy of Asiatic expansion—was the more apparent,
as a Franco-Russian attack, which was the sole hypothesis
that justified a Triple Alliance policy, could be left out of
our calculations.
The value of the Italian alliance needs no further reference.
Italy will want our monev and our tourists even after the war,
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


with or without an alliance. That this latter would fail us in
case of war was patent beforehand. Hence the alliance had no
value. Austria needs our protection in war, as in peace, and
has no other support. Her dependence on us is based on
political, national, and economic considerations, and is the
greater the more intimate our relations with Russia are. The
Bosnian crisis taught us this. Since the days of Count Beust
no Vienna Minister has adopted such a self-confident attitude
towards us as Count Aehrenthal during the later years of his
life. If German policy is conducted on right lines, cultivating
relations with Russia, Austria-Hungary is our vassal and
dependent on us, even without an alliance or recompense ;
if it is wrongly conducted, then we are dependent on Austria.
Hence there was no reason for the alliance.
I knew Austria too well not to be aware that a return to
the policy of Prince Felix Schwarzenberg or Count Moritz
Estcrhazy was inconceivable there. Little as the Slavs there
love us, just as little do they wish to return into a German
Empire even with a Habsburg-Lorraine emperor at its head
They are striving for a federation in Austria on national lines,
a state of things which would have even less chance of being
real'ised within the German Empire than under the Double
Eagle. The Germans of Austria, however, acknowledge
Berlin as the centre of German Might and Culture, and are
well aware that Austria can never again be the leading Power.
They wish for as intimate a connection with the German
Empire as possible, not for an anti-German policy.
Since the 'seventies the position has fundamentally changed
in Austria, as in Bavaria. As, in the latter, a return to Great
German separatism and old Bavarian policy is not to be
feared, so with the former a resuscitation of the policy of
Prince Kaunitz and Schwarzenberg was not to be expected.
By a federation with Austria, however, which resembles a
big Belgium, since its population, even without GaJicia and
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


Dalmatia, is only about half Germanic, our interests would
suffer as much as if we subordinated our policy to the views
of Vienna or Budapest —thus espousing Austria’s quarrels
(“ d'Spouser les querelles d'Autnche ”).
Hence we were not obliged to take any notice of the
desires of our ally ; they were not only unnecessary but also
dangerous, as they would lead to a conflict with Russia if we
looked at Oriental questions through Austrian spectacles.
The development of the alliance, from a union formed on
a single hypothesis for a single specific purpose, into a
general and unlimited association, a pooling of interests
in all spheres, was the best way of producing that which
diplomacy was designed to prevent —war. Such an “ alliance
policy ” was also calculated to alienate from us the sympathies
of the strong, young, rising communities in the Balkans, who
were prepared to turn to us and to open their markets to us.
The difference between the power of a Ruling House and
a National State, between dynastic and democratic ideas of
government, had to be decided, and as usual we were on
the wrong side.
King Carol told one of our representatives that he had
ehtered into the alliance with us on the assumption that we
retained the leadership; but if this passed to Austria, that
would alter the foundations of the relationship, and under such
circumstances he would not be able to go on with it.
Things were similar in Serbia, where, contrary to our
own economic interests, we were supporting the Austrian
policy of strangulation.
Every time we have backed the wrong horse, whose
breakdown could have been foreseen : Kruger, Abdul Aziz,
Abdul Hamid, Wilhelm of Wied, ending—the most fatal
of all mistakes —with the great plunge on the Berchtold
stable.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


THE CONFERENCE OF AMBASSADORS.
Shortly after my arrival in London, at the end of 19 12 ) Sir
E. Grey proposed an informal conversation to prevent the
Balkan War developing into a European one, after we had
unfortunately refused, on the outbreak of the war, to agree
to the French proposal of a declaration of disinterestedness
The British statesman from the very beginning took up the
position that England had no interest in Albania, and had no
intention of going to war over this question. He merely
wished to mediate between the two groups as an “ honest
broker” and smooth over difficulties. He therefore by no means
took sides with the Entente, and during the eight months or
so of the negotiations his goodwill and his authoritative
influence contributed in no small degree to the attainment of
an agreement. We, instead of adopting an attitude similar
to the English one, invariably took up the position which was
prescribed for us by Vienna. Count Mensdorff was the
leader of the Triple Alliance in London; I was his ‘'second.”
It was my duty to support his proposals. That clever and
experienced man Count Szogyenyi was conducting affairs in
Berlin. His refrain was “ Then the casus foederis will arise,”
and when I once ventured to doubt the truth of this conclusion
I was severely reprimanded for “ Austrophobia,’ It
was also said that I had an “hereditary weakness ” the
allusion being to my father.
On all questions we took sides with Austria and Italy
about Albania, a Serbian port on the Adriatic, Scutari, and
also about the delimitation of the frontiers of Albania while
Sir E. Grey hardly ever supported the French or Russian
claims. He mostly supported our group in order not to give a
pretext like the one a dead Archduke was to furnish later on.
Thus with his assistance it was possible to coax King Nikita
out of Scutari again. Otherwise this question would already
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


have led to a world-war, as we should certainly not have
ventured to induce “ our ally ” to give way.
Sir E. Grey conducted the negotiations with circumspec-
tion, calm, and tact. When a question threatened to become
involved, he sketched a formula for agreement which was
to the point and was always accepted. His personality
inspired equal confidence in all the participants.
As a matter of fact we had again successfully emerged
from one of those trials of strength which characterise our
policy. Russia had been obliged to give way to us on all
points, as she was never in a position to procure success for
the Serbian aims. Albania was established as a vassal state
of Austria and Serbia was pressed back from the sea. Hence
this conference resulted in a fresh humiliation for Russian
self-esteem. As in 1878 and in 1908, we had opposed
the Russian plans although no German interests were
involved. Bismarck was clever enough to mitigate the
mistake of the Congress by the secret treaty and by his
attitude in the Battenberg question; but we continued to
pursue in London the dangerous path, upon which we had once
more entered in the Bosnian question, nor did we leave it
in time when it led to the precipice.
The ill-humour which prevailed in Russia at that time was
shown during the conference by attacks in the Russian Press
against my Russian colleague and Russian diplomacy. The
dissatisfied circles made capital of his German descent and
Roman Catholicism, his reputation as a friend of Germany,
and the accident that he was related both to Count Mensdorff
and to me. Without possessing a very distinguishedpersonality,
Count Benckendorff is endowed with a number of qualifications
that distinguish a good diplomat—tact, polished manners,
experience, courtesy, and a natural eye for men and matters.
He was always at pains to avoid a brusque attitude, and was
supported in this by England and France.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


Later I once remarked to him : “ I presume that Russian
feeling is very anti-German.” He replied : “ There are also
very strong and influential pro-German circles, but in general
people are anti-Austrian.”
It is hardly necessary to add that our “ Austrophilie k
outrance ” (friendship for Austria through thick and thin) was
hardly calculated to loosen the Entente and to direct Russia
towards her Asiatic interests !
THE BALKAN CONFERENCE.
At the same time the Balkan Conference was sitting in
London and I had occasion to come into contact with the
leaders of the Balkan States. M. Venizelos was certainly
the most distinguished personality. At that time he was
anything rather than anti-German, and visited me several
times; he was especially fond of wearing the ribbon of the
Order of the Red Eagle —he even wore it at the French
Embassy. His prepossessing charm and ways of a man of
the world secured him much sympathy. Next to him
M. Daneff, at that time Bulgarian Premier and confidant
of Count Berchtold, played a great part. He gave the
impression of a subtle and energetic man, and it is
probably only due to the influence of his Vienna and
Budapest friends, of whose homage he often made fun, that
he was induced to commit the folly of entering upon the
second Balkan War and of refusing Russian arbitration.
M. Take Jonescu was also frequently in London and then
visited me regularly. I knew him from the time when I was
Secretary at Bucharest. He was also one of Herr von
Kiderlen’s friends. In London he was endeavouring to obtain
concessions to Rumania from M. Daneff by means of negotia-
tions, in which he was assisted by the very able Rumanian
Ambassador Misu. It is known that Bulgarian opposition
brought about the failure of these negotiation i. Count Berchtold
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


(and we of course with him) was entirely on Bulgaria s side,
otherwise by putting pressure on M. Daneff we might have
secured the desired satisfaction for Rumania and placed her
under an obligation to us; she was finally estranged from
the Central Powers by Austria’s attitude during and after
the second Balkan War.
THE SECOND BALKAN WAR.
The defeat of Bulgaria in the second Balkan War and the
victory of Serbia, with the Rumanian invasion, naturally
constituted a humiliation for Austria. The plan to rectify
this by an expedition against Serbia seems to have been
evolved in Vienna soon after. The Italian revelations prove
this, and it may be assumed that Marquis San Giuliano,
who described the plan—most aptly—as a pericolosissima
aventura, saved us from being involved in a world-war as
early as the summer of 1913.
Owing to the intimacy of Russo-Italian relations, the
Vienna plan was doubtless known in Petrograd. In any case,
M. Sazonow openly declared at Constanza, as M. Take
Jonescu told me, that an Austrian attack on Serbia would be
a casus belli for Russia.
When one of my staff returned from leave in Vienna in
the spring of 1914 he said that Herr von Tschirschky had
declared that there would soon be war. As I, however, was
always left in ignorance about important events I considered
this pessimism to be unfounded.
As a matter of fact it would appear that, ever since the
peace of Bucharest, Vienna was bent on securing a revision
of the treaty by her own effort and was apparently only
waiting for a favourable pretext. Vienna statesmen could,
of course, depend on our support. They were aware of that,
as they had been repeatedly accused of lack of firmness.
In fact, Berlin waa pressing for a “ rehabilitation of Austria.”
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


LIMAN VON SANDERS.
When I returned to London in December, 1913, from a
lengthy leave, the Liman von Sanders question had led to a
fresh crisis in our relations with Russia. Sir E. Grey, not
without concern, pointed out to me the excitement there was
in Petrograd over it; “I have never seen them so excited ”
I received instructions from Berlin to request the Minister
to exert a restraining influence in Petrograd, and to assist us
in settling the dispute. Sir Edward gladly did this, and his
intervention contributed in no small degree to smooth the
matter over. My good relations with Sir Edward and his
great influence in Petrograd were repeatedly made use of in
similar manner when we wished to attain anything there, as
our representative proved himself quite useless for such a
purpose.
During the fateful days of July, 1914, Sir Edward said to
me; “ When you want to obtain anything in Petrograd you
always apply to me, but if I appeal to you for your influence
in Vienna you fail me.”
THE COLONIAL TREATY.
The good and confidential relations which I had succeeded
in establishing, not only with society and the most influential
people like Sir E. Grey and Mr. Asquith, but also with the
great public at public dinners, produced a marked improve-
ment in the relations of the two countries. Sir Edward
honestly tried to confirm this rapprochement, and his inten-
tions were most apparent on two questions—the Colonial and
the Bagdad Railway Treaties.
In 1898 Count Hatzfeld and Mr. Balfour had signed a secret
agreement dividing the Portuguese colonies into economic
spheres of influence between us and England. As the Govern-
ment of Portugal had neither the power nor the means to open
up her extended possessions or to administer them properly,
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


she had already thought of selling them before and thus
relieving her financial burdens. An agreement had been come
to between us and England which defined the interests of
both parties, and which was of the greater value because
Portugal is entirely dependent on England, as is generally
known.
On the face of it this agreement was to safeguard the
integrity and independence of the Portuguese State, and
merely declared the intention of being of financial and
economic assistance to the Portuguese. Literally, therefore,
it did not contravene the ancient Anglo-Portuguese Alliance
of the fifteenth century, which was last renewed under
Charles 11. and gave a reciprocal territorial guarantee.
In spite of this, owing to the endeavours of Marquis
Several, who was presumably aware of the Anglo-German
agreement, a new treaty —the so-called Treaty of Windsor —
was concluded between England and Portugal in 1899*
confirming the old agreements, which had always remained
in force.
The object of negotiations between us and England, which
had commenced before my arrival, was to amend and improve
our agreement of 1898, as it had proved unsatisfactory on
several points as regards geographical delimitation. Thanks
to the accommodating attitude of the British Government I
succeeded in making the new agreement fully accord with
our wishes and interests. The whole of Angola up to
the 20th degree of longitude was assigned to us, so that we
stretched up to the Congo State from the south; we also
acquired the valuable islands of San Thom£ and Principe,
which are north of the Equator and therefore really in the
French sphere of influence, a fact which caused ray French
colleague to enter strong but unavailing protests.
Further, we obtained the northern part of Mozambique;
the Licango formed the border.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


The British Government showed the greatest considera-
tion for our interests and wishes. Sir E. Grey intended to
demonstrate his goodwill towards us, but he also wished to
assist our colonial development as a whole, as England hoped
to divert the German development of strength from the North
Sea and Western Europe to the Ocean and to Africa. “We
don’t want to grudge Germany her colonial development,” a
member of the Cabinet said to me.
The British Government originally intended to include the
Congo State in the agreement, which would have given us
the right of pre-emption and enabled us to penetrate it
economically. We refused this offer nominally in view of
Belgian susceptibilities. Perhaps we wished to be economical
of successes ? With regard also to the practical realisation of
its real though unexpressed intention—the later actual
partition of the Portuguese colonies—the treaty in its new
form showed marked improvements and advantages as
compared with the old one. Cases had been specified which
empowered us to take steps to guard our interests in the
districts assigned to us. These were couched in such a
manner that it was really left to us to decide when “ vital ”
interests arose, so that, with Portugal entirely dependent on
England, it was only necessary to cultivate further good
relations with England in order to carry out our joint
intentions at a later date with English assent.
Sir E. Grey showed the sincerity of the British
Government’s desire to respect our rights by referring to us
Englishmen who wished to invest capital and asked for the
support of the British Government in the districts assigned
to us by the new agreement, even before this was completed
and signed, and by informing them that their enterprise
belonged to our sphere of influence.
The agreement was practically completed at the time of
the King’s visit to Berlin in May, 1913. At that time a
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


conference took place in Berlin under the presidency of the
Imperial Chancellor; in this conference I also took part,
and certain further wishes of ours were defined. On my
return to London I succeeded, with the assistance of Coun-
cillor of Legation von Kuhlmann, who was working at
the agreement with Mr. Parker, in having our last proposals
incorporated, so that the whole agreement could be paragraphed
by Sir E. Grey and by me in August, 1913, before I went
on leave.
But now fresh difficulties arose which prevented its being
signed, and I did not obtain the authorisation to conclude it
till a year later—that is, shortly before the outbreak of the war.
It was, however, never signed.
Sir E. Grey was only willing to sign if the agreement
■were published together with those of 1898 and 1899.
England had, as he said, no other secret treaties besides these,
and it was contrary to established principles to keep binding
agreements secret. Therefore he could not make any agree-
ment without publishing it. He was, however, willing to
accede to our wishes with regard to the time and manner
of publication, provided that such publication took place within
one year from the date of signature.
At our Foreign Office, where my London successes had
caused increasing dissatisfaction, and where an influential
personage, who acted the part of Herr von Holstein,
wanted the London post for himself, I was informed
that the publication would endanger our interests in the
colonies, as the Portuguese would then not give us any more
concessions.
The futility of this objection is apparent from the con-
sideration that the Portuguese, in view of the closeness of
Anglo-Portuguese relations, were most probably just as well
aware of the old agreement as of our new arrangements, and
that the influence which England possesses at Lisbon renders
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


their Government completely impotent in face of an Anglo-
German agreement.
Another pretext had therefore to be found for wrecking
the treaty. It was suggested that the publication of the
Treaty of Windsor, which had been concluded during the
time of Prince Hohenlohe—though it was only a renewal
of the Treaty of Charles 11., which had always remained
in force —might endanger the position of Herr von Bethmann
Hollweg, as a proof of British hypocrisy and perfidy !
I pointed out that the preamble of our agreement
expressed the same thing as the Treaty of Windsor and as
other similar treaties, namely, that we would protect the
sovereign rights of Portugal and the inviolability of its posses-
sions. In vain ! In spite of repeated discussions with Sir
E. Grey, at which he made many fresh suggestions for the
publication, the Foreign Office persisted in its attitude, and
finally arranged with Sir E. Goschen that matters should
be left as they were !
The treaty, which offered us extraordinary advantages,
the result of more than a year’s work, was thus dropped
because it would have been a public success for me.
When I mentioned .the subject to Mr. Harcourt at a
dinner at the Embassy in the spring of 1914, the Minister for
the Colonies told me that he was placed in a difficult position,
and did not know how to act. The present position was
intolerable—he wished to safeguard our interests, but was in
doubt whether he should proceed on the terms of the old or
the new treaty. It was therefore urgently desirable to clear
up the situation and to settle the matter, which had dragged
on for such a long time.
In reply to a dispatch in this sense I received instructions
couched in terms which showed more emotion than civility,
telling me to abstain from any further interference in the
matter.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


1 now regret that 1 did not immediately travel to Berlin
and place my post at the disposal of the monarch, and that
I had not lost faith in the possibility of arriving at an
understanding with those in authority, a sinister mistake
which was to take its revenge a few months later in such a
tragical way.
However little 1 even then enjoyed the goodwill of the
highest official of the Empire, as he feared that I was aspiring
to his post, yet I must in justice to him say that during our
last interview before the outbreak of war, at the end of June,
1914, to which I will refer later, he gave me his assent for
the signature and publication of the treaty. In spite of
this it required repeated applications on my part, which were
supported by Herr Dr. Solf in Berlin, before sanction was
finally obtained at the end of July, As Serbian
crisis at that time already imperilled the peace of Europe,
the completion of the treaty had to be postponed. It also
is one of the sacrifices of this war.
THE BAGDAD TREATY.
At the same time I was negotiating in London, with the
able support of Herr von Kuhlmann, about the so-called
Bagdad Treaty. The real object of this was to divide up Asia
Minor into spheres of influence, although this term was
anxiously avoided in view of the rights of the Sultan. Sir
E. Grey also repeatedly stated that there were in existence
no agreements with France and Russia about the partition of
Asia Minor.
In consultation with a Turkish representative, Hakki
Pasha, all economic questions concerning German under-
takings were settled in the main according to the wishes of
the Deutsche Bank. The most important concession Sir
E. Grey made to me personally was the continuation of the
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


railway as far as Basra. We had dropped this point in favour
of the connection to Alexandretta ; up to that time Bagdad
had been the terminal point of the railway. An international
commission was to regulate navigation on the Shatt-el-Arab.
We weie also to have a share in the harbour works at Basra,
and received rights for the navigation of the Tigris, which
hitherto had been a monopoly of the firm of Lynch.
By this treaty the whole of Mesopotamia as far as Basra
was included within our sphere of influence (without prejudice
to already existing British navigation rights on the Tigris and
the rights of the Wilcox irrigation works), as well as the
whole district of the Bagdad and Anatolian railway.
The coast of the Persian Gulf and thd Smyrna-Aidin
railway were recognised as the British economic sphere, Syria
as the French, and Armenia as the Russian. If both treaties
were executed and published, an agreement with England
would be reached which would preclude all doubts about the
possibility of an “ Anglo-German co-operation. ”
THE QUESTION OF THE NAVY.
The Naval question was and is the most delicate of all. It
is not always regarded rightly.
The creation of a powerful fleet on the other side of the
North Sea—the development of the greatest military power
of the Continent into the greatest naval power as well
was bound to be felt in England as at least “ inconvenient "
There can be no doubt about this in any reasonable view.
In order to maintain her advantage and not to become
dependent, in order to secure the rule over the seas which
is necessary for her if she is not to starve, she was
compelled to undertake armaments and expenditure which
weighed heavily on the taxpayer. England's international
position would be threatened, however, if our policy created
the belief that warlike developments might ensue—a state of
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


affairs which had almost been reached during the time of the
Morocco crises and the Bosnian problem.
Great Britain had become reconciled to our fleet within
its then appointed limits , but it was certainly not welcome,
and was one of the causes —though not the only cause and
perhaps not the most important —of her adhesion to France
and Russia ; but on account of the fleet alone England would
not have drawn the sword any more than on account of our
trade, which has been alleged to have produced jealousy and
finally war.
From the very beginning 1 maintained that, notwith-
standing the fleet, it would be possible to arrive at a friendly
understanding and rapprochement if we did not introduce a
new Navy Bill and our policy were indubitably pacific. I
also avoided mention of the fleet and the word never passed
between Sir E. Grey and me. On one occasion Sir E. Grey
said at a meeting of the Cabinet, “ The present German
Ambassador has never mentioned the fleet to me.”
During my tenure of Office Mr. Churchill, then First Lord
of the Admiralty, proposed, as is known, the so-called “Naval
holiday ” and suggested for financial reasons, and probably also
to meet the pacific wishes of his party, a year’s pause in arma-
ments. Officially Sir E. Grey did not support the proposal •
he never mentioned it to me, but Mr. Churchill repeatedly
spoke to me about it.
I am convinced that his suggestion was honest, as
prevarication is altogether foreign to English nature. It
would have been a great success for Mr. Churchill if he could
have come before the country with ‘reductions of expenditure
and freed it from the nightmare of armaments that weighed
on the people.
I replied that for technical reasons it would be difficult
to agree to his plan. What was to become of the workmen
who were engaged for this purpose, and what of the technical
MV MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


staff? Our Naval programme had been decided on. and it
would be difficult to alter it in any way. On the other hand
we had no intention of exceeding it. But he reverted to k
again and pointed out that the sums used for enormous
armaments might better be employed for other and useful
purposes. I replied that this expenditure too benefited
our home industries.
Through interviews with Sir W. Tyrrell, Sir E, Grey’s
principal private secretary, I managed to have the question
removed from the agenda without causing any ill-feeling,
although it was again referred to in Parliament, and to prevent
any official proposal being made. It was, however, a pet idea
of Mr. Churchill’s and the Government’s, and I think that by
entering upon his plan and the formula 16:10 for battleships
we might have given tangible proof of our goodwill, and
strengthened and encouraged the tendency (which already pre-
vailed in the Government) to enter into closer relations with us.
But, as I have said, it was possible to arrive at an under-
standing in spite of the fleet and without a “ Naval holiday.”
I had always regarded my mission from this point of view,
and I had also succeeded in realising my plans when the
outbreak of war destroyed everything I liad achieved.
COMMERCIAL JEALOUSY.
The “ commercial jealousy,” about which we hear so much,
is based on a wrong conception of the circumstances.
Certainly Germany’s rise as a commercial power after the
war of 1870 and during the following decades was a menace
to British commercial circles which, with their industries and
export-houses, had held a virtual monopoly of trade. The
increasing commerce with Germany, which was the leading
country in Europe as regards British exports —a fact to which
I invariably referred in my public speeches—had, however,
given rise to the wish to maintain friendly relations with their
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


best customer and business friend, and had driven all other
considerations into the background.
The Briton is matter-of-fact—-he takes things as they are
and does not tilt against windmills. Notably in commercial
circles 1 encountered the most friendly spirit and the
endeavour to further our common economic interests. As a
matter of fact nobody in them took any interest in the
Russian, Italian, Austrian, or even in the French representa-
tive, in spite of his striking personality and his political
successes. Only the German and American Ambassadors
attracted public attention.
In order to get into touch with important commercial
circles, I accepted invitations from the United Chambers of
Commerce, and from the London and Bradford Chamber, and
was the guest of the cities of Newcastle and Liverpool. I
was well received everywhere; Manchester, Glasgow, and
Fdinburgh had also invited me, and I intended to go there later.
People who did not understand British conditions and
did not realise the importance of “ public dinners,” also
people to whom my successes were unwelcome, reproached
me with having done harm with my speeches. 1 believe
on the contrary that by appearing in public and emphasising
common commercial interests I contributed in no small measure
to the improvement of relations, quite apart from the fact
that it would have been clumsy and churlish to refuse all
invitations.
In all other circles 1 also met with the most friendly
reception and hearty co-operation —at Court, in society, and
from the Government.
THE COURT AND SOCIETY.
The King, although not a genius, is a simple and well-
meaning man with sound common sense ; he demonstrated
his goodwill towards rne and was frankly desirous of furthering
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


my task. Although the British Constitution leaves only very
limited powers to the Crown, yet the monarch, in virtue of his
position, can exercise a considerable influence on opinion both
in society and in the Government. The Crown is the apex of
the social pyramid ; it sets the fashion. Society, which is
principally Unionist (Conservative), has always taken an active
interest in politics, a habit which the ladies share. It is
represented in the House of Lords, the House of Commons,
and hence also in the Cabinet. An Englishman either is a
member of society, or he would like to be one. It is his
constant endeavour to be a “ Gentleman,” and even people
of undistinguished origin, like Mr. Asquith, delight to mingle
in society and the company of beautiful and fashionable
women.
The British gentlemen of both parties have the same
education, go to the same colleges and universities, have the
same recreations—golf, cricket, lawn-tennis, or polo. All
have played cricket and football in their youth; they have the
same habits of life, and spend the week-end in the country.
There is no social cleavage between the parties, but only a
political one ; in recent years it has so far developed into a
social cleavage that the politicians of the two camps avoid social
intercourse with one another. Even on the neutral territory
of an Embassy one did not venture to mingle the two parties,
as since the Veto and Home Rule Bills the Unionists have
ostracised the Radicals. When the King and Queen dined
with us a few months after my arrival, Lord Londonderry left
the house after dinner, as he did not wish to remain together
with Sir E. Grey. But it is not a difference of caste or
education as in France; they are not two separate worlds,
but the same world, and the opinion about a foreigner is a
common one, and not without influence on his political
position, whether Mr. Asquith be governing or Lord
Lansdowne.
MV MISSION to LON DON 1912-1914.


There has been no difference of caste in England sinc£
the time of the Stuarts, and since the Guelphs and Whig
oligarchy, in contrast to the Tory landed gentry encouraged
the rise of an urban middle-class. It is rather a difference
of political opinions about questions of constitutional law
and taxation. Especially aristocrats like Grey, Churchill,
Harcourt, Crewe, who joined the people’s party —the Radicals—
were most hated by the Unionist aristocracy; one never met
any of these gentlemen at any of the great aristocratic
houses, except at those of a few party friends.
We were received in London with open arms and both
parties rivalled one another in courtesy towards us. In view
of the close relationship between politics and society in
England, it would be wrong to undervalue social relations,
even when the majority of the upper ten thousand are in
opposition to the Government.
There is not the same unbridgable gulf between
Mr. Asquith and the Duke of Devonshire that there is between,
say, M. Briand and the Due de Doudeauville. Certainly they
do not consort together in times of great tension; they
belong to two separate social groups, but these are parts
of the same society, though of different grades, the centre of
which is the Court. They have common friends and habits
of life ; mostly they have known each other from their youth
up and also are frequently related to one another either by
blood or marriage.
Phenomena like Mr. Lloyd George the man of the
people, petty attorney, and self-made man—are the exception.
Even Mr. Burns, the Socialist, Labour leader, and self-
educated man, sought contact with society. In view of
the prevailing attempt to rank as a gentleman, whose
unattained prototype is still the great aristocrat, the
value of the verdict of society and its attitude must not be
underestimated.
mv mission to London 1912-1914.


Hence the social adaptability of a representative nowhere
plays a greater role than in England. A hospitable house
with pleasant hosts is worth more than the most profound
scientific knowledge ; a savant with provincial manners and
small means would gain no influence, in spite of all his
learning.
The Briton loathes a bore, a schemer, and a prig; he likes
a good fellow.
SIR EDWARD GREY.
Sir Edward Grey's influence in all matters of foreign policy
was almost unlimited. On important occasions he used indeed
to
always agreed to his views. His authority was undisputed.
Although he does not know foreign countries at all, and had
never left England except for a short visit to Paris, he was
fully conversant with all the important questions owing to his
long parliamentary experience and his natural insight. He
understands French, but does not speak it. He was returned
to Parliament as a young man, and soon began to interest
himself in foreign affairs. Under Lord Rosebery he was
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and became
Secretary of State in 1906, under Mr. Campbell-Bannerman ;
he has now held the post for some ten years.
The scion of an old north country family, which had
already furnished Grey, the well-known statesman, he joined
the left wing of his party and sympathised with Socialists and
pacifists. You may call him a Socialist in the ideal sense, as
he carries the theory into his private life and lives very simply
and unpretentiously, although he has extensive means. Osten-
tation is foreign to him. In London he only Had a small house,
and never gave dinners, except the one official dinner at the
Foreign Office on the King’s Birthday. On the few occasion*
MY MISSION TO LONDON 191 2- 1 9 1 4.


when he entertained guests it was at a simple dinner or
lunch with maidservants to wait. Also he avoided large
functions and banquets.
Like his colleagues, he regularly spends his week-ends
in the country, but not with large or fashionable parties
He is mostly by himself in his cottage in the New Forest,
where he takes long walks to study birds and their ways, as
he is a passionate lover of nature and an ornithologist.
Or sometimes he goes to his estate in the north, where he
feeds the squirrels that come in at the windows, and breeds
different species of waterfowl.
He was very fond of going to the Norfolk marshes to
watch in their breeding season the rare kinds of herons,
which nest only there.
In his youth he was a well-known cricket and racquet
player ; now his favourite pastime is salmon and trout-
fishing in Scottish rivers in company with his friend Lord
Glenconner, Mr. Asquith’s brother-in-law. “ All the rest
of the year lam looking forward to it.” He has published
a book on fishing.
On one occasion, when we spent a week-end with him
alone at Lord Glenconner’s, near Salisbury, he arrived on a
bicycle and returned to his cottage about thirty miles distant
in the same way.
The simplicity and honesty of his ways secured him the
esteem even of his opponents, who were to be found rather
in the sphere of home affairs than of foreign policy. Lies
and intrigue afe equally repugnant to him.
His wife, to whom he was devotedly attached and from
whom he was inseparable, died in consequence of being
thrown from a trap she was driving. As is generally known,
one of his brothers was killed by a lion.
Wordsworth is his favourite poet, and he could quote
much of his poetry.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


The calm quiet of his British nature is not lacking in a
sense of humour. Once when he was lunching with us and
the children, and heard them talking German, he said, “I
can’t help thinking how clever these children are to talk
German so well,” and was pleased with his joke.
This is a true picture of the man who is decried as
“ Liar-Grey ” and instigator of the world-war.
MR. ASQUITH.
Mr. Asquith is a man of an entirely different stamp. A
jovial bon-vivant , fond of the ladies, especially the young and
pretty ones, he is partial to cheerful society and good cooking;
and his zest for enjoyment is shared by his wife. Formerly a well-
known barrister with a large income, and for a number of years
in Parliament, then a Minister under Mr. Gladstone, a pacifist
like his friend Grey, and favouring an understanding with
Germany, he treated all questions with the cheery calm and
assurance of an experienced man of business, whose good
health and excellent nerves were steeled by devotion to the
game of golf.
His daughters were at school in Germany and spoke
German fluently. In a short time we got on friendly terms
with him and his family, and were his guests in his small
country house on the Thames.
Only on rare occasions did he concern himself with
foreign politics, when important questions arose; then of
course his decision was final. During the critical days of July
Mrs. Asquith repeatedly came to us to warn us, and in the
end she was quite distraught at the tragic turn of events.
Mr. Asquith also, when I called on him on the 2nd August to
make a last effort in the direction of expectant neutrality,
was quite broken, though absolutely calm. Tears were
coursing down his checks.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


NICOLSON.
Sir A. Nicolson and Sir W. Tyrrell were the two most
influential men at the Foreign Office after the Minister.
The former was no friend of ours, but his attitude towards
me was absolutely correct and courteous. Our personal
relations were excellent. He too did not want war; but
when we advanced against France, he no doubt worked in
the direction of an immediate intervention. He was the con-
fidant of my French colleague, with whom he was in constant
touch ; also he wished to relieve Lord Bertie in Paris.
Sir Arthur, who had been Ambassador at Petrograd, had
concluded the treaty of 1907, which had enabled Russia again
to turn her attention to the West and to the Near East.
TYRRELL.
Sir W. Tyrrell, Sir Edward’s private secretary, possessed
far greater influence than the Permanent Under-Secretary.
This highly intelligent man had been at school in Germany,
and had then turned to diplomacy, but had only been abroad
for a short time. At first he favoured the anti-German policy,
which was then in fashion amongst the younger British
diplomatists, but later he became a convinced advocate of
an understanding. He tnfluenced Sir E. Grey, with whom
lie was very intimate, in this direction. Since the outbreak
of war he has left the Office and found a place in the Home
Office, probably because of the criticisms passed on him for
his Germanophil tendency.
ATTITUDE OF THE GERMAN FOREIGN OFFICE.
Nothing can describe the rage of certain gentlemen at
mv London successes and the position which 1 had managed
to make for myself in a short time. They devised vexatious
-MV MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


instructions to render my office more difficult. 1 was left in
complete ignorance of the most important matters, and was
restricted to the communication of dull and unimportantreports.
Secret agents’ reports, on matters about w.hich I could not
learn without espionage and the necessary funds, were never
available to me; and it was not till the last days of July, 1914,
that I learnt, quite by chance, from the Naval Attache of the
secret Anglo-French agreement concerning the co-operation
of the two fleets in case of war. The knowledge of other
important events which had been known to the Office for a
longtime, like the correspondence between Grey and Cambon,
was kept from me.
IN CASE OF WAR.
Soon after my arrival I obtained the conviction that under
no circumstances had we to fear a British attack or British
support lof any foreign attack, but that under any cir-
cumstances England would protect the French. I expressed
this view in repeated dispatches, with minute proof and great
emphasis, but did not obtain any credence, although Lord
Haldane’s refusal to assent to the neutrality formula and
England’s attitude during the Morocco crisis had been pretty
obvious indications. In addition there were the secret agree-
ments which I have referred to, ami which were known to
the Office.
I always pointed out that in the event of a war between
European Powers, England as a commercial state would
suffer enormously, and would therefore do her best to prevent
.a conflict; but, on the other hand, she would never tolerate a
weakening or annihilation of France; because of the necessity
of maintaining the' European balance of power and of
preventing a German superiority of force. Lord Haldane
had told me this shortly after my arrival, and all the leading
people h?d expressed themselves in the same sense.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1913-1914.


THE SERBIAN CRISIS.
At the end of June I went to Kiel by command of the
Emperor. A few weeks prior to this I had been made an
honorary D.C.L. of Oxford, an honour which had not been
conferred on any German Ambassador since Herr von Bunsen.
Onboard the Meteor we learned of the death of the Archduke,
H M. regretted that his efforts to win him over to his way of
thinking had thus been rendered vain. Ido not know
whether the plan of an active policy against Serbia had
already been decided on at Konopischt.
As I was not instructed about views and events in Vienna,
I did not attach very great .importance to this occurrence.
Later on I could only remark that amongst Austrian aristo-
crats a feeling of relief outweighed other sentiments. On
board the Meteor there was also an Austrian guest of the
Emperor's, Count Felix Thun. He had remained in his cabin
all the time suffering from sea-sickness, in spite of the
splendid weather; but on receiving the news he was well.
The fright or joy had cured him.
On my arrival in Berlin I saw the Chancellor and told him
that I considered the state of our foreign relations very satis-
factory, as we were on better terms with England than we
had been for a long time, whilst in France also the government
was in the hands of a pacifist Ministry.
Herr von Bethmann Hollweg did not appear to share my
optimism, and complained about Russian armaments. I
sought to reassure him, emphasising the fact that Russia had
no interest in attacking us, and that such an attack would
never receive Anglo-French support, as both countries wanted
peace. Thereupon I went to Dr. Zimmermann, who was
acting for Herr von Jagow, and he told me that Russia was
about to raise 900,000 additional troops. His language
betrayed unmistakable annoyance with Russia, which was
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


“ everywhere in our way.” There were also difficulties in
economic policy. Of course, 1 was not told that General von
Moltke was pressing for war; but I learned that Herr von
Tschirschky had been reprimanded because he reported
that he had counselled moderation towards Serbia in
Vienna.
On my return from Silesia to London 1 stopped only a
few hours in Berlin, where 1 heard that Austria intended
to take steps against Serbia in order to put an end to
an impossible situation.
I regret that at the moment I underestimated the import-
ance of the news. I thought that nothing would come of it
this time either, and that matt.ers could easily be settled,
even if Russia became threatening. I now regret that I did
not stay in Berlin and at once declare that I would not
co-operate in a policy of this kind.
Subsequently I ascertained that, at the decisive conference
at Potsdam on the sth July, the Vienna enquiry received the
unqualified assent of all the leading people, and with the rider
that no harm would be done if a war with Russia should result.
Thus it was expressed, at any rate, in the Austrian protocol
which Count Mensdorff received in London. Soon afterwards
Herr von Jagovv was in Vienna to consult Count Berchtold
about all these matters.
At that time I received instructions to induce the British
Press to adopt a friendly attitude should Austria administer
the coup de grace to the “ Great Serbia ” movement, and to
exert my personal influence to prevent public opinion from
becoming inimical to Austria. If one remembered England’s
attitude during the annexation crisis, when public opinion
showed sympathy for the Serbian rights in Bosnia, as well as
her benevolent furtherance of national movements in the days
of Lord Byron and Garibaldi, the probability that she would
support the intended punitive expedition against the murderers
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


of the prince appeared so remote, that I found myself obliged
to give an urgent warning. But I also warned them against
the whole plan, which I characterised as adventurous and
dangerous, and advised them to counsel the Austrians to
moderation , as I did not believe that the conflict could be
localised.
Herr von Jagow replied to me that Russia was not ready ;
there would probably be some fuss, but the moie firmly we
took sides with Austria the more would Russia give way. As
it was, Austria was accusing us of weakness and therefore
we dare not leave her in the lurch. Public opinion in Russia,
on the other hand, was becoming more and more anti-German,
so we must just risk it.
In view of this attitude, which, as I found later, was based
on reports from Count that Russia would not move
under any circumstances, and which caused us to spur Count
Berchtold on to the utmost energy, I hoped for salvation
through British mediation, as I knew that Sir E. Grey’s
great influence in Petrograd could be used in the direction of
peace. I therefore availed myself of my friendly relations
with the Minister to request him in confidence to advise
moderation in Russia in case Austria, as seemed likely,
demanded satisfaction from Serbia.
At first the English Press preserved calm and was friendly
to Austria, because the murder was generally condemned.
But gradually more and more voices were heard insisting
emphatically that, however much the crime merited punishment,
its exploitation for political purposes could not be justified.
Austria was strongly exhorted to use moderation.
When the ultimatum was published, all the papers with
the exception of the Standard— the ever-necessitous, which
had apparently been bought by Austria were unanimous in
condemnation. The whole world, excepting Berlin and
Vienna, realised that it meant war —indeed, “ the world-war.”
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


The British Fleet, which happened to have assembled for
a naval review, was not demobilised.
My efforts were in the first place directed towards
obtaining as conciliatory a reply from Serbia as was possible,
since the attitude of the Russian Government left room for
no doubts about the gravity of the situation.
Serbia responded favourably to the British efforts, as M.
Pasitch had really agreed to everything, excepting two
points, about which, however, he declared his willingness
to negotiate. If Russia and England had wanted the war,
in order to attack us, a hint to Belgrade would have been
enough-, and the unprecedented Note would not have been
answered.
Sir E. Grey w-ent through the Serbian reply with me, and
pointed out the conciliatory attitude of the Government of
Belgrade. Thereupon we discussed his proposal of mediation,
which was to include a formula acceptable to both parties
for clearing up the two points. His proposal was that a
committee, consisting of M. Gambon, the Marquis Imperial!,
and myself, should assemble under his presidency, and it
would have been an easy matter for us to find an acceptable
formula for the points at issue, which mainly concerned
the collaboration of Austrian Imperial officials at the
investigations in Belgrade. Given goodwill, everything
could have been settled at one or two sittings, and the
mere acceptance of the British proposal would have brought
about a relaxation of the tension, and would have further
improved our relations with England. I therefore strongly
backed the proposal, on the ground that otherwise there was
danger of the world-war, through which we stood to gain
nothing and lose all; but in vain. It was derogatory to the
dignity of Austria—we did not intend to. interfere in Serbian
matters —we left these to our ally. I was to work for “ the
localisation of the conflict.”
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914


Needless to say a mere hint from Berlin would have
decided Count Berchtold to content himself with a diplomatic
success, and to accept the Serbian reply. This hint was not
given; on the contrary they urged in the direction of war.
It would have been such a splendid success.
After our refusal Sir Edward requested us to submit
a proposal. We insisted on war. I could not obtain
any reply but that Austria had shown an exceedingly
“accommodating spirit’’ by not demanding an extension
of territory.
Sir Edward rightly pointed out that even without an
extension of territory it is possible to reduce a state to a con-
dition of vassalage, and that Russia would see a humiliation
in this, and would not suffer it.
The impression grew stronger and stronger that we
wanted war under any circumstances. It was impossible to
interpret our attitude, on a question which did not directly
concern us, in any other way. The urgent requests and
definite assurances of M. Sazonow, followed by the Czar’s
positively humble telegrams, the repeated proposals of Sir
E. Grey, the warnings of the Marquis San Giuliano and
Signor Bollati, my urgent counsels, all were of no avail.
Berlin persisted; Serbia must be massacred.
The more I pressed the less were they inclined to come
round, if only that I might not have the success of averting
war in conjunction with Sir Edward Grey.
Finally, on the 29th, the latter decided on the famous
warning. I replied that I had invariably reported that we
should have to reckon with English opposition if it came
to a war with France. Repeatedly the Minister said to me :
“If war breaks out, it will be the greatest catastrophe the
world has ever seen.”
After that, events followed each other rapidly. When
at last Count Berchtold, who up till then had, at the behest
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


of Berlin, played the strong man, decided to come round,
we replied to the Russian mobilisation, after Russia had
negotiated and waited for a whole week in vain, with the
ultimatum and the declaration of war.
THE ENGLISH DECLARATION OF WAR.
Sir Edward was still looking for new ways of avoiding the
catastrophe. Sir W. Tyrrell called on me on the morning
of the ist August to tell me that his chief still hoped to
find a way out. Would we remain neutral if France
did ? I understood that we should then agree to spare
France, but he had meant that we should remain altogether
neutral —towards Russia also. That was the well-known
“ misunderstanding.” Sir Edward had asked me to call in the
afternoon. As he was at a meeting of the Cabinet, he called
me up on the telephone, Sir W. Tyrrell having hurried
to him at once. In the afternoon, however, he talked only
about Belgian neutrality and the possibility that we and
Prance might face one another in arms without attacking.
Thus this was not a proposal at all, but a question without
any guarantee, as our interview, which I have mentioned
before, was to take place soon afterwards. Berlin, however,
without waiting for the interview, made this report the
foundation for far-reaching measures. 1 hen there came
M. Poincare’s letter, Bonar Law’s letter, King Albert’s
telegram. The waverers in the Cabinet excepting three
members who resigned —were converted.
Till the very last moment I had hoped that England
would adopt a waiting attitude. Nor did my French colleague
feel at all confident, as I heard from a private source. Even
on the ist August the King had given the I resident an
evasive reply. But England was already mentioned as an
opponent in the telegram from Berlin announcing the
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


imminent danger of war. Berlin was therefore already
reckoning on war with England.
Before my departure Sir E. Grey received me, on tfie sth,
at his house. I had called at his request. He was deeply
moved. He told me he w T ould always be prepared to mediate.
“We don’t want to crush Germany.” Unfortunately this
confidential interview was made public, and Herr von Beth-
mann Hollweg thus destroyed the last chance of gaining
peace through England.
The arrangements for our departure were perfectly
dignified and calm. The King had previously sent his equerry,
Sir E. Ponsonby, to express his regrets at my departure
and that he could not see me himself. Princess Louise
wrote to me that the whole family were sorry we were
leaving. Mrs. Asquith and other friends came to the Embassy
to take leave.
A special train took us to Harwich, where a guard of
honour was drawn up for me. I was treated like a departing
Sovereign, Such was the end of my London mission.
It was wrecked, not by the perfidy of the British, but by the
perfidy of our policy.
Count Mensdorff and his staff had come to the station in
London. He was cheerful, and gave me to understand that
perhaps he would remain there, but he told the English
that we, and not Austria, had wanted the war.
RETROSPECT.
Looking back after two years, I come to the conclusion
that I realised too late that there was no room for me in a
system that for years had lived on routine and traditions alone,
and that only tolerated representatives who reported what
their superiors wished to read. Absence of prejudice and an •
independent judgment are resented. Lack of ability and want
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


of character are praised and esteemed, while successes meet
with disfavour and excite alarm.
I h*ad given up my opposition to the insane 1 riple Alliance
policy, as I* realised that it was useless, and that my warn-
ings were attributed to “ Austrophobia,” to my idie fixe. In
politics, which are neither acrobatics nor a game, but the
main business of the firm, there is no “ phil ” or “ phobe,”
but only the interest of the community. A policy, how-
ever, that is based only on Austrians, Magyars, and lurks
must come into conflict with Russia, and finally lead to a
catastrophe.
In spite of former mistakes, all might still have been put
right in July, 1914. An agreement with England had been
arrived at. We ought to have sent a representative to
Petrograd who was at least of average political capacity,
and to have convinced Russia that we wished neither
to control the straits nor to strangle Serbia. Lachez
V Aut riche et nous Idcherons les Frangais ” (“Drop Austiia
and we will drop the French”), M. Sazonow said to
us. And M. Gambon told Herr von Jagow, “ Vous n’avez pas
besom desuivre I'Aut riche partout" (“You need not follow
Austria everywhere”).
We wanted neither wars nor alliances; we wanted only
treaties that would safeguard us and others, and secure our
economic development, which was without its like in history.
If Russia had been freed in the West, she could again turn to
the East, and the Anglo-Russian rivalry would have been re-
established automatically and without our intervention, and
not less certainly also the Russo-Japanese.
We could also have considered the question of the reduction
of armaments, and need no longer have troubled ourselves about
Austrian complications. Then Austria would have become
the vassal of the German Empire, without any alliance—and
especially without our seeking her good graces, a proceeding
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


ultimately leading to war for the liberation of Poland and the
destruction of Serbia, although German interest demanded the
exact contrary.
I had to support in London a policy the heresy of which
I recognised. That brought down vengeance on me, because
it was a sin against the Holy Ghost.
MY RETURN.
As soon as I arrived in Berlin I saw that I was to be
made the scapegoat for the catastrophe for which our
Government had made itself responsible against my advice
and warnings.
The report was deliberately circulated in official quarters
that I had allowed myself to be deceived by Sir E. Grey,
because, if he had not wanted war, Russia would not have
mobilised Count Pourtal£s, whose reports could be relied
on, was to be protected, not least on account of his relation-
ship. He had conducted himself “ magnificently,” he was
praised enthusiastically, and I was blamed the more severely.
“What does Serbia matter to Russia?” this statesman
said to me after eight years in office at Petrograd. The
whole thing was a British trick that I had not noticed. . At
the Foreign Office they told me that war would in any case
have come in 1916. Then Russia would have been ready;
therefore it was better now.
THE QUESTION OF RESPONSIBILITY.
As is evident from all official publications—and this is not
refuted by our White Book, which, owing to the poverty of
its contents and to its omissions, is a gravely self-accusing
document —
i. We encouraged Count Berchtold to attack
Serbia, although German interests were not involved
and the danger of a world-war must have been known
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


to us. Whether we were aware of the wording of
the Ultimatum is completely immaterial.
2. During the time between the 23rd and
July, 1914, when M. Sazonow' emphatically declared
that he would not tolerate any attack on Serbia, we
rejected the British proposals of mediation, although
Serbia, under Russian and British pressure, had
accepted almost the whole of the Ultimatum, and
although an agreement about the two points at
issue could easily have been reached, and Count
Berchtold was even prepared to content himself
with the Serbian reply.
3. On the 30th July, when Count Berchtold wanted
to come to terms, we sent an ultimatum to Petrograd
merely because of the Russian mobilisation, although
Austria had not been attacked; and on the 31st July
we declared war on Russia, although the Czar pledged
his word that he would not order a man to march as
long as negotiations were proceeding—thus deliberately
destroying the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
In view of the above undeniable facts it is no wonder that
the whole of the civilised world outside Germany places the
entire responsibility for the world-war upon our shoulders.
THE ENEMY POINT OF VIEW.
Is it not intelligible that our enemies should declare that
they will not rest before a system is destroyed which is a
constant menace to our neighbours ? Must they not other-
wise fear that in a few years’ time they will again have to
take up arms and again see their provinces overrun and their
towns and villages destroyed? Have not they proved to be
right who declared that the spirit of Treitschke and Bernhardi
governed the German people, that spirit which glorified war
as such, and did not loathe it as an evil, that with us the
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


feudal knight and Junker, the warrior caste, still rule and
form ideals and values, not the civilian gentleman ; that the
love of the duel which animates our academic youth still per-
sists in those who control the destinies of the people ? Did
not the Zabern incident and the parliamentary discussions
about it clearly demonstrate to foreign countries the value we
place on the rights and liberties of the citizen if these collide
with questions of military power?
That intelligent historian Cramb, who has since died, an
admirer of Germany, clothed the German conception in the
words of Euphorion :
Dream ye of peace?*
Dream he that will—
War is the rallying cry I
Victory is the refrain.
Militarism, which by rights is an education for the people
and an instrument of policy, turns policy into the instrument
of military power when the patriarchal absolutism of the
soldier-kingdom makes possible an attitude which a demo-
cracy, remote from military Junker influence, would never
have permitted
So think our enemies, and so they must think when they
see that, in spite of capitalistic industrialisation and in
spite of socialist organisation, “the living are still ruled by
the dead,” as Friedrich Nietzsche says. The principal
war aim of our enemies, the democratisation of Germany,
will be realised !
BISMARCK.
Bismarck, like Napoleon, loved conflict for itself. As a
statesman he avoided fresh wars, the folly of which
he recognised. He was content with bloodless battles.
After he had, in rapid succession, vanquished Christian,
* The original ha* fi war/’ presumably owing t 9 a misprint, —Translator.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


Francis Joseph, and Napoleon, it was the turn of Arnim, Pius,
and Augusta. That did not suffice him. Gortschakow, who
thought himself the greater, had repeatedly annoyed him.
The conflict was carried almost to the point of war —even by
depriving him of his railway saloon. This gave rise to the
miserable Triple Alliance. At last came the conflict with
William, in which the mighty one was vanquished, as
Napoleon was vanquished by Alexander.
Political life-and-death unions only prosper if founded on
a constitutional basis and not on an international one. They
are all the more questionable if the partner is feeble. Bismarck
never meant the Alliance to take this form.
He always treated the English with forbearance ; he knew
that this was wiser. He always paid marked respect to
the old Queen Victoria, despite his hatred of her daughter
and of political Anglomania; the learned Beaconsfield and the
wordly-wise Salisbury he courted; and even that strange
Gladstone, whom he did not like, really had nothing to
complain about.
The Ultimatum to Serbia was the culminating point of
the policy of the Berlin Congress, the Bosnian crisis, the
Conference of London : but there was yet time to turn back.
We were completely successful in achieving that which
above all other things should have been avoided—the breach
with Russia and' England.
OUR FUTURE.
After two years' fighting it is obvious that we dare not
hope for an unconditional victory over the Russians, English,
French, Italians, Rumanians, and Americans, or reckon on
being able to wear our enemies down. But we can obtain
a peace by compromise only by evacuating the occupied
territory, the retention of which would in any event be a
burden and cause of weakness to us, and would involve the
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914,


menace of further wars. Therefore everything should be
avoided which would make it more difficult for those enemy
groups who might possibly still be won over to the idea of
a peace by compromise to come to terms, viz., the British
Radicals and the Russian Reactionaries. From this point of
view alone the Polish scheme is to be condemned, as is also
any infringement of Belgian rights, or the execution of British
citizens—to say nothing of the insane U-boat plan
“Our future lies on the water.” Quite right; therefore
it is not in Poland and Belgium, in France and Serbia.
This is a return to the days of the Holy Roman Empire
and the mistakes of the Hohenstaufens and Habsburgs. It
is the policy of the Plantagenets, not that of Drake and
Raleigh, Nelson and Rhodes. The policy of the Triple
Alliance is a return to the past, a turning aside from the
future, from imperialism and a world-policy. u Middle
Europe” belongs to the Middle Ages, Berlin-Bagdad is a
blind alley and not the way into the open country, to
unlimited possibilities, to the world-mission of the German
nation.
I am no enemy of Austria, or Hungary, or Italy, or Serbia,
or any other state, but only of the Triple Alliance policv,
which was bound to divert us from our aims and bring us
onto the inclined plane of a Continental policy. It was not
the German policy, but that of the Austrian Imperial House.
The Austrians had come to regard the Alliance as an umbrella
under the shelter of which they could make excursions to the
Near East when they thought fit.
And what must we expect as the result of this war of
nations ? The United States of Africa will be British, like
those of America, Australia and Oceania. And the Latin
states of Europe, as 1 predicted years ago, will enter into the
same relations with the United Kingdom that their Latin
sisters in America maintain with the United States. -The
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.


Anglo-Saxon will dominate them. France, exhausted by the
war, will only attach herself still more closely to Great Britain.
Nor will Spain continue to resist for long.
And in Asia the Russians and the Japanese will spread
and will carry their customs with their frontiers, and the
South will remain to the British.
The world will belong to the Anglo-Saxons, Russians,
and Japanese, and the German will remain alone with Austria
and Hungary. His rule will be that of thought and of com-
merce, not that of the bureaucrat and the soldier. He made
his appearance too late, and his last chance of making good
the past, that of founding a Colonial Empire, was annihilated
by the world-war.
For we shall not supplant the sons of Ichwe. Then will
be realised the plan of the great Rhodes, who saw the
salvation of humanity in the expansion of Britondom —in
British Imperialism.
Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento.
Hae tibi erunt artes: pacisque imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis et debellare superbos.
Printed in Great Britain by Thb Field & Queen (Horace Cox) lm>..
Bream’s Buildings, London, E.C. 4.
MY MISSION TO LONDON 1912-1914.
