

MY...
RECOLLECTIONS.
BY
WILLIAM RUSSELL.
“Werriberrie.”




My Recollections
BY
WILLIAM RUSSELL,
“Werriberrie.”
CAMDEN:
PRINTED AT THE CAMDEN NEWS OFFICE.




Engraved by
A. A. Lawson.
WILLIAM RUSSELL,
“Werribenie,”
Photo by
R. Dowle,
The Oaks.
Th e Chief Man of the Gun-dun-gorra Aboriginals of the
Burragorang Valley. Age 84 at 1914.




Joye Word.
Spring Hills,
Glenmore,
February 16, 1914.
DEAR READER.
I seek the opportunity under “Foreword’ ’ to state
that I trust you will derive the same amount of pleasure
reading Old William Russell’s Recollections as I have in
writing them down for him.
I will not apologise for any crudeness in diction, I
have just taken what he had to tell verbatim at the odd
moments I had to spare, I was glad to be of service to
the old chap, for he will receive all profits resulting from
the sale of this phamphlet.
I have ever had rather a veneration for the fast dis-
appearing Australian Aboriginals, of which Eussell is al-
most the last of his tribe, and is certainly by far the
oldest native of this district.
I fully agree with the writings of my grandfather,
the late Samuel Bennett, written over 50 years ago in his
History of Australian Discovery and Colonisation. ’ ’
“ We know enough, however, to sanction the belief
“ that the Australian Aboriginees are the representatives
“ the most ancient family of mankind, which infer-
“ ences justify the conclusion that even if the greatest
“ antiquity ever claimed for the Egyptian, Assyrian, or
“ Indian Monuments should be conceded, they could only


“ carry us back to a period which is as yesterday in the
‘ ‘ history of our race. If no ruined cities, or fallen fanes,
“ evidence the presence in Australia in former ages of
“ higher civilisation, if we have no monuments of ancient
“ art, no remains which tell of the triumphs of conquerors,
‘<' or the ambitions or piety of rulers —the negative proof
“ thus affords of the vast antiquity of the present Austra-
“ lian race is the strongest possible to imagine.”
My brother, S. Y. Bennett, too has expressed the same
idea in his verses :
TUB BLACKFBLLOW’S GRAVE,
“ No marble marks this resting place,
No artist here has stopped to trace
The sculptured words of woe,
No gilded organ pipes are here,
Naught but the wild bird’s note we here,
Or the wind murmuring low.
There are no stable hatchments shown,
No weeping seraphims in stone
Above this sylvisn grove ;
No towers nor spires overhead
But lofty gums their branches spread,
And mournful grass trees wave.
The wild flowers bloom about the place,
Sad token of a vanished race,
Vanished, Ah! who may know?
O, pass not by with careless tread
The sacred ashes of the dead —
The dead of long ago. ’ ’
S. V. Bennett, 1903.


While Gray in the beautiful elegy
‘‘Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault.
If memory o er their tomb no trophies raise,
Where, though the long-drawn aisle and fretted valt.
The pealing anthem swell the note of praise.
Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery sooth the cold ear of death?
Through the past years I have collected a fairly com-
plete vocabulary of Gun-dun-gorra words and legends,
which I trust may some day be printed for the information
of those interested. In my investigations I have also
found that other inquirers have ploughed the same field,
but principally as to the grammatical structure of this
language compared with that of other tribes. I refer to
Miss M. M. Everitt’s “The Organisation Language and
Initiation Ceremonies of the Aboriginees of the South
East Coast of N.S.W.”; and odd writings of Mr. E. H
Mathews, scattered through some of his many phamphlets
on the Australian race in general
Trusting the present phamphlet will be favorably re-
ceived for old Billy’s sake.
Believe me, yours sincerely,
A. L. BENNETT.




My Recollections
By WILLIAM RUSSELL.
“ Werriberry.”
JANUARY, 1914.
AS my friends throughout this district have from
time to time been interested in the information that I
could give them about my Aboriginal-Fellow-Tribesmen, my
recollections of “Old Hands,” both native and European,
as well as the conditions of the district when I was a boy,*
I have come to the conclusion, at the suggestion of my
friend, Mr. A. L. Bennett, of The Oaks, that perhaps my
experiences would be of further interest if they were
written down and thus made available for those who have
not the pleasure of my acquaintance.
My earliest recollections are naturally of my mother,
“ Wonduck,” named after the place where she was born’
near Riehlands, which was the general custom in the tribe
of my race, i.e.,—The GUN-DUNG-GOER A, though
Wonduck’s husband being named “ Muroon,” which is the
name of the wild cucumber vine bearing oblong berries,
called Moom-bir, and which are of a brown colour when
ripe, the vines are rather plentiful in stringy-bark country.
My uncle was “ My-an-garlie, ” wrongly called
Mullun-gully ”by whites. “ My-an-garlie, ” was the
Aboriginal name of a locality near a place now known as
Connor’s Plain near Bathurst. My-an-garlie, my uncle,
became principal man of our tribe about 50 years ago,
his chief camping ground being in the Burragorang Valley!
The chief man before him that I can remember being a
very old blind man whose name I have forgotten ; and
then “ Old Boyne,” who was a clever man either with the
spear, Boomerang or sheild, as well as feats of strength
and fighting, I have also heard the name “ Goondel”
mentioned as an early chief man.


I was born on the banks of the Werri-berri Creek,
near where Mrs. Felix O’Hare’s farmhouse now stands, and
I can remember my mother carrying me on her back
cuddled down in a fold of her ’possum rug folded across
her shoulders, I felt quite safe and comfortable, as any
young Burru (Kangaroo) in his mother’s pouch. Many
times when travelling and I was crying for a drink, she
wonld, when near water, quench my thirst by filling her
mouth at the stream and then give it to me from her mouth
to mine.
I believe it has been stated that the convict for life,
Bussell, who was captain of a bushranging gang, and who
carried on his “profession” along the Sydney-Bathurst
road, was my father, but this is not correct, and I do not
believe it.
WEREEBEREY CREEK.
The only white people I remember about The “Oaks
Creek,” were the late Mr. and Mrs. Reilly, (Mr. Jim. and
Mr. Phil. Reilly’s parents). I can remember Jim. as a
very little fellow. There was no one then on the creek
till Mr. John Wild’s place, called “Yanderville,” was
reached This was quite a well improved property, big
paddocks being under wheat, many convict men, as well
as Aboriginals, used to help to reap the crop and do the
bush work. I can remember also there was a large flock
of sheep which were sheparded in the day time, and at
night enclosed behind the house in a not too large a
paddock, for wild dogs, Mirri-gang ambero (dingoes a
lot), were then very numerous. I remember Mr. Wild’s
big snow-white hack, I have never seen a better horse
since. Mr. Wild would start from Yanderville about sun-
rise and be in Sydney at ten o’clock the same morning.
Mr. Wild was always kind to us Aboriginals, and very often


when there was a visitor at Yanderville he would get our
best men to throw the Boomerang, and especially the
long spear ; one old man called Old Jonney-bo greatly
pleased him often, by his accurate throwing at an old tall
black hat placed at upwards of one hundred yards away.
My mother often spoke of a Major Eussell, who
had a large property near Eegentville, and I can just re-
member being at his estate.
Major Eussell, of Eegentville, also owned the pro-
perty at The Oaks, now called “ Oaklands,” the place was
then called “ Authese,” after a battle at which the Major
fought.
Mr. Lutlier was not at the ‘ ‘ Hermitage ’ ’ then, but
used to make wine at Eegentville for Major Eussell, where
I remember seeing him, but soon afterwards he came to
live at the Hermitage and cultivated a fine vineyard, I
do not remember the former occupants of the place, I
understand that old blackfellows used to sharpen their
stone axes there, but this was before my time, as 1 never
saw any of them used, as the English iron ones were then
plentiful among us, and those made by the local blacksmith.
I remember also Mr. Thomas Inglis senr., grand-
father of Mr. Thomas Inglis now living at Hardwick.
As a boy I was very frightened of him, as he was a big
man with a gruff voice. It was on his property, Craig-end,
ihat the Aboriginals got their paint to decorate their
bodies whenever they were going to have a korroberry.
The red earth there, “Bulber” (oxide of iron), was roast-
ed in the fire to give it a brighter colour, and then mixed
with fat or grease, a paint brush would be made by bruis-
ing a green twig or young branch. Old Boyne was gener-
ally the artist on these occasions, as he was so good at
different designs. White pipe-clay and yellow clay was
used also. They looked funny fellows I can tell you ;


there was no meaning in the designs, only put on just
as the painter fancied, or what idea came into his head.
A Mr. West used to own the property further up the
creek, now known as Mr. Dobson’s, Victoria Park, the
Aboriginal name of which was “ Durrumrby-ang, ’ ’ the
name of the big white gum trees that used to grow there.
A man named Parramatta Jack did most of the clearing
of the paddock.
PICTON
I remember the late Mr. William Antill, of Abbots-
ford, as a boy, but he was a few years older than myself.
We were never interfered with on any property of the
Antill family, which included all the Picton Valley. There
was no railway there in those days, and all the carrying
was done by big bullock teams. The roads were very bad
the teamsters were often in great trouble. I remember
bullock teams being killed on the Eazorback track,
through the waggon dashing down hill and running over
the bullocks.
“ Carbundi” was the native name of the hill at
Picton where the Antill vault is. Carbundi means —like a
hat.
“ Narre-ga-rang, ’’ — Name of Picton Lakes, called
because the soil around the lakes is not firm, i.e.— a
shaky place.
“ Bindi-bung, ’ ’ was the name of the little round
clear hill now owned by the Hewitt family.
• Messrs. Teniplaton and Harper were tenants on
Major Antill’s property.


A man named Crisp used to keep the George Inn,
which was a very busy house. Both Mr. and Mrs. Crisp
were big people, and very much liked by their visitors.
Mr. Tom Hilder, late manager of the Yerranderie Mines,
is a grandson of Mr. Crisp, his father, Mr. Thomas Hilder,
marrying a Miss Crisp.
An old policeman of Picton was Huie Neil. I
remember a hurrah fight once amongst some white men,
Paddy Poley and others, who were farm hands in for a
spree, also some natives. Huie Neil run up to stop it,
and “Luke,” a small Aboriginal, stopped his advance by
throwing a stone at his tall billy-hat (which used to be
worn in those days), the stone going right through it.
In those days we did not care so much for police-
men, and fighting generally had it out with each other.
The police too were not so strict as they are now, and
generally when bushmen got to town they would have a
good spree before leaving
Mr. John Bollard also kept an Inn at Eedbank, the
Government township; and Mr; William. Bollard kept
one where the Commercial now stands. Mr. Cashman
was the blacksmith, and Mr. Larkin had a store and a
flour mill,; there were not many other houses.
Old Cranky Charley, or native name Grumlin, used
to be about a lot and do an odd job about the old mill.
THE BURRAGORANG VALLEY.
The Country about Tonalli Creek was always good
open feeding country, and the Burru—kangaroo, were here
in great numbers, going in large mobs.


THE WORD * ‘ BUERU, ’ ’ —Kangaroo.
Burru-ga-rang—Burragorang.
Burru-Burru—Burra-Burra, a lake and run near Richlands,
owned by Mr. James Macarthur.
Burru—A lake or water-hole near Cawdor. At places
where good feeding ground and water was to be
found, here generally mobs of kangaroos also, i.e.
Burru.
Burru ga—The Burru ga was a bone placed through the
cartilage of men’s noses. This was generally made
out of the shank bone of the Burru.
Burru —ngang. This suffix denotes the possessive case
then the adjective, Bug-ga-ra-baug as
Burru-bug-ga-ra-bang.—Kangaroo great or big, and again in
the legend of the great Kangaroo, hunted by the
Bulla-Bulan—two Gods, —it was in the large water-hole of
the Wollondilly at Upper Burragorang that this kangaroo
managed to escape for a time his persuers. Thus by
dropping the unnecessary “bug” of the adjectrive, we get
a fairly intelligent word sounding very similar to that of
the Aboriginal name of the Valley—Burru-ga-rang. Burru -
ga-ra-bang, and referring to the great kangaroo’s place
(of escape.)
The word Kangaroo was never considered by us
as a native word. We always thought it to be an Eng-
lish one. Mr. Bennett tells me that it was first used by
the man (*) who wrote up Captain Cook’s Journal, saying
it was used by the natives of the Endeavor River in Queens-
land, but no investigators could ever after find trace of
the word in any tribe in any part of Australia.
( * ) —Editor’s note —Hawksworth,


Trooper Flyn was stationed at the mouth of the Nattai
Eiver, near where Mr. Morrice Gorman now lives. Mr.
Flyn was on the alert in those days should any bush-
rangers make for the Burragorang Valley. I have heard
of a brave arrest he made of I think two bushrangers
together, but I am sorry that I have forgotten the right
facts about it.
An old man named Hoyle was found dead on the
top of the cliffs near where the old track into the Nattai
Valley came down, the track was not far from where Mr.
and Mrs. Shea lived.
A strange kind of a man named Lannigan lived
out towards Mt. Werong, at a place callen the Hole, and
was I consider a very wild fellow, and much worse than a
blackfellow. He took great interest in other peoples’
cattle, and always did his stock work on foot, ofter with
only a shirt on.
A Mr. Joe Creaghton used to live at Bimlow on the
Wollondilly, but later removed and lived at the place now
owned by Mr. Dan McKinnon.
Mr, Patrick Carlon, senior, father of Mr. Bernard
Carlon and his brother, and also his father, Mr. Brian
Carlon, who was a very old man, lived in Burragorang. I
was always told that Mr. Brian Carlon and Mr. Michael Quig
senior, were the first men in the Valley to grow wheat.
Mr. William Dennis used in those day to live at
Black Goola on the Cox’s Eiver. I think that Mr. Jim
Dennis was born there, but Messrs. Harry, Euben, Bob
and Jack at Summer Hill, near the mouth of the Tonnalli
Creek.
A good lot of the cultivation was done with the hoe,
and the harrowing by dragging bushes along, and fine
crops resulted.


Mr. Charley Collin’s selection was opposite where
Mr. Flynn now has the post office.
A man named Priest was the builder of both Mr.
John Gorman’s and Mr. John Jones’ stone houses.
Once when Mr, Jim Gorman was yarning to a
friend and leaning over the fence, a large ram, which was
owned by Mr. Luke Gorman’s father. Jim got a sudden
surprise and a rise in the world, for he was pitched over
the fence, for the ram had taken a great charge and hit
him fair on the seat. We all laughed, which only made
Jim more wilder than the ram, who was always known as
he would generally charge anyone crossing near where he
was.
MR. JAMES MAOAETHUR, of Camden Park.
I remember first seeing Mr. James Macarthur travel-
ling a large flock of sheep from his station called “Burru
Burru, ’ ’ near Richlands ; he started his shepherds with
some odd thousand sheep, he went by Benevolin out to
Benduck; he had two bullocks with his camp pack, the
track was too rough for pack-horses ; the bullocks had
winkers on, each carried a big load. The track then
travelled was up the old Burragorang Mountain, but there
was no road, only a very rough track. The place called
the “Jump-Up” got its name because there was a rough
ledge or jump-up which only bullocks could manage safely,
for it was a difficult job to get a horse over this spot. It
was a two days job to get those sheep up the mountain.
As a young boobal (boy), I was then camped with my
people on the Big Flat, which was then called Burru-ga-
rang; there was about 50 or 60 of us camped about through
the Valley


The late MR. EDWARD MOORE, of Raby & Molle’s Main.
I have worked for the late Mr. Edward Moore, of
Raby; my work consisted of stock work, bush work and
fencing, etc., at his large cattle run in the Upper Burra-
gorang, for he owned most of the River, both sides through
Upper Burragorang at the time I speak about. Large
drafts of bullocks were sent by him from there to his
station Booligal, on the Lauchlan River; from there the
cattle would be sent when very fat to Melbourne. Messrs.
W. Dennis, Jim Dennis, Kieran, W. Gaudry and Davy
Lord were the principle men who did Mr. Moore’s droving
and stock-keeping. Once when there was a very large
mob of big bullocks, between 800 and a thousand, muster-
ed in Coolong paddocks ready to start for Booligal, heavy
rainy weather came on, which as everyone knows is a bad
time to start bush cattle on a journey, especially if they
are snifty, i.e. wild. Well the cattle soon trampled up
the small mustering paddock, and were roaring while they
followed round the fences. As this large mob of cattle
had taken a lot of trouble to gather togther, and were
from the roughest and wildest parts of the run, no risks
could be taken of letting them out, for they would most
probably never be seen again for perhaps a year. How-
ever, one extra dark and very stormy night, there was a
great bellowing and stampede, and this great mob taking
a frightened rush at the fence swept it before them as
if nothing was in the way at all. I have heard it said that
someone who was to go with the cattle did not like start-
ing next morning, so took a pannel of fence down, and
then frightened them from the other side which of course,
when the bulk of the mob came, flattened down all the
fence. This mob never started for Booligal for some con-
siderable time after.


Mr. Moore was a good man to cattle people, for he
was an excellent buyer of stock, and those who had them
to sell always looked out; to sell to him. Governor Moore
was what he was called, and he was always looked on as
a good boss, i.e. master, to work for.
The late MR. HENRY DUNN, Senior.
The first year Mr. Dunn came down to the Burragorang
Valley, he got me to strip stringy-bark for his house to
be built on Brushy Island, at the mouth of the Wollon-
dilly and Cox’s, and head of the Warragamba Rivers. A
Mr. George Catt and Mr. Robert Shoobridge were also
working for Mr. Dunn. The house on Brushy Island was
not to be long enjoyed, for a very rainy season set in,
and the rivers rose higher than ever known before, in fact
sweeping over the island, and the waters rising up the
slabs of the hut compelled Mr. Dunn to seek shelter on
the roof. After this experience Mr. Dunn thought it
safer to build a home on the main land, which still stands,
and is by the lagoon, and the place is now called Lagoon
Mat.
At this same flood I saved a Mrs. Pope, and also
two children, who were living up the Cox’s River at Black
Goola, from drowning. Mr. Pope was away up at Ton-
nally Creek then, thrashing wheat for Mr. Dennis at Upper
Burragorang, Sarny, Addle, and Bobbie Murruin, both
natives, were camped with me, and we all expected the
river to rise and cause trouble by swamping the hut.
When day-break came we could see the waters surrounding
the hut, so I got across and carried them all safely to
higher ground, for I knew where to walk to find a ridge
which was only covered so that the water came up to my
middle. Mrs. Pope told me she had left some money in
a box on the shelf, and I said —“ Well I’ll try and save
that too.” I swam back, and just as I was leaving the


hut on my return I heard agreat cracking, creeking, and
a bang, and the hut collapsed behind me. I had a narrow
squeak, but money was very scarce then, and well worth
saving. Mrs. Pope was very generous, and gave me all
she could spare.
MR. JACK FITZPATRICK, of Burragorang.
Mr. Jack Fitzpatrick, of Burragorang, is somewhere
about my age, I can remember his father at his farm,
Go-gon-gal-li, on the other side of the Warragamba River.
Old Mr. Fitz., senior, was as good as a native, for he knew
our language and could use a spear and boomerang as
good as any one of us, and was called Burrung-gullut by us.
He was a splendid bushman, and like his son now could
beat most of the young men of to-day at anything at all.
A man named Tom Green, known as Bunty Tom,
lived at Gudga-bung in Green Wattle Creek, he was one
of the oldest hands of the Yalley. Mr. George Seymour,
father to Messrs. Bob, Tom and Jack, lived near here also.
I remember a man named John Norton, whose father
was very rich and lived at Newtown, Sydney. Mr. Norton
owned the most part of the Kanimbula Valley as his
station. He had large flocks of sheep and cattle. He
was a wild man when in drink, and I often thought he
would be killed by his great horse “ Jollocks, ” a blood
horse, and very lively indeed, but Norton could sit him
though he could not walk himself. The Church flat at
Cox’s River is still known as Norton’s Flat.
Mr. Tim. Lacy lived at Lacy’s Creek, on Gunna-
dar-el Creek, its native name. He had good cows, and
always had plenty of farm produce to sell, and his farm,
Eimlow, was considered one of the richest in the Yalley.
Later years he built a good home at The Oaks. I have
often helped Mrs. Lacy about the place.


JOHN GORMAN.
Mr. John Gorman had all the country at the mouth
of the Nattai and Wollondilly Rivers, and was a fine man
indeed. He also had a run for his young cattle at Wom-
heyan and Tallagang. Luke Gorman, who was John
Gorman’s father, lived at Upper Burragorang, at a place
called ‘ ‘ Murro-lung-gulung, ” which means that a Hand
was stamped on a rock cave at this place. I never knew
what was the meaning of the hands on the rocks, but old
natives said they were very, very old indeed, and were
in some way connected with the Bulan —Aboriginal God.
SIR WILLIAW MACARTHUR.
Sir William Macarthur was always especially kind
to the Aboriginals, and encouraged us to camp on his pro-
perty when we were in that part of the district. Our
camping place was generally on the slope where Mr. George
Macarthur-Onslow now has his fine home ‘ ‘ Murrandah, ’ ’
I remember Sir William often walking through our camp
and speaking in a friendly way to the older men. He
took more interest in the orchard and farming work of
the Estate, and his brother, Mr. James, was most among
the stock.
“Cubbitch Barta” was then the name of the Cow-
pasture, or Camden tribe, from white pipe-clay—Bartar
plenty. The old Aboriginals about Camden were a differ-
ent tribe to those of Burra-ga-rang. Old Bundle was then
the chief of that tribe, and Gur-gur being the name of
their language, while that of ours was Gundun-gorra.
“Murrandah” was the name of a chief-man of
the sub-tribe at Burru Burru, Richlands. I have seen it
printed in a semi Government paper that “he was killed
in a fight with Burragorang tribe of blacks in 1844.” I
can remember Murrandah as I was about 15 years of age


when he died. The fight really was between he and
another man, and was not a tribe fight at all. Murrandah
had his arm broken, as well as other injuries. Sub-tribes
never fought against each other, but only against men of
other tribes, such the Wiraijuri tribes, north and west about
Bathurst, those of the south of Yass and the coast tribes
Dharruek, and the Camden tribe, Cubbitch-Batha. When
a battle was to take place fighting men would be gathered
from the main tribe and all the sub-tribes, and all would
combine together.
Mr. George Macleay used to own the property at
Brownlow Hill, now belonging to Mr. F. W. A. Downes.
In those days a very fine vineyard being there. Mr.
Macleay was a very lively man with red woolly hair, he
also was kind to the Aboriginals and took a great interest
in their korroberry. Yabbun is the word in our language.
1 can remember his coachman, Bucket, going to Camden
for the mail, but before his return a heavy thunderstorm
arose and such rain fell that the creek became flooded,
however, the poor fellow in trying to swim his horse over
both were drowned. Michael Billy was the superintend-
dent of both farm and stock work, he was a relative of
the Billy’s of Upper Burragorang, who are my cousins.
The late Mr. John Grundy was then a young man under
Mr. Billy, and in later years he became superintendent
too. I remember we often enjoyed the fruit from the
orchard and we were always given what we needed from
the farm and slaughter house.
Mount Hunter Valley was then thick with big thorn
bushes, the Macarthurs had all the land on the east side
of the creek and shepherds looked after their flocks, their
good camping ground generally was around the lagoon at
Cawdor, known as Burru to us.


At Camden there was only one public house, a Mr.
John Galvan was the proprietor, there were very few
other houses. Mr. Thompson’s flour mill, the old one
was then working, and wheat used to be brought very
long distances to be ground; this was long before Mr.
Roberts ’ mill at Glenmore was built.
Mr. Edward Blaxland’s mill at Blaxland’s Crossing,
where the late Mr. James Baines’ farmstead is, was then
in full swing. A Mr. Davy was the manager of the mill,
he use to also act as brewer. I remember seeing two
large waggons loaded with great casks of beer ready for
Sydney, The men of our tribe used to enjoy a fill of beer
whenever they could get it. At these times, when some
would get too much, they would try to cross over the mill
race of the weir across the Nepean River, these tipsy men
would get dizzy looking down at the water through the
mill race, and would fall in and be quickly swept down
stream, there would be then great excitement and shout-
ing and rushing about, while the others pulled them out.
Once when I was leading Old Bundle across, I was fright-
ened he would pull me in too, but I managed to just get
clear while he had a good ducking.
At Winbourne, Mr. George Cox’s place at Mulgoa,
there were a great many men working, principally looking
after the vineyard; the aboriginals liked the wine some-
times given them, but they could not understand why it
gave them the stomach-ache.
Mr. McCooey, father of Mr. Harry McCooey, who
used to take such interest in snakes and lizzards of this
district, used to live near by the very old grave yard,
and Mr. Shadforth also living near by too.
Bent’s Basin we called Gul-guer, meaning a falling
or shooting down or swilling round, which causes the
water to make a large round hole. A Gu-rung-adge, some-


thing like a gigantic eel, used to live in this water-hole,
this would not be a Bunyip, which is a word of another
tribe, however, we used to call that thing a Durr A-Mu-Lan
which was an evil spirit of the water. Two of my rela-
tions were drowned in this place, one quite a young boy,
and his body was never found. It was always believed
that he was swallowed by a Gu-rung-adge.
I remember Mr. and Mrs. Blackman living at their
home on the other side of the river from Brownlow Hill.
We used to call any sandy place “Jer Jer. ” Mrs. Black-
man was a very stout lady, and was always very kind to
women of our tribe, giving them often clothes. Mr.
Blackman had a run also at Upper Burragorang. I have
often been told by my people that in the older days the
soldiers who were then acting as policemen used to chase
the Gundun^gurra’s whenever they attempted to cross
the Nepean River. My grandfather was killed by the
soldiers at Eazorback, through the efforts of a native who
was head of the Camden tribe helping him to track grand-
father to his hiding place, which was in a tree. How-
ever, my stepfather, I heard, got his revenge later by
tommy-hawking the native some years later at South Creek.
I certainly do not feel as young as when the police-
man at Katoomba tried to run me in for being a bit tight.
However the surprise was his for I put the hand-cuffs on
him instead, and marched him to the lock-up. I was sorry
I did not give this Bobby more to go on with, as I was fined
£9/10/- for taking him Home.
Billy Lynch the next oldest Aboriginal to me, lived
for many years at Katoomba. I saw him last year before
he died, though I was much older than he was, and he was
not as active as lam now. I think Steve Sherrit will be
chief man when I am gone, as he knows a fair amount of
the language. Yet lam good for many years yet I hope.


Native Words.


NATIVE WORDS.
Budgang —A bird ( any kind.)
Eirriban —Emu.
Bundo-luk —Rossella Parrot.
Budda-wak or Budda-yak—Owl.
Dicta-gang—King Fisher.
Boombill-na—Bush Turkey.
Kurra-gang —Magpie.
Buralga —Native Companion.
Goo-nan-a-dan —Quail.
Gooramgboon —Butcher Bird.
Gin-yuk—Black Swan.
Guiu-daring—Black Duck.
Gerre-gang—Black Magpie.
Gil-ber-ark —Skylark.
Gerarc —Gill bird.
Gabugan—Gubbu-gang, Eggs.
Irri-bi-gang—lrri-bing-gang, Swallow.
Jakular —Lyre Bird.
Mullyang —Eagle.
Murrin-bil —Pewit.
Nulla-bunya-gang—Wood Duck.
Warbin or Warrabing—Curlew.
Wogolin—Crow.
Binure —Old Mountain Dingo.
Boom-bi —Black Swamp Wallaby.
Bidang—Small Scrub Wallaby.
Burri —Eock Wallaby,
Balbo—Big Kangaroo Eat.
Goolung—Wambat.
Gun-da-wa —W allaroo.
Murruging—Wild Cat or Native Cat.


Mirragang—Common Dingo.
Mundo —Bandicoot.
Werrimbi —Flying Fox.
Wella —Opossum.
Gulung-gooluk—Bullock.
Gumbuk-gooluk—Cow or heifer.
Y erra-mang—Horse.
Goolung—Pig (Wombat).
Mugga—Any sort of Snake.
GiTwidge—Black Snake.
Wagul—Diamond Snake.
Worrgun— Whip Snake.
Mudgerwik—Death adder,
Dinwere —Perch (fish).
Cunark —Mud or black eel.
Mibbi —Mullett,
Wagga—Small black Pish.
Gunge—Hut.
Mulla-da —Big Stone Axe.
Mldger—The edge of a stone axe.
Dowin —Steel axe.
Gum-bal-bal —A Native grind-stone.
Boolang—Throwing stick.
Gurabee —Fire.
Bunung—Ashes.
Numbuk —Smoke.
Gimbil—A Spark.
Berack—Dead.
Mirra —Left hand.
Durra-ma—Eight hand.
Nub-da—Knife or sharp-edged stone,
Karrat —Eain.
Goonama—Snow,
Kurang—Cloud.


Murungnal—Thun der.
Mayap—Lightning.
N adg-yung—W ater.
Bunyal—Sun. Winu —Hot.
Jerra —Stars.
Burri —Night.
Burral —Day.
Barundi —Yesterday.
Benduk —A plain,(a flat round plain).
Gunar —Mountain top.
Dulang—A River.
Dumbi dumbi —Swamp.
Bulling-gang—Salt water, salt.
Gadung—The sea.
Goong-ung—River in flood.
Eoombi—Spring.
Burrum-burrung—Lap stones.








