

ICK,












p nss
MY TRIP THROUGH
TASMANIA,
WITH A VISIT TO
PORT ARTHUR, TASMAN’S AND
FORRESTIER’S PENINSULAS,
AND MACQUARIE HARBOUR.
SOME ODD PLACES AND QUEER PEOPLE,
“NUNQUAM DORMIO ”
HISTORIC, REALISTIC Sf INTERESTING.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
All Eights Reserved.
cifEclbournc:
Ford & Son, Printers, 372 & 374 Drummond Street, Carlton.


This Little Booklet is Dedicated
Mt Kind Host and Hostess, Mr. and Mrs. Jenkins,
of “Spraydon,” Saltwater Ejyer, Tasmania.


No pretence is made by the author of the notes
embodied in this little book of having written anything
especially interesting or novel. But as his method of
“ seeing the lions ” of the little island was not that of
the ordinary traveller, and as there may be many who
would prefer to take his way as the better one, when on
holiday tour, he has been induced to put together his
experiences and impressions for their benefit. And he is
pretty sure that those who honor him by following his
footsteps, will find their time and money better spent,
than in pursuit of the social attractions and etceteras of
Hobart, as a mere summer resort and watering place.
As probably affording the tourist some little information
concerning early days of the tight little island, the author
has written a brief sketch, referring to the more striking
historical events of that period. This will be found under
the head of Addenda.




Launceston - - • - 7
Accoin modation - - 9
Souvenirs - - - 11
Invalid Depot - - - 12
John Webster- - - 13
Bamford and Smoker - 15
Across by Train
Hobart - - - - 17
Seeking Shelter - -18
The Exhibition
The Penitentiary
An Old Time Yarn - - 22
To-Day - - - - 23
Other Sights - - - 23
Mount Wellington -- 24
Cascade Brewery
Fish and Fruit
Old Folk’s Eest
A Trip to Port Arthur -26
Saltwater Eiver
Dead Point - - -29
The Coal Mines - - 29
A Lay Brother
Taranna - - - - 33
The Old Church - - 35
Tasman’s - - - 35
CONTENTS.
Addenda;
m3355V F
2 . 12. <=?l
Port Arthur - - -35
Enins and Eelics - -38
Old Penitentiary - -39
The Model Prison and
Silent System - - 40
The Dark Cell - - 41
The Chapel and Service - 41
Smith O’Brien - - 42
Point Puer - - - 42
Dead Island - - - 44
An Incongruity - - 45
Government Farm - - 46
Safety Cove - - -46
Brown Mountain - -47
Eaglehawk Neck - -48
Tesselated Pavements -49
Clyde Island - - - 49
Blow-Holes - - -50
Tasman’s Arch - - 50
The Devil’s Kitchen - 50
Macquarie Harbour - 52
Bolters - - - - 56
Early Times - - - 61
The Black War - - 6F
Bushrangers - - - 66


■


P\y Trip Tasmania
LAUNCESTON.
»ASMANIA is the land of health and long-
evity. All over the country you will find old
men and women who are approaching the
century of existence. They laugh at the
notion of the limitation of man’s rehearsal here, on
earth, to three score and ten years. They talk as
familiarly of events sixty years ago, as ordinary
people do of occurrences of the day before yesterday.
They are the despair of the doctors; the indignation
of the undertakers. Some of them may own up to
an experience of slight illness during their lives, but
when you come to investigate the matter, you get the
history of a decayed tooth, a head broken in a brawl,
or a heart damaged in a love affair. Bless these old
people—so hale, and fresh, and bright; who take such
a keen interest in life, and who, I verily believe,
have not the faintest idea of getting beyond it by
dying.
It is not wonderful that a land which produces
these evidences of a strong vitality should attract the
valetudinarian, and the worn and wearied of this side
of the Straits. The air of Tasmania has certainly a
most revivifying quality. It is a Brown-Sequard
elixir, with the advantage of being inhaled, instead
of being pumped into the system.
The Tasmanians, proud, doubtless, of their climate,
and its health giving properties, have reasonably
considered that, as their other resourses of revenue
are limited, they ought to make the most of this
natural gift of wholesome air. So they charge up to
2a


the hilt for the right to breathe it. Tasmanian air
is indeed a costly article; because it is necessary to
eat and drink and have shelter while enjoying it, and
they who cater for these commonplace necessities
fleece their victims infamously.
Indeed, the inhabitants of the tight little island
are so far true to its traditions that they lose no
opportunity whatever of getting hold of the stranger’s
cash. The boniface who serves you with a glass of
ale will take yom* “measure” instantly, and make
you pay twopence more than he charges the local
customer. The man who carries your handbag from
the steamer to the hotel wants half-a crown, and
sticks to his claim with all the stolid obstinacy of his
class. And if you should employ a cab—then you will
realise to the full that you have fallen among thieves.
The Tasmanian cabman is as unique in his way as
his vehicle and horses. The whole turnout seems to
have come down from the earliest times—so patri-
archal and withal vicious, does it seem. The cabmen,
I have no hesitation in affirming, are lineal descend-
ants of the old time bushrangers. They take you
down with an ease and aplomb which can only be the
outcome of hered ty, and, if you be mad enough to
attempt argument about your wrongs, will treat you
to language which you readily recognise as fitting
your theory. Oli! the Tasmanian cabman is an
institution of historic interest.
He who expects to take his ease at his inn in
Tasmania must te ready to open his purse to its
widest gape. And even then his ease cannot be
guaranteed. I hive heard that in the old days the
inns of Tasmania reflected all the comfortable hospi-
tality of old English hostelries, and that bed and
board at such places were matters which were
remembered by the traveller. But all that was
before I was bora, and I don’t think that I am called
upon to believe in traditions, which, gauged by
recent personal experiences, are no more reliable than
fairy tales. I cm only say that if Tasmania was
once the home of hospitality and fair dealing it is no
longer so. It is about as hungry a place as any I
have ever visited in my travels, and that is saying a
great deal.


ACCOMMODATION.
The fascinations of an advertisement induced me
to repair to a Launceston Coffee Palace for temporary
lodgings. After having waged battle with a cab-
man, who plainly told me that the only use of a
blooming visitor lay in his capacity to bleed, I
entered the gorgeous establishment and secured a
room. I was rather surprised at my luck, because
upon inspecting the visitors’ list hung up in the hall,
I discovered that if the establishment were not choke
full up to the garret, it must have very ample
accommodation indeed. I afterwards found out that
the ingenious “director” of the palace was in the
habit of placing the names of every member of his
family and household upon the list; and that Mrs.
de Gravy was his cook, and Miss Mopstairs his
housemaid. I don’t think we can beat that this
side. It tickled me immensely when I found that
the Major Brown on the list was identical with an
old gentleman who cleaned the boots and tottered
about doing odd errands.
The room into which I was shown was situated in
a half-finished building attached to the main edifice,
and to reach which I had to climb a number of stairs
and traverse several passages. It was miserably fur-
nished. It had an immense window—without cur-
tains—from which an invigorating view of a backyard
was enjoyed. There was neither water-bottle, chair,
nor table in this primitive apartment. The bedstead
was scantily furnished with bedding. There was a
deceptive looking-glass that made one’s visage
wickedly like that of an “old timer,” and a damaged
washstand with cracked ware. Afterwards, when
inspecting the gaols, I found that for true comfort
you may go there, and that with a tenderness of
reminiscence which is almost pathetic, the only people
who are really treated with consideration are they
who keep up the traditions of the land by contribut-
ing to the criminal statistics. I paid a sum per day,
for accommodation which would have been scorned
by any of the hard-visaged rascals under the care of
the authorities.


The tomato, so common to our tables here, is
esteemed as a rare and costly adjunct to a meal in
Launceston—in a coffee palace, at any rate. I
obtained half of one—-ostensibly cooked. I also
received a potato, and, to my meek request for
some bread, was served with some by an obliging
waitress. These articles, together with a prehistoric
steak (fried) constituted my first meal in a land,
in which, as I had been led to believe, all that is
good in eating was obtainable in profusion. I
must own that the menu card was of an attractive
order; hut as, upon enquiry, every article enumer-
ated as “on” was “off,” there wasn’t any more
satisfaction to be got out of that circumstance
than honest Sancho derived from his Bara-
tarian feasts. I arose from the table with a
dawning conviction within me (the only thing that
was within me of a trustworthy kind) that I was
sojourning in the land of frauds.
Having brushed my clothing with a brush kept
chained in the hall, like a watch-dog, I sallied forth
to see what was to be seen. And 1 soon found that
I should not overtax my strength in the process. 1
once spent a week in Geelong, and narrowly escaped
softening of the brain. A similar period passed in
Launceston would, I think, plant me as a raving
lunatic in the asylum. An awful dulness reigns over
the place. It is as though you had been suddenly
cast back, as it were, into a past age and a “primeval
civilisation”—this is the feeling which comes to you
as you walk the streets of Launceston. It has never
moved these fifty years—that I’ll swear. The very
policemen testify to the fact. There they are—
veritable “peelers,” of half a century back. Clothed
in a long rough coat reaching to his heels, with a
broad belt around his waist, ,a bull’s-eye lantern
fixed thereto, and a mighty truncheon dangling at his
side, the policeman of Tasmania recalls most vividly
the official so deftly satirised in the early numbers of
London Punch. There is one peculiarity, however,
in the Launceston policeman, which I take to be
unique, and which I have no doubt owes its existence
to official prejudice. Every man wears long red
whiskers. Long red whiskers are as much part


and parcel of the Launceston policeman as his
huge and cumbersome coat, his bull’s-eye, and his
truncheon. I don’t think this circumstance has ever
been noted by any previous tourist; but I make no
doubt that now I mention it, others will remember
having observed the curiosity.
The sights are soon exhausted. There are the
City Park to see, and the Gardens; the Museum
and Exhibitions Grounds. The Cataract Gorge,
however, is the sight of Launceston—a lovely spot,
to which art has added attractions. My spirits
were raised by this spectacle, so that when I
returned I had a hearty appetite, and attacked my
tea with energy. This done, I went forth and heard
a band play in the City Park, to which visitors are
admitted upon payment of a silver coin. The money
thus acquired on Sunday nights is sufficient to keep
the grounds in order. This is a wrinkle.
SOUVENIRS.
The following morning, after partaking of some
breakfast, I proceeded to inspect the gaol. In
Tasmania, one naturally thinks of gaols and gibbets
and those sorts of things. And I found the gaol
really a very creditable place. The inmates appear
to be so remarkably well treated, that it is a marvel
every inhabitant of the town doesn’t manage to get
located there. And I was not at all surprised to
learn that very many of the gentlemen I saw in
seclusion were old residents; or that, when they
occasionally left the snug establishment, it was not
for long. It really is a very comfortable place, in
which prisoners are treated (according to their grade)
with a humanity that does not extend itself to coffee
palaces and such like other places of entertainment.
In the dining hall, I beheld something which,
as applied to days and circumstances, when the
inhabitants of this place were treated in a far
different manner, struck me as what Artemus Ward
would call “ sarkasm.” A tablet is fixed against
the wall, on which is inscribed these legends :


“Grace before Meat.”
“ Bless, Lord, these Thy good creatures, to our use, and
by them fit us for Thy service, through Jesus
Christ.”
“ Grace after Meat.”
“ Accept our thanks, O! Lord, for these and other
mercies, and may we show our gratitude by our
love through Jesus Christ. Amen.”
There wasn’t much meat to be thankful for when
those tablets were set before the wretched men who
ate their skillie in that room, in the old days. How
many a poor devil must have felt the irony and
mockery of those adjurations! How many cursed
rather than blessed the “good things” to which he
had been brought by his most direful fate!
A portion of the gaol is devoted to the accommo-
dation of elderly ladies, who have fallen upon hard
times. Some of these dames have a notable history
—the narration of which is easily stimulated by a
little present of tea, sugar, tobacco, or money. One
of these gentlewomen, I was informed, had brained a
man with a saucepan, and, looking into the depths of
her azure eyes, I was quite prepared to believe it.
Indeed, there were moments when the dame seemed
capable of killing forty men, so vindictively did she
regard some near her, of whom it was plain she enter-
tained a very poor opinion. She is old—awfully,
criminally old.
INVALID DEPOT.
Of the places I visited in Launceston, the most
interesting is the Male Invalid Depot. The estab-
lishment is happily situated on the banks of the
Tamar, opposite the gaol, and in former days was
used as the soldiers’ barracks. Here are housed
some singular personalities—men who have passed
into these modern days with no perception of the
change, and with only memory of the days of old ;
and who seem as incongruous, and odd, and out of
place as might a priest at a pantomime, or a book-
maker at a confirmation. They are old and worn,
and senile, and still they cling to life with the
tenacity of ivy to a wall, or a limpet to a rock. And


yet they don’t seem to care for life, beyond the fact
that it enables them to blink their eyes in the sun-
shine, and to eat their humble victuals, and, above
all, to smoke a pipe of tobacco when they can get it.
Theirs has been an animal life all through, and it
fittingly ends so, for surely one would scarce tyish
them aroused to an intelligence which would exhibit
to them all the horrors of their past. Far better
that they should die as they have lived—insensible to
aught save that which moves the animal nature, and
imperceptive of any higher good than the appease-
ment of animal appetite. This may be heterodox,
but it is true philosophy for all that. Let each
cart-wheel mark its own rut.
JOHN WEBSTER.
Here I was introduced to John Webster in the
following graphic terms : —“ Let me introduce you to
John Webster, one of the biggest scoundrels that
ever put his foot on the island—ex-convict, thief,
burglar, bushranger, and a thorough rogue.” At
this Mr. Webster looks rather flattered than other-
wise, and, standing as erect as his age and infirmities
will permit, nods his grey head at me, and, with a
forced smile, mumbles : —“Glad to see you, sir.”
John Webster is the ruin of a very fine man—
broad - chested, narrow’ - flanked,' long - limbed, and
standing considerably over six feet in height. His
face is not a bad one, and far from unintellectual,
but the sure marks of a life of torture, crime, and
vice are also there indelibly printed. His eyes,
though so old, have yet some fire in them, and there
is a certain cunning humour in the droop of his
mouth, as he speaks of his past, which indicates that
the old rascal has a keen appreciation of humbug.
He is quite candid in his narration. Says John—
“l was convicted of burglary at 15 years of age, and
transported for life. The first thing I saw when I
landed was a placard offering a reward of £250 and
500 acres of land for the capture, dead or alive, of
Britten, or to any prisoner of the Crown, free pardon,
his passage paid to England, and £2OO. That gave
me a notion of the value of a lag, and I laughed.


Well, I was assigned to a master. All went w r ell for
some time; but one day up comes a constable, and,
says he— £ Come on here,’ and he claps the bracelets
on. He didn’t give any reason—but I knew what it
was for— it was for taking some men across the river
in a boat. Well, I got three months in irons, and
had to work in a chain gang, where of course, I met
with some desperate characters. With what I learned
from them, and in the ship coming out, I promise you
my education wasn’t neglected. I was fast becoming
a full-blown I’ogue, when I was assigned again to
a master. Well, I had to carry milk into Hobart,
and of course I came across all sorts, —Tom, Bill, and
Harry,—and then I’d drop across the gals, and the
temptations were too strong for me. Anyway one
night I overstayed my time—we had to be home at
8, —and next morning I was sent in and got another
sentence. Punishment, may be, may do some chaps
good,—it didn’t improve me. I became worse and
worse, and for many a year was in constant trouble.
“Then I got married. I’ve grown-up daughters
living in Melbourne. The wife’s over there, I believe ;
she left me. I’ve a daughter too, in Launceston ;
married well, but of course she don’t know me.
Perhaps it’s my own fault, but then I was brutally
treated as a boy, and afterwards by ignorant and
inhuman monsters,—my masters out here. But I’d
like to have my time over again. Why, I tell you,
in the old days a free man in this colony was thought
more of than the Queen herself. Some ot ’em were
good to the prisoners. For instance, if a prisoner
did any act of bravery and such like, or saved life,
they would help him, and he’d generally get his
pardon. Of course, if a prisoner had friends, it
was an easy matter. They would make up so’s a
man’d fall into the water, and the prisoner jump in
and save his life, and work it that w'ay. But those
without friends, and whose real crime was that they
hadn’t the means to bribe the conscience of others,
were treated like dogs.”
At this point Mr. Webster seemed lost in a reverie
upon the past, from which I aroused him by asking
how old he was? At which he turned his large eyes
upon me with a pathetic expression, and answered


“ Eighty-one, and I suppose I shall die here now.”
Eighty-one years, and of these sixty-five spent as an
unredeemable rogue ! And yet, as I looked at the
old fellow, with his scarred and beaten visage, and
his great hands, knotted and twisted by constant
grip of the staves upon which he rested, I could not
but think of rogues greater than he, scoundrels more
infamous, villains more callous, who, under modern
conditions of enlightenment and progress, do not end
their days in the poorhouse, nor are buried in a
pauper’s grave; but live in the semblance of honor,
rich and comfortable, and die, to the great grief and
loss of society, and are laid away under a splendid
headstone. Yes, bad as the fellow may have been,
as I looked on his wrinkled visage, I bethought me
that I could match him with many another scoundrel
I wot of, who rides in his carriage and fares sump-
tuously every day.
BAMFORD AND SMOKER.
I saw another old identity at this place named
Bamford. I suppose he is dead by this time, for
when I was introduced to him he was at his last
gasp. Owing to his serious illness, he was not so
pleasant a personage to interview as Webster. The
latter owned to being an unredeemable scamp, but
old Bamford had for some time been “converted.”
He found that it paid, and so he took to preaching
to his fellow inmates, with the result that he was
accommodated with a special apartment, and with a
man to wait upon him. This old arch-hypocrite had
probably less real sense of his sinful past than poor
old Webster.
A cunning old rascal, called “Smoker,” hung at my
heels during my visit, with the silent but not the
less significant assiduity which indicated a life-long
training in the art of cadging. “ Smoker ” looks
to the mess-rooms, and derives his peculiar name
from the fact that he is the spy and the tell-tale of
the institution. To smoke, in thieves’ slang, means
“to understand,” “to perceive.” However, “ Smoker ”
amused’ me, for he is a veritable Tom Pepper.


ACROSS BY TRAIN.
The journey from Launceston to Hobart seemed
to me very uninteresting. I had heard much of the
beauty of the scenery; the rural character of the
country; its resemblance to English aspects. I
beheld none of this. To be sure, it was an unfavour-
able season—the country was parched and withered,
and but few patches of green herbage or cultivation
were to be seen. But I looked in vain for the snug
farmhouse, the smiling orchards, the miles of haw-
thorn hedges, of which I had been told. The scenery
was monotonous, and typically Australian, and the
few tumble-down cottages I saw, surrounded by
dilapidated fences, in no way reminded me of the
cosy homestead and pleasant fields of the old country.
Nor were the towns and villages through which
we passed reminiscent of the rural hamlets of old
England. I cannot help coming to the conclusion
that very many of the descriptions I have read of
the country parts of Tasmania were written by
people who never visited the island at all, much as
Sala is said to have written certain famous war
correspondence in a cosy Sussex tavern. At a place
called Ross, the station is near an old graveyard,
into which I strolled, during the time the train
stopped. And here I read upon a gravestone the
following curt inscription :
“At 12 1 was a maid, at 13 a wife.
At 14 a mother, and then departed life.”
I reckon that this records the smartest piece of work
ever done in Tasmania.
The train from Launceston to Hobart takes its
time. There is no hurry, you see. With our
neighbours, as with the Spaniards, to-morrow will
do as well as to-day, and so we droned along, at a
tram-car pace, for many long hours. It was the
dreariest drive I ever underwent, and right glad was
I when the noble crest of Mount Wellington asserted
itself, ans the dim blue line of the mountain range
which backs up the capital came into full relief.
Then the aspect of the country changed, and soon
we passed through many pleasant spots —neat houses


and large gardens, broad fields and smiling meadows,
came into view: the wide stretch of the noble
Derwent to the left, glinting in the moonlight, like
a sweep of molten silver.
HOBART.
W e arrive, and instantly fall among thieves. The
cabman has first shot at us, and leaves us panting
with unavailing indignation in* the hands of a hotel-
keeper, who with a meaning smile, welcomes us with
the remark:—“ A visitor, I presume?” You assent,
and your fate is sealed.
I was hungry when I was deposited at a hotel, and
after having secured a bedroom, asked for something
to eat. This, after delay, was supplied to me and a
fellow-traveller, and we set to work to appease our
appetites. Now, it happens that I like bread: so did
my companion. The four thin squares, two inches
long by two broad, which were supplied with the
meat, did not suffice; so we asked for more, and
received two more slices each. My companion stared.
Then he rang a bell. A girl entered.
“ Pray,” said my fellow-tourist, “is your baker-
dead r
“ Eh ?” ejaculated the astonished girl.
“Is your baker dead?” sternly demanded my com-
panion. The girl did not answer, but left the room.
My friend instantly rang the bell again. This time
the landlord entered.
“ When does the funeral take place ?” asked my
facetious companion.
“ What funeral, sir ?” asked the landlord.
“ The funeral of the baker.”
“ The baker !” ejaculated the astonished boniface.
“ Aye ! the baker—your baker—the baker who
died and could not supply you, and so compelled you
to put your guests on gaol regulation diet.”
“ I really do not understand you,” said the land-
lord.
“ Sir,” cried my companion, “we came from a
country where it is the fashion, in respect of bread,
to cut and come again. The bakers don’t die there.
You will always find a two or four pound loaf on


every table. But here, I perceive, bread is very
scarce. Now, rny friend,” continued the speaker,
leaning back in his chair, and regarding the gaping
landlord with a benevolent smile, “ here is a shilling.
Send forth a hireling. Let him scour the city for a
live baker, and let him bring us a loaf—a whole loaf,”
—and he extended the coin politely. The man stared,
turned red, muttered something, and then left the
room. Then his daughter —a big red-haired girl—
entered, and placed a- loaf of bread before us with an
indignant toss of the head and an expression of face
which plainly indicated her opinion of us. And here
I am tempted to suggest that there should be a good
opening for a baker in Hobart, for all the bread I
came across was fearfully “ doughy ” and ill-baked.
It is the same wherever we go in Tasmania. They
limit your bread. It is served out as though it were
a luxury, or as though the place were in a state of
siege, and it was necessary to economise the bread
supply.
SEEKING SHELTER,
The following morning I sought for private lodg-
ings. lam not a drinking man, and I soon found
that a visitor of my temperate order was out of place
in a Tasmanian hotel. It worried me to have a girl
come to me every twenty minutes, with the enquiry :
“ Did you ring, sir T or, “ Do you require anything
to drink, sir 1 ?” and that is how they keep up your
temperature in the public houses of Hobart. So I
went abroad to seek for lodgings, and found it by no
means an easy matter to secure them. However,
with the aid of a Tourist’s Bureau, I .managed to
obtain the names of some “ likely places.” The first
one I went to happened to be full. Number two and
three instantly demanded to know if I were a visitor.
That settled, each proceeded to raise the tariff to an
extent that terrified me. Number four was a fat old
Irish lady, with a red nose and hair to match, and
she consented to “oblige” me with accommodation
in a garret, where the top of my head touched the
ceiling. I declined. Then I happened upon a house
in Davy Street, the landlady of which I recognised


as an old acquaintance. I had seen her at Scar
borough, Bournemouth, Margate—in every watering
place in England. There she was, as I ever remem-
ber her, with the sharp hungry face, the eager eyes,
the vulture visage of the woman we have all met
when we have run down from London at holiday
time to take the air by the seaside. I groaned
inwardly, for I knew what to expect. But I was
tired of lodging-hunting, and so made my bargain
with the dame, and in due course transferred my
belongings to a room which might very appropriately
be called a cell. It was so dark that I had to light
the gas during the day. It had a window without
curtains, from which a cheerful view of a large meat-
safe and sundry other articles connected with the
kitchen was presented. There was neither chair nor
table; the bed was of flock an inch thick, laid upon
palliasses, and the floor was almost bare of covering.
A rickety washstand, ware, and glass constituted the
wretched furniture. Here, again, from the window
the privacy of my apartment was open to the obser-
vation of the domestics. It did not suit me, so I
asked for a blind; then I ventured to suggest a chair
and a water-bottle. Finally, I said I thought a table
wouldn’t be out of place. I got these articles by
degrees, but I could see that I was regarded as
fastidious, and that if I made further demands for
luxuries, the establishment would “buck.” Hence, I
resolved to make the best of it. I wanted rest, for
I was ill, and in that temper under the influence of
which one is willing to lie down anywhere. But here
again I was baulked. Bled I had been already, so
far as my purse was concerned; but now I had to
undergo a species of phlebotomy of the most repulsive
order. To me the bug is as abhorrent as the rat. I
had not retired to rest half-an-hour that night ere I
became a subject of interest to legions of bugs. I had
to arise, light a candle, and institute some means of
retaliation. The light scared my enemies, which
escaped into their hiding places, and so I had to lie
with the candle burning until the early hours of the
morning. That night I realised what the sufferings
of Saint Lawrence must have been. I arose with
every bone aching. “ Truly,” quoth I, “ this is the


tourist’s paradise.” However, I was not going to
stay long at Hobart, so I made a bold attempt to put
up with my woes. And these did not merely refer to
my sleeping accommodation. The menu at the
boarding-house was ordered upon the most genteel
scale. The bread, as usual, was limited ; it was dealt
out in small squares, cut with “regulation” accuracy.
1 almost paralysed the hostess when I demanded
more bread. There were three old maids en perman-
ence in the establishment, and they received most of
the attention the landlady thought fit to extend to
her guests. To them alone was toast accorded—each
a slice. In my innocence I appropriated one of these
slices. If glances could have slain me, I had not
written these lines. The ancient damsel whom I
had outraged, arose, seized a slice of bread, stuck it on
a fork, and, with an indignant toss of the head, sallied
forth to toast it by the kitchen fire. That was the
first and last piece of toast I had at the establish-
ment. The landlady and her family sat down with
us, but never ate anything, probably on principle,
and as setting a good example to the boarders. But
I found out that they sustained nature in private,
and so did not heed their conduct at the public table.
So I paid thirty-five shillings for bed, bugs, and a
morning view of the meat safe, and obtained my
meals at restaurants. N
Naturally, I grew nervous. I would lie awake for
hours, watching some patriarchal bug on the ceiling,
until I almost fancied the creature was a vampire
awaiting an opportunity to drain my veins dry. And
then, ever and anon, I would hear the clank of a chain.
My morbid thought conjured up the idea that some
ghost of departed convict wandered around the estab-
lishment during the night time. But I afterwards
found that the noise came from a cellar, inhabited by
an ancient crone, who cleaned pots and pans. She
only came forth at night time, and it was she who,
moving about, made the noise which my diseased
fancy had thought to be the sound of fetters. Add
to this that the bedroom window was guarded with
strong iron bars, and you may understand that I had
some excuse for my morbid imaginations. To my
surprise, I discovered that they were secured from the


outside. I heard, upon enquiry, that the bars had
been placed there to prevent the escape of a lunatic,
confined in the room for years. Poor wretch ! How
the bugs must have enjoyed him.
THE EXHIBITION.
I went to see the Exhibition, of course, —a very
handsome building, happily situated on rising ground
in the Domain. But, alas ! It is a “frost,” as theatri-
cals say. I should not say there were fifty people
present when I visited the place; and the whole
affair looked as melancholy as a cat in the rain.
Our Victorian representative, upon whom 1 waited,
received me most courteously, and gave me all the
information I wanted, —which was not much. I
came to the conclusion that exhibitions want a rest.
The Hobart show, I am sure, will die from sheer
inanition.
THE PENITENTIARY.
The sights of Hobart— that is, the city,—are not
many. The old Penitentiary is perhaps the most
interesting to the tourist who, like myself, seeks for
historical records. This old prison is situated in
Campbell Street, and extends the whole length of a
street section from Bathurst to Brisbane Street.
Here, in the old days, the better behaved convicts
were caged. Every morning at eight o’clock you might
behold chain gangs issuing forth to work at different
points,—constructing wharves, quarrying, road-
making, and the like. It was a gruesome spectacle to
see these men, habited in the uniform of their degrada-
tion, their chains clanking dismally, as they marched
tothe place at which they laboured. Some were young
stalwart fellows, who walked with a light step and
alert air, as though in them hope, still alive, and
the prospect of happier days to come, gave them
comfort. Others, old, withered, shrunken, their faces
marked and furrowed, not only by the course of time,
but that of crime, shuffled along sullenly. You read
no hope in their aspect; no support from the whis-
perings of courage. Their course was run; all they
had to do was to bear, to suffer, and to die.


In the good old days, when Mr. Price ruled the
convict roost in Van Dieinan’s Land, the discipline
was very severe. Those prisoners who were permitted
tickets-of-leave, had to report themselves each night
at hdf-past eight. If they were two minutes late
their privileges were withdrawn, and they were
clapped into the dungeons under the old Trinity
Church at the northern end of the Penitentiary, and
there left to bread and water and the society of rats
for a fortnight. It was cruel work, and more than
one poor wretch lost his reason under the treatment.
AN OLD TIME YARN.
Tley tell a story of those times which has its
comb aspect, albeit the hero of it, no doubt, saw
noth.ng to laugh at in the episode. The poor devil,
who had been an actor in the old country, and had
probably been transported for little worse crime than
murdering the Queen’s English, used to turn a penny
by performing at a small play-house in Liverpool
Street, called the Albert Theatre. As most of the
actois were convicts, on ticket, the performances
always commenced about live o’clock in the after-
noon, in order that Hamlet the Dane, or Richard
the Third, might have ample time to get back to his
lodgngs in the Penitentiary within the regulation
time Well, it happened that a certain actor named
AraMn, who was a free man, came from Sydney,
with a company to give the people of Hobart Town
a taste of high art. It became necessary to employ
a few ticket-of-leave men as supers, and on one
occasion the man who played Buckingham, in his
enthusiasm overstayed his time, and was arrested
by a, constable and carried away to the “Tench.”
Arabin was unaware of the circumstance. A fellow
came on the stage and cried: “my lord, Buckingham’s
took!” “Off with his head,” stuttered Richard.
“But, my lord, he’s took!” “Well, off with his
bead,” shouted the indignant actor. “But, I say,
you know,” whispered the other confidentially,“ it
can’t be done, —the bloomin’ traps has got ’im.”
And poor Buckingham, if he did not lose his head,
doubtless “did time” in the gloomy, rotting dun-


geons beneath old Trinity—seeing nothing, hearing
nothing, save perhaps on Sundays, when his felbw-
felons sang praise to God in the church above him.
How earnestly he must have joined in their adjur-
ations.
TO-DAY.
The prison to-day presents a wholesome picture.
The wrong-doers confined there'are well treated, —
rather better treated, I fancy, than they ought
to be. First offenders get a snug room and a
comfortable bed to rest upon, with good diet.
Second offenders have to sleep on a plank, and do
not receive such good fare or lodging; while incor-
rigibles are treated with further severity. The system
is logical, and seems to work well, and, as every man
incarcerated is taught a trade, the place presents to
a visitor the appearance rather of a huge workshop
than a prison. There is a school attached, in which
those who are ignorant are taught, and well-conducted
offenders are allowed books to read from the library.
I should say that, apart from the degradation of she
position, there are worse situations in life than that
of a prisoner in Hobart Gaol. If any of the gentle-
men incarcerated are given to philosophising, they
must be inspired with a happy comparison between
their condition and that of those who, forty or fifty
years ago, inhabited the place—when men were caged
like wild beasts, and treated like them, and when
fetters, and stripes, and every species of torture
calculated to blast a man’s conscience and till
out all hope, and therefore all moral energy, were
adopted by authority in the cause of “ reform;”
Accursed times !
OTHER SIGHTS.
They have a good Public Library in Hobart, and
a fair Picture Gallery. There is one Theatre. The
Town Hall is a fine building. Government House,
very prettily situated, is a handsome structure. The
Botanic Gardens are hard by, beautifully placed on
a bay of the river. The Public Domain or Park is
a noble area, many hundreds of acres in extent, well
wooded, and intersected by beautiful drives.
3a


MOUNT WELLINGTON.
Mount Wellington is to Hobart what “ Our Har-
bour ” is to Sydney, and I think the brave old
mountain has the best of it. Nothing can spoil him.
There he stands, as of old, sometimes with his nightcap
of snow on his brow, at other times beaming sunnily
upon the city at his feet. The view from the summit
is exquisite, extending away to seaward on the one
side, on the other over hill and vale, and plain,
towards the interior; while to the back rise the
chain of wooded mountains which extend westwards
to the coast. At the base of the mountain the city
of Hobart spreads itself—a beautiful picture.
CASCADE BREWERY.
Before you ascend the mountain, you should visit
the Cascade Brewery and sample the ale, the virtues
of which cannot be overrated. Much of the excel-
lence of this delectable tipple is due to the stream
wniter which tumbles down Mount Wellington, and
which itself is nectar. Those who know what Yan
Yean water is, can scarce conceive the difference
between that puddle and the crystal brook that
supplies Hobart.
FISH AND FRUIT.
There is a popular idea that fish and fruit may
be obtained in profusion, and of first excellence, in
Hobart. Don’t believe it. There is fish, I grant,
but only he who has more money than wit can
command it. I am assured that Hobart fish are
sent to Sydney and Melbourne, and sold at far lower
prices than you purchase it in its native mai'ket;
and this, when you come to consider, is consistent
with the general policy which governs the Hobart
community. They can’t help “ putting it on ” when
the visitor comes around. So with the fruit. You
can get apples and pears in Melbourne for half the
price, and of better quality, than you can purchase
them in the Tasmanian shops.


OLD FOLKS’ REST.
At Newtown, a suburb of Hobart, stands a building
enclosed in a spacious park, which was formerly used
as an orphanage. A church, the interior of which
is very tasteful, occupies the centre of this structure.
Orphans seem to have gone out of fashion in
Tasmania, and the place is now occupied by the
old and worn-out. There are 350 old men, and
150 females in a refuge that does honour to
Tasmania. It is a suggestive sight to see these
old people blinking in the sun, or at meal times,
munching their meat.
There are some strange people here. One man, I
noticed, is all in “kinks”—twisted out of all normal
shape. He owes this calamity to loss of money, and
I couldn’t help thinking that if some people I knew
this side who have lost money took the disaster the
same way, we should have a number of curious
physiological studies for our doctors. This man
came out from England as a navvy, and saved up
,£l5O, which he duly lost in a public house. The
shock ruined his nervous system, and he is now the
wreck I have mentioned.
There is an old fellow, named Warburton, in the
place, who is vicious, and is kept secured. He lies
upon some straw. He is blind, and mad, and he is
the champion blasphemer of the place. With a
devilish malignity, this wretched creature keeps
fairly quiet during the day, and bursts forth with
the most hideous language at night time. He was
formerly a mate of Jeffrey, and it makes one’s blood
curdle to listen to the monologues of the old wretch
as he speaks of their villainous feats.
There is another old gentleman who was intro-
duced to me as “Boomer Jones”—why, I don’t
know. There are old soldiers and old sailors here,
and old, very old, old hands, upon whose faces the
marks of the past are writ large. But they are dying
out fast, owing, as one sly old chap told me, to the
increasing cold of the winters. It is always well to
be prepared with a reason.
In the females’ department, I noticed one woman
who bore the remains of extraordinary beauty. She


was deaf and dumb, and her two children were with
her. She had a sad history, 1 believe of man’s deceit
and treachery. Compared with the withered old
dames around her, this woman looked like some
creature of different creation, and as having no
relationship whatever to the coarse and debased
semi-imbeciles around her.
The institution is really a credit to the colony, and
I am right glad to refer to it with praise, inasmuch
as I saw so much that did not meet with my approval,
or elicit my admiration. But this house for old and
worn out people is conducted on the broadest lines of
a true and gracious charity.
* * * *
However, I did not care much about remaining
any longer in Hobart. It is a dull place at which to
sojourn, after the life and bustle of our large cities.
What I had come across to see had yet to be investi-
gated. I wanted to realise, so far as eyes and ears
could bring the picture to my mind, something of
that strange weird life of which this island was the
site and locality. It is the past of Tasmania that
interests those who are concerned in tracing through
the pages of history, those strange evolutions of
society, which even as the development and birth of
the child, are attended by such phenomena, and such
pangs of suffering.
And so, indifferent to the beauty of the ladies of
Hobart, the convivial temperament of the gentlemen,
the gay promise of social diversion, and all the
ordinary fascinations of a summer watering place, I
made haste to visit a spot associated with the great
Penal System: under the action of which Great
Britain sought to solve a question that is beyond
solution, and in the attempt built up a record, for
the time being, of extraordinary cruelties and injus-
tice. Port Arthur and its surroundings were what
I had come to see.
A TRIP TO PORT ARTHUR.
Naturally, I desired to acquire as much infor-
mation as possible about so celebrated a place as
Port Arthur, from local sources. But I found that


it is the humour of the “ aborigines ” to know-
nothing of a locality so intimately connected with
the past history of the country. This sensitive-
ness has been exhibited in the change of the
name of Port Arthur to Carnarvon, and, it is the
proper form in good society in the Tasmanian capital
to affect absolute ignorance of the place unless you
call it by the name of its regenerate christening. I
departed, therefore, upon my quest after old time
signs and records, with very little help from anybody,
except from a very old man, who dragged his left leg
in a peculiar manner, and who, to my enquiry as to
whether he knew anything about Port Arthur,
cocked his eye, and answered—“ Port Arthur !My
oath ! If I don’t, sonny, nobody does. I was there.”
But I found that even this gentleman’s resources
were to be gauged only by the amount of rum
supplied to him, and that the more he got the less he
said. And so, having reduced him to a condition of
absolute silence, I gave him up, and determined to
rely upon my own observations, and what I could
pick up from residents upon the spot.
We started from Hobart at 8.30 in the morning ;
and on a dull and depressing kind of day. Old
Wellington was enveloped in mist, save for his top-
most head, which seemed to frown upon all below.
’Tis a noble old mountain, this—full of changeful
aspects, severe, solemn, grand, smiling as his mood
(as it were) seems to move him. Is there not some-
thing in these grand old mountains which suggests a
sentient faculty. They seem to brood, to scowl some-
times, on all beneath them ; and at other times to
brighten into the broad smiles of some rare old
benevolent giant.
SALTWATER RIVER.
At noon we arrived at Saltwater River, and here
for the first time my sinister impressions of Tasmanian
hospitality were shaken. “ Spraydon ”is the name
of the private hotel kept by Mr. Jenkins, and here
so kindly a reception did I meet with, and so just
were the charges made, that I was tempted to remain
some days. It is a charming place to stay at, and as


for the host and hostess no words at my command
can do Justice to their simple but most cordial treat-
ment of a guest. The wanderer, smarting from the
rapacity and cold-blooded selfishness from which he
has escaped, is naturally inclined to make the most of
a reception so consolatory and comforting. I landed
with the intention of staying a few hours; I
remained a week. This was my solitary experience
of the hospitality of which I had heard so much, and
I think it only fair to put it upon record.
At Saltwater River the remains of the old proba-
tion settlement may be inspected. The old chapel
still stands. Where are they who, in their abject
misery, used to assemble within its walls to appeal
for that mercy, which they knew right well was not
to be found on earth ? Standing within this building
it needs but little exercise of imagination to conjure
up that picture of the past,—the miserable congrega-
tion assembled to listen to the hope and promise of
the Christ. How many were affected, I wonder?
How many went forth, comforted? Hot many, for
it is surely madness to believe that men suffering
under the most terrible punishment at the hands of
fellow men, were in a favourable mood to listen to
exhortations which must have sounded as mere mock-
ery. Conceive the humour with which a starving
wretch would listen to the promise of the joys of
Heaven. Alas ! the present is always tangible, and,
under its impulse the influence of the future has small
scope within which to work.
There are other buildings in partial ruin,—the
soldiers’ quarters, the courthouse, and the prisoners’
barracks. Here an old treadmill crumbles. Ah !
the weary, weary tread of many an unhappy wretch
upon those mouldering steps ! What a story could
that ancient machine tell, of the groans and curses
of the tortured, the stern insistance of the task-
masters, the enforced submission of the slaves. They
have burned down the infamous records of Port
Arthur; why do they not destroy this reminder of
a time when inhumanity was the highest policy and
virtue in our dealings with those who had sinned
against the law, and by the law were punished ?


In the ruins of the officers’ quarters, at the Coal Mines, the writer
discovered a rude sketch, which he copied, and now produces for the
benefit of the modern art critic. It was evidently the work of a
humorist—probably some young ensign, with some gifts in the direction
of caricature.
1 ¥41*7 y P ( OALMINES .N TMt EARIV o*r4




The cells in which the prisoners were confined here
at night time measured seven feet by four. Some six
or seven are yet intact. The only ventilation pro-
vided was effected by a slit in the ceiling, three inches
by six. At this station, 400 probationers used to be
controlled by a guard of tliirteen soldiers and a
sergeant.
DEAD POINT.
The road to the coal mines is along the beach,
occasionally passing through patches of dense scrub.
Half-a-raile from Saltwater River is Dead Point, a
small promontory jutting out into the waters of the
bay. The place owes its name to the circumstance
that a number of men were buried there, princi-
pally in the year 1842, seamen chiefly, belonging to
H.M.S. Tortoise. They evidently succumbed to some
epidemic. It is noticeable that the victims were all
young men. The impression is solemn and sad,
when, as the traveller proceeds on his road to the
coal mines, he suddenly comes upon this dreary
resting place of the dead of long ago. Resting place,
did I say ? Not so. The curious in human skulls and
bones have been busy here.
Now and then you come upon a clear spot upon
which the beautiful native heath grows luxuriantly.
A wallaby occasionally hops across your path, or a
huge black snake wriggles his loathsome carcase into
the scrub. Snakes are abundant on Tasman’s and
Forrestier Peninsulas, and tourists will do well to
remember the fact. I nearly walked upon one ugly
customer, which reared its veneraous head, and hissed
at me wickedly. I almost expected the brute to
ask—“ Are you a visitor?” as every other creature
does (more especially of the boarding-house order) in
the island.
THE COAL MINES.
The “ coal mines” settlement is now in ruins. It
was built on the slope of a hill and consisted of a
large stone house, a resident officer’s establishment,
and the usual prisons. And here are some grim
reminders of the dreadful treatment to which the
unhappy wretches were subjected, who toiled at these


mines years ago; treatment which, when recalled in
imagination, discounts our indignation against the
Russian discipline of Siberia. Here you may find
the ruins of underground cells, into which the
offenders—real or supposed, —for it much depended
upon the temper, the digestion, or the caprice of
authority,—were thrust for punishment. Horrible
infamy ! I suspect those who worked at the mines
were thrush into these cells to sleep. Burrowed into
the earth, these places were built up of brick. A
long passage is seen, on each side of which are nine
cells, each measuring seven feet by nine feet. Here
the wretched creatures who had been working from
early morning until four o’clock in the afternoon,
were immured each night. Oh, blessed Christianity !
which has taught us this thing, that no hell can receive
the soul, worse in it’s torture than that which man
inflicts upon his fellows upon earth.
Men who were sent to the coal mines were
supposed to be “hard cases.” It was probably an
economical plan to reduce their ranks by a course
of treatment at these mines. It may perhaps be
understood that a man who for years worked all
day in the bowels of the earth, burrowing like a
stoat or weasel, in tunnels not four feet high ; who
only saw the light of day in his weary trudge
between the settlement and the mines (a distance of
about a mile), and back again; and who, directly he
got back again to the settlement, was shut up in
a dark and massive cell to spend the night—was
not likely to be improved morally, intellectually, or
physically. As a means of reforming a “hard case,”
I take it to have been illogical; but it was so far
meritorious that it got rid of a great number of
people who might, under more favourable circum-
stances, have cost the state a considerable amount of
money, and some trouble. Men died off like flies
in winter. Many who did not die went mad, and
in many cases committed suicide. Meanwhile, the
inhabitants of Hobart Town warmed themselves by
their bright coal fires. Pah ! Every sputter and flash
and flame which the coal gave forth was but an
echo of the groans and agonies of the emaciated men
who dug it. I wonder if the children, then, weaving


fancy pictures in the fire, ever saw the ghastly truth
reflected there.
The coal mines, in the old days, were a station,
semi-probationary, semi-penal. This is what I am
told. But how it came into the mind of authority
to submit probationary prisoners to tortures which
must, of neccessity, drive. them mad, puzzles me.
Haply, however, the probationary men were used as
cattle, to drag the waggons along—who k^ows 1 ? All
the same, they must have had hard times of it.
I have said that they died off like flios. The most
sinister commentary upon the system lies in the fact
that the cemeteries at all these places are thickly popu-
lated, The dead were buried about three feet deep,
much to the comfort of modern traders in skulls and
shin-bones, who have been very busy hereabouts, as
the scattered ruins of long-dead felons testify. The
thieves had not the decency to return the remains to
the mother earth from which they ravished them.
Here the coal has been on fire for thirty-five or
forty years past. Walking hereabouts is perilous.
The crust of earth over the fire is sometimes so thin
that you can push a stick through it, and withdraw
it burning.
On the top of the hill a long shaft is seen, some
thirty feet in circumference, and about seventy
or eighty feet deep. A splendid view is to be
obtained from this point. Many tunnels have been
driven here by the prisoners—one. it is said, extended
seven miles in length. But I take leave to doubt
that story, since I fail to understand how air,
sufficient for the workers, could have been obtained
from the single outlet of one shaft. However, it
may be that air was not one of the articles provided
to prisoners in those days. It certainly had no place
in the underground cells into which the unhappy
creatures were thrust to take their repose, in the
intervals of their working shifts. I don’t think that
the sulphur mines of Iceland, or the iron mines of
Siberia, are worked on more brutal lines. It was
about this time, I think, that the Christian world was
making a great fuss about negro slavery. Nothing
in the history of that institution was more hideously
inhumane than the Christian treatment of our own
flesh and blood.


A LAY BROTHER.
During my wanderings I encountered a very
singular person, who conveyed to me most emphatic-
ally the lesson that after all it is very easy to
get a living. This gentleman (an English rustic)
is a broad shouldered heavy looking person,
habited in a. black frock coat, a coloured waistcoat,
moleskin trousers, heavy hob-nails, and a felt hat.
He looks a compromise between the navvy and
evangelist. *fle is the spiritual guide of the district.
He travels upon salvation, and seems to fatten on
his business. He has not been long from the old
country, whence he told me he had been sent, under
the auspices of the Church, for the benefit of his
health. So far, the Church has been justified. A
finer example of physical health it would be difficult
to imagine. Fat rolls on his limbs. His cheeks
are ruddy. His small eyes, slumberous and dozy,
remind one of the pictures Morland delighted in.
But he is not a bad sort of fellow: full of that
stolid hope which sometimes supports such natures,
and even projects them into prosperity. He was
very confidential; told me that he was only in
embryo, but had great confidence that he would
ultimately blossom into a full-blown minister. Nay,
he hinted that, as a Wolsey had sprung from a
butcher’s shop, so might he, then obscure and
unknown, come to the lawn sleeves of a bishop.
He is a good natured fellow : full of that half-
cunning, half-simplicity, which belongs to the rural
clown in England. His projects are wondrous.
He contemplates getting a steamboat—some day—to
enable him to keep pace with the spiritual wants of
the community. And, although he is a man border-
ing upon forty years of age, he designs to make the
belle of the district—a young girl of eighteen—his
bride. He is not aware, perhaps, that this last
project makes him a highly interesting personage to
the ladies down that way, whose otherwise somewhat
dull and monotonous lives are cheered t>y the amuse-
ment the reverend gentleman’s amatory designs
affords them—and none are more entertained than
the object of them.


He and 1 went fishing, and it is probable that had
I not experience, as an old sailor, in the management
of a boat, the hopes and fears, the ambitions and
restless energy of this reverend person would now
be sunk fathoms deep in the quicksands of the bay.
What induced him to the course, I know not; but
no sooner had we got afloat in a flat-bottomed scow,
than he stood up, as though to preach, and very
nearly sent us to the perdition he is so fond of
talking about. I remonstrated; he sat down, and
in the act nearly did for us again. I pointed out
the danger of moving in such a boat, and then he
thought we had better return. His ruddy cheeks
paled—he doubtless thought of his charmer, and the
bishopric. But I kept him there until we had tested
the fish resources of the spot. He was glad when I
declared that it was a failure, and that we would
therefore return. I think the parson will henceforth
keep to dry land in his fishing.
This man amused me very much. The old Adam
was strong in him, and at certain times would assert
itself very emphatically. Occasionally his mouth
seemed to water for an oath, and it was ludicrous
to observe how pathetically he looked up to note
whether the struggle between his aboriginal nature
and his evangelistic character had betrayed him.
He had broad ideas of human nature, and exhibited
a very intelligent appreciation of feminine prejudices.
For instance, he told me that he often found it
necessary when in the presence of attractive ladies,
to hint that he was a married man. “It cools ’em
down, you know,” he observed, artlessly. “They
don’t take such an awkward interest in a man when
they think that he has been hung up.”
“Hung up !” and this from a man who looked for a
bishopric as the ultimate reward of his labours and
his virtues.
TARANNA.
Leaving my kind hosts at the hotel, with many
thanks for their treatment of #ne, I started on a fine
morning, to visit Port Arthur. The road leads past
Impression Bay, where there are remains of an old
probation settlement; then you come to Koonya or


the Cascades, as it was formerly termed, where there
are likewise ruins of an early convict depot. Thence
you pass on to Taranna. Here there is an hotel, and
here I was rudely reminded that my recent experi-
ence at Mr. Jenkin’s hostelry at Saltwater River was
exceptional. I asked if I could have some tea. A
girl with reddish hair and angular neck bones and
elbows, stared at me for about five minutes, and then,
slowly, doubtfully, and evidently labouring under a
sense of great responsibility said, that she could “give
me something to eat.” This was gratifying and I ate
the bread and butter and drank the tea provided,—
nothing else—with thankfulness.
I slept that night in a room that was all windows.
I had asked that I should be called at six o’clock;
the good and simple folk knew better than that. If
they had called me, I should have been away before
breakfast time, and they would thus have missed an
opportunity of spoiling the stranger. So they let me
lie (it is all lie in the hotels in Tasmania). When I
issued forth the morning meal was ready. There
were pork chops,—the pig that yielded them must
have come out in the first fleet. I have such a vivid
recollection of those awful chops, that I sometimes
dream of them, even now. An egg, fried to cinder,
and bread and butter, completed this meal. I
punished the bread, as the best way I knew of, of
striking at the susceptibilities of a Tasmanian hotel-
keeper. Then, I paid up,—six and sixpence—and
went my way, to walk off the pork chop and its
consequences.
On leaving Taranna, you take a course in a
southerly direction for Port Arthur. You can either
travel by the beaten track or follow the line of the
old tramway, mouldering remains of which may be
seen running between Norfolk and Long Bay. This
tramway was laid down in the old times in order to
expedite the delivery of stores, etc., at Port Arthur.
Its terminus at Long Bay is about two miles from
the old penal settlement.
The walk from has little interest. But as
you arrive upon the summit of a gentle rise you
behold the village and gardens, nestling on the shores
of a broad bay, whose waters shimmer in the sunlight.


And as you walk onwards you come upon a ruin
which instantly arrests your sense of the picturesque.
It is the old church of the settlement.
THE OLD CHURCH.
The Church at Port Arthur, remains of which may
still be seen, ivy covered, and looking as ancient as
some old English rum of the kind, was designed by
a convict. He submitted his plans to the comman-
dant, Captain Booth. They were sent to Arthur,
and approved. The architect was rewarded with a
ticket-of-leave. He obtained employment with a
rich widow, much older than himself, and being a
handsome man, found favour in her eyes. When he
became free, she married him, and as the story books
have it, they lived happily ever after. Romance, it
may be seen, sometimes finds its way into queer
quarters.
TASMAN’S.
W T hen the stout old Dutchman who first explored
the waters of the Derwent, and the bays and estu-
aries of the coast, christened the peninsula upon
which Port Arthur is situated, with his own name, he
had little thought, I imagine, to what degraded use it
would come. Else he would surely have shrunk from
associating his name with such a place; nor would he
have given his sweetheart’s name to the island after-
wards devoted to convict reception ; nor again would
the proud Van Dieman, governor of Batavia, have
had his name sent down to history in connection with
a land soon thereafter to be made the cesspit for
England’s infamy. But when we christen countries,
it is pretty much as when we are christening children
—we are all in the dark as to the future.
PORT ARTHUR.
Port Arthur was founded by Governor Sir George
Arthur, somewhere about 1830. It was maintained
as an Imperial institution, even after transporta-
tion ceased, and was afterwards given over to the
Colonial Government, who continued to use the prison


as a penal establishment. It was there that the
more turbulent of the prisoners were sent. The discip-
line was severe—that was, doubtless, needful in order
to keep the wild beasts in order. It is questionable,
however, whether some of the stories that have got
into print as to the cruelties practised towards the
convicts at this place are true. Mr. Marcus Clarke
has painted some hideous episodes as occurring at
Port Arthur, but I have failed to find any records
justifying his dramatic but revolting pictures. It
seems to me, indeed, that, all things considered, the
system by which convicts were governed in Van
Diemen’s Land was more humane than that which
obtained in New South Wales. However, it was bad
enough. But Port Arthur and its associations have
passed into oblivion. The place is called Carnarvon
now, and the old settlement is in ruins.
The earlier “ settlers ” at Port Arthur were chiefly
men who had already tasted misery in its most tragic
forms at Macquarie Harbour. Their experience had
therefore prepared them for the worst the change of
residence might bring them. But even they had not
perhaps undergone many of the forms of punishment
and privation which were now introduced under the
“new system.” At first, and until the coal mines
were developed, and such other industries taken in
hand, as afterwards gave employment to the convicts,
they were chiefly employed felling and preparing
timber, and dragging it to the shore for transfer to
Hobart. No beasts of burden, other than felon
humanity, were used in any work, there conducted.
There was no need for horse or bullock labour.
Was there not an abundance of rascal brawn and
muscle to drag, and haul, and carry ? It was cheaper
to employ this labour saving agency than to feed and
tend cattle. And then you could hardly flog a poor
dumb beast, as you could this human offal. A
hundred lashes would weaken the value of a horse.
It improved and stimulated the powers of a man.
It was the fashion in those days to regard all
convicts as pretty well on the same level of iniquity.
A man who had committed some crime, for which
in these days, he would expiate, perhaps by paying


a small fine, would perchance find his way to Port
Arthur, and be herded with others of an infernal
past. For many men, whose original crime had been
trivial, and who, on first arrival in the colony, had
been counted as less deserving of harsh treatment,
frequently got into trouble through some breach of
discipline or exhibition of temper. And then they
would be sent to Port Arthur—not because of the
offences for which they were transported, but for
some petty misdemeanour by which they had offended
the officials in power. And once at Port Arthur,
they were branded as dangerous, and subjected to
the severest treatment. Clad in the yellow livery
of first-class offenders, and their legs in fetters, they
became the marked felons of the colony. The
injustice would rankle in their minds; and many
a poor wretch whose nature was not indeed evil,
was thus morally ruined. In this way it is probable
that as much crime was manufactured by the system
adopted to punish it, as found its origin in its
original breeding grounds.
Port Arthur was broken up in April, 1877. On
the 17th of that month, the S.S. Southern Cross
transferred the last of the prisoners, numbering forty-
seven, and twenty-seven invalids, to the Campbell
Street Gaol in Hobart. The following day the
steamer returned for a cargo of lunatics, and the
place was left to brood over its past importance.
When I visited Port Arthur, a great fire had devas-
tated the old settlement. The walls of the prisoners’
and officers’ quarters, and other buildings were stand-
ing, but the conflagration had completely gutted the
interiors. The residents seemed rather glad than
otherwise. One, a policeman, expressed his satisfac-
tion openly. “It would be a good job,” said he, “if
every stone in the accursed place was obliterated, and
the memory of the infamy lost.”
I confess that I thought this hypersensitive. One
might as well desire that the instruments of torture
exhibited in the Tower of London should be destroyed,
as referring to circumstances in the national history,
which do not make that history smell as sweet as
lavender.


RUINS AND RELICS.
The ruins, however, are in sufficient preservation
to enable the visitor to trace their former purpose
and importance. It is not difficult to fancy yonder
building, thronged at night time with the wearied
and soul-broken convicts of the settlement; or to see
in the mind’s eye the dismal rows of stretchers in
that edifice, which was used as a hospital, and to
watch the poor wretches stretched thereon, and to
listen to their moans and smothered cries of agony.
In that ruin on the hillside, formerly surrounded by
a blooming garden, dwelt the superintendent; hard
by, the officer commanding the military detachment
resided ; and there, on the opposite side of the road,
Dr. Seccombe used to live his quiet bachelor life.
On evenings, when the felony of the settlement was
securely locked up, the good people of the civil and
military establishment used to meet at one or other
of their houses, and amuse themselves with music,
cards, or conversation. In the warm summer nights,
when the myriad stars shone down their lights upon
the earth, and when the salt sea breeze moved the
waters to soft murmurs on the beach, and when every
pulse of nature beat to the harmony of peace and
gentleness, I wonder if it ever occurred to the mind
of authority, that there were those within the prison
walls to whom such influences bore no sense, and who
had long learned the indifference of the brute to the
suggestiveness of natural beauties and sweetness and
light. You see, the stars might shine, the moon
might beam, the waters might shimmer in their light,
and the air might be full of the movement and
vitality of nature in her gentlest mood ; but never a
sense of this could reach the unhappy wretches
cooped up in yonder prison. So that the aesthetic
development depends upon the environments. If you
are free to look upon beauty, you may develop beauty.
Condemned to live amidst base and coarse and brutal
surroundings, how shall you come forth save as
tainted 1 I don’t think these facts are even yet
realised by those who have in their hands the govern-
ment and control of our criminal classes. It was
certainly not within the understanding of the good


people to whom authority was committed in those
rare old times, when “ the system ” was superior to
all laws other than those it embodied; and when
men, whatever their nature, or character, or crime,
or history, were to the official mind, so many
creatures to be worked, flogged, hung, or shot down
as occasion demanded, but never to be considered as
worthy of a generous thought or a merciful treatment.
If the stones, now blackened ominously, of these
ruins could speak, what stories would they reveal of
unspeakable wrong and cruelty ! Yet again, as I
believe, they might tell us of many a pathetic
incident of Christian dealing and mercy ; of tears
drawn from hardened felons by some simple touch of
sympathy; of hearts comforted, sometimes by kindly
words by some honest man in power. .We know
that it was so, and that however much the penal system
may have served to harden and demoralise the official
nature in general, there were some men among those
placed in power ©ver those miserable felons who,
whilst performing their duty, never forgot their
common manhood, nor the lessons of their religion.
Such men must have seemed gods to the miserable
creatures who were ordinarily treated from the stand-
point, and that of the penal system.
OLD PENITENTIARY.
The old Penitentiary at Port Arthur was built into
a cutting of a hill, so that one side of the walls which
surrounded it was of natural formation. It was a
large fouf-storied building. You first enter the
receiving hall, were the convicts were searched.
Then to the right and left there are passages, on each
side of which are cells. On the second flat a balcony
traverses the area, from which cells are also entered.
The third flat was devoted to the feeding of the
inmates —the food being cooked in another building,
and sent up to the “ refectory ”by a lift. This
place was also used as a library, in which the better
behaved were allowed to read until eight o’clock,
when all lights were extinguished. The top flat was
used as a dormitory—one end being also appropriated
to the service of the Roman Catholic communion


every day. In the front of the building was the
muster yard, where the convicts were gathered,
checked, and marched off to work on week days. On
Sundays they wore clean shirts and specially polished
bluchers, and ought to have been happy, because
they were then mustered for divine service, and privi-
leged to march to church under care of a military
guard with loaded muskets. When in the church,
they could join in the devotions, which must have
been of great consolation, especially when the clergy-
man lifted up prayer to Heaven for its mercy upon all
prisoners and persons in captivity. Queer and weird
thoughts must have passed through many a felon
brain in that old church. And the humorous among
them (and you can never quite kill humour), must
have found some amusement in the farce.
An adjoining building was occupied as a workshop
for the carpenters, blacksmiths, and other felon
tradesmen of the settlement.
THE MODEL PRISON AND SILENT
SYSTEM.
The ruins of the Model Prison indicate that it was
designed by an artist who fully realised the responsi-
bilities attached to the task. The “ model ” was
constructed for the purpose of dealing with such
characters as were insensible to ordinary methods.
Here were confined those who were subjected to the
“ silent system,” and from this place, consequently,
the Lunatic Asylum was chiefly fed. It has been
aptly described by an old time visitor as an
“exquisitely contrived instrument of mental torture.”
The building devoted to this form of punishment
was a circle within a circle. The inner cir cle formed
the guard and point of direction, from which branched
angles and corridors. Along these the cells were situ-
ated. Between each line of cells was an iron gate,
with two or three yards of space, forming radii to the
centre. All the floors were heavily matted. Warders
and prisoners wore list shoes. A bell tinkled. A
cell was quietly opened, and the prisoner appeared
with a mask over his face. Through two small eyelet


holes he could see the guard pointing to one of the
yards. This he entered. A bell was touched and the
door shut. The mask was raised from the man’s head,
and he was walked up and down for an hour’s exercise,
to keep him healthy. Then back to his cell, and his
daily meal, served through a trap door : an automatic
process, which, undergone every day for a consider-
able period, must have had a stimulative effect upon
the convict’s intellect.
THE DARK CELL.
Among other ruins to be seen at this place, in con-
nection with the old “ model prison ” is that of the
dark cell, in which specially turbulent and hot-blooded
rascals were placed, to cool down. There were three
doors attached to this ingenious retreat—one follow-
ing the other, and each having an aperture for venti-
lation. By the time the offender entered the third
door, he had realised something of the meaning of the
Biblical phrase, “ outer darkness.” Having reached
his living grave, he was left to meditate, and, in most
instances, developed into a lunatic. So surely had
the ingenuity of authority designed this place of
torture, that had a cannon been fired off outside, the
man within could not not have heard the report.
This sort of thing went on within recall of many yet
alive, and yet we hold up our hands with horror when
we read of the “ manners and customs of savages and
cannibals.”
THE CHAPEL AND SERVICE.
The model prison had its chapel. As a general
thing, even among free and unrestricted society, Ave
find that God’s houses are cheek by jowl Avith the
institutions of Satan.
“ Wherever man erects a house of prayer.
The devil’s sure to build a dwelling near.”
AnyAvay it must have been comforting for the
inhabitants of the “ model,” that the authorities
afforded them a show for better luck in the after life.
But care was taken that the consolations of religion


should not be enjoyed too luxuxfiousl-y. Armed
soldiers sat facing the felon worshippers, ready to
repress with powder and ball, any manifestation of
the devil’s influence that might obtrude itself. The
convict pews were arranged in a semicircle, beginning
about five feet six inches from the floor, and rising
one above the other. The worshippers could not sit
down—that would have made the position too attrac-
tive. All that could be seen of them was the tops of
their heads, as they stood, during the service. One
man was taken out of his cell at a time, and placed
in one of these boxes, and there left to think of
things spiritual and beatific. Then the next box was
filled, and so on throughout. Thus these wretches
never saw each other’s faces, and save for the parson’s
droning voice, never heard a sound, other than the
soft pat of feet upon the thickly padded floors of their
cells of silence. Conversion must have had a good
time under such stimulating circumstances.
SMITH O’BRIEN.
At the top of a rise stands the cottage in which
Smith O’Brien resided for some little time. Mr.
O’Brien was a man of most humane and refined
character, and I fancy that his nerves must have
suffered considerably while compulsorily witness of
the operations of the “ system ” by which the govern-
ment of Britain’s criminals was controlled. In truth,
there could scarce have been better teaching for this
reactionary gentleman of the utter futility of appeal-
ing for justice under conditions of modern civilisation,
than the daily spectacle presented to him must have
afforded.
POINT PUER.
Before leaving Port Arthur I visited Point Puer.
Point Puer, as the name signifies, was the place where
the youthful criminals were stationed, and where
they were taught trades, and “ reformed.” The ages
of these children varied from eleven years to eighteen ;
that is to»say, boys, whom we now fine five shillings
for small offences, were then sent from England for
seven and fourteen years transportation, and on
arrival were conveyed to Point Puer.


There were some grotesque examples, as for instance,
that of the child who stole a bun, and was sentenced
to seven years’ transportation by my Lord Campbell;
and a girl and two boys who were transported for
stealing some wood, valued 2d., the property of the
Crown; and the serio-comic story of the juvenile ruffian
who, having picked the pocket of a judge, was, by that
gentleman condemned to fourteen years’ transporta-
tion for the heinous offence. This youngster after-
wards got on in the world, and having worked out
his sentence, departed to South America, where, in
Chili, where I met him, he made a fortune, married,
and begat a family, and died full of years and honors.
And yet, such was his shameless hardihood, he would
often tell the story of his crime and its consequences
as exhibiting, in his narrow view, the cruelty with
which the laws of England then dealt with youthful
criminals.
The cruel wrong that was done to these children
lay not only in the nature of their monstrous punish-
ment itself, but in the fact that they were associated
with older and depraved criminals. On the voyage
out they were herded with the matured rascality of
the time, and no doubt, with the apt imitation of
youth, gathered more evil from that intimacy than
they could ever well get rid of. How callous and
brutal authority then was, may be gathered from the
circumstance that it never occurred even to the most
enlightened official intellect that these children were
of that age at which educational impressions are best
made. It never suggested itself to my Lord Russell
and other big wigs of the time, that by transporting
children in company with men and women seasoned
in crime, they were feeding the very source which
they sought to check. It was one of the most
infamous features of an infamous system that
children, many so young as to scarce enjoy a
consciousness of the difference between right and
wrong, were subjected to the debasing associations
of matured rascality, and punished with all the
rigour meted out to irreclaimable villains.
Some of the boys confined at Point ,Puer were
of an incorrigible mature, and, impatient of the
beneficent efforts made by the government to redeem


them, precipitated matters by committing suicide.
It may be that these ill-regulated children brooded
over their severance from parents and home, and so
fell into that demoralisation which prompts self-
murder. Or it may have been—and this has been
suggested by captious critics—that the treatment
to which they were subjected influenced them to
their miserable conduct. Whatever thq cause, the
fact remains, that many a felon child, in the good
old days, sought peace, and rest, and oblivion in the
waters which wash the stones of Port Puer.
DEAD ISLAND.
Dead Island yonder is thick with graves. No
marvel that the growth and tangle of shrub and
creeper are rich and luxuriant. The soil has been
well fattened by felon carcases. It is a curious
thought, but it occurs when one’s eyes look with
admiration upon the green, and yellow, and brown
tints and shades of fern, and shrub, and blooms upon
Dead Island, that each glint and flash of beauty
owes its existence to some rascal’s rotten corpse.
The earth is rich with convict mellowness. Strange
that from such a nutriment it should have given
forth such a goodly spectacle. Judged by the logic
of the old system, one might have supposed the
villain bodies here deposited would have sapped the
virtues of the earth in which they were lain, rather
than have fed it to strength and vitality. Here lies
Dennis Collins, who was transported for life for
throwing a stone at King William the Fourth at
Newmarket Heath. Collins was a sailor, and,
doubtless, had his reasons for thus exhibiting his
antipathy to the sailor king. It cost him dear.
We may not even in these days, cast stones at
royalty. May, the miscreant who “burked” the poor
little Italian boy in London, is buried in this isle of
the dead. 80 ought the surgeons to lie there who
bought the bodies from the brute, and asked no
questions. Several soldiers and sailors of the navy
are also interred on the island. They boast grave-
stones, 'upon some of which the faint lettering can
be deciphered.


There are 1699 graves on this island, fully
tenanted. Mark Jeffrey, the notorious, was at one
time the caretaker of this gruesome place, and lived
in a hut at the other end. He contemplated dying
there, and so dug his own grave at the south end.
It is almost a pity that his views were not carried
out, inasmuch as it would not only have saved society
some trouble and annoyance at the hands of the
stalwart Mark, but it would have rounded off the
number of the dead on the island to 1700. As it is
Mark Jeffrey’s grave is a trap for penguins, who fall
into it and perish. The isle swarms with these
curious birds, and it does not need much exertion of
the fancy to conceive that they may be the reincar-
nated souls of the poor wretches who were laid there
long ago. I protest that, as I looked at some of these
creatures, I thought I could catch the expression
which, of course, always characterises the faces of
criminals after they have been found out and punished.
For a man may be the very devil himself, and bear
the visage of an angel, whose real nature has not
been exposed. Once found out, however, it is aston-
ishing how we discern that the celestial countenance
is after all the face of a fiend ! Oh, it is very funny.
In church, a man looks like a saint; in the dock,
what a brute he becomes !
AN INCONGRUITY.
Before the visitor turns his back upon this old
time site of old time human misery, let him remember
that it is no longer known as Port Arthur. That
name stinks in the nostrils of the genteel Tasmanian.
The place is now known as Carnarvon. And as a
corollary to this sweetening reform, an hotel has been
established, which is called the “ Carnarvon,” and is
directed by a gentlemen who is an admirable judge
of men and manners, and everything that is nice and
proper and elevating to the mind and morals. Which
is cheering to the wayfarer, albeit the incongruity
of such sweetness and light planted in one of the
old buildings of the former city of desolation may
strike the observant and reflective.


The landlord of the Carnarvon Hotel came over
from Victoria, where he was at one time a prominent
member of the Woolgrowers’ Association. With
the view probably of making tourists from the main-
land as comfortable as they would be “at home,” he
conducts his hotel on Victorian lines. He eschews
the happy-go-lucky methods of the Tasmanian Boni-
face, who, as a general thing, has made no progress
in the art and mystery of hotel-keeping since the
dark ages of the Colony. The rough and ready
customers of the locality are not permitted to linger
through the day over a few pints of beer in the
Carnarvon. The hotel is run in the interests of
those who love, and are willing to pay for, the
“sweetness and light” of our ordinary existence.
GOVERNMENT EARM.
Leaving Port Arthur, the tourist, travelling west,
comes to the old Government farm. Here the peace-
ful avocations of the agriculturist and dairy farmer
were conducted. The farm buildings were on the
old English lines. The cowshed was 100 feet long
by 20, covered in with skylights. Altogether this
establishment must have been very extensive and
elaborate. Who profited by the farm, which was, of
course, cultivated by the convicts, I can’t say. The
butter, and cheese, and vegetables, I reckon, did
not much interest the majority of the residents of
Port Arthur.
The farm is now in occupation of a Mr. Harrison,
who rents it from Mr. Jenkins, of Saltwater River.
He was alone when I called, and eyed me with an
expression which plainly indicated suspicion as to my
bona fides. Mr. Harrison intimated that he had a
“ brother,” who was about, his object doubtless being
to scare me. However, he told me how I was to get
to Safety Cove, and favoured me with a draught of
milk, after which he bade me good day, and set about
his work.
SAFETY COVE.
Safety Cove lies about a mile further on. The
path leading to it runs through the bush. It is a
decline nearly all the way, until you presently come
upon a dense scrub, which encircles a wide basin or


sand-pit, worked out by the tides. You descend this,
and suddenly there is revealed to you a large cavern,
about 300 feet long, and fully forty feet high, which
leads into the ocean. At the outset this singular
channel splits into two, through which the surf
charges with thunderous boom.
Following the beach, you come to a blow-hole—a
vast crack or fissure in the rock through which the
waters are impelled and hurled into the air some
thirty or forty feet high. This blow-hole of Safety
Cove is seldom visited. All the same it is well
worth the trouble.
On my way back, T called at the farm, notwith-
standing the evident disinclination of Mr. Harrison
to receive strangers. But it was dark and too late
to return to Port Arthur, so I managed to persuade
him to accommodate me for the night. I did not see
his “brother,” but I noticed that he had got his
firearms out and loaded up. Surer than ever I felt
that I had impressed him as a villain. In return for
his hospitality, I showed him how I used to make a
damper in Queensland years ago, and cooked break-
fast in the morning with a success that he evidently
appreciated. There are some men who have no genius
for cooking, and this gentleman is one of them. He’ll
certainly come to be on intimate terms with the fiend
dyspepsia if he lives much longer his bachelor life.
However, I thank him here for his hospitality.
While we were at breakfast an old man came to
my host with a request that he might be permitted
to set a snare to catch a kangaroo —a petition which
was graciously granted. I learned then that kan-
garoo meat is in much request in this part of the
world, and that the animal is strictly preserved by
the law during the close season. Curious that we
here hold battues of destruction, while a few hundred
miles the other side of the Straits the creatures are
protected from the hands of sportsman or trapper.
BROWN MOUNTAIN.
Before leaving Port Arthur the tourist should
make an excursion to Brown Mountain, which is 2598
feet high, and from the summit of which a noble view


is obtained of Cape Raoul and Tasman’s Island. Here
are some wonderful caves, and two blow-holes. From
the latter, when a strong wind blows, and the waters
are impelled into the tunnels, the foam is hurled high
into the air from the blow-holes—a magnificent sight.
Very few people seem to think it worth their while
to wander thitherward, and I found that even in the
township these natural phenomena, a few miles distant,
were a matter of tradition with most of the residents,
rather than spectacles known to them by personal
inspection. But this is characteristic of the local
apathy which rules in all countries. I have met
hundreds of Londoners who were never inside West-
minster Abbey; and, indeed, who knew far less of
the “ little village ” altogether than I did, who was
not to the manner born as they were. I met many
people in Hobart who had never been to the summit
of Mount Wellington. I know a man in Melbourne,
a resident of thirty years, who has never been inside
the Public Library. I know others (not many) who
have never been to Pentridge. As a general thing,
men, when at home, move in a circle like a fly in a
bottle, and learn, with surprise, from strangers, of
facts existing under their very noses.
Returning to Port Arthur, I made for Taranna.
Here I received my handbag from the landlady of
the hotel, who, to my intense surprise, charged
nothing for its board and lodging while I was away.
I pointed out to her that she was weak to miss such
an admirable chance of turning an honest penny, but
she was firm, and would not charge. But she was
not magnanimous enough to allow this liberal spirit
to affect her when “ billing ” for my tea (bread and
butter). She grinned as I paid her, as though she
thought that she had got the better of me all along
the line—and so she had.
And now I made for another historic landmark
Eaglehawk Neck. It is about five miles from
Taranna, north-easterly. The easiest road is along
the beach.
EAGLEHAWK NECK.
Eaglehawk Neck is a narrow isthmus, running
north and south, and connecting Tasman’s with


Forrestier’s Peninsula. In the good old days, a
number of blood hounds were chained at regular
intervals on a stage built into the shallows, to prevent
the passage of any escaped convicts across that part.
And as on the neck itself guards were stationed, and
the waters hereabouts swarmed with sharks (which
were carefully fed by authority), the poor devils had
a poor show anyway. Nevertheless, many managed
to get across, only, however, to fall again into the
hands of authority, and endure worse tortures than
those from which they had sought to escape. One may
imagine the unhappy wretch, flying from his tyrants,
confronted by the savage brutes on this stage which
he must cross if he would escape; while on the other
human guards barred his passage there ! And on
either side again, the surf roared and leaped ! Conceive
his despair, as, turning his gaze upon the waters, the
sinister fins and ugly shadows of brutes as fierce
as the yelping hounds were seen ! Nothing in Dante’s
Inferno is more gruesomely suggestive.
TESSELATED PAVEMENTS.
A short walk to the north-east of Eaglehawk Neck
brings the tourist to one of the most singular
spectacles, I should think, to be seen in any land.
It is one of those works of nature which impel the
idea in those who look upon them, that art, in truth,
has its origin in nature. For here surely is a work
exhibiting many indications of art design and exe-
cution. It is a tesselated pavement, each section of
which seems to have been cut to measure, and fixed
to another by some skilled human hand. It is diffi-
cult to understand that this extraordinary feature is
of natural formation. Walk upon any pavement or
floor laid down in church or hall, and you shall not
see any work more accurately fitted; more certainly
laid to measured design, than you behold in this
wonderful floor of basalt.
CLYDE ISLAND
Passing from the tesselated pavement down a
natural causeway, you reach Clyde Island, about
an acre in area. Right through this island a


channel has been worn by the action of the waters,
and a small blow-hole has been thus created.
BLOW-HOLES.
Indeed, this part of the world is full of blow-holes.
In order to reach another (Marcus Clarke’s blow-hole)
you return to Eaglehawk Neck and follow the beach
in a south-easterly direction until you reach Fossil
Island. Then descending and following the cliffs for
about half-a-mile, this blow-hole of the historic novel
is seen. You first pass a small cave, which leads you
to another of much larger area, extending some four
or five hundred feet into the cliffs. The roar of the
water as it surges into this cavern is great, and if
you fire a shot, it reverberates through the arches
with striking effect. Hereabouts it is as well to be
on guard against the fall of rocks from the cliff side,
which frequently occurs.
TASMAN’S ARCfH
After having seen these caves, the traveller,
proceeding along the coast for about a mile, encoun-
ters another wonderful formation, called Tasman’s
Arch. Two long parallel walls support a huge mass
of rock, upon which earth to a great depth rests, and
trees, and undergrowth, and flowers. This arch is
about 200 feet high, and about thirty feet thick. It
is worth while making the journey, and running the
gauntlet of lodging-house keepers, cabmen, and other
human leeches, to look upon this wonderful work of
nature.
THE DEVIL’S KITCHEN.
Half a-mile further on, the Devil’s Kitchen is
reached. This is a square that has been worked out
of the face of the cliff by the waters, while a passage
with acute angles, leading from the kitchen, has also
been formed by the same agency. Standing above
this singular phenomenon, one can understand how
apt was the idea which occurred to the godfather of
this grim place. In the Devil’s Kitchen some grim
cooking might well take place. Some short distance


from the Devil’s Kitchen another arch is encountered
of similar character to Tasman’s, but not so pictur-
esque or bold. Nevertheless, it is a curious piece of
nature’s eccentric handicraft, and well worth the
trouble of walking to inspect it.
* * * *
And now I consider I have “ done ” the lions of the
Peninsula. I was well satisfied. The scenery alto-
gether is bold and sometimes grand, and the many
curious natural features to which I have referred are
most interesting. Eaglehawk Neck is a really desir-
able place at which to sojourn. I stayed here for
several days at Mr. Risby’s Hotel. The accommoda-
tion is good, and the charges are fair. But perhaps
this was due to the fact (who knows 1) that I hinted
casually to the old lady that some day Tasmanian
hospitality would receive its due reward. This lady’s
late husband was a very enterprising man. Among
other enterprises he contemplated, at the time of his
death, was the cutting of a canal through the neck,
to shorten the journey to Hobart, and avoid the
sometimes rough passages round Cape Raoul. No
doubt this idea will be carried out some day.
The telephone to Taranna and Hobart is laid on
here, but the post only reaches the place twice a week.
The station is here situated, for signalling the
approach of vessels to Hobart. You can return from
the Neck to Hobart either overland, through Sorell or
Bellerive, or as I did, by boat from Taranna. To
see the Peninsula, surrounding country and its
features, it is necessary to stay at least a fort-
night. Most tourists run down for a day, and thus
come away as wise as ever; but those who wish to
see what I saw, and learn something of the traditions
which hang around every settlement in this part of
the country, should follow the route I took, and
commence at Saltwater River. The tourist of
sporting tastes will find it a good place to visit. But
I warn them that they will need stout clothing to
stand the wear and tear. Game is abundant, wild
fowl and duck, deer, kangaroos, and the fishing is
first-class. Mem.—Keep your weather eye open for
snakes.


MACQUARIE HARBOUR.
Having seen all that is to be seen on Tasman’s and
Forrestier’s Peninsulas, I hastened back to Hobart,
with the intention of returning to Melbourne as
speedily as possible. But it happened on arrival in
the pleasant little city that nestles at the foot of
old Wellington, I met a friend, who had come over
on business matters, connected with a “ big thing ”
at Zeehan. He was just about to start in the
steamer. Here was a chance to visit the historic
“hell” of early penal days—Macquarie Harbour.
And so, yielding to my friend’s persuasions, and my
own curiosity, I went forth to look upon that scene
of past sufferings, wrongs, brutalities and infamy
generally.
But whatever it may have been in the long past,
there is not much in the modern pretty settlement
to remind you of it. Beyond a few ruins, there is
nothing to show that this place was at one time the
dumping ground for the most desperate rascaldom,
perhaps, in the wide world. All that is over. It
takes a vivid imagination to conjure up the daily
scenes and incidents of cruel tortures and sufferings,
of those bad old days. The dull sound of the lash,
the vile oaths, the stem commands, the clank of
chains, the occasional musket shot and cry of some
wounded wretch—these are of a past that it is hard
to think ever existed. But then time hath a
mellowing hand. Who, visiting the field of Waterloo,
can think out the great struggle that raged where
now he stands 1 It is well that this is so, and that the
course of time smooths away the ugly wounds and
scars of past conflict and turbulence. The bravest
harvest springs from the battle field.
It is however well to remember that within the
memory of man this present site of peace and indus-
try was the scene of horrors indescribable ; and that
where contented citizens now dwell, wretches, aban-
doned of hope, yet clinging to her skirts, passed
through a direful experience of daily suffering. One
might think that those stately woods yonder would
still echo the groans and blasphemies of the Port
Macquarie of seventy years ago. But it takes a


strong fancy to catch those whispers of the devil, in
the mutterings and murmurs of the salt sea breeze,
as it wrestles with the dark pines on those dreadful
mountains—those grim and beetling ranges through
which, in vain, so many desperate creatures had
sought to penetrate. Not one in ten thousand, I
believe, ever thinks of such things, of those who now,
in search of the riches that lie hidden in those
mountains, visit this former Hell of old Tasmania.
In those days, good seamanship was a common
matter. There was no aid of steam, and little from
imperfect charts, to help the mariner who groped his
way through Hell’s Gates into Macquarie Harbour.
That bar, which is still a formidable obstruction to
safe entry, was taken by those old time skippers
with confidence. They worked their sound old tubs
through difficulties which not seldom bring your
modern steamboat skipper to grief. All the same,
it must have been a ticklish matter, in old times, to
“cross the bar” with some lumbering brig, slow to
answer her helm ; with uncertain breeze, or a gale
behind you, and the knowledge to nerve you, that
you had a hundred or two of unhappy convicts
battened down in the hold. Aye ! they were stout
seamen in those times, who worked for little reward,
and who got, as was then the rule for merit, “ more
kicks than ha’pence ” from those who employed them.
Macquarie Harbour—named after the Governor
of New South Wales—was founded for the purpose
of easing Hobart Town of some of its most unman-
ageable felons. It was well selected. There was
no escape from that natural prison, save by sea.
And it was so far productive that the timber was
admirably suited to the ship building needs of
Hobart Town. Moreover, its natural stern and
rugged aspect was likely of itself to strike terror
into the hearts of men who were to be best
controlled by such emotions.
Remote from the seat of government, the rule of
such a place lay in the hands of almost irresponsible
authority. But it is absurd to infer from the grim
accounts of suffering and punishment which have
reached us that they to whom the government of
the station was entrusted were all necessarily brutal,
5


We know that it was impossible for even the
most just and honourable commandant to foil the
malice and brutality of subordinates. It was an
easy matter in those days, for some rascal overseer
to secure the punishment of auy poor wretch who
had offended him. So wrong was done. And so
hate and despair and -desperation were bred, and
Macquarie Harbour earned the name of “ Hell.”
Bonwick, a schoolmaster, who spent some years
at Hobart Town in successful pursuit of his pro-
fession, wrote an alleged history of Tasmania. In
the course of this work, the author, who is a man of
statistics, gives the following grim account of matters
as they were conducted at Macquarie Harbour. It
is done in melo-dramatic style, and would fit an
evening newspaper report: —
“The double twisted and knotted cords, applied
to the excoriated back, lashed forth the everlasting
music. The brutality and injustice of convict over-
seers were the chief cause of such inflictions, and
the exciting motive to escape from the cruelties of
men to the heartlessness and horrors of surrounding
natives.”
Of these last, it may be here interpolated, there
were none in that part of the island. The country
was too wild, inhospitable, bleak and hungry to
give shelter or sustenance even to the aboriginals.
However, allowance must be made for the historian’s
vivid imagination. He goes on :
“That the punishment was vigorous enough, and
life unendurable, the records of the settlement
offered abundant proof. Of eighty-five deaths at
Macquarie Harbour, for instance, only thirty were
from natural causes. In three years two-thirds of
the felon residents had received 6280 lashes. In
the dreadful season of 1822, out of 182 # men, 169
men were punished to the amount of 7000 lashes.
During the ten years of occupancy, 112 men
attempted to escape. Of these eighty-two perished.
The rest returned in despair to the station. At one
time there were 350 men at Macquarie Harbour, and
of these the majority were under constantly recurring
punishment of the lash. If anything could possibly
add to the sufferings of the convicts at the hands of


their keepers, beyond the venom of self reproach,
and the life of cruel servitude and tyranny, it was
the wretched treatment of each other. Too degraded
to sympathise with sorrow, too persecuted to tem-
porise with feeling; they deadened their nature to
every appeal of intellect or moral sentiment, and
cursed alike their fellows, themselves, and their
God. Priding themselves upon stoicism in receiving
punishment, and indifferent to the continuance of
their existence, they cax-ed for nothing.- When it
is remembered that these slaves of ill-governed
passions were thrust in herds of misery and vice,
without one redeeming feature in their circum-
stances, one solitary expression of kindness, no one
can wonder at the phrase of “ the hell ” of Macquarie
Harbour or Pox’t Arthur. Under such conditions
it is not astonishing to hear of men anxious for some
change, however dreadful, tossing up for life. The
gambling was to determine who was to be the
murderer, who the murdered, who the witnesses.
The blow would be struck, one sufferer would be
released, one would be hanged, and two or three
would enjoy for a few weeks a transference from the
Harbour to Hobart Town gaol.”
All of which is very sensational writing. But
good old Bonwick,.who was ever a gobemouche , ready
to swallow every tale that was brought to him,
forgets to show how men, fiends as they were, who
were sent to Macquarie Harbour, were to be con-
trolled save by the utmost severity. To attempt to
govern such devils as they were by a rule of pity and
sympathy would but bring down disaster and failure
upon the simple fools who essayed it. It must be
remembered that the felons who were sent to
Macquarie Harbour all wore the yellow livery of the
more desperate and irreclaimable. As well seek to
control the lions and tigers of a menagerie, with
gentleness and caresses, as attempt to govexux by
kixxd words and admonitions such abnormal savages
as they were, who form the subject of Mr. Bonwick’s
hysterical deliverance. No doubt, however, this
fact led to much wanton and excessive harshness.
Cruelty, commenced as a necessity, becomes at last a
congenial weapon in the hand that once was wont to


hesitate in its infliction. And there can be no
question that the policy of placing petty power in
the hands of convict officials, accentuated the horrors
of the system. These men were ever the most pitiless
and brutal. But there was little help for it. The
kind and humane policy of our present day treatment
of criminals (the success of which is doubtful), would
have failed utterly in those bad old days. Machon-
ocliie tried it at Norfolk Island, and in less than
three months had the whole settlement in a state of
insurrection. So that shudder as we may, when we
read of these dreadful things, the lash and the
gallows were then the only deterrents and controllers
upon which authority could rely, in its treatment of
such devils as were sent to Macquarie Harbour. And
this acknowledged, no wonder that the conviction of
their value was extended to the treatment of the
less dangerous classes—men who might have been
redeemed by kindness. But it was hard to discrim-
inate under the “ system.”
BOLTERS.
The love of liberty is never extinguished - Read
the stories of Baron Trenck and Silvio Pellico, and
we are confronted with the conviction that this
passion impels men to deeds that under less strain
would be impossible of accomplishment. And so we
may not be surprised at the desperate, and in some
cases insane attempts which were made by convicts
of old days, to escape from their purgatory.
One of the most remarkable achievements of this
kind was made by a body of convicts under the
leadership of a man named Swallow. They were on
the way to Macquarie Harbour, where the vessel,
the Cyprus , was anchored in Recherche Bay. The
Cyprus was in command of Lieutenant Carew, and
a guard of ten soldiers was on board. Carew, the
surgeon, and the mate, with two others, took a boat
and went fishing. The convicts seized upon this
chance, attacked and overcame the guard and became
masters of the ship. The few shots fired during the
brief struggle warned the fishing party of the trouble.
Carew hastily returned. He and his companions had


to yield to superior force, armed and determined.
But the rascals behaved well. They placed provisions
in the boat, and handing Mrs. Carevv into it with
courtesy, Swallow ordered, the others to enter also,
together with thirteen convicts who had refused to
join in the mutiny. And so the poor captain lost his
ship, and had to take the shore for it, where he and
his friends were likely enough to have hard times of
it. The pirates sailed away, first to Tahiti, thence
to Japan. There they scattered. Three of the
scamps, it is known, became “absorbed” in the
native population. Probably,—who knowgs,—they
were indirectly instrumental in inspiring the Japs
with that tendency towards European civilisation
which has characterised that people within the last
twenty-five years. We can never make sure as to
what small matter may have given the first impetus
to a national revolution. It is a curious fancy at
any rate, that perchance from this exploit of Captain
Swallow, might be traced the evolution of a great
power.
Captain Carew (his wife was with him) and his
party on shore were put to sore straits. However,
brave men never give in. Two of the prisoners who
understood such matters, built a rough boat, in which
four of the party put to sea. They were fortunately
picked up, and boats were sent to rescue those on
shore. It was this incident that gave Marcus Clarke
the cue for his graphic chapter in “His Natural Life,”
describing the escape of the party from Macquarie
Harbour in a boat built by liufus Dawes.
Another party of convicts seized the Frederick, a
100 ton brig, at Macquarie Harbour. They got
away to South America, where they were well
received by the Spanish authorities.
And yet—such was the Nemesis that dogged their
steps—the leaders of both of these bold enterprises
ultimately found their way back to Tasmania. Both
Swallow and the other man, Barker by name, died as
convicts at Port Arthur. Bitter indeed must have
been their reflections.
It is no marvel that men should seek to escape
from such a hell as Macquarie Harbour, and that
every chance to do so by sea should be eagerly sought.


It was known to be impossible to get away by land.
During the occupation of the place hundreds of
despairing wretches sought to penetrate the bush
and traverse the mountains that backed up the
settlement. But all who did not die from starvation
and other miseries of their situation, came back and
delivered themselves up to punishment. One party,
five in number, set forth, headed by a man named
Pearce. This man returned. He had eaten his
companions ! The story is graphically told in “ His
Natural Life.” Of such was the humanity of Mac-
quarie in the old bad days.
It is hard to say who were the greater brutes—the
governed or the governors. There was not much to
choose. Own as we may, the necessity for severity
or even cruelty, men who could consent to be the
instruments by which it was applied could scarcely
have been of much higher natures than those they
controlled. And as familiarity with coarseness surely
breaks down our sense of refinement, so daily contem-
plation of the brutal and cruel dulls pity and withers
sympathy. Many an official may have come to
Macquarie Harbour a kind and just man, and gone
away from the “ hell ” hardened and demoralised.
Reading of the monstrous cruelties inflicted upon
those unhappy wretches at Macquarie Harbour—the
daily lashings, the never-ceasing toil, the dull mo-
notony of utter misery, one falls to wonder that
murder did not run riot, and that the victims in
sheer desperation did not in their greater strength
of numbers fall upon and annihilate their rulers.
But is the awe inspired by authority and by
discipline that we find constant illustration of power
in the hands of a few, controlling the passions of a
multitude. Such a spectacle was exhibited during
the ten years of settlement at Macquarie Harbour.
* * * *
My run through Tasmania was now practically
ended. To be sure, I went to New Norfolk to see
the Salmon Ponds and the Lunatic Asylum, but as
everybody visiting Hobart does the like, as a matter
of duty, and puts his impressions into some form of
expression, my ideas upon the salmon question or


the conduct of the Lunatic Asylum at New Norfolk
would have no attraction for my readers. The best
part of the visit to New Norfolk is the trip up the
river in the steamer. The township is dull, but
picturesquely situated.
What I especially wanted to see I did see, and as
far as I know, saw thoroughly. I had read of the
convict system in Tasmania, and wished to realise as
far as one may, by personal visit to the localities in
which that system, in its most graphic intensity, was
exhibited, the whole tragic story of the past. So far,
then, Tasman’s Peninsula formed the most interesting
searching ground for me. But lam free to confess
that for others who are not moved by any curiosity
as to the grim past of Tasmania, the country pos-
sesses other attractions of a high order. If only the
ladies and gentlemen who cater for the necessities
and comfort of visitors could be aroused to some
impulse of conscience, and their “ bills of costs ”
were brought within moderate proportions, I am
confident that each year, many like myself, of slender
purse and frugal minds, would yet willingly spend
their holidays in the pleasant island. Scenery, and
pure air, and quaint traditions are all very well if
reasonably priced ; but when one has to pay for them
as one pays for first-class champagne or a diamond of
the first water, there is nothing in it. My grievance
is that of many I have met—that the tourist is made
the prey of the people who take him in and do for
him. And while that state of things rules, the
incursion of tourists will be limited to those who
can afford to be fleeced—a class, I fancy,
become lessened in number.
’Tis a brave little island, and should be the
sanitarium to which invalids and the weakly would
willingly repair ; and in this view, it will be well
when some speculative persons this side of the
straits establish themselves in Tasmania for the
purpose of accommodating the wayfarer. Such
enterprises, I am sure, would pay well, for, so far
as I can see, the one thing that keeps the ordinary
tourist out of the island is the horde of grasping
hotel and lodging-house keepers.


However, speaking from a personal point of view,
I am well content that I ventured into this land of
leeches; for verily though they fixed on me “as a
visitor,” and tried their best to suck me dry, I had
some fun out of them: just as we may find amusement
in the efforts of a pickpocket to get at our purse
which is empty.
Finally, a word to the wise. If you would see the
best of Tasmania, leave the beaten tracks, and don’t
depend upon guide books, and you will find, I
daresay, as I did, that there is more to be seen in
the little island than the directory compilers have
dreamed of in their philosophy.


ADDENDA.
JBk]l|AN DIEMAN’S LAND, so named by Abel
y|ra/fl Jansen Tasman, its discoverer, after the
vPIt Dutch Governor-General in the East
Indies, was not settled by Europeans
until 1803. The French were then busy in this
part of the world, and Governor King, of the penal
settlement of Botany Bay, was apprehensive that
they might seize upon an island inconveniently near
to the new colony. So he sent Lieut. Bowen along,
wdth a small party of marines and convicts, to take
possession. In the meantime Collins, formerly judge
advocate at Botany Bay, had been sent out by the
British Government to form a penal settlement at
Port Phillip. He landed where Sorrento is now
situated, and remained there for about ten months.
But considering the place unfit for settlement, and
probably moved by some personal designs also,
Collins removed his party to Van Dieman’s Land,
and settled it upon the shores of a bay called
Sullivan’s Cove. Bowen, who had established a post
higher up the river, was recalled.
For many years, the little colony had to «fcattle
with adversity. It was chiefly dependent upon
Sydney for supplies, where, at that time, the public
larder was very often bare also. Kangaroo meat
was sold at eightpence per pound. Flour was £ll2
per ton. In 1807 the value rose to £2OO per ton.
The price was regulated by garrison order. Armed
sentries were placed over the wheat fields. To steal
wheat or flour was punishable with death. In 1808
all the wheat and maize was exhausted: the salt
beef and pork were all consumed. Kangaroo meat
and fish were the chief means of subsistence; with
one and a half pounds of rice a# a weekly allowance


per head. A vessel arrived from Bengal with sugar.
It was bought by the government and issued to the
public. But there was plenty of rum in the place, and
that helped the good people to face the trouble.
However, this passed over. The advent of a few
emigrants from England with capital give a fillip
to enterprise. Population began to spread. Land
came into cultivation. Stock increased. In 1810
the population had risen to 1500. There were as
many acres under wheat. At the northern end of
the island matters were also flourishing. The town
of Launceston had been founded. Settlers were
spreading in all directions. And presently the
community which had been more than once on the
eve of starvation began to export wheat and wool,
and hold up its head as an industrial fact.
When we consider that up to 1820, and even later,
the government of the colony was virtually a military
autocracy, and that law and justice meant but the
whim or will of those in power, it is marvellous
that the settlement held together at all. It surely
proved that despite the drawbacks attending the
colonisation of the island, during its early years,
there must have been good stuff in the settlers to
overcome them. As a matter of fact, however, it
was the happy luck of Tasmania, to attract, at a very
early period, a large number of free settlers from the
old country, of good social standing, and possessed of
means. And when matters became somewhat ordered,
and Governor Arthur took command, every encour-
agement was held out to such people, by grants of
land, to settle permanently in the colony. To this
circumstance is owing the fact that throughout the
colony, the visitor from the old country encounters
in the settlers, descendants from old English county
families, who live on estates named after the homes
their fathers left, as younger sons, to carve out a new
life in this part of the world. And then, attracted
by the climate and the facilities for acquiring land,
the colony drew some worthy settlers from India—
half-pay officers for the most part —who contributed
very considerably to raise the tone of society.
And this was needed. The early settlement of the
colony, in so far as its social aspect is concerned, was


not wholesome. The moral tone of army and navy
men of those times was not very high. Few of the
officials were married men. And it is recorded that
when ships bringing female convicts to the place
arrived, it was the usual thing for the officials and
military of the place, yearning for feminine com-
panionship, to select temporary help-mates. The
seventh commandment was not very generally
respected. It is said that the chaplain, a jolly
parson named K nop wood, though he denounced the
sins of the community, was not beyond sharing in
them. “ Don’t do what I do,” he would observe,
“ but do what I say.” And then again the good
people of old Hobart were not temperate folk. Some
of the early tombstones bear upon their surface
engraven eulogies of the good fellows lying under-
neath. But if the truth were told, it would be found
that the virtues thus extolled were of the roaring,
drinking order, such as gave the four bottle man of
those old times a braver reputation than a saint
might earn by pure and holy life.
Governor Arthur did much to purify society. And
when the Rev. Win. Bedford came out, and succeeded
“ Bobby Knopwood,” he made earnest efforts to
cleanse the Augean stable. He had a hard fight for
it. But the Governor backed him up. Concubinage
was officially denounced.
Drunkenness became an offence. Decent behaviour
came into fashion. And with the constitution of the
island as a separate colony from Hew South Wales,
and the appointment of a judicature and an official
system of its own, the social tone was raised, and the
old wild, shameless, wicked practices were discon-
tinued. It was pretty hot, however, while it lasted,
so that one horrified visitor (a clergyman), may be
forgiven for denouncing the settlement as “a den
of thieves, that cove of robbers, that cage of unclean
birds, that isthrhus between earth and hell.” And
yet the dispassionate investigator knows that more
evil is bred in one week of London or Paris than in
the years of such a small settlement as that of early
Hobart Town. But then, in the great cities of the
world vice is hidden. In the old time outposts
hereaway, there was no attempt to conceal that which


was a first element of society. The consolation is
given by the fact that from such an unpromising a
source, the colony has risen to such material pros-
perity, and such character of social and political
excellence.
THE BLACK WAR.
When Lieut. Bowen first established his post at
Risdon, a point some miles beyond Hobart, on the
Derwent, the blacks were disposed to be friendly.
They advanced in some considerable numbers carry-
ing green bushes in their hands, signifying their
peaceful disposition. But Bowen, who was probably
one of the numbskulls with which the army was
then plentifully provided—mere fighting animals—
did not recognise these pacific intentions on the part
of the savages. He ordered his men to fire upon the
advancing party. They did so and several blacks were
killed or wounded. And from this stupid blunder
on the part of Lieut. Bowen, may be traced the
rapid extirpation of the aboriginal inhabitants of the
island. Thenceforth they were suspicious of the
strangers. The word was set abroad among them
that these people had come to destroy. Animated by
a natural hate and sense of wrong, the poor wretches
waged war against the enemy upon every opportu-
nity.
It is probable that at the time of the first settle-
ment of the country by the whites, the aboriginal
population amounted to about one thousand. But in
fulfilment of what would seem to be an inevitable
law, the mere presence of the white men seemed to
act as a pestilence in reducing their numbers
As the country became settled, conflicts between
the miserable natives and the well armed whites
became frequent, and of course the natives came of
w orse. All the poor wretches could do in retaliation
was to spear a solitary shepherd as 'occasion offered;
kill sheep and cattle, and rob outlying huts of provis-
ions. This sort of warfare they conducted with such
pertinacity and effect, that, at last, the Blacks ques-
tion became as serious as the Bushranging problem.
Governor Arthur who was the first to attack both
these drawbacks to the peaceful settlement of the


island, took measures to secure the submission of the
aboriginals. He called upon all, the inhabitants to
join in the enterprise. The plan of campaign was
carefully thought out and settled. A cordon of
whites was to be drawn across the island. The
blacks were to be driven before it, into a corner, so
to speak. The rest was easy.
From all parts of the country the settlers joined in
this adventure. Hobart Town supplied soldiers and
volunteer civilians. The plan so carefully considered
was carried out in its integrity. The thin white line
spread across the island, advanced, driving the black
men before it. 'The point was reached. The net was
drawn in. Result—one old man and a young gin.
Never was there a greater fiasco. Over five thousand
men had taken the field against a handful of savages.
The cost of the farce exceeded c£3o,o<fo.
At this point, a man named Robinson, a free
settler, volunteered to induce the blacks to come in
and surrender themselves. Robinson was one of those
men who are gifted with a special faculty for dealing
with savages. He had acquired a fair knowledge of
the aboriginals’ language. He was one of the few
settlers who had secured their confidence ; and his
knowledge of what may be termed their mental
attitude towards the whites, had been gathered by
frequent personal intercourse with them. His offer
was accepted. He penetrated into the hiding places
of the poor frightened wretches, and sought to allay
their fears. But the lesson of past treachery were
for a time stronger than his persuasions. They even
doubted him, and conspired to kill him. His life
was saved by a gin, who carried him to a place
of safety. There he lay for a time, and until the
suspicions of the blacks had weakened. Then he
sought them again, and prevailed. And this man, —
unaided, and without firing a shot, —accomplished
that which an army had failed to achieve. He
brought the whole body of blacks, now reduced to a
couple of hundred, into Hobart Town, where they
made their submission. They were sent to a settle-
ment down the river. There many quickly sickened
and died off. The remainder were at last transported
to Flinders Island. But no step could stay their


doom. They died off rapidly. It is thirty years
since the lost of the Tasmanian aboriginals disap-
peared from a direful history. In the straits, some of
their descendants exist in the persons of half-castes
—offspring of a union of aboriginal women with old
time sealers.
BUSHRANGERS.
Very early in the establishment of the colony
attempts were made by runaway convicts, to find that
liberty in the bush which they were debarred from in
the settlement. But the resources of a Tasmanian
bush were not sufficient to provide them with sus-
tenance. Those who did not die from privation, or
who were not killed by the blacks, returned penitent.
It was better to endure the pangs of slavery and be
fed, than the joys of liberty at the price of starvation.
As settlement progressed, however, bush ranging
became more practicable. The farmers had to pay
toll. And as the authorities were supine and made
little effort to capture the runaways, the evil
increased in extent, until it grew to be a serious
curse. At the time of Arthur’s advent there were no
less than fifteen separate gangs of rangers abroad,
whose robberies, often accompanied with bloodshed,
held the whole country in terror. The settlers had
been left to grapple with the evil unassisted. All
that the government did was to offer rewards for the
capture, dead or alive, of the malefactors.
Arthur struck at the evil with characteristic
resolution. He despatched numerous bodies of
troops in pursuit of the evil-doers. He offered free
pardons and rewards of money to those prisoners who
succeeded in the capture of a bushranger- He
assisted the settlers by sending to their aid,
constables, —convicts themselves. But, do his best,
he could not crush out the trouble. During the
whole of his tenure of office, this matter was one of
his chief embarrassments. It was said that in his
eagerness to suppress the evil, he descended to open
up communication by letter with one noted free-
booter, named Brady. As for the soldiery, they
were of little use in the bush. At one place called
Sorell, Brady and his gang surprised a whole party


of the redcoats, and made them prisoners. It was
reserved for the settlers themselves to capture these
fellows. Many a desperate tight took place between
them, and many were the killed and wounded. But
in the end, if a bushranger did not fall by a bullet
from a farmer’s musket, he was pretty safe to hang
from the gallows of Launceston or Hobart Town.
Michael Howe, an old man-o’-warsraan, was the
first notorious bushranger in Van Dieman’s Land.
In a certain" coarse way there was a romance in his
career. W hen he made for the bush he carried with
him his sweetheart. She remained with him for
some two years. Then they tired of each other, and
she returned to civilisation. It is probable that the
authorities learned much from her of the freebooter’s
haunts and habits. At any rate he was hard pressed
by the military. He had now a companion with
him—a black girl. During one of his hurried flights,
this faithful creature—who was enceinte could not
keep up with the rascal’s rapid pace. Irritated,
and fearful that the girl’s tracks would betray the
course he had taken, Howe levelled his pistol at the
girl and shot her. But the wound though severe,
did not kill her. She recovered, and now tilled with
hate for the man who had so cruelly treated her, she
became the guide by whom Howe’s pursuers were
enabled to keep at his heels. At last he was sighted
•—a strange figure, clad in skins, aud wearing a false
black beard. To the challenge of the sergeant he
cried : “ Black beard against grey whiskers for it,”
tmd fired. He missed. The soldier’s aim was truer.
Howe fell to the ground. He drew T a knife to defend
himself. Another soldier run up and battered out
the wretched man’s brains, with the butt of his
musket.
Another notorious gang of bushrangers was
composed of three men named relatively, Cash,
Kavanagh and Jones. One of the feats, by which
this trio became notorious, was the slow roasting
# 7 O
of an old woman, in order to extort from her the
hiding place of her money. Kavanagh was the
chief actor in this playful business. Cash interfered
and saved the old woman when only half cooked.
Jones and Kavanagh were hanged. Cash served a


sentence at Port Arthur, was released on probation,
and securing a small section of land near Hobart
Town, earned his living by wood carting. He had
grown too old for more “active occupation.” Besides
we all become tamer as the years close around us,
and rheumatism seizes upon our joints. The poor
houses of Tasmania used to be full of played out,
and therefore repentant villainy.
Notwithstanding the evil reputation of Tasmania
in the past for bushranging, it is doubtful whether
any of her desperadoes were as blood-thirsty—wan-
tonly £o—as modern bushrangers of New South
Wales and Victoria. No greater villains than
Morgan ever troubled the peace of Tasmanian society.
The Clarkes of New South Wales were matchless for
cold-blooded cowardly murder. And the Kelly gang
in Victoria were surely bloody scoundrels. Few of
the convict bushrangers of old days, surpassed these
modern knights of the road in brutality. As a
general thing, when they stuck up a gentleman’s
house, and were not resisted, they were very civil and
well behaved. And it is a curious fact that in the
whole history of Van Demonian bushranging there is
no instance recorded of any outrage committed upon
women.
Theirs was a poor life anyway. Hemmed in a
small and well-settled island, there was little chance
of escaping ultimate capture. They had no rest, but
were for ever on the march. If they lighted a fire
they trembled lest it signalled their halting place.
What a life ! And yet it afforded, for a brief time, ac
shadow at least, of that freedom which all living
creatures, articulate or dumb, value as life itself.
Printed for the Author by Ford & Son, Drummond St., Carlton, Melb.




l^ftCJO
flSSo'l*'
- DEC 1992
*




