

My
Travels
Around
the
World.
LETTERS
to my Wife
BY
A. POYNTON.


My
Travels
Around
the
World.


INTRODUCTION.
I make no apology for placing these letters before you.
Many of my friends who have seen them, expressed a wish
that I should publish them in pamphlet form, Ido not claim
that they show any literary ability, they being only the im-
pressions of an Australian native who has seen much of Aus-
tralia, but up tip tfwp-time of taking this trip for the benefit
of his health, had not been outside of this Continent. The
letters have the merit of being the impressions of a “Gum-
sucker” abroad, eager to glean information of conditions
which obtain in other parts of the English speaking world.
I regret that many of my letters have been inadvertently over-
looked, and are not included in this short account of my
travels. At the time of my visit to the mother lapJfcjL was
fortunate in being there during the important the
Coronation of King George the Fifth and Queen Mary, and
through the instrumentality of the Committee of Members of
the Lords and Commons I was enabled to meet a much larger
circle of people of the old world than otherwise ■ would have
been the case. I was also afforded an opportunity of meeting
the representatives of the several Dominion Parliaments, viz.,
Canada, South Africa, New Zealand, and Newfoundland,
which included men of such renown as Sir Wilfred Laurier,
General Botha, and the present Prime Minister of Canada.
Amongst the statesmen of the United Kingdom that I had
the pleasure of conversing with there were Mr. Asquith, the
present Prime Minister, Hon. A. J. Balfour, the then Leader
of the Opposition, Lloyd George, Sir Rufus Isaacs, Ramsay
MacDonald, the Leader of the Labor Party, and many other
notable statesmen. The hospitality shown to the Australians
and other Dominion representatives by all sections of the
people of the United Kingdom will ever remain green in my
memory; In the limited time I had at my disposal I have
endeavored to give a true picture of things as I saw them.
I trust that the reading of the letters will not only prove
interesting, but instructive, and if the result be with you, as
it is with me, you will have a much greater admiration for
Australia our inheritance, for which we owe so much to the
Imperial authorities.
Yours Sincerely,
A. POYNTON.


My Travels
Around the World.
ON THE TRAIN.
Vancouver, April 7, 1912.
lam writing this letter while the train is travelling. I
left Vancouver last evening on the 3-45' train, and have had
my first night on the Great Canadian Pacific Train. I shall
be on this train for three nights and days/ ,and will arrive at
Winnipeg on Monday next. I have a lower berth, and the
cars are very comfortable, being kept warm by steam pipes
passing through the train. We are now passing through
what is known as the Rockies, getting into them about IO
o’clock last night. lam informed that we will be in them all
day. For about 200 miles after leaving Vancouver we were
on the banks of the Fraser River, which is noted for its salmon
fishing. When the season opens, which will be in about two
months, there will be thousands of men engaged in the salmon
fishing industry. On the banks of the river as we passed
along could be seen many large canning buildings where the
business of preserving the salmon in tins is carried on. This
is one of the most important industries in British Columbia.
The next is, I think, lumber, or the timber trade. There is
great abundance of good timber, the chief of which is pine;
yet notwithstanding this abundance of good timber, the chief
living abode of people in the country is a miserable shanty.
Just had a cup of tea and bread and butter at a station,
Revelstoke, and paid 25 cents for it. Last night had dinner
on the dining car and paid 90 cents for one course with a cup
of tea. On each side of the train as we pass along there are
high mountains 1 reaching as high as ro,ooo to 12,000 ft., and
all are capped with snow and look very grand indeed. In be-
tween these are great valleys and rivers and in some cases
many hundreds, of feet below the train, and at some places
the railway runs' on the extreme edge of these. There are
also good rivers and fine streams of water passing through all
these valleys. The hills and valleys are covered with pine
timber, named here spruce and fir. Some of these are sev-
eral hundred feet high and as straight as a ruler. As we
pass along we see evidences of what at one time must have
been terrible bush fires which have burned all the trees for


miles. Although the hills and mountains are covered, with
snow and many of the lakes and still waters are frozen* it is
not nearly as cold as I expected, but I expect to feel it colder
at some places that I have to call in where the temperature
falls many degrees, below zero. There are hve dining cars on
this train, and the train is about a third of a mile long. The
country we are passing through is very rough and stoney and
will not, in my opinion, be of much value except for timber.
On the hills it is too stoney for anything, and in parts of the
valleys where there is soil it would cost from £2O to £3O per
acre to clear it. The Canadian Railway Company have to
keep large gangs of men on these lines for the purpose of
clearing away the land and snowslips. Some of these make
it impossible for the train to go on for many hours, and in
some cases the train is in danger from these landslips. I
am securing a set of post cards which, will give you a good
idea of the beauty of the Rockies, although they do not show
the snow-capped heights as I see them from the train. Lan-
guage fails one to do justice to the scene. Where lam pass-
ing now there is a mountain on either side of the train which
must be 12,000 feet high, and from its base to its summit is
clad with snow, and the hr trees peeping out above the snow
and near the railway line within a few feet of us. The snow
is 10 or 12 feet deep,; and the train is winding in aoout the
valley like some great monster serpent. In the valley now
on the left of us there are immense pines, and the trees are a
great height. We have just now passed over a very deep
but narrow rocky ravine, and it appears to be several hundred
feet deep. The name of this is Albert Canyon, and the con-
ductor tells me it is 500 feet deep. Great piles of snow
frozen hard are on both sides of us, and the snow on the
heights under the glare of a bright sun stands out in its un-
describable grandeur. Now on our right there is a fine
stream in which there are pyramids of blocks of ice, and while
the bed is many feet below the train passes along on its very
edge. One must not stop to think what would happen to the
passengers if the train got off the line.
A beautiful scene can be seen from the window now, the
great mountains are near us —the one is covered with snow,
while the other does not appear to have any snow upon it,
and is covered with a dense forest of pine, so dense that you
cannot see any distance into it; and at their base the Col-
umbia River is situated, and we can hear the rushing of the
waters while waiting a few minutes on a siding for a passing
train. As we get nearer we find that the effect is caused
by one mountain having been swept by fire in recent years
and denuded of its timber; hence the snow is easily visible,
while on the other it is concealed by the dense forest. We
are having a most delightful day, bright and clear, with quite


a bright and warm sun, all of which tends to add beauty to
the panoramic view which is on either side of us. From the
entrance and up to the terminus of the Rockies it is 500 miles,
and it frequently happens in these parts that the Railway
Stations after a severe snow storm have to be dug out, and it
is a common sight to see great heaps of snow at the side of
these stations, which have been removed from the lines, and
then it seems like great heaps of white salt, and in many cases
frozen hard. On the sidings where we are delayed there are
several houses half concealed by snow, and the occupants
have dug trenches through it so that they can get in and out
of their houses. In parts where the snow is frozen and
hangs over a precipice it hangs down like crystals, such as
is often seen in leaves. We have just passed through a
great gorge, and the railway authorities have constructed
great timber platforms right over the train, which are for the
purpose of carrying over the line the great snow slides which
frequently take place in these parts, and from the bottom
of these platforms hang great clusters of crystals of ice which
make a most brilliant display.
The construction of this line was without doubt a most
gigantic undertaking, and must have taken many years and
cost a considerable sum of money, but they are being well
repaid for their enterprise, and it is said that it is now one
of the most wealthy companies in Canada. In a short time
there will be four of these lines passing through the Rockies
to carry the wheat which is grown on the prairies which we
pass over to-morrow. In plenty of places on the line there
are walls of snow 10 to 20 feet high, which have been cut
through to allow the train to pass, and in many cases great
timber barriers have been erected to keep the snow back.
Where we are passing now the snow on the mountains
has covered up the trees, notwithstanding their great height,
and when it slides down it tears out all the timber and drags
it down to the bottom of the mountain. Although where we
are at present the sun is out quite bright, within a few miles
the snow is falling heavily on the top oT the mountains. At
this place the railway company have erected a large hotel, but
owing to the great prevalence of snow in this part it is closed
for several months each year. While passing through these
mountains the speed of the train is very slow. We are now
passing over what is called the loop, and in going round and
round and climbing a very steep grade she passes over her-
self several times, and makes a complete loop as it is called.
Before we reach the top we will have climbed loop feet, and
only travelled three miles in a direct course. Most of the
trees are covered with snow, but where they are visible they
appear to be from 2 to 4 feet in diameter, and of great height.


The train is now standing on a siding for a few minutes to
give passengers a chance of seeing the glaciers, which are
visible at a distance. When we leave here the train will for
a considerable distance pass under snow, which lies on the top
of a large framework of wood constructed expressly for the
purpose of allowing the snow slides of the mountain to pass
right over the train. In some places the woodwork is visible,
but in others none of the wood tunnel can be seen, and there
are thousands upon thousands of tons of snow sliding right
over the railway.
We are still cimbing the mountain side, and the beauty of
the scene increases as" we rise. We are now passing under
the woodwork, and you can see the water dripping down over
the train from the snow above us. It was at this point that
some 40 odd men were killed in the train by one of these
snowslides. This happened only a year ago, in February
last. On the occasion of the accident an enormous slide
came down and carried away the wood framework which was
erected to protect the trains. We are passing over the spot
where the accident occurred. The company use a rotary
snow' plough for clearing the railway line, which is much
quicker than shovels. These snow slips give very little warn-
ing and once they start to slide it is a most difficult matter
to get out of their way if you are at the foot of the mount.
We have now reached the summit of Selkirk Range, which
is about 5,000 feet above sea level, and for a time we will
be on the decline, and at the rate of 250 feet to the mile.
Sometime this afternoon we will rise again and reach the high-
est point on which the railway passes over the Rockies. The
height is 5,200 feet above sea level. To avoid heavy cutting
and tunnel work this railway winds about in the valleys and
round the foot of the mountains, but at this part they have to
get over the dividing range, hence some climbing has to be
done. It is so comfortable and warm in the train that you
could hardly believe that you are passng through such great
quantities of snow and ice.
Just had lunch, which consisted of four small slices of ox
tongue and a few potatoes, washed down with a cup of wret-
ched tea; price 60 cents. We are passing up a deep valley
with massive walls of rock on either side, towering many thou-
sands of feet above us. Our course is now up the bed of
the King and Horse River, and to take out some of the bends
tunnels of short lengths have been cut through the point of the
ranges. Thousands of small falls of water are racing splash-
ing down the hill or mountain side, and magnificient chande-
liers of cr>fctalised water glisten under the sun’s rays, spark-
ling like diamonds, and making beautiful ornamentation of the
mountain side. Towering above us now is a massive moun-
tain of rock totally destitute of timber of any kind, the only


ornamentation being wreaths of virgin snow, which at a dis-
tance looks like the white sandhills on parts of the west coast,
only a thousand fold higher. These rocky heights present
various views. Some of their outcrops look like castles im-
pregnable against any assault; others look like a number of
houses artificially made and piled up on top of each other;
others like the pyramids of Egypt, and one wonders what force
in nature erected these great piles of rocks. Yet with all its
.grandeur, it has a barren, cold look, and the thought runs
through one’s mind of how dreadful it would be if caught in
one of these snowstorms in this barren looking waste. We
are again climbing the mountain, and the valley and the
rivers are many hundred feet below us, and the train dan-
gerously near great precipices. Snow is all round us and
great peaks of it virtually look as though they would reach
up to the heavens. As we proceed the timber is disappearing,
and when any is visible it is of a stunted kind. Most of the
highest points of the mountains have no timber or vegetation
of any kind. The train is travelling now at the rate of 20
miles an hour. We are now at a place called Field. On the
one side is Mount Steven, on the other is Mount Donald. The
time is advanced by one hour here, and in the next 12 miles
we climb up 4000 feet. Up to the present we have had two
engines attached to the train, but from this point we have
three engines, and the weight of each is from 160 tons to
200 tons. Field is a small place, there being only a few acres
of land upon which it f is possible to build, the rest being so
steep that it is almost impossible to climb* l The C.P.R.—that
is, the Canadian Pacific Railway Company—have a fine hotel
here similar to many of their hotels on their railways. Every-
thing in this country is dominated by this company who have
had large concessions of good land from the Dominion Gov-
ernment towards the cost of the construction of the line, and
in addition to the large land grants the Government has given
large sums of money to assist them. There is no doubt but
that this company practically controls Canada, and already
the producers are feeling the effect of this huge monopoly.
Within the last two or three years, notwithstanding the great
increase in passenger traffic and general freight, the charges
have increased by over two million dollars. Between the
Canadian Pacific Railway and the land boomers the people
will have a bad time in front of them. As we pass from Field
and climb the great heights of the dividing range of the
Hockies the scenery is wonderfully grand and baffles all des-
cription.
The night is closing in and the mountains with their huge
-white sheets of snow stand out as great ghosts in the closing
in of the daylight. There is a fairly good moon and these
great white monsters are none the less fascinating. The


train is travelling very slowly, and the three powerful engines
are puffing and groaning under great weight.. The great
charm of these mountain heights is so fascinating that one
could keep on writing for ever, like the brook in. its progress,
hut I feel that I must draw this to a close or the cost of pos-
tage will ruin me. Yet I must give you a few more particu-
lars of this climb. The actual distance from Field to the top
of the range is eight miles, but the train to climb it travels
1 16 miles, and in doing so passes through two tunnels, one
mile and one and a half miles long. The tunnels are the
greatest triumphs of engineering, and in both tunnels the
figure 8 isf formed and the train passes over its own track,
which is many feet below. The tunnel was, when being con-
structed operated from both sides of Mount Cathedral, and
when the parties met each other they were only a few inches
out. The work took 20 months to complete, and there were
a thousand men at work. The cost of the work was 1,500,000
dollars. Seventy-five carloads of dynamite were used, or up-
wards of 1,500,000 lb., and the cost alone of the explosives
came to over 250,000 dollars.
We have now (next day) reached a place called Medicine
Hut—a fairly large town, anti the population is about 9000.
Since 10 o’clock last night we have been on the prairies, which
are open plains extending for hundreds of miles. It is situ-
ated in the valley of South Saskatchewan, and is a good
wheat country, but has rather low rainfall. Some of the
largest cattle ranches are on the prairies. Coal is found here
in good supply, and there is a natural gas from which all heat
and light is derived. It is found at a depth of 1200 to 1800 ft.
The natural gas is sold to the manufacturers at 5 cents per
1000 cubic feet, and 13J cents for domestic use. This strip
of the prairie is looked upon as their dry belt, and in the near
future will be supplied by irrigation schemes. Water can be
obtained at from 20 to 30 ft. There is a little snow on the
ground, and as we pass along, various herds of cattle and
horses can be seen, and they look to be in fair store condi-
tion. There is no stone for building or roads, and conse-
quently the houses are of wood. The houses of the average
settler are small and insignificant, and are called shacks. We
would call them humpies. These prairies extend for about
800 miles east and west, and are destitute of any kind of
timber; consequently there are very few fences—only stakes,
or what we call pegs, to denote the respective boundaries.
Loose stock of these settlers are turned out and roam at large
over all the holdings at their sweet will. At present there
are some paddocks in fallow, but when the crops are up, I
expect loose stock must either be herded and under control,
or housed. Quite a number of squabbles take place over the
respective number of stock to be allowed to roam at large.
For continuation of this letter see page IX. at end of book


MY TRAVELS
AROUND
THE WORLD.
LETTERS
TO 7UW iztflPE.
BY
A. POYNTON.
JLbelatii.e :
Till? Co-Opekativk Printing ah d Publishing Company
of South Australia, Limited,
19 12.


My Travels
Around the World.
WINNIPEG, April 14, 1911.
CONDITION OF THE CITY.
Wages of men engaged on outdoor work are on the whole
low. Although the main streets in this city are in good order
some of the side streets and lanes are in a dreadful condition,
covered with water and mud. The Albanian immigrants are
a fairly sturdy looking lot of people, out look to be very
poor, and the noticeable feature of the women’s head-dress
is a shawl or handkerchief, no hats being worn by them.
They are neatly dressed and the men wear a considerable
lot of furs and animal skins. Buffalo skins are at a great
premium in this country, and a well-tanned skin will bring
from 300 to 500 dollars.
MARKET FOR AUSTRALIAN GOODS.
There should be a good market in Canada for our Nor-
thern Territory buffalo skins. No fruit of any kind is grown
on the prairies, and there is an excellent market for Australian
fruits, especially at the time our fruit season is in, as the
Californian fruit is then scarce. There is also a good market
for Australan butter, bacon, beef, mutton, lamb, potatoes,
onions. New Zealand is already doing a fair business in
these lines, but the great growth in settlement of the prairies
and the undoubted growth of population and increase or
cereal growers here will in my opinion, be for all time a great
market for many of our products. There are very few sheep or
cattle in the country, and horses of good stamp are bringing
great prices. Good draught horses are bringing as much as
600 to 800 dollars each, and only yesterday I heard on good
authority that a farmer paid 2,000 dollars for a couple of good
brood mares. The mares were exceptionally good, but so was
the price. All beef is hand or stall fed, and consequently
is expensive to fatten.


AN HISTORIC PLACE.
This place is histoiic because of the fights in the old
days with the Indians. Fort Garry is right in the middle ot
the city. This fort was first constructed in the year 1806,
and was named Gibraltar, and in 1816 was destroyed. In
1822 it was rebuilt by the Hudson Bay Company, the same
company which had originally erected it. The first fort was
called Fort Garry. In 1835 it was enlarged and built of
stone and it measured 280 ft. from east to west and 240 ft.
north to south. The walls were 4 ft. 6 in. through, and there
were small holes left in the walls some feet from the ground
to fire their guns through. In 1880 the fort was further ex-
tended, and a large gateway erected. In 1882 the fort was
sold with the exception of the gateway and most of the mat-
erial was taken away.
In 1897 the Hudson Bay Company presented the reserve
and the remains of the fort to the city of Winnipeg, and it is
■now fenced in and nice grass lawns are around the old gate-
way which is the only evidence of the. many battles between
the early whites and the Indians. On several occasions the
Indians got possession of it and held within its walls many
white prisoners, some of whom were killed. If these old
walls could speak what exciting tales they could tell. In 1869
a half-breed Indian named Real, with a band of Indians,
attacked the fort and succeeded in driving out the,whites
and taking possession of the forts, and the whites took shel-
ter and protection in a substantially built nouse owned by a
gentleman named Schultz. When driven out by Real and his
Indians 60 Canadians including three white women and some
children, barracaded themselves in Schultz’s house, but after
holding out valiantly against the attack of Real and his sav-
age band they had to surrender, and were all taken prisoners
and imprisoned in the fort, which had just been taken from
themselves. After some time they were liberated, with the
exception of a man named Thomas Scott, who was shot by
the Indians under the instruction of Real. Subsequently
Real was hung. The Schultz’s house referred to above was
burnt to the ground on the night after my visit to the fort.
The fire is a mystery, and another historic landmark is gone.
WONDERFUL DEVELOPMENT.
The growth of these towns and cities on the prairies
during the last few years has been wonderful. The popula-
tion of Winnipeg in 1902 was 48,000; to-day it is 150,000.
In other prairie towns the growth has been more surprising.
Winnipeg, unlike Vancouver, is pushing on its manufacturing
industries, and has now 236 factories, employing over 14,000
hands, and the value of the output is, for this year, estimated
to be 36,000,000 dollars, or over seven millions of our money.


Winnipeg is without doubt in th.e centre of an immense
wheat district, and every bit of wheat or agricultural product
grown on the prairies, except for home use, must pass
through Winnipeg. There are 24 railway tracks which
junction at this city. The C.P.R., C.N.R., and the Grand
Trunk Pacific Railway Companies have their big shops loca-
ted here, and employ upwards of 4,000 hands. Its electric
tram system operates 200 cars on 66 miles of city tracks >nd
45 miles of suburban lines. Those trams, like every other
large public utility, are in the hands of private companies.
In the three great wheat provinces the following area was
under cultivation last year:—Wheat, 8,453,200 acres; Oats,
4,225,800; Barley, 1,022,000; Flax, 630,000. There are
12,118 miles of railway which junction at this city. There
are no manures used on the prairies, the land being so Teh
that it is not required. Out of the twelve months there are
only about four months good weather when the ground is
not covered with snow. The rainfall does not exceed 15 xn.,
including moisture in snow, and although the temperature
goes down to 30 and 40 degrees below zero it goes up to
several degrees above the hundred in the shade, indeed, some
of the residents told me that it has reached as high as 120 in
the shade. During the period that the crops are growing,
there are from 16 to 19 hours daylight, and the result is hat
the combination of heat and light matures the crops in 90
days.
SNOWSTORMS.
It is not generally known that these prairies are liable
to drought notwithstanding the heavy fall of snow, but it is
so, and the last year there was a partial failure for want of
moisture. From information gleaned the snow in these
parts contains but a small percentage of moisture, and Will
take many feet of snow to produce an inch of rain. During
my stay at Winnipeg there was a fierce snowstorm, which
lasted 24 hours. The wind was so strong that several people
were carried off their feet, causing many accidents, such as
broken legs and arms, and in one case fracture of the skull.
Owing to the great deposit of the snow and the fierce winds
it was impossible for womenfolk to get past some of the
street corners, and it waS a humorus sight to see the police-
men carrying the ladies across the street and around difficult
corners. For a time it was thought that the train traffic
would have to be suspended, but with the assistance of a
large staff of men and steam snow ploughs they kept Tie
trains running. The day after the snowfall it was most
difficult to get about the city, as in many places the snow, was
frozen hard, and it was difficult to keep on one’s feet, and
many came to grief, some getting nasty falls. Having pro


cured a pair of goloshes or rubber shoes, I managed to keep
on my feet, but with much difficulty in some
a great sight to see the trams, motor cars, and other vehicles
together with foot traffic ploughing their way through the
snow. All the places between the spokes in the wheels were
filled with snow. Owing to the storm the various prog-
rammes of sports which were advertised for Good Friday had
to be postponed. Theatres and all kinds of sports are held
on Good Friday here, and the day is proclaimed a public
holiday. There are a number of public holidays, and the
law provides that no interest can be charged on loans on
those days. On Friday 2,500 immigrants arrived by train,
most of these are from the United Kingdom, and they were a
fine body body of men and women, all in their youth or prime
of life, and the picture of health.
Winnipeg is a great immigration centre, and the immi-
grants are sent to all parts from this centre. Real estate is
a great industry here, and everbody talks dollars in five, six
or seven figures, and one is at a disadvantage when speaking
of values of products or real estate in Australia, because our
pound represents five times as much as their dollars, and the
mass of people here have dealt or traded in dollars all their
lives and do not grasp the significance of pounds, and are apt
to confound dollars with pounds.
TRAIN TRAVELLING.
These notes I am trying to write in the train, having left
Winnipeg last night for Toronto, where I expect to arrive on
Sunday, being two nights and days in the train. All this day
we are passing through some miserable country, all covered
with rocks, and having neither soil or timber of any value on
this route for a considerable distance. For 50 miles on this
track the three giant railway companies’ lines are laid down,
side by side, and are within a few yards of each other. We
have now arrived at a place called Fort William. This place
has a population of 16,000 people. This is the great ship-
ping place for the bulk of the wheat grown on the prairies.
Between here and the Atlantic is some i,Boo miles, and by
lake, canal or river it is navigable the whole distance by large
boats, which only require a light draught of water. At pre-
sent there are a large number of ships in the harbour, but as
the water is all frozen they are all tied up until the ice thaws.
All the land here is wretchedly poor, covered all over with
rocks and not fit for the production of anything, and the
whole of the inhabitants depend on the shipping trade. The
fort itself was established by the Hudson Bay Company ag-
ainst attacks of Indians. The timber is poor, being bastard
fir and poplar, and of no commercial value. For a great


number of miles we are within sight of Lake Superior, which
is very large, and to-day as we pass along its shore, we notice
that it is one solid lump of ice; but in a month or six weeks’
time, when the ice has thawed, it will present a busy scene
•of shipping. Fort Arthur is another large centre for shipp-
ing, and has a population of 20,000, and as these important
towns are within a few miles of each other there is a great
rivalry and not overmuch good feeling. The motto, “The
injury of one is the concern of all” is not at all appreciated
in these towns.
THE LAKES.
Near the town of Nipigon we cross over a very fine river
called the Nipigon River, and this River has its source at Lake
Nipigon, which covers an area of 100 square miles of country,
being inland from Lake Superior about 80 miles. The river
falls very rapidly, and offers great possibilities for electric
power. There are large bodies of iron ore on the banks of
Lake Superior, and I am informed there are nickel and copper
mines in this district. The lake, as we pass on, looks like a
great salt lake covered over with salt, the ice and snow giving
it that appearance. But it is not salt; it is good fresh water.
At some of the towns on the railway we see some Indians
and their squaws and their children. They are an unattrac-
tive lot. Where we are passing the lake now, the ice is all
broken up in large blocks, and it will soon all disappear as
there is a fair amount of heat in the sun, and to-day it is
unpleasantly warm in the train.
A COLD COUNTRY.
We are now staying for a few minutes at a place where
the temperature goes at parts of the year 55 below zero, °nd
at times the snow on it, I should say, is piled up on each side
of the line as high as the cars of the train. This is owing to
the constant shovelling of snow off the line during the winter.
Women and children wear top boots reaching to their knees,
which are made of rubber. The whole of the day’s travel
has been through poor, rocky country, with very little tim-
ber on it, and it is impossible of improving Sunday morning.
Passed through some better country, there being a distinct
improvement in the timber, and at Panry Sound on Lake Hu-
ron, there are some large lumber mills. There is a great
chain of these lakes, which extends for 600 miles to the Atlan-
tic Ocean, but are all frozen up at present. When the ice
thaws, the great stacks of timber will be taken away in boats
and barges.
In the- sleeping car men and women are mixed up in
the car. For instance, in the sleeper that I am travelling in
there is nothing but a drapery screen between passengers


of opposite sexes. In my case I have a beautiful young
woman sleeping next to me and nothing between us but a
curtain. Their only chance of dressing or undressing is in
their berths. In this car there are several similar cases.
This would seem strange in our country but passengers here
do not seem to take any notice of it. There is a decided
improvement in the country this morning, and on both sides
of the line there are small farms and fairly good houses and
outbuildings. The land is a rich black soil, but they have not
started to put in this year’s crops. Most of the farms have
substantial barns, and I presume their winter feed is in these
barns, as there are no haystacks visible. On the train is an
interesting old gentleman, 70 years old, and who is Ek native
of this country, and I am told is a multi-millionaire. I’m
having a chat with him. He informed me he started as a boy
at 10 dollars a month, and is now the owner of several large
wholesale dry goods businesses. He is a most remarkable
man of Irish descent, has a fine physique, and has a head
of hair much longer than King O’Malley’s, white as the driven
snow. He is a resident of Toronto, and I may see more of
him, as I shall stay in that city a few days. We expect to
reach Toronto at 3.30 this afternoon. The most singular
thing about this country is that, notwithstanding the intense
cold of the winter, the summer in many places is exceedingly
hot, and the shade heat is many degrees over 100.
On the whole of the journey from Winnipeg to Toronto,
I have not seen a decent fence, although for the
last 200 miles of the journey there is abundance of
good fencing timber. The fences are the most ob-
solete thaf one could imagine, and are constructed
on the dogleg principle. In some of the fences there are up
to nine split rails in a panel and they are piled up in a zigzag
fashion, so that the flat end of one rail rests on the flat end
of a rail in the next panel and thus they are built up from i he
ground and present most ridiculous appearances. The other
style of fence is to put stakes in the ground about six to
eight inches apart at intervals the length of the rails and
then pile up the rails between them until a height of four feet
from the ground is reached, and by this process they use
about three times the number of rails that are wanted io
make a good fence, and when done it is a most ungainly
one. I have not seen a post and rail, as we know them, or
a wire or wire-netted fence, except on the railway, which
has decent fences. There are two periods of the year when
wheat is sown. One is the fall or autumn, and the other is
in the spring, but only one crop is reaped. The fall crop is
one that is put in before the snow or winter season, and the
seed lies in the ground and germinates, but does not grow


until the snow melts. The other is put in after the snow
melts. The fall crop matures the earliest, but all districts
will not permit of the fall sowing being successful.
IN TORONTO.
Arrived at Toronto, the capital of Ontario, on Easter
Sunday. The population of this city is about 350,000, and
the city is situated on the bank of Lake Ontario. With the
exception of the streets being somewhat narrow, the city is
well laid out, and the buildings are of a substantial character,
some being 13 storeys high, stone and brick being the chief
material in the buildings; but in the more up-to-date business
houses all steel girders are used. Churches of many denomi-
nations are conspicuous by their exceptionally high spires.
Most of the houses of the well-to-do are two storeys, and,
unlike other cities, there are no garden fences in front of
them. Neat and well-kept lawns border the footpaths, but
altogether unadorned with street fences.
Eaton & Co.’s general stores are the largest in this city,
and the floor space occupies 25 acres of ground. There are
from 8,000 to 10,000 hands employed, and from a needle to
an anchor is supplied. In addition to lifts for raising people
to the various floors, there is also an endless chain about 2 ft.
wide, on which the customers stand, and are carried up or
down. All goods are marked in dollars or cents and ?re
certainly cheap. This shop closes five days a week at 5
o’clock and on Saturday at 1 o’clock. This is the first town
I have visited which gives change as low as a cent. There is
also a large business house here which sells no article costing
more than 15 cents. Tram fares are 5 cents for any distance
100 yards or ten miles. The trams, like the railways, are
owned and controlled by private companies. There are three
railway companies which have their chief centre in this city,
but two gentlemen named McKenzie and Mann have the lion’s
share of the railway roads. Mr. Mann is reported to be a
multi-millionare, and some say he is worth 100,000,000 dol-
lars, although it is only a comparatively few years since he
was a working ganger on some of the roads. Although this
is Easter Monday, I notice that many of the shops are open
including the largest. The average Canadian is so fond of
chewing tobacco and expectorating on the footpaths and
other public places that a law was enacted making expecto-
rating on the footpaths a serious offence, and is punishable
by a fine of 50 dollars, and from my observations I should
say that the law has had the desired effect. In all hotels,
restaurants, and public places, great brass spittoons are
much in evidence, and the Canadian being an expert in ex-
pcforating manages to reach the spittoon at long distances.


Hotels in this country are so built that there is a roomy lounge
where lodgers and customers generally can rest on easy
chairs so arranged that all that is going on in the main street
can be seen through large windows. These lounges are
mostly some distance from the public bars, which are -o
made as to admit of a large number of people being served.
Drinking, so far as my observation goes, is indulged in '‘o a
great extent, and it is very noticeable in Winnipeg. I have
seen from ipo to 150 men in a bar drinking. This I have
noticed in several bars. Waitresses are quite expert in car-
rying a tray in one hand elevated above their heads. These
trays are from 2 ft. 6 in. to 3 ft. longj, and about 20 to 24 in.
broad. They are loaded with delf and food, and it is really
wonderful how the waitresses wend their way through a large
crowded dining room with these great weights balanced on
one hand and walking at a smart pace, and I understand that
they very seldom have an accident. Their wages are from
17 to 22 dollars per month, but in the latter case it does not
include lodging, and it costs the girl 10 dollars a month for
lodging.
INDUSTRIES AND MACHINERY.
Massey-Harris agricultural works are in this city, and
the buildings alone cover 27 acres of ground. There are
about 4,000 hands employed inside, and an equally large
number outside. This firm has its own timber forests, and
keeps on hand a supply of matured and well seasoned timber
of 15,000,000 ft. The plant is the most up-to-date I have
seen. At Hamilton, which is only 30 miles from here, there
is a branch of the McCormick or International Harvester
Works, and there are employed in these works over 8,000
men. The public buildings in Toronto are very fine and are
situated in Coleridge Park, and there is in course of erection
a public hospital which will cost two and a half million dollars.
Parliament House of the province of Ontario is an imposing
structure, but at present part of it, which was partly des-
troyed by fire some short time ago, is undergoing repairs.
There are 104 members in this Parliament, but there is no
Second Chamber, and Property, with a large P, appears to
be quite safe. The voting qualification is manhood, the op-
posite sex not being granted the franchise. There are a
large number of Russian Jews in this city, and one part is
entirely owned and occupied by these people. I passed
through this part of the city yesterday, and judging from the
dirt and rubbish piled up in the streets where the Jews reside,
I should think that their standard of cleanliness is not a very
high one.


THE LABOR CAUSE.
The Trades and Labor Council is owned by the various
trade organisations, and the president drove me all over the
city, and extended me a hearty welcome. I have addressed
meetings in this place, and have been interviewed by two of
the leading daily papers. If Andrew Fisher or any of the
Federal Ministers visit Toronto on their return from London,
they will have a great reception from the members of the
Labor organisations. To-day I had lunch with the editor of
the “News,” who is well posted in Australian and New Zea-
land’s political asjpirations, and holds very strong opinions
that we are progressing on right lines, and indeed there are
many public spirited men I have met who think we Austra-
lians are doing right in keeping in check, or, better still,
preventing trusts and combines getting such powers as have
been given to them here. These all powerful companies,,
controlling as they do all public utilities, do almost as they
like now, but the grip and power over the people will in my
opinion increase with age, and will almost, if not quite, re-
quire a civil war to get back the people’s rights. I addressed
a meeting last night at the Temple of Labor, and there was
present one of the leading labor organisers of the United
States. His name is Mahon, and he is a good speaker. Trade
unionism is very weak in this city, and at the outside there
is not one-fourth of the workers in the organisations. One of
the causes of this is the great inrush of immigrants and 4 ‘he
difficulty to get them to assimilate with local conditions, and
another reason is their methods of organising, which rather
repels than attracts. Some of the organisers I have met
greatly lack tact in handling the non-union element.
OTHER DETAILS.
To-morrow I intend proceeding to the Niagara falls, but
will return to this city before going on to Ottawa, the seat
of the Federal or Dominion Government. Ottawa is only
about nine hours’ train from here, and is in the Province of
Ontario. The sewerage of this great city is connected with
Lake Ontario, and from the same lake the water supply is
all obtained; the thought of it is likely to givfe one a bad
taste and almost tempts one to add a little antidote to the
water before drinking it. There is a movement now on foot
to erect some septic tanks to deal withl the sewerage. Not-
withstanding the great influx of immigrants into Canada, this
province has great difficulty in retaining their population, as
many are proceeding to the new territories which are being
opened up, and the population is not greater here than it was
many years ago. In ordil to hold their own, this province
has made special arrangments for obtaining immigrants.


The general immigration policy is conducted by the Dominion
Government and the several railway companies. Toronto was
founded as a French trading port in 1749, and was incor-
porated as a city in 1834, and then had a population of 9,254.
To-day it has 254 churches, no hotels, 7 theatres, and 9
hospitals. There are 150 passenger trams run in and out of
Toronto each day. There are 33 banks, 76 insurance com-
panies and 298 miles of sewers. There are 978 manufactur-
ing establishments, employing 75,000 hands and paying
4,000,000 dollars in wages annually. In 1910 the city had
407 miles of streets, 145 being paved. There are 40 parks
and gardens, covering an area of 1640 acres. Toronto’s
street railway revenue for 1910 was 4,192,015 dollars, there
are 74 public schools, 890 teachers, with 46,956 pupils. Of
other schools there are 19, with no teachers and 6,474 P u ~
pils. One technical school with 51 teachers, and 7 high
schools with 78 teachers. The City Hall cost 2,344,902
dollars and the educational institutions 4,013,383 dollars.
I have at last seen the world-famed Niagara Falls, and
certainly they surpass my wildest-expectations. Not because
of their height, but because of the immense volume of water
which passes over them. What are known as the Horseshoe
Falls are on the Canadian side, and certainly the greatest
volume of water passes over them, but I could not get any
data of width or gallons of water which falls. To enable
visitors to get an under view of the Horseshoe Falls, a shaft
has been sunk 100 ft., and then a tunnel driven in the solid
rock 800 ft. At the end of this tunnel visitors are standing
right under the falls, and can see the great blocks of ice
carried over and being smashed into thousands of atoms.
The noise of the running, waters, together with falling blocks
of ice is positively appalling. Near to these falls is a
new steel bridge 1268 ft. long, and the Grand Trunk Railway
has another steel arch bridge 800 ft. long. ■ The American
Falls are 1060 ft. wide and 167 ft. deep. These falls are
being largely used for the purpose of electric power, and for
practically 100 miles on either side the electric current is car-
ried to light up several large cities. Toronto which is about
80 miles from Niagara, obtains all her electric power from
this source, and (so I was told) the cost is only about one-
fourth of what it would be if coal had been used instead of
this natural power. Electric cars branch out in all directions
into the country, and all obtain their propelling power from
Niagara. I saw also the rapids where Webb, the champion
English swimmer, tried to swim across and lost his life in
the attempt. It was at this spot also that Blondin, the
tight rope walker, crossed the river on a wire rope. Between
Toronto and Niagara the land is occupied by small holders,
and there appears to be a large fruit industry throughout this


district, but there is generally the same poor homesteads,
wretched fences,"and all ploughing is done with a single fur-
row plough.
VISITING RELATIONS.
I visited a town in this district called Thorold, where an
uncle of mine lives. He is the husband of my mother’s sister,
who died on May 16, 1903. Her six children—four boys and
two girls—died before her. They lived to the age of men
and women, and then succumbed to that dreadful disease,
consumption. In the Thorold cemetery lie the remains of my
grandmother on my mother’s side, my aunt, and six cousins.
Mr. Hughes (my uncle) is a hearty old man of 73 years of
age. As a young lad he enlisted in the 47th Regiment, and
was in the thick of the fight with the Russians. When climb-
ing the heights of Alma against the Russian Cossacks, out
of 1000 men in the 88th Connaught Rangers, there was only
one man left to tell the tale. Out of the 47th Regiment, to
which my uncle was attached, there were only ten who with-
stood the slaughter. My uncle took part in the Balaclava
fight, and also at Sebastopol, and the seige at the latter place
lasted 14 months. In the battle of the heights of Alma, ?nd
on the Sunday morning before the Russians were routed there
were tremendous Russian losses. The old gentleman is doing
odd work for the Dominion Government, and is in receipt of
a small pension from the English Government. You can just
imagine how glad he was to see me.
THE CANAL WORKS.
At Thorold I had a good look at the canal work connect-
ing Lake Ontario with other points. These canals are carried
many miles, and a large volume of shipping passes through
them each year. They are deep enough to carry a vessel
drawing 15 ft. of water, and by a system of locks the shipping
is carried over a range 150 ft. high. The canals which are
now in use are the second lot made, and another scheme is
now talked of. which will reduce the number of locks required
to negotiate the highest part of the range. These canals or
waterways play an important part in the development of Can-
ada. The civic authorities did me the honor of waiting on
me at the hotel where I was staying, at the close of
council meeting.
WORK AND WAGES. .
After leaving Toronto, I proceeded to Ottawa, the capital
of Canada. The land as seen by me from the railway when
on this route is very poor indeed, most of it being covered
with poor timber and very stoney, and it was a common sight
to see some settler ploughing a few chains of land between
the stones. On the whole of this journey, which occupied


eight hours by train, I saw nothing but single furrow ploughs
with tw;o horses at work, and it is a marvel to me that the
Canadian Government can get anyone to occupy such
wretched country. But occupied it is, and dotted all over as
far as one can see from the railway, are the poverty-stricken
homesteads. I shall now give you some figures as to wages,
taken from the official report of the Bureau of Labor of the
province of Ontario for the year 1910: —In the timber manu-
factories there are employed 6,511 persons; their average
annual earnings are 347 dollars, and the average per day ;s
one dollar 68 cents, or about 6/6 of our money. Sash and
door factories there are 1,336 hands; average daily rate of
pay, one dollar 75 cents. Furniture manufacturers, 3,215
hands employed; average daily rate of pay, one dollar
46 cents. Agricultural implements and dairy machinery,
average daily rate of pay, one dollar 49 cents. Piano, organ,
and musical instruments, average daily rate of pay one dollar
68 cents. Wood pulp paper and stationers, average daily
rate of pay, one dollar 47 cents. Founders, rolling mill, and
structural iron, average daily rate, one dollar 76 cents.
Stoves and hot-air furnaces, &c., average daily rate of pay,
one dollar 89 cents. Engine boiler and machinery factories,
average daily rate, one dollar 65 cents. Wire fence, wire
rope, and wire cloth factories, average daily rate, one dollar
55 cents. Brushware and plumbers’ supplies, average daily
rate, one dollar 79 cents. Silver-plated ware, average daily
rate, one dollar 69 cents. Woollen, cotton, and yarn mills,
average daily rate, one dollar 24 cents. Clothing factories,
average daily rate, one dollar 12 cents. Boot and shoe fac-
tories, average daily rate, one dollar 44 cents. Furriers, hats
and cap factories, average daily rate, one dollar 22 cents.
Tanneries, harness factories, average daily rate, one dollar
54 cents. Bakers and confectioners, average daily rate, one
dollar 51 cents. Canning, pork, and bacon factories, average
daily rate, one dollar 16 cents. Distilleries, breweries, and
tobacco factories, average daily rate, one dollar 87 cents. I
would like to note here that in this industry the percentage
of wages of gross value of product is only 10 per cent., but
I have not time or space here to enlarge upon this phase of
the wage problems. Printing and allied trades, average daily
rate, one dollar 74 cents. In nearly all of these trades the
working day is 10 hours. Bricklayers and masons get the
highest wages in the trade rates, and they work 54 hours per
week. The weekly rate, of pay is about 21 dollars, but •c-
--cording to the official records they have 100 days’ loss of time
each year. The cause of this is, I think, the severe winter.


AT OTTAWA.
I arrived at Ottawa on April 26, it being quite a warm
day, being 70 in the shade. Only a little time back, less than
a month or six weeks, it was 35 degrees below zero. Ottawa
is a very pretty city with about 80,000 as a population. This
is the capital of Canada, and the Dominion, or Federal Parlia-
ment House as we would call it, is a very imposing structure.
It stands back some 400 to. 500 yards from one of the main
streets on an elevated position, with large open lawns in front
of it, and looking in the rear direction there is an unimpaired
view for a long distance, showing some mountainous country.
The buildings are good, and so are all the surrounding build-
ings which cover the various Government departments. To-
day I had an interesting chat with the Prime Minister (Sir
Wilfrid Laurier) who, when he heard I was in Ottawa, rang
me up through his private secretary and made the appoint-
ment with me. There is a good electric car service here, but
many of the streets are very narrow and their condition is. a
positive disgrace to the civic authorities. The streets in num-
erous places are from 3to g inches below the tramlines. Of
course, like every other place I have visited, the tram system
is in the hands of private companies who appear to be able to
do just as they please. The buildings in the city are good, but
the streets are, as stated, very narrow with a few exceptions.
A fair percentage of the inhabitants are French, and the
French language is in requisition here. When in Parliament
to-night, the question under discussion was about some
French member who used Government paint and Government
men to paint a political building for himself, and as far as
I can gather he was found out before the painting was com-
pleted, and he then offered to make good by paying for labor
and material used. The question debated was whether he
should be let off at that. As the debate had not come to a
close, I am not in a position to advise you of the final result,
but the thing which struck me most was that there should
be any member found in the House who could find any justi-
fication for his action. Yet there are many, and you will
thus gather the state of political corruption in this country.
From the conversations T have heard in the trains, the ac-
cepted opinion of both business and other people, is that poli-
ticians are generally corrupt; it is not considered any honor
to be a member of Parliament here, and yet when it is sug-
gested that it is in the hands of the electors to alter this
state of affairs, I am told that those who are found out are
no worse than the others. Some most glaring cases of poli-
tical graft and dishonesty, as investigated by an independent
commission, have been brought under my notice, but in no
case, so I have been informed, have the delinquents been


punished. When seeking re-election they have gone in with
great majorities. It is an open boast that it is a common
occurrence to buy up votes in large numbers, and this is con-
firmed in an able address given before the Canadian Club by
a Dr. McDonald on Saturday night last. He attributes the
cause to the foreign element who in many instances have
been known to sell their votes to the highest bidder.
In lighting the streets of Ottawa,’ the civic authorities
appear to have decided that only a few of the main streets
should be lighted; for while the main—or some of them—are
fairly lighted, quite a number of streets—and important
streets at that —are left in total darkness or semi-darkness.
On some streets there are clumps on each lamp-post of globe-
covered electric lights; and the question which I feel inclined
to ask is—Why do not they put a few of these superfluous
lights in the side streets ?
Some of the Labor leaders here met me to-day, and were
good enough to take me for a nice drive through and around
this beautiful city. The trees are just coming out in leaf,
and early flowers are just beginning to bloom. I should say
that in about six weeks from now, or even less, this place
will be a perfect blaze of flowers and green leaves. There
are some exceptionally pretty drives here, and the experimen-
tal farm which is almost in the centre of the city, is exceed-
ingly well kept and up-to-date in every way and a credit to
those in charge. The only industry of importance in his
place is the lumber trade, and that is a large one. The
timber is brought down the river Ottawa in many barges ~nd
floating rafts in natural logs, and then is cut at the mills
into various sizes. The Ottawa River is a very fine one, and
connects with the St. Lawrence and thence runs into
Atlantic Ocean. In some parts the rapids are unsafe for
navigation, but at such localities there are land canals and
lock systems so arranged that the shipping passes through
them.
CANADIAN CONSTITUTION.
The Constitution of Canada is unlike the Federal Consti-
tution of Australia. In our case we have delegated to - he
Federal Parliament limited powers, but in Canada, the Domi-
nion Parliament has delegated to the provinces, or State
Houses, limited powers; and thus it will be seen that there
are not the same fights over State rights as occur in Austra-
lia. The Senate here is not an elective House, being nomi-
nated by the Government in power, and the total number of
members of the House of Commons, which is elected on man-
hood suffrage is about 200. Here again the Constitution
differs from ours. In ours, as you are aware, the maximum


number of members there can be is 75, but in the Canadian
Federal House of Representatives—or Commons as it is
called—there is an ever-increasing number.
THE LABOR QUESTION.
After giving a fair amount of consideration to the Labor
movement in Canada, I have come to the conclusion that it
is but a small factor in the politics of this country. It is
true that in the Dominion House, there is one direct Labor
man who is returned by a Montreal constituency, and there
is also one in the Parliament for the province of Ontario.
These are the only two I have heard of, and the reason that
there are so few Labor men in the Parliaments of this country
may be accounted for by several reasons, hirst there is such
a stream of immigrants of such cosmopolitan nature, coming
as they do from all parts of the world, who do not from their
previous environment assimilate with the British here. Nor
do I think they will awake to their political possibilities for
many years. Secondly because the conditions here are very
much in advance of the countries from which much of the
immigration comes; and thirdly, but by no means least, there
are too many issues in the movement here. One of the most
successful methods of capital, is to divide Labor’s strength
by issues of many names, and in this country this has been
done with good effect. Another cause is what is called here
by some of the more sensible the work of “rainbow
painters,” or wonder workers. These are a section of the
workers who do not believe in a little Socialism in our Lme,
but prefer to wait for the unattainable, and the result is they
get none. Then there are those who believe that the reforma-
tion of the conditions of labor can only be brought about by
revolution, and not evolution, and these benighted reformers
always succeed in retarding possible reforms. Some of them
glory in their work. You will therefore see that with such
elements of dissension there is little wonder that no progress
is made.
POLITICAL CORRUPTION.
Another opinion which has been arrived at after mature
consideration, is in connection with the spoils of office policy
which obtains in this country. This makes it difficult to dis-
place any political party which is in power, no matter how
corrupt they may be. Nearly all positions of importance in
this place are filled by the political hacks of the party in
power, and those so appointed in self-defence, must forsooth,
fight to keep in power those who gave' them the positions
they now hold. There is little wonder that the average elec-
tors here have no confidence in government institutions when
it is so generally known that there is no such thing as pro


motion or appointment because of merit. Gentlemen are ap-
pointed to the most important positions, not because they
are qualified for the work, but because they have rendered
some political service to the party in power. Such positions
as postmaster in an important office, or deputy postmasters-
general, are not based on the service of men whose merit and
seniority entitle them to such positions, but they are taken
from outside, and may not know any more of the duties per-
taining to the office than a donkey knows about his father.
Is there any wonder that Government institutions here are
spoken of in contempt by the taxpayer, and when it is sug-
gested that the remedy is in their own hands, you are coolly
told that those in power are no worse than the Opposition,
who would as soon as they got the chance, give all these
positions to their own political hacks. On the principal that
“the devil we know is better than the devil we don’t,’’ they
let things slide. One is not long in this country before he
discovers that it is no honor to hold a position in the Legis-
latures, because such positions here are looked upon by all
sections of the community as being associated with “graft’’
of all kinds, and the amusing part of it is that when an open
exposure is made through a commission appointed to enquire
into corrupt charges made, nothing comes of it. The ‘wo
great political parties depend largely for financial support
from the wealthy members of their respective parties, and it
is the common talk on the streets, on the railways, and other
places, that in accepting tenders for public works, prices
.much higher than actual tenders received are given on the
understanding that the excess of tender is given to the funds
of the political party for organisation work. The same, it
is said, takes place in tenders for all Government supplies.
These stories have been told me by representatives of large
commercial firms and other people, and although I am unable
to verify these statements, there must be some fire where
there is so much smoke, and it is little wonder that a member
of Parliament in this country is looked upon as being asso-
ciated with the worst forms of “graft.”
The same opinion prevails in connection with municipal
positions, and quite recently a number of exposures were
made in connection with municipal and civic work, and the
amazing point is that the electors seem to be powerless or
indifferent over these matters, and look upon such results as
being the natural corrollary of their political and semi-political
institutions. All State undertakings in this country are huge
financial failures, and no wonder, when the only qualification
to a highly paid and responsible position is political service
to the party m power. Therefore all public utilities are likely
to remain in the hands of private corporations for many years.
Only quite recently there was a proposition that the street


railway company of Montreal be given a perpetual lease over
the Montreal street franchise, and that notwithstanding die
fact that this company has failed in many ways to have car-
ried out the terms of its charter in the most vital parts no
decision has been arrived at as yet. But the consensus of
opinion is that the company will obtain a renewal of their
lease, and for a long term of years.
IN MONTREAL.
In this I purpose giving a few historic particulars of
Montreal. It was founded by Massaneuve in the year 1642;
in 1758 fortified by the French; in 1760 surrendered to the
British; in 1775 taken by the Americans; and in 1776 retaken
by the British. It has a population variously estimated from
450,000 to 600,000. There having been no census taken
since igoi, it is difficult to get the exact population. There
is an inland river and canal system of 14 ft. draught for 1,400
miles. The export of grain in 1910 was 26,000,000 bushels,
and the cheese and butter exports were valued at 17,000,000
dollars. It is the largest city in the Province of Quebec, but
the Parliament meets at Quebec. There are 257 miles of
streets, and out of these, 60 miles are paved. The territory
of the city contains an area of 11,671 acres. There are 232
miles of brick sewers, and 38 public parks covering an area
of 632 acres. The street railways cover 117 miles. It has
a debt of nearly 38,000,000 dollars. The street tram or ’■ail-
way system is in the hands of a private company, and there
were last year carried over them 95,376,000 passengers. Its
water supply system is a pumping one, and the source is the
St. Lawrence River. The amount pumped daily is 36,730,992
gallons. Montreal post handles one-third of Canada’s com-
merce, and there are 75,000 dwellings. In Canada there are
30 religious denominations, and 23,000 churches, being 59
per cent. Protestants and 41 per cent. Catholics; and the
proportion of Methodists 17 per cent., Presbyterians 15.68
per cent., Church of England 12.67 P er cent., and Baptises
6.50 per cent. There are 80 versions of the Bible distributed
in Canada. There are 80 Y.M.C. Associations, with a mem-
bership of 27,961, and the Young Women’s Christian Asso-
ciation has 11,000 members. The income of all churches
in Canada for all purposes is estimated at 15,000,000 dollars.
The Salvation Army in Canada has 987 officers, cadets, and
employees, 512 corps, societies and outposts, and 44 social
institutions. The Roman Catholic Church has 72 univer-
sities and colleges, and 327 charitable institutions. The
Presbyterians have seven theological colleges, and have
23,909 teachers in their Sunday Schools. The Church
of England has 22 bishops, 1,300 clergy, and 34
foreign missionaries. The Methodists have 2,580 ministers.


2,541 local preachers, 1,267 exhorters, 4,664 class leaders,,
3,674 Sunday Schools, and 36,503 school officers and teach-
ers. Canada has 34,000 teachers in public schools. The Can-
adian debt on March 31, 1910, was 336,268,549 dollars net;
rate of interest, 2.18 per'cent. Sixty-four nationalities are
represented in the immigration of 1910.
OTHER STATISTICS.
The total cash given to the several railway companies by
the Dominion and Provincial Governments is 218,736,868 dol-
lars. In addition to this cash many scores of millions of
acres have been given to these companies, and on top of this,
the Dominion and Provincial Parliaments have guaranteed rhe
bonds of these companies for many millions sterling. The
lands sold in the year 1909 by the Canadian Pacific Company-
netted the company 49,959,150 dollars, this being an increase
of 9 per cent, over the year of 1908. For the years 1910 and
1911, the return from the sale of land by the same company,
will be much in excess of the sales for the year 1909, and
the average value of the land sold by the company was 14
dollars 87 cents per acre, or a little over £3 per acre in our
money. The number of employees of this company is 75,000,
and the monthly pay is 3,780,000 dollars. Porters on the
trains get 25 dollars a month, and attendants in the dining
car are paid about the same rate, and look to the passengers
giving them enough in tips to make up a living wage. The
C.P.R. has a most complete workshop at Montreal. The r aw
material goes in at one end of the shops and comes out at
the other, the finished article being in the shape of locomotives
and railway carriages. There are several thousand men at
work there, and in the engineers’ branch of the works, 75
per cent, are unionists, but in the woodwork branch, there
are only 25 per cent, members of the Carpenters’ Union or any
other woodworkers’ union. There are a good percentage of
the blacksmiths in the union, and the working hours are 10
hours per day, while the wages are less than for similar work
in our country. The company maintains a very fine instruc-
tion school, and apprentices are allowed off one hour during
working hours to attend the lectures. Classes are also ar-
ranged at night for the benefit of the company’s employees
who wish to improve themselves. When at Montreal I at-
tended the Trades and Labor Council meeting, and had a
great reception. The great majority of the delegates are of
French descent, and all records of the council have to be en-
tered up in the two languages —French and English. There
are two minute secretaries—one to write the minutes in Eng-
lish and the other in French, and both of these minutes have
to be read at the meeting. The president of the council has
to give all resolutions in both languages, and the consequence


is it takes a long time to get through much business. I had
the pleasure of addressing the meeting, and a good report
of my speech was published in a French paper next day.
On the day following the meeting, two of the members
of the council drove me all over the city and Mount Royal,
and the day being a fine one, I had a most pleasant outing.
The view of the city from the summit of Mount Royal is un-
surpassable. The summit is some 700 ft. above the St. Law-
rence River level, and the face of the mount reaches 'he
centre of the city in some places, and there is an incline rail-
way from the city to the top of the mount. This line was
constructed in 1884, at a cost of 55,000 dollars, and since it
was opened, over 7,000,000 people have been carried on it
without a single accident. In about a mile, 75° ft- °f an
incline is reached.
MONTREAL DESCRIBED.
Montreal is a place of many contrasts; there is a popu-
lation of over 400,000 and of a cosmopolitan nature; but the
great majority are French or of French descent. The city
is at the foot of Mount Royal, and is built on very uneven
land, being hilly in parts and the rest being on flats or valleys.
There are some exceptionally good buildings, and the Wind-
sor Hotel covers a whole block. The Canadian Pacific rail-
way station also is one of the most imposing buildings I have
seen. The city is well laid out with a number of parks and
squares, and there are some good streets, but the dirty nature
of the streets surpasses anything I have seen. Heaps
of muck are to be seen piled up in quite a number
of fairly good streets, and many of the lanes or
by-streets are an abomination. Cobble stones dressed
and otherwise are used in the road making, and the
noise of the traffic is enough to drive one mad. The
car service isra fairly good one, but all the rolling stock is
painted a dirty yellow, and looks as if it had not been painted
for many years. There are brilliant electric lights of all
colors imaginable displayed on various business places; and
in the streets there are many horses so poor in condition that
they would not be worth much for zoo purposes. The chief
stone used in the buildings is a dark one, and that and the
smoke from the various factories give the place a very fune-
real appearance.
This place is noted for its churches and chapels, and they
stand out as prominent features all over the city. On the
slopes of Mount Royal there are many beautiful residences
of the fairly well to do, and there are some very pretty drives
in and around this mount. This is the chief shipping centre
of Canada, and there are many important industries. On the


whole, it seems to be a very busy place. ' Nearly the whole
of the population speak French more or less, but English is
spoken freely also, and therefore I had no difficulty in making
my wants known, although I have met some people in
car who did not understand me. This reminds me of a rather
good joke. At one important town, a number of Australians,
including myself, were looking over a large shop, when one
pf the attendants (a young woman) asked us if we wanted
to purchase something, and we announced that we were Aus-
tralians, and were only looking over the building. The young
lady said that we were quite a little way from home, and
then went on to say that she understood us. She
further told us that she was at one time staying
with some English lady who used to say “laugh”
for “laife” and “half” for “haife.” Addressing us
she said, “You don’t talk like that, do you?” And we
hurriedly confessed that we were afraid that we did. She
remarked “How funny.” This young lady, I would like to
remind you, was a Canadian by birth, and spoke with a strong
Canadian accent, which seems as strange to us as no doubt
does our accent to the average Canadian. In this city you
get the French Canadian blend, which has its own peculiarity,
there is also the Irish, Scotch, English, and Italian and other
foreign blends.
MAY DAY.
This is the first of May, and May Day here has quite a
new feature for me. Under the tenement system at Mon-
treal, all tenancies commence on May i, and as far as I can
learn, the great bulk of tenancy here is for 12 months; hence
numerous removals take place between April 30 and May 1
and 2. All Saturday and night, and again on Sunday, and
Sunday night, there were hundreds of loads of furniture and
household effects passing through the streets, and the same
occurs to-day amidst a heavy downfall of rain. I am told
that between Saturday and Monday there are over 60,000
families to get into new homes. The furniture van man has
quite a harvest, and as much as five dollars per hour is being
paid for a van. Beautiful ladies of Parisian origin are much
in evidence, together with lovely Parisian dresses and exqui-
site hats, and after the churches came out on Sunday night
there was a great display of beauty in the main streets. In
one of my letters I think I told you of the high rate of hotel
license fees, and in addition to having to pay from 700 to
1,600 dollars for a license there is to be a further charge from
to-day, viz., 5 per cent, on the gross takings over 60 dollars
per day.
Speaking again of the tram system here, there is one
feature of it that is worth copying in Australia in connection


with our tram systems. In this city they run an observation
car or tram. These are open cars with slightly raised seats,
and carry about 100 passengers. The lowest seats are in
the front, and the highest at the rear of the car. It is beauti-
fully got up, and at night is brilliantly illuminated with various
colored electric lights. These cars are specially designed for
country or other visitors, to enable them to see all the city
at a cost of 25 cents, or about a shilling of our money, and
the distance covered by the ride is from 20 to 30 miles. Cars
of this kind should take well in all our cities during the sum-
mer months, and I commend them to the notice of the
authorities.
IN NEW YORK.
I have at length arrived at New York, the second largest
city in the world, London being the first. The population of
this city is over 4I millions, and the population of New York
State is 10 millions, or about a ninth of the tota} population
of the United States, viz., 90,000,000. This great city is
laid out on the most simple lines, and it is quite an easy mat-
ter to know how to get about once you have a knowledge of
the key of the system. All streets, as we call them, run-
ning north and south are called avenues and are numbered,
and those running east and west are called streets. Then
there is the usual numbering of houses in avenues and streets,
and at every street corner the number is in distinct figures
on posts, and the same applies to the avenues. The surface
car system is also distinguished by the same method of num-
bering, and there is a complete system of transfer from car
to car and any part of this vast city can be reached on the
payment of one fare of 5 cents. lam lodging in 361 West
55th street, and the nearest avenue being the Bth one down
which the surface cars run, I have only to remember this,
and can without any trouble reach any part of the city. 1
have only to tell the conductor of the car, and he will at once
tell me the necessary transfer to make if the car I am on
does not reach the locality I am lokonig for. In addition to
the surface cars there are also the subways and overhead
street railways, and later on I shall tell you something about
them.
GOOD AGRICULTURAL COUNTRY.
I arrived here on Saturday, May 6, and on my way here
from Montreal passed through many important towns -nd
rich agricultural lands. The route is a most interesting one,
and for many hours of the journey the Connecticut River is
close to the railway, and at parts of the River there are
fairly large falls, and, at some of them the water is used for
electric power.


A WONDERFUL CITY.
Two important events took place on the day of my ar-
rival, the first being a 12 miles footrace, in which there were
over 1,000 competitors of all nationalities, but the first r, nd
second at the finish were two Indians. The next event was
a procession of women suffragists, who marched through
some of the main streets, there being about 3,000 who took
part, embracing every trade and profession in which women
are engaged in the United States. There were quite a num-
ber of banners and bannerettes, with appropriate mottoes on
them. During the period of the procession there were hun-
dreds of thousands of people on each side of the route of
the procession, and traffic in these streets had to be sus-
pended, and at the close of the march it was quite a sight to
see the way in which the police handled the congested vehicle
traffic, which in some important junctions of the streets was
one unbroken line as far as one could see. This is really a
wonderful city, and is extending to the north with great
rapidity, so that what was but a few years ago an open on
the north is now a solid mass of houses for many miles out
and is still extending with great rapidity. The streets are
good, and many of them exceptionally wide. The buildings
are massive to look upon, many of them are well-named sky-
scrapers. The latest addition to these amazing piles of steel,
brick, stones and mortar is one which is now in course of
erection, and is about 57 storeys high. The owner of 'his
giant structure runs a five and ten cents store. That is,
he only stocks up with articles that he can sell at five or 'en
cents., and on this cheap line of goods he has built up a
leviathan business. ■ The “Times” printing buildings are
most conspicuous. These stand almost in the centre of
Broadway, and although the building consists of a large num-
ber of storeys at the north end oLthe structure it is only 20
feet wide at the surface, and although it is of the grid iron
shape it is not much wider at the south end. There is also
the building in which the Equitable Insurance have offices,
which covers even less ground than the “Times” office. The
most remarkable thing about this city is the rapidity with
which comfortable new and well-built structures become ob-
solete and are pulled down and new ones of the most modern
type are erected in their place. This is apparent in every
part of the city. I should think in New York there is the
most comprehensive street railway and tram system of the
world. Surface trams or cars, as they are called here, tra-
verse all parts of the city, and in addition to these there are
scores of miles of subway railways. Again, there are the over-
way railways, and in some of the streets there are one or two
of them on each side of the street suspended on steel pillars


and girders. I am also informed that in one street no less
than four distinct railway and car systems operate to handle
the traffic. Two of these are under-ground, one on the sur-
face and one overhead. Each of these have from two to four
tracks on each level. There are 83 theatres and other places
of amusement operating every night in the week except Sun-
day. According to the world’s almanac there were 1,998
newspapers published in the year 1910, while the total pub-
lication for all the States was 22,730. The United States
is now made up of some 50 States, and in addition to these
there are a number of dependencies. One of the worst blem-
ishes to the streets of New York is the overway railways.
Just picture for yourself a huge ungainly looking structure
of steel on both sides of important streets, about 20 feet from
the ground, and its owner filling the whole space between the
footpaths and obscuring from view as you walk down 'he
footpaths all but the base of the buildings on either side, and
you will then have some idea of the disfigurement of many
streets. The electric lighting and the many artistic electric
lighted advertisements are things never to be forgotten. The
illuminations are a perfect blaze of all colors, and the only
time in Australia that I have seen anything to approach them
was at the inauguration of the Commonwealth at Sydney, and
the festival of opening the Commonwealth Parliament in Mel-
bourne. But here it is a nightly occasion. All public utili-
ties here are held by private corporations, and of the 236,377
miles of railways in the United States there are 210,940 miles
owned by ten groups of capitalists. In the past ten years
there have been 103,187 persons killed by railway accidents,
and 868,236 injured, and the total number of railway em-
ployees is 674,259, who are in the majority of cases paid
very low wages if the hours worked are taken into considera-
tion. There were 1,041,370 immigrants who arrived in the
States for the year 1910, and they are from all parts of the
earth. Of this large number not one-tenth came from English
speaking countries. I find that there are 921,083 army and
navy pensioners in the United States for the year 1910, and
the total amount paid to pensioners for that year was
160,629,587 dollars. There are only four States of the United
States where women possess votes on equal terms with men—
viz., Wyoming, Colarado, Utah, and Idaho.
AN EIGHT HOURS DAY.
A day’s work for all laborers, workmen, and mechanics
who may be employed by the United States Government or
by a contractor or sub-contractor upon any of the works of
the United States is limited to eight hours. In all the sep-
arate States there is a law that the eight hours principle


shall be observed in many occupations, unless otherwise ex-
pressly stipulated in the contract. In some of the States it
is stipulated that eight hours labor shall be deemed to be a
legal day’s work in all cases of labor and service of the day
where there is no agreement or contract to the contrary. But
there generally is an agreement or contract to the contrary.
Farm or agricultural labor service by the week, month or
year is not included in the above. Miners, artisans and
skilled laborers generally are fairly well paid; unskilled
labor is very poorly paid; but in considering the question of
high or low wages one must not lose sight of the many other
factors which have to be taken into consideration before
being able to judge whether wages are high or low. The
chief of these are rents, cost of living, and permanency of
employment. When applying these tests to wages paid either
here or in Canada as compared with Australia, I have no
hesitation in saying that wages paid generally in the coun-
tries first referred to are low. In the first place cost of living
is very high, rent ditto, and owing to the severe winters there
is much lost time, apart from other factors which generally
occur to make work intermittent. Not only do severe winters
cause much loss of time to many workers, but there is also
an added burden of cost in coal and other fuel in making the
homes habitable during the winter months. There are 125
trade union organisations comprised in the American Federa-
tion of Labor, and the President of the same is Mr. Samuel
Gompers, and there are six other national unions which
not affiliated with the American Federation of Labor, nd
the names of these are as follows:—Bricklayers and Masons’
Union, Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, Brotherhood of
Locomotive Firemen and Enginedrivers, Brotherhood of Rail-
road Trainmen, Railroad Conductors’ Order, and the Western
Federation of Miners. There is also the Knights of Labor,
which has a large membership roll. These divisions are m
themselves a weakness, and could not be better arranged if
done by the employer to keep labor impotent. On top of this
is the same problem as confronts the Canadian I obor move-
ment, the stupendous difficulty in getting the large importa-
tions of foreign labor to assimilate. You will note that 1 have
already pointed out in this letter that over nine-tenths of the
million immigrants who came here in the year 1910 were non-
English. The actual total of these was 926,291, and the total
immigration for the past ten years has been 8,786,308.
In this city, go where you will, one sees splendid build-
ings pulled down to be replaced by more up-to-date ones. In
the construction of the new the steel frame is erected first
and the whole of the inside is lined with fire-proof bricks, and
then the outer walls and partitions are covered with stone or
brick. The rapidity with which this new class of building


is erected is amazing, and when I look up to these sky-scra-
pers I wonder what sort of buildings will be substituted for
them a few years hence. With regard to the tenement houses
in which the working class live they are an abomination.
These buildings reach many storeys high, and in nearly all
cases cover all the surface from street to street, or street to
Jane. They have not the slightest pretention of architecture,
being just a huge pile of steel, bricks, stone and mortar. In
each of them there are a large number of families, and on
the rear there is a flimsy zig-zag ladder called a fire escape.
There are no yards or flower patches unless it be a few flower
pots on the window sills of some of them. There are no
places for the little children to play except on the footpaths
or in the streets, and the consequence is that hundreds of
these dear little innocent mites are killed annually, while
many are crippled for life. Last month’s record shows 40
killed and double that many injured, and this said not to lie
an abnormal number. Most of these are killed by vehicles
running over them, and only the other day one was killed
by a flower pot which fell from one of the window sills. The
only place the mother can leave the child with safety is m
the tenement buildings, and even there there are many acci-
dents from fire. I was an eyewitness to the death ot one
child. In this case the child was killed by a horse tram, and
if it was not for the police the mothers and fathers in tne
vicinity of the accident would, I think, have killed the driver.
I was also an eyewitness to a little boy being run over oy a
motor bicycle, and in that the rider did not stop to find out
how? the child' had fared, but his riding away did not avail
him much, because as soon as it was known a gentleman in
an automobile took after him and soon ran him down and
brought him back to an angry crowd. Again it was me
police that saved him. It is true that there are partes and
squares in this large city, but it is only on rare occasions
that these children can have that pleasure, their genera] play-
ground being the footpath ahd the street, and for these wret-
ched homes—if one is justified in calling them such—» rent
of from 25 1 to 35/ per week is charged for four, five or six
rooms. When I think of the beautiful villas with their little
flower plots and decent yard room in nearly all of our suburbs
of Adelaide, I think parents should thank God that they have
such healthy and congenial conditions to rear their families
in. Just out of curiosity I took the number of autombiles
passing a certain spot, and they averaged one every two sec-
onds. You can therefore have some idea of what the traffic
is like, and what the dear little kiddies have to put up with.
OTHER BUILDINGS.
The next class of building which houses a large number


of the fairly well-to-do is the apartment house, which,
is also many stories - high, and while they are better
built and are on more commodious lines, they gen-
erally cover the surface from street to street, and' have no
gardens or lawns, and are just as objectionable from the
standpoint of bringing up a family in. But these people are
in a position to keep a maid, and do so when there is a fam-
ily, but the general rule is no family, or, at any rate, small,
ones. Is there any wonder, that the late President had to-,
complain of race suicide? Then there are the residences of
the mujlti-miliionaires, such as the Vanderbilts, Goulds,
Astors, Rockefellers, Morgans, Mackays, and Harmengers,
Fields, Belmonts, Whitneys, Leiters, Collets, Corillards, and’
Carnegies. In these there are every luxury, spacious
grounds, and plenty of playgrounds at home for their chil-
dren, and yet so many people wonder why so many look with
envious eyes upon, the great wealth of these men. I have
travelled many miles in various directions in this city, and I
have not seen a cottage or villa, nothing but the huge tene-
ment or apartment house, which, after all, is a homeless
home, and I frequently hope that we will never see the like-
in beautiful Adelaide.
POLICE PARADES.
Yesterday 6,000 of the city police marched through the
city. This body consisted of foot police, mounted, water
police, bicycle, and motor bicycle men. There were many
beautiful bands and the sight was an imposing .he
foot police marched 20 abreast and the mounted 13 aoreast.
They are splendidly built men, being 6 feet or . over, and ex-
ceptionally good looking, and in their prime, there not being-
many old men; a better looking body of men would be diffi-
cult to find, and yet according to a statement made only
yesterday by President Taft, the number of criminals who
escape punishment here is infinitely greater than in London.
Who is to blame for non-punishment of crime? lamat a
loss to know, but if what I hear is correct “graft” is respon-
sible for much of it. I notice that the authorities say that
the vagrant class is increasing at an alarming rate, and it
is said that there are 100,000 beggars in the city of New
York, and it is now suggested that they must either work on
a State farm or be deported. From what I can learn, work
is very slack, and there is a considerable amount of destitu-
tion, which to me appears only to be the natural corollarv,
of the indiscriminate immigration policy. On Saturday I saw
the national game of baseball between the New York team,
or, as they are generally referred to here, “the giants,” an !
the St. Lavis team. There was an exceptionally large at


.tendance, and much excitement, but the Giants had their
opponents beaten easily from the first innings, having put
up an extraordinary score of 13 runs, and finished up for t'v
day with 21 to their opponents 5. By the way, the national
games are played on the Sunday, as well as other days in
the week, and I noticed also that many shops are open on
.Sunday, including grocers, for certain hours. Hotels and
saloons are open at all hours on week days and nights, fut
-are closed on Sundays. The license fee for a saloon here is
1400 dollars per year, and an hotel license fee is much higher.
There are nine prohibition States, and in one State the manu-
facture of liquors has been abolished. The nine prohibition
States have a population of over 12,000,000 people. In two
States laws have been passed prohibiting the glasses or tum-
blers being used in the trains, and anyone requiring a drink
of water must purchase a receptacle made of paper to drink
out of. This has been done, so lam told, to prevent the
spread of consumption, yet at Toronto, Ottawa, and other
important towns the drinking water for the city supply is
obtained from the lake or river in which the sewerage of the
■city is deposited. Only recently a severe outbreak of ty-
phoid fever occurred at Ottawa, and there were many fatal
results. But the glasses in the trains must be abolished,
and the water supply drawn from the water in which the
sewerage is emptied! Wages with the exception of a few
trades in the United States are very low. Men doing pick
and shovel work get 20 cents per hour, and in some of the
Southern States tradesmen only get two dollars per day.
Railway porters on the trains get 25/ per week, and porters
on railway stations are paid only 2/ per day. These are
not boys but able-bodied colored men. Sweating is rampant
in many branches of industry.
QUEBEC.
After leaving New York I returned to Montreal on m?
■way to Quebec, and when on my way to the latter an acci-
dent occurred on the train just in front of us with fatal re-
sults, three men being killed. This delayed us, for several
hours, resulting in my not reaching Quebec until midday on
Friday, the 19th, and as we had to sail that day I had not
much time to examine the old and quaint city of Quebec,
which is situated on the St. Lawrence River, which is he
finest river I have seen. It is navigable for 900 miles from
the Atlantic to Montreal, and at some places it is many miles
wide. Quebec is one of the oldest settlements on this side,
and at one time great battles were fought between the Eng-
lish and the French. The French at an early period built
-substantial fortifications, and the massive walls and guns are
still there. The site that the city stands on is much above


the level of the St. Lawrence River, and the situation was
most suitable for the purpose of fortification. From the his-
torical standpoint Quebec is most interesting, but the streets
are very narrow, and many of the buildings are old fashioned
indeed, but there are some good buildings there, the best
being the new hotel erected recently by the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company.
PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY.
This company is the greatest monopoly in Canada. It
owns, operates, or leases 15,225 miles of railroad, and the
earnings of last year were 94,989,276 dollars. In 1885 its
total earnings were 8,364,493 dollars. For 1910 its opera-
ting expense was 61,149,534 dollars. To-day this com-
pany has 62 vessels. Sixteen of these ships are on the At-
lantic, and the tonnage of some reaches 14,500 tons. There
are four on the Pacific between Australia and Vancouver, ig*.
on the Pacific Coast, and 18 on the lakes and river service.
In every important city throughout Canada it has palatial
hotels. There are 1334 locomotives of the largest type, 294
sleeping and dining cars, and with the exception of the
from Montreal to New York I have been on this company’s
boats and railways ever since I left Sydney. Its railway em-
ployees represent over 75,000 hands, apart from those em-
ployed on their shops and hotels, and it is said that this
company is making money so fast that they do not know
what to do with it. In addition to the above large tracts of
timbers and agricultural lands are owned by the C.P.R. The
wages paid to its employees are low. On the boat lam trav-
elling to London on (the Empress of Britain) there are about
200 table and cabin stewards and other attendants, who re-
ceive the wretched pay of £2 2/ for the round trip, which:
occupies 21 days, and therefore receive about 2/ or 50 cents,
per day. The able seamen get £3 10/ per month, and with
the exception of loco, drivers and conductors the railway men
are paid proportionately low rates, and yet it is often pointed
out that this company has exceptional business ability which
is responsible for its wonderful success. Is it any wonder at
its great accumulation of wealth when paying such low
wages? All fruit, confections, and newspapers sold on he
trains are sold by people connected with the C.P.R. I think
I showed in one of my letters that the second-class passen-
gers were treated very badly by this and other railway com-
panies who have an agreement as to fares and freights, so
that there is no actual competition in railway fares and
freights. For instance, the return fare from Montreal to New
York first class is 18 dollars 10 cents and the second class
fare is 18 dollars, there being only ten cents difference. The
service on the whole is good, but I cannot understand why


the railway commission which was appointed some few years
ago to review the charges of this company allows them to
fleece the second class passengers to the extent they do.
I am also informed that owing to an arrangement between
the different companies excursion trains have been abolished;
yet the members of the Federal Parliament do not seem to
have the courage to preserve for the people the public utilities,
for since I have been here the Parliament has guaranteed the
bonds of a line from Port Arthur to Montreal, which will be
several hundred miles in length when completed. The guar-
antee is for 3I per cent, on a cost of 35,000 dollars per mile.
1 would not be surprised if the line is made considerably
under the cost of the guarantee. One would think that if it
was good enough to take all ihe risk of a private company’s
bonds it should be good enough for the Government to con-
struct the line themselves. Since I have been in this country
quite a number of people have expressed surprise that Gov-
ernment railways of Australia are paying concerns, they hav-
ing been led to believe quite the reverse; and the ignorance
which generally prevails about Australian conditions and pro-
sperity is appalling. While we in Australia get a fair am-
ount of Canadian news daily in our newspapers, in Canada
it is most difficult to get any Australian news, and it almost
points to a conspiracy on the part of somebody to keep the
Canadians in total ignorance of Australia’s doings. After
travelling over much of Canada I am convinced of the great
possibilities for a number of Australian products finding a
profitable market in this country. lam also strongly of the
opinion that the Commonwealth of Australia should establish
agencies in the principal towns of Canada where reliable
information of Australia can be obtained. I would even go
so far as to establish distributing agencies for Australian
products, and thus prevent the local combine from manipula-
ting Australian or New Zealand products, and keeping up a
fictitious value by limiting the amount which is shipped. For
instance I am told that the total shipping space on the boats
—that is cool storage space—is held by one company, and
to enable a high and exhorbitant price to obtain the cool
storage space is not used; and yet no one else could c end
our products in the space thus kept idle. lam also informed
that the Dominion Government of Canada grants rebates on
all duty-paid machinery or other Canadian manufactured
goods which are exported to Australia. This is a thing our
Custom authorities should enquire into, and if it be true it
could be adjusted when reviewing our tariff. The Empress
of Britain—the boat lam proceeding to London in—is a fairly
fast boat, and covered from 411 to 425 miles each 24 hours
we were coming over. I must now draw this to a close, and
the next letter you get will be about impressions of London.


SIGHTS OF LONDON.
I have arrived in London at last, and the journey in e
train from Liverpool was a delightful one. On either side of
the railway was a panorama of beautifully kept farms and
gardens, enclosed by well-trimmed hedges and a complete
blaze of flowers. The oak and other trees were in full leaf,
and the Chesnut trees were brilliant in their bloom. Eng-
lish grasses and red and white clover was in evidence every-
where in the meadows, and all over them were the cattle,
sheep and horses in prime condition. The green of the mea-
dows and of the trees in these parts differs from the green
in Australia. I cannot describe this difference, but it is
softer and more delicate in its coloring. On arriving at
Euston railway station I put up for the night at the Euston
Hotel, and next morning before breakfast I took a walk in
the direction of the Strand, and the first man I met and spoke
to was Dave Bowman, the leader of the Labor Party in
Queensland, who, with his wife, is on a visit to London. He
recognised me at once, and called me by name to my sur-
prise. Yet this happened in a place where the recent census
shows there are 7,000,000 inhabitants. The result of the
meeting is that I am staying a the same house as Mr. Bow-
man and his wife, which is a nice, quiet boarding house, nd
lam well pleased with my lodgings. At present London is
full of visitors for the Coronation, and hourly their numbers
are increasing, and by the time the great event comes off
the city will be so full, and the principal streets so crowded
with people, that those who have secured seats on the stands
on the line of procession will have the greatest difficulty to
get through the crowd. The only chance will be to go to
the stands overnight and sleep there, and take sufficient food
to sustain them until after the great event. At present, and
for weeks past, and up to the eve of June 22, thousands of
carpenters were employed in erecting seating accommodation
on the line of march; in fact, it is wood everywhere from
Buckingham Palace to London Bridge, and every available
frontage is being utilised for row after row of these elevated
seats. No building appears to be exempt from this method
of getting money. Even the fronts of many churches •re
being covered up by these ungainly looking structures, and
exceptionally high prices are being readily paid for the privi-
lege of sitting on these cushionless seats for many hours. 1
am to have a seat in the Abbey, and will thus have an oppor-
tunity of seeing the crowning ceremony, but I shall not see
the procession that day, but will have an opportunity on the
next. Although I live within ten minutes drive of the Abbey
I shall have to start for the church about 6 a.m. to make sure
of getting there. This week end I shall be the guest o'


Lord Harrowby, and will be his guest until Tuesday, and
when there will meet the Earl and Countess of Dartmouth,
Viscount ana Viscountess Middleton, Lady Margaret Ryder,
a number of other titled people, besides many of the leading
statesmen of the United Kingdom. Saturday’s programme
will include the reception of Mayor and Corporation of Staf-
ford, lunch at Sandon Hall, deputation of 300 of the United
Working Men’s Empire League, motor drive round Lord Har-
rawby’s estate to inspect small holdings, dinner at 8 p.m. to
meet members of the municipalities of the district. In ad-
dition to this we are to inspect the Shelton Iron and Steel
Works, the tile works, and about five other great works. To
•do this the party will be divided into three sections. Now I
have just mentioned this week-end programme to show you
what sort of a holiday we are having, and if the delegates
survive the strain put upon them they will be strong men
indeed, and show what grand constitutions are produced in
Australia. Invitations are being showered upon me, and I
■ almost require a clerk to assist me in my correspondence.
These invitations come from every direction, and include many
from lords, dukes and duchesses. Mr. Fisher is getting a
great reception everywhere, and on Tuesday next I accom-
pany him to Bristol where he has been invited to be presented
with the freedom of the town. I have had the pleasure of a
visit to the House cf Commons, and heard an excellent debate
on the Trades Unions Bill. The principal speakers when I
was present were Sir Rufus Isaacs (Attorney General), who
was in charge of the Bill; Mr. Smith, K.C., a member of the
'Opposition and a good speaker; and Mr. Ramsay McDonald,
The Leader of the Labor Party in the House of Commons.
I have not been here long, but long enough to lose my-
self, and it took me three hours to get to my lodgings owing
to my having rambled on the top of cars and buses in many
directions trying to get on the outskirts of this city. The
people here do not appear to go to bed during the summer
nights, and long after 12 o’clock at night the streets are
full, and one has great difficulty crossing many of the streets.
Yet there are very few accidents considering the congested
traffic, so well do the police do their work in this respect.
The police, too, are wonderfully well posted with information
about the routes in this city, and if one asks a policeman
the road anywhere he will be told immediately, together with
the number of the bus or train to take to reach the locality
asked for.
A WONDERFUL PLACE.
London is a most interesting place. It is the centre of
all commerce, and all other things that are great. I have
■only seen but little of it yet, but the more one sees of it, *he


more does he become interested. It is one continuous bus-
tle of business, and the vehicle traffic is a sight never to 'he
forgotten. Every street is crowded with people. It is a
most difficult city to get about in, but its complex nature
makes it the more interesting. I have only as yet estab-
lished a few landmarks from which I can take my bearings,
but I don’t know what many people would do if it were not
for the police. What the traffic will be like when the country
visitors come in next week one fears to contemplate, and es-
pecially on June 22 and 23 when the whole route of the pro-
cession will be closed after 8.30 a.m. From end to end of
the route is one blaze of wooden platforms, the seating on
which has been let at very high prices.
AUSTRALIANS WELCOMED.
Ever since I have been here I have been attending official
welcomes at the rate of two and sometimes three each day.
Messrs. Fisher, Batchelor, and Pearce have had much more to
crowd in the day’s programme. The welcome we are get-
ting is wonderful, and all sections of the people of the United
Kingdom seem to look upon it as their solemn duty to feast
us to death. I am booked up every day to the end of the
month with invitations to banquets, dinners, luncheons, and
at homes. Up to the present neither my hats nor my waist-
coats are too large for me, but if this abundance of feasting
continues I will certainly have to extend the waistbands of
my clothes if not increase the size of my hats. Yesterday I
visited the White City Exhibition, and was delighted with
what I saw there. The exhibit of the Indians at work is
exceptionally good, and the work done by the Indians with
their primitive tools is really wonderful. The electric lighting
of the exhibition at night is perfect, and the White City under
the various colored electric lights is really a fairyland. Tne
landscape painting of parts of Ireland, Scotland, Cornwall,
and Wales is so realistic that it is most difficult to detect
the artificial from the real. Up to the present I have nc t
seen much of the shady 'side of this great city, but it is mj r
intention to do so at an early date. One of the sad sights
I have noticed since I have been here is the large number
of women (young and old) to be seen in public-house bars
drinking, and to the average Londoner this degrading sight
does not appear unusual, so accustomed has he become to
this demoralising practice.
A WEEK’S WORK.
The following is a summary of one week’s work, and
may be called a “rest cure.” Saturday took train to Stafford
(distance 80 miles) with Mr. Fisher and some other Austra-
lians. On arrival the party was met by the mayor and coun-
cillors, and an address was presented to Mr. Fisher. Thera


proceeded by motor 3! miles to Lord Harrowby’s (our host)
estate, Sandon. Had lunch and there received a deputation
of 200 working men who presented Mr. Fisher and parry
with an address of welcome. At 4 p.m. afternoon tea, and
then a motordrive around the estate to inspect some of the
tenants’ dairy farms, arriving home just in time for dinner
at 8 p.m., where we met a number of lords, viscounts, and
ladies, together with the representatives of all sections of She
district for many miles round. Sunday, breakfast at g. 30
a.m., divine service at 11 a.m. at the church on the estate.
At close of service motored to the Marquis of Anglesey’s es-
tate and had lunch, meeting all of the distinguished and lead-
ing people of the district. After lunch motored to Lincoln
and were met by the mayor and councillors, and another ad-
dress of welcome was presented to Mr. Fisher. At 4 p.m.
attended divine service at the Lincoln Cathedral, and heard
an impressive service and some good singing. At 5 p.m. had
tea) with the bishop, who briefly related the stirring history
of the cathedral and then showed us the old walls and moat
which surrounded the church, and inspected the interior of
this historic building. Then proceeded home to a heavy din-
ner. On both days the route of the party was crowded with
people, and flags and bunting were much in evidence, while
handkerchief waving and hearty cheering were indulged in
by the people to their hearts’ content. Monday motored to
Sandon railway station, then railed to Shropshire. The party
was divided into three and driven over the city and inspected
some of the principal industries. I would like to mention
that although Monday was a public holiday, those employed
in the industries we came to inspect volunteered to remain
at work in order that the party might see the entire process
of manufacture. The principal industries at Staffordshire are
Doulton & Co.’s pottery works, the Shelton iron and steel
works, Wedgwood & Son’s Eturia works, Minton &Hollis’ tile
works, and those of Johnson & Son. After the inspection,
we were driven to the city hall to lunch, and on the whole
line of route there were crowds of people and plenty of bunt-
ing. After lunch we were driven to the park to see an Eng-
lish fair, where there was a fine exhibit of the manufactured
goods of Staffordshire industries. The next was a drive to
Trenharn railway station and rail to Sandon, where motors
were ready to take us back to Lord Harrowby’s ancestral home
where a banquet awaited us and at which we met many more
representative persons including many of the leaders of the
Labor movement. Succeeded in getting to bed at 12.30 a.m.
OFF TO BRISTOL.
Tuesday at 10 a.m., started for Bristol a journey of 4I
hours by rail. On arrival the party was met by the lord


mayor and other civic authorities, bundled into taxi’s, and
driven to the lord mayor’s mansion house, where a number
of leading townsmen were awaiting our arrival, and dinner
getting cold waiting for us. After lunch we were taken in
taxi’s over some of the beautiful drives of the city, and shown
the new docks which have been erected at great cost. Re-
turned to the lord mayor’s mansion house just in time to get
into evening dress'for the banquet.at the city hall in company
with the leading statesmen of the Empire. Wednesday—At-
tended city hall, and had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Fisher
given the freedom of Bristol, and at the conclusion of the cere-
mony were hurried to the train in taxi’s, and were, figura-
tively speaking, pitched in just in time as the train was about
to start for London. Arrived at London at 2.50 p.m., and
found stacks of invitations awaiting my acceptance or other-
wise, and in either case had to be replied to. Thursday—
Received a command from the King to attend at the Abbey
at Westminster on day of coronation and in court dress. Took
’’bus to High Commissioner’s office, to ascertain if it was im-
perative to appear in court dress and was informed at a later
hour that a dispensation had been issued which allowed those
of the Australian delegation to attend the coronation in silk
hats and frock coats. Started to call on the Murrays, of
Fowler’s Bay, who are in London on a visit, and who I had
promised to dine with at 7. I negotiated the difficulty of
through the tube railway, and was congratulating my-
self when I discovered I had left in my other coat Mr. Mur-
ray’s address of the house he was staying at. There being
no time to spare I had to take a taxi and return to my lodg-
ings and get the much-needed address, and then get back to
Murray’s just in time for dinner. At 9.30 p.m. started for
the Imperial Institute, where Sir George and Lady Reid were
giving a welcome to the Australian Prime Minister and his
accompanying ministers, which started at 10 p.m. There
were 1700 Australians who attended the reception. Called on
the Orient shipping people and booked my passage in *he
S.S. Ophir, leaving on the 21st July, and due in Adelaide on
August 21. Called at the Hotel Cecil in search of a missing
umbrella supposed to be in the hands of the secretary of
General Botha.
This is my week’s work, and I am still living.
VISIT TO BELFAST.
I have not mentioned the splendid reception we had at
Belfast. We left Dublin at 9.45 a.m. by rail, and arrived at
Belfast at 12.20, passing through some most interesting coun-
try. On our arrival we were met by the lord md
driven to the Exhibition Building, which was beautifully de-
corated on our behalf. After partaking of a bounteous lunch


we were driven over the principal works of the city, and one
that I enjoyed most was the linen works in which there are-
some 7,000 hands employed, a great number of whom were
girls and women. I saw the process of manufacturing linen
from the crude flax to the beautiful damask table cloths.
Much has been done in Belfast to improve the conditions of
the worker, and to this end some 35,000 new homes have
been built by the Government and sold to the people on easy
terms of repayment. The shipbuilding works at Belfast em-
ploy 14,000 hands, and have as much work as they can do.
In 1861 the population of Belfast was 121,602, and to-day
it is 384,449. There is in this city the largest graving dock
in the world. Over has been spent by the
British Government in buying farms for the people, and the
payment to the Government for these farms extends over bo-
years, and the annual amount paid in instalments and interest
is less than The farmers used to pay for rent. In many places
in the country district houses are erected on an acre of land
and are rented to the working classes at 1/6 per week. Ihe
difference in the rent paid and the actual cost of these houses-
is taken from the general tax-payers’ fund. In the evening
we were banqueted by the lord mayor and city corporation,
and there was a very large number of townspeople present.
The whole town was decorated, flags and bunting flying every-
where, and we were cheered at every place we went. When
entering the banquet room, each lady of the party was pre-
sented with a box containing a dozen linen handkerchiefs with
most beautiful work upon them.
ON THE BOAT.
We are at present just lying outside of Gairloch, and
will be landing in a few minutes in Glasgow. Monday and
Tuesday we had a most delightful time in Dublin and Belfast.
The party is called the Dominion party, and consists of over
86 persons including the ladies, and is representative of Aus-
tralia, Canada, South Africa, and Newfoundland. We had
splendid receptions in both of these cities, and the night I
was in Dublin I was the guest of a Major and Mrs. Fuge.
While there, we visited the museum, university, Bank of Ire-
land, and Dublin Castle. The museum has the finest collec-
tion of prehistoric specimens, of the ancient Greek manufac-
ture, of a variety of "tools of trade and ornaments, and in
the university there is a beautiful piece of work in the trans-
lation of the Bible, which was done by some nuns in the
eighth century. Every page is embossed, and the colors used
are as fresh to-day as though it was but recently done. The
Bank of Ireland was formerly the building in which the Irish
Parliament met, and is therefore of historic interest because-
of that. We saw the Dublin Castle under a disadvantage, a?


it was being thoroughly renovated to receive the King and
Queen, who are visiting Ireland this week, and great prepara-
tion is being made to give them a right royal welcome. I
had a lovely motor drive in the Pheonix Park, which is, I
think, the finest I have seen, and there is a fine lot of deer
in it. Great improvements have been made in Dublin in the
last decade, and the housing of the people has been one of
the changes for the better. The buying of the land for the
tenant farmers by the Government under easy terms of re-
payment, is much appreciated by the people. We had lunch
at the vice-regal lodge with their Excellencies Lord and Lady
Aberdeen, who are much loved by the Irish people. We were
also entertained at the theatre in the afternoon by an Irish
play, which was well played and the acting was, good. The
whole of the play was a local production. At night we were
divided into two parties and banqueted. When in Dublin an
unfortunate fatal accident happened. One of our motor cars
.ran over a little boy some five or six years of age, and killed
him. It appears that the little fellow ran right in front of
the motor, and the driver had no show to pull up the car
before it was over the child. There was only one young lady
in the car, and she was greatly upset as a result of the acci-
dent. Yesterday in Belfast, one of the delegates from South
Africa slipped on some steps and fell very heavily and broke
a small bone in his leg. As a result he will not be able 1o
■proceed with the party. The old gentleman is 73 years of
age.
When writing this I am at Cambridge and for the future
I shall be able to claim that at any rate a part of my studies
have been at this ancient college. When I wrote last I was
at Scarborough, and time has not been available to describe
the many interesting buildings of that ancient city. The
house still stands in which Richard 111 lived in the year 1484.
There is also a well-preserved chair on view which is called
a ducking chair. At one time this used to be fixed at a
place on the beach called a ducking hole for the purpose of
ducking in the sea scolding women, and the record shows
that the last person who was ducked in this way was a Mrs.
'Gamble, who was ducked in 1795. I understand that the
ducking process was not confined to women, for it is said
that there were several cases of men .having received the
same punishment.
ACROSS TO GLASGOW.
At 11 p.m. we went on board a steamer, and started foi
Belfast, and arrived at Gairloch at about 7.30, and had
Breakfast on board. At 10.30 the lord provost and corpora-
tion of Glasgow came down to meet us on a boat which was


beautifully decorated, and there were with him about 150 of
the townspeople of Glasgow. We had to go on their boat,
the Duchess of Hamilton, and take a trip up the Gairloch,
the Holyloch, and Loch Lang. At 1 p.m. some of us lunched
on the boaf, and others were landed and lunched at an hotel
close by. While at lunch we were serenaded by a band of
beautiful singers who had turned out to do us honor. After
lunch we proceeded up the Loch Lomond amidst the most
beautiful scenery, and from thence proceeded up the Clyde,
passing all the great shipbuilding works on the Clyde, and
on the whole of the route, all vessels—and there were many
of them —were gaily decorated with flags, and all along the
river bank on every place of vantage there were thousands of
people out to do us honor. The banquet at night was a great
success. One new feature in connection with many of L he
banquets given to us was the presence of large numbers of
ladies, which in my opinion, is a decided improvement.
IMPRESSIONS OF GLASGOW.
When I wrote last I had just arrived at Glasgow, and I
think I related briefly the wonderful welcome we, as members
•of the oversea dominions, nad received from the Glasgow
people, but after my writing there were many more striking
evidences of the warm affection of the people of Glasgow for
the representatives of the oversea dominions. On the day
after our arrival, there was one of the finest gatherings of
people at the St. Andrew Hall to see the ceremony of pre-
senting the freedom of the city of Glasgow to Mr. Fisher and
other oversea premiers, and also to General Kitchener. The
ceremony was a very impressive one, and each of the gentle-
men presented with the freedom of the city was also handed
a gold casket of beautiful design and of considerable value.
The St. Andrew’s Hall, which is a large one, was packed to
the roof, and this vast audience displayed great enthusiasm.
At the conclusion of this, we were all entertained at lunch
by the lord provost and councillors, in the city hall, which was
beautifully decorated for the occasion. This hall is said to
be the finest in the United Kingdom. After lunch, we visited
many of the industries, myself visiting one of the great ship-
building works, where there are 8,000 men employed. At
night we were again banqueted by the lord provost and city
councillors at the exhibition grounds. At Glasgow on the
■second day, the party was divided in two; one section pro-
ceeded to Edinburgh, and, I understand, were equally wel-
comed. On Friday the party was divided into three, one '-ec-
tion going to Newcastle on the Tyne, another to
Sheffield, and the one I was attached to proceeded
to Leeds, which is a large manufacturing district, with
a population of about half a million of people. In


each of these places there were the same extraordinary
outbursts of v welcome. Yesterday the section of the party 1
was with, was joined by the other two sections, and on our
arrival here at 5.30 p.m., we were met by the mayor and
councillors at me railway station, and welcomed to the most
beautiful city of Scarborough. From the railway we were
conveyed in carriages to the Grand Hotel, and the streets
were lined by many thousands of people, who cheered us
heartily. Last night there was a brilliant banquet in our
honor. To-aay we are resting, with the exception of attend-
ing a garden party at Lord and Lady Londesborough’s. To-
morrow we Have quite a number of functions to attend, but
I shall describe these in my next.
DR. BARNARDO’S HOMES.
I have just returned from an inspection of Dr. Barnardo’s
cottage homes, and have spent one of the most interesting
and instructive times since I have been in London. There are
70 of these cottage homes at Bockingsgrete, where I have
been to-day. They are all two storeys, and contain a number
of rooms, and are up-to-date in every particular. In addition
to the homes, there is a substantial hospital erected with
the money raised by the Barnardo boys who visited Australia
some time ago. There is also a fine church, and many work-
shops in which the older boys and girls do most useful and
excellent work. There is a beautiful area, of land of 70 acres,
and the homes form a circle in the centre, and the other
part of the land is utilised for playgrounds and growing vege-
tables. In the homes I inspected there are some 1500 in-
mates, but connected with this grand institution there are
9,000 boys and girls, the balance being located in similar
homes in other parts of London. All of the children are
taught useful trades and other work, and the Work done is
of the best. Among this large number of children there are
some blind, others who have lost both legs, and many who
are deficient of an arm or a leg; yet all do excellent work,
and really have a splendid home, and I think, are very happy.
Many of the boys and girls as they grow up are sent to
-situations and trades, and give an excellent account of them-
selves to their new masters or mistresses, as the case may
be. One of the most remarkable things brought under my
notice, was the exceptionally clever work done by boys and
girls of defective intellect, the most remarkable being die
lace and fancy work done by the girls of weak intellect. Some
of the lace made by them brings as much as a yard. All
the bread used in this institution is made by the boys, and
the girls do the cooking, and while I was" there I saw a
splendid sample of what they could do as cooks. Of course.


.as you know, I had often heard of these homes, but until I
had inspected the place and saw the work that they are
•doing, and the capable and good citizens they are turning
out, I had only the faintest conception of the value of this
God-like institution. Up to the present, this institution has
had 70,000 of these children in their hands. The doctor, as
you know, died quite recently, but his good wife lives, and is
just as enthusiastic in this noble work. I had the pleasure
■of meeting her, and am of the opinion that she is a most
wonderful lady. And how the children love her, especially
the blind who have never seen her. I don’t think that there
is a slum house in the whole of London that she has not
visited, and how she loves the work. She is supported by
an excellent, well-trained staff of men and women. While I
was there I had a sample of what the boys could do in Tie
shape of bands. There is a brass band which does c-edit
to its teacher, and there is also a Scotch pipe band of boys
which might take its place anywhere. In addition, there are
many of the boys who are excellent players on many other
instruments. In conclusion I would like to say that there
is no institution which is doing better work than this one,
and consequently none more deserving of financial support.
AT STAFFORD.
I am writing from Lord Harrowby’s country residence,
•on his Stafford Fst-ate. It is indeed a beautiful place, and
is situated midway between London and Liverpool. Mr. and
Mrs. Fisher, also Mr. Batchelor, and a number of other Aus-
tralians, are spending the week-end here. Yesterday we had
• a great reception from the residents of Stafford. The estate
is about five and a half miles from the town, and when being
driven out in motor cars, there were thousands of people on
each side of the road waving handkerchiefs and cheering us
as we drove along. In the afternoon, hundreds came out to
Lord Harrowby’s residence to present an address of welcome
to the party. These were the working men and their wives
and children from all over the estate and the adjoining towns.
The road from the railway station where we got out, and up
to the gate leading into the estate, was lined with.flags and
small banners. In the afternoon we were driven over ihe
estate to see a number of small dairy farms which Lord
Harrowby has established on his estate. The size of the small
farms was about 40 acres, and on them are erected substan-
tial homes and good milking sheds for the cows. The number
of cows kept on each place is about 14 milkers and some
young stock. On Sunday we , attended divine service in Tie
parish church in. the park, and then drove 12 miles and had
lunch with the' Marquis of Anglesey at his beautiful home,


named Beaudesert, which has been in possession of the family
since the reign of Henry VIII. There was a distinguished
gathering at lunch. We were present at divine service six
miles further on, at Litchfield Cathedral, at 4 p.m. Had tea
with the Bishop of Litchfield at 5 p.m., and then motored back
to Sandon, the Earl of Harrowby’s ancestral home. When
at Litchfield, we received an address of welcome from ihe
mayor and councillors. During the whole of the journey
there were large numbers of people on the route, waving nags
and cheering. To-day we go to Stoke-on-Trent, where there-
is a big programme to go through.
AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE.
There have been this week some very important events,
the chief of which was, I think, the entertaining by the King,
and Queen, of 100,000 children at the Crystal Palace. There
were 92 trains run to convey the children to the grounds, and
in order that the guests could be easily found when lost, they
wore head adornments resembling a variety of flowers. The
ages of the children were over 11 and under 13, and they
were arranged in nine batches, in charge of their teachers.
There were nine imitations of flowers, and the colors were-
from the bright red of the poppy, to the white lily. Just
imagine if you can, the cheers of these 100,000 voices, and
what a grand sight the children presented when arranged
in the nine battalions in all of their beautiful representations,
of flowers. Just imagine, if you can, the tons of buns, cakes,
and lollies there had to be made up in bags, ready for dis-
tribution, and the amount of work there must have been in
getting the supplies ready. I want you also just to imagine
the excitement in the scores of thousands of homes of the
children on the night before, and the morning of the great
fete. What a time their mothers must have had, and how
excited the children must have been. The great anxiety on
the part of the parents and teachers was about the weather,
as it was raining heavily on the eve of the great festival.
Think also of the anxiety as to some of this vast number of
children getting lost. I can fancy I see thousands of blinds
being lifted up at the peep of day, to see what the morning-
had brought forth, and what joy there must have been at
the news that it was not raining. Just think'you see 100,000
children in some nine battalions, marching in several direc-
tions through London on their way to the trains which
were to convey them to the Crystal Palace, and those
thousands of happy faces as they march, march along.
Presently they are all in the 92 trains, and it is not
long before they are being marshalled into the palace grounds.
Then just imagine you see the 100,000 arranged in lines,


between which the King and Queen, accompanied by three of
their children—the Prince of Wales, Princess Mary, and' little
Prince George. Don’t you hear them cheering? Presently
you see the royal party walk right down the lines, in the
midst of these imitations of poppies, roses, carnations, pinks,
cornflowers, sunflowers, violets, lilies, and buttercups. Then
these happy little ones are losing their heads and getting
beyond the control of their guardians, and getting all beauti-
fully mixed up like a garden in a nightmare. How *hey
yelled and danced. The confusion is but temporary, however,
and discipline prevails, and the King and Queen and their
three children pass on smiling. Presently you see a little
girl present a bouquet to Princess Mary, and make a beauti-
ful curtsey. If there ever were cheers that made the King's
and Queen’s hearts glow, it was surely the cheers of these
100,000 children. What a day they had, seeing wild animal
shows, riding on zig-zag railways, whirly-go-rounds, swinging
boats, and many other pleasures. Arranged on the grounds
were depots for lost children, and finally the children are
homeward bound. As far as I can hear, not a mishap of
any kind occurred. Was there ever a greater bun struggle
and a more willing army to take on the fight? It was for-
tunate, indeed, that the weather was fine, as we have had
very much wet weather lately.
CITY OF SCARBOROUGH.
The ancient city of Scarborough has much in it which is
of great interest to the traveller from the newer lands. It
is described as the queen of watering places, and is indeed
a beautiful place and a pleasant seaside resort for pleasure
seekers. Its history dates as far back as B.C. 56, and is
a most remarkable one, its inhabitants having played a most
important part in war and peace, commerce, adventure, edu-
cation, science, and in matters of the church. Although his-
tory is silent on its earliest inhabitants, there have been dis-
coveries made which conclusively prove that it was peopled
by a hardy race for many centuries before the Roman inva-
sion, but no recorded events can be obtained until the year
930, and it was about this period that Scarborough was
raided by the Danes. But the Danes on that occasion were
routed. In the year 1066, the then King of Norway ravaged
both sides of the river Tyne, and proceeding to Scarborough,
took up a position on Castle Hill. From this position he
threw large burning pieces of wood on to the town, which
was situated at the foot of Castle Hill, and in a short time
the town surrendered. History records that the invaders
killed large numbers and carried off as plunder everything
worth taking, and the only condition on which the lives of


the conquered could be spared was by becoming slaves to
the conquerors. Scarborough at this early period was a
walled city, but the houses, were of wood and consequently
could easily be reduced to ashes. It is recorded that in
1050-1086 there were only 26 souls, and six weeks before the
battle of Hastings, this city was reduced to ashes, and the
above record of those few left to tell the tale is a testimony
of the devastation of the Norwegian invasion, and the mas-
sacre by William the Conqueror.
CASTLE HILL.
One of the most interesting relics at Scarborough is the
-old castle, the remains of which stand on Castle Hill, the
place from which the Norwegians hurled their logs of fire.
This castle was in the first place built of wood, and was
erected about the year 1227. The stone structure, part of
which remains, was not begun until almost the reign of Henry
11, and history records that the stone castle was built be-
tween the years 1158 and 1168. Castle Hill is a most remark-
able one. It stands several hundred feet above the sea level,
and is surrounded on three sides by the sea. It is indeed a
most commanding position t as from its top you have a view
of the ocean as far as the eye can reach, and no body of men
could approach it by land without being seen many miles
before they could reach its base. The slopes of the hill on
three sides are so steep that it is with difficulty anyone can
climb them. On its top there is a tableland covering an
of some 60 acres, and around this tableland a massive stone
wall was erected, and in the centre a castle built on hnes
of strength which exceed anything of modern times. I have
seen nothing in my life of such an impregnable position. At
the foot of Castle Hill, on the only side which was approach-
able, was dug out a great ditch, and the loose earth thrown
up on the side in a way that made it most difficult to climb.
At the main entrance there are two massive gates and a
drawbridge between. Over the first gate, within a similar
wall, there is a device for the boiling of lead, which could be
emptied on the enemy if by any chance they could break
down the outer gate. This same device is also in evidence
in the castle. For those of the enemy who succeeded 1 in
breaking through the massive doorway, and began to mount
the narrow stairway, there was the hot lead awaiting them.
But that was not all, because there, was a false landing which
could be let go at one end, and thus hurl the occupants of
the platform down into the dungeon below, which was full
of the most venomous reptiles. The plan of this building
and all its devices emanated from the brain of a monk, who


was described as a weeping monk. There was also a dun-
geon for prisoners, with no ventilation or light, at the base:
of the building, while in its upper storeys there were '■he
rooms, on a grand scale, in which the kings and their friends,
held great banquets. As one stands over the dungeon, it is.
not difficult to imagine the horrible torture of the prisoners,
while those in power were revelling in luxury and debauchery.
ANCIENT WELL.
Near the castle is a circular well, which in recent years
has been discovered by the Scarborough civic authorities, and
cleaned out to a depth of 180 ft., yet they have not yet got
to the bottom. In this well, cannon balls have been found,,
some of stone and others of iron. Some of these cannon
balls are larger than are being used to-day. Quite a number
of other interesting relics of pottery and other things have
been discovered, including some of the coin of those days.
It is believed by some that from this well there was a secret
passage to the parish church at the foot of the hill, which was
started about the year 1140. This building, or the part which,
remains, is of much interest. Whether the theory be right
that it is connected with the castle well, of course, there is.
no evidence, but there is a general consensus of opinion that
this deep shaft was not used as a well for water purposes,
as there is no water in it. I am informed that it is the in-
tention of the civic authorities to pursue their search further,
and try and get to the bottom of this well at a later date.
The hrst charter of incorporation of Scarborough dales
back to the year 1100, and at several subsequent periods the
charter was renewed. It was Henry I who granted the first,
charter. Reverting again to the castle, time or space will
not permit me to say more about it except that it stood
the brunt of all until Cromwell it. Then it met its
master, and after a siege extending over 12 months, Sir Hugh-
Cholmley, its defender, was compelled to surrender. It was
in this castle that George Fox, the founder of the Society of
Friends, was imprisoned.
PORT SUNLIGHT.
Again leaving Scarborough, we passed through what is
known as the black country, which is a great manufacturing
oistrict, and gets the name of the black country because of
a continuous cloud of smoke that hangs over it for miles.
The day we were passing through it was very thick, indeed,
making it difficult to see anything at a distance from f he
train. The day was very warm, and the presence of sulphur
in large quantities in the smoke made it very unpleasant.


We were on our way to the Sunlight soap works, which are
situated at Port Sunlight, near Liverpool. These works are
owned by the Lever Brothers, one of them (W. H. Lever) be-
ing a member of the House of Commons. There are some
4,000 hands employed on these works, and a beautiful village
has been built by the Lever Brothers for their workmen. Each
house stands on a fair-sized block of land, and has a flower
garden in front with a vegetable and fruit garden in the
rear. There are no two houses on the same design, and all
have the best of conveniences. These houses are let at a
very low. rental. The streets of the village are wide and
well made, and ample provision is made for playing and
bathing grounds. Concert and reading halls are also pro-
vided, and schoolhouses of the most up-to-date style have
also been erected by these employers. The factory, which
covers many acres of land, is on model lines, and is truly
named “Sunlight” because I have never seen a better ar-
ranged building for light and ventilation. In the book-keep-
ing department, there are 400 clerks, and the large hall they
work in is a perfect model for light and other conveniences.
Indeed, go where you will through this great works, and you
are the more impressed with the appropriate name, “Sun-
light,” which has been utilised to the fullest degree in the
construction of the building. It is quite evident that it was
the architect’s determination to allow no sunlight to go fo
waste. The cleanliness of the works from end to end is the
next thing which impresses the visitor, and without exag-
geration, it is not too much to say you could take your meals
off any of the floors of the building, they being spotless and
as white as a well-kept kitchen table. Bathrooms are pro-
vided all over the works, and every attention has been given
to the sanitary side of the question. Doctors, chemists, and
nurses are provided on the works, and any employee indis-
posed is attended to on the spot. Rooms are also provided
and under the care of a nurse any of the young girls if tem-
porarily indisposed may recline, and receive the attention of
the nurse and doctor if required. Every employee partici-
pates in the profits, and last year 1500 opened savings bank
accounts as a result of their annual dividend. The Lever
make it quite clear that none of this special atten-
tion to their employees is on philanthropic grounds, but as
they put it in plain, undeniable language, “It pays to do
this.” In passing through the works, I noticed a beautiful
dining-room, and on the door was the notice that a three-
course meal was provided at a cost of 2d. From enquiries
made, I am satisfied that the meal is a fairly substantial one,
and this only goes to show what can be done by co-operation.
.After seeing these works, and noting the consideration given


by the employers, Sunlight soap will carry to me the most
happy remembrance of what splendid conditions prevailed at
this factory. Time will not permit me dealing more fully with
this deserving subject here, but I may later on have more to
say on this head.
CADBURY’S WORKS.
I think it would be htting that in this letter I should tell
you of what I saw at Cadbury’s works, which are situated
near Birmingham. The Cadburys are Quakers by religion,
and if lam not mistaken so are the Lever Brothers. In the
Cadbury confectionery works there are some 7,000 employees.
This firm has erected 700 cottages for the workpeople, and
their cottages, like those of the Sunlight people, are of
most modern design. Each of these is on a good roomy
block of land, and has a nice flower plot in front, and a good
vegetable and fruit garden at the back. There are no at-
tached buildings or semi-attached. Large recreation grounds
(one for the men and one for the women) are beautifully kept.
Gymnasium clubs and plunge and shower baths are provided,
and are on such up-to-date lines that one almost envies t' e
employees of this firm. The total area of land occupied with
the houses, factories, railway and other yards, and recreation
grounds, is one square mile of country. Employees in the
bulk of cases only work 46 hours per week, and none more
than 48 hours. During working time certain gymnasium ~nd
bathing exercises have to be taken, the result being that there
are many hundreds of expert swimmers and equally clever
acrobats. So much so, that Cadbury’s teams of boys or girls
when in competition with those from other parts win with
ease. There are three bands-—two of string and the other
brass—the girls having one of the string bands. Most of the
work is done at piece rates, but the girls earn at their rates
about 2d. an hour more than girls of similar ages earn at
other works. Here, as at Sunlight, everything is spotless.
Cleanliness is in evidence everywhere, and the greatest of
consideration for the employees is shown. Doctors, chemists
and nurses are provided at the owner’s expense, but it is
made quite clear that there is no charity about the method
of conducting this business. It pays best to consider the
employee. It pays to feed, house, and attend to the health
of humanity, in the shape of their employees. Evidence is
plainly visible of this consideration in every part of the works.
If employers generally would take this interest in their em-
ployees, there would be a much better feeling between em-
ployer and employee.
IN WALES.
After leaving Liverpool, we proceeded to Llandudno,
which is a beautiful seaport in Wales. We were given a


great reception there, the town being well decorated, and
thousands of flags and streamers flying everywhere. In the
evening a Welsh concert was especially provided for us in
which several hundred singers took part. We had the plea-
sure of hearing the best singing that we had heard in all our
lives. From Llandudno, we proceeded to Carnarvon Castle,
and were present at the ceremony of the investiture of the
Prince of Wales.
ROWNTREE & Co.,
Within one and a half miles of the ancient city of York
the cocoa and confectionery works of the abovenamed com-
pany are situated, and are carrying out one of the finest ex-
periments in industrial betterment. When visiting that ancient
city I made it my business to call on the principal director
of this company, and he kindly arranged that I should have
the fullest opportunity in the time at my disposal to see what
was being done. The principal shareholders in the company
are the Rowntree brothers, who are Quakers, and, like the
principals of Cadburys’ and the Sunlight Works, the resident
director, (one of the Rowntree Bros.), made it clear
to me that what was attempted to be done was done not only
on philanthropic lines, but on absolute business lines, and
that the experiment so far proved that it pays to consider
the health and reasonable comfort of the employees. These
works were started in 1891 on the present site, but prior i.o
that I understand they had two factories at work in the
city of York. The buildings on the present site cover more
than 10 acres, and about 60 acres are devoted to gardens,
recreation grounds and allotments. The number of employ-
ees in- 1910 was 3848, and at the time I visited the works
there were some 5,000 hands, about 3,000 being girls and
women, and the rest men and boys. As much depends on
the overseers of such large works as these, great care is ex-
ercised in selection, it being recognised by the promoters of
this industrial betterment scheme that such overseers —or
overlookers as the Arm designated them—must not only be
capable workmen or women in their respective departments,
but they must also be in sympathy with the scheme, and are
expected to discourage gambling, intemperance, and bad 1 n-
guage, and to encourage in every possible way a right tone
in the factory. As the promoters in this scheme put it,
that industrial betterment may therefore be said to begin
with the right selection of the overlookers, this is looked
upon as being important in the foundation of the undertaking.
Great care is also exercised by the directors in keeping them-
selves in touch with the results of their individual employees.


For instance, at short intervals the overlookers have to fur-
nish statements to the directors showing the individual earn-
ings, whether it be piece-work or wages. Again, no em-
ployee can be discharged or suspended for more than a week
until the directors have been made acquainted with -all the
facts. This is being done to protect to the fullest the em-
ployee from wrongful dismissal, or having to work for less
than is considered a minimum wage, and if it is found upon
perusal of these reports that the individual earnings of *hose
on piecework is under what is considered a living wage en-
quiries are at once made to find out the cause. In the piece-
work departments a new employee is put on at a weekly
rate, and continues at such for three months, and at the end
of that term if the employee does not show aptitude for
that class of work he or she is given a chance in some other
•department to see whether he or she may show better re-
sults, and in some cases employees have been given trials in
several departments before they get into their right places.
‘Of course there are some who have to be eventually dis-
charged, but not many, as this consideration by the employer
generally appeals to the best traits in the employee’s nature.
THE SOCIAL SIDE.
One of the most interesting and, I think, essential part
of this betterment scheme is the social side of it which was
organised and started on these works in 1891. For ‘‘his
purpose social helpers are engaged for their special know-
ledge of the particular phase of the social work they have to
take in hand, such as clubs and societies of the following
character:—Sick clubs, sewing clubs, recreation clubs. The
arrangement of libraries, visitation of those who are ill, care-
ful inspection! of wages from the employer’s as well as the
■employee’s standpoint, to see that the food, such as meals
•supplied on, the works is wholesome, nutritious, and at a mini-
mum cost. The social staff in 1891 consisted of one, and
in igio was 14, and is somewhat larger at present. In iqio
there were five men and nine women social helpers. One of
fhe men is a university man who had considerable experience
in a settlement in East London; another is an elementary
•schoolteacher and teacher of gymnastics, and is responsible
for work among the lads. Each of these has an assistant.
There is also a clerk who devotes his whole time to the social
department, and there are two others whose time is largely
occupied in visiting men and boys who are ill. On the staff
of female helpers are, in addition to teachers of cookery,
fiygpene and dressmaking, known as the domestic school,
ladies who have had experience in country work and girls hat
■work. The engagement of girls is always left to the women
-social helpers, and whenever it is necessary to speak to any


of the girls about their work or general conduct, this is also
done by the female side of the social helpers, land
this is done in such a way that no other employee-
has any knowledge of it. Should any of the girls,
not put in an appearance on any working morning one of ihe
social helpers is at once dispatched to call on the girl or her
home. It is also the duty of these social helpers to visit 'he
homes of the girls living with their parents or at lodging-
houses, as the case may be, and ascertain what the home life
is like, and whether the girl has in her home life or lodging
a good environment. Two first-class doctors are retained by
the company who attend at the works for two hours on five
days each week,, and can be consulted by any employee free
of cost. In cases where prescriptions are given by the lec-
tors a bottle of medicine is supplied at the price of 6d., this
being about the average cost. The hours worked in the fac-
tory are eight, and during this period a certain time is devoted
by some of the girls to domestic economy. The works close
at 12 noon on Saturday, and consequently to put in the 48
hours per week the time lost on Saturday is made up by start-
ing a little earlier on each day of the week.
GOOD TREATMENT.
Just to show how the employees are considered by his.
firm I would like to mention here that at 10 o’clock there is
light refreshment provided, and can be obtained by the em
ployees on payment of a small charge. For instance, a large
glass of fresh milk, hot or cold, can be obtained for one
penny, and other light refreshments at reasonable rates.
Many of the girls who have made a poor breakfast take ad-
vantage of this boon. The eight hours system has not always,
been the practice but came into operation of January 1896.
Prior to that the hours were 53 per week, and the principal
speaking of this change says that it was found that he
workers on piece-work earned as much in the 48 hours as
they previously did in the 53. No reduction was made in the
wage hands, and the director says of this that if any loss
was made to the company it was very slight, and even though
there be a slight loss it is nothing compared with the advan-
tages which followed this change. There are dining rooms-
for the girls and separate for the men and boys, and cooks
and waitresses are provided by the company. Any of f he
employees can get their dinner there if they want to. Em-
ployees bringing their own dinner with them can have same
warmed for them in the hot stoves free, and in such cases
these dinners are put in the place alloted to the employee iri
the dining room. At the head of every table a tap is ar-
ranged from which boiling water can be obtained free for the-
purpose of making tea, cocoa or coffee as the case may be.


All cooking utensils, tables, floors and everything in the dining"
rooms are beautifully clean. In addition to the girls’ dining
rooms there is what is known as the rose garden, which con-
tains an area of between three or four acres, and in this
there are shelter sheds, and what is not occupied with flowers
is a beautiful lawn. Many of the girls take their dinners
there, and during the interval of an hour, which is allowed for
dinner they play cricket and other games which at times in-
cludes dancing. All of these games are organised by one
of the lady social helpers. The girls’ large dining room w'l
accommodate 750, the smaller one 500' and the men’s 500.
It has been found that many of the men who live near the
works go home, and consequently there is not as large am
attendance of men as girls. The following is a sample of the*
prices charged:—Cup of cocoa, Jd.; serving of fish, id.; fruit,,
id.; meat, 3d. and 3d.; large glass of milk, id.; meat pies,
id.; serving of peas, sausage and mashed potatoes,, id.,
soup, id.; stew, id.; tea, and sweets, id. Various games-
are indulged in during the meal hour in the dining room and
a lecture or concert a couple of times each week in the concert
room during the winter months. There are two good bands
among the employees, and in competing with outside teams
at cricket and other games of sport the company teams are
formidable opponents to meet and can show quite a list and
a brilliant display of prizes that they havfe won.
MEDICAL ATTENTION AND REST.
One of the duties of the social overlookers is to arrange
for sending some of the employees who requiring a rest ‘O
the convalescent home at Scarborough. In making this
selection the njost needful cases are chosen, and in the year
1909 170 employees were sent to the home at the cost of the
company. I have already referred to the doctors retained by
the company, and during six months in 1909 the doctors were
consulted 3041 times. The doctors have to test the eyes of
employees and prescribe the spectacles. They also examine
all applicants for work. A dental department is also estab-
lished, as the doctors’ report referred to ailments among the
employees as the direct result of faulty teeth. An experi-
enced dental surgeon gives his whole time to this work, ex-
tractions and stopping of teeth being done without charge
except in such cases where gas is required in extraction, and
then a charge of 6d. is made. There is also a dental mech-
anic, and sets of teeth are supplied at cost price. The works’
doctors do not visit the homes, but through a medical club
established among the employees medical attendance and
medicine can be obtained on the payment of id. per week for
themselves and wives, and on the payment of 1/6 per quarter
for each child under 14. There are over 1000 employees
members of this club. Ambulance drill work is taught by


the club, and nursing requisites are lent to members at very
low rates. As there is a lot more to be said about what is
being done at the Rowntree Cocoa Works I purpose having
something further to say in another article. Much of rhe
information in this article was obtained by me when on the
works and the balance from the reading of a pamphlet issued
by the Company.
VENTILATION AND LIBRARY.
Ventilation of the factory receives special attention, and
to this end the company’s chemist analyses the air in the
different work rooms several times each hour, and a system
has been inaugurated which removes the impurities of the n ir.
During the winter the air is passed through steam pipes before
being introduced into the work rooms, and every considera-
tion is given to the supply of pure air, while electric light is
used in preference to gas. ■ There is a free library of some
i/oo volumes, and 1074 employees borrow from it regularly.
This library is under the charge of one of the social helpers,
who renders assistance to the readers in the choice of books
and in the general selection for the library. There is also a
works magazine, which comes out monthly, and is given free
to the employees. This magazine is a very creditable pro-
duction.
ALLOTMENT OF LAND.
Adjoining the factory there are some 30 acres of land,
subdivided into 132 allotments, the largest containing some
345 square yards, and the rent of these is 10/ per year. The
next size is 115 square yards, and the rent is 3/4 per year,
and the Smallest size is 86 square yards, which is used for
boys, and a rental of 2/6 a year is charged. Prizes are given
yearly to the best kept lots, and prizes are also given for che
best production of vegetables and flowers, and for the smallest
size manure and seeds are provided free of cost. These lots
are inspected yearly by a lecturer from the Yorkshire College
at Leeds, who in his last report stated that the work was
most satisfactory, and that there was nothing in the whole
of Yorkshire to equal them, and I am given to understand
that they are very highly valued by the holders. The head
gardner and one of the social staff give occasional advice and
help. This firm has also a horticultural society, and holds
two shows in each year. There are also bulb and flower
competitions.
PENSION FUND.
In the year 1906 a pension fund was established. This
fund is optional, and although the fund has only been started
three years, out of 1243 employers who are eligible 1239 are
members of this fund. An employee must retire from the
work at the age of 65 for men and 55 for women, and the


minimum pension under this scheme will be 15/ per week and!
the maximum 20/ per wek. The age of entry is 20 for males
and 25 for females. The company provides 75 per cent, of
the contributions for men and slightly over 80 per cent, in the
case of women, and the following scale of payment would en-
title a pension of 15/ per week at the age of 65: —Age 20 at
entry, 6d. per week; at 26 /d.; 30, 9; 35, 1/; 40, 1/6.
Employees can, if they so desire, increase their pension pay-
ment at the commencement of the financial year and thus
obtain a larger pension. In the event of death or withdrawal
before the pension age all subscriptions are returnable with
2\ per cent, compound interest, also on death after pension;
age the unpaid balance, with 2£ per cent, interest, is payable
to member’s personal representative. There is also a sick,
benefit scheme, which is registered under the Friendly Socie-
ties Act. There are also savings banks, one for girls and.
one for men and boys. Prior to 1905 a depositor could not
deposit more than in one year, or £3OO altogether, and.
the Company paid 5 per cent on the first £SO and 3f on the
balance, but that has now been revised, and the following
takes its place:—Collectors visit each department weekly and
receive deposits from 2d. per week upwards, and at the e"d
of the year officials from the post office and local bank attend
the works for the purpose of opening accounts with the em-
ployees, and the accounts opened with the company are en
transferred, the company paying in the meantime 5 per cenc.
interest on the amounts collected by them that do not ex-
ceed £2O, but no interest' is allowed on accounts which are
not transferred at the end of the year. All expenses of col-
lecting and bookkeeping are born by the firm. The number
of accounts open on March 31, 1910, was—Men’s fund 225;
girls’ fund 459; or a total of 684.
A DOMESTIC SCHOOL.
In 1905 the domestic school was started, and at present,
there are 850 girls on the register. They have to attend
these classes for three years on entering the works, and must
be present for 2f hours each week during working hours, and:
piece workers are not paid for the time when in the domestic
school, but day workers are given an opportunity of making;
up lost time by putting a little more energy into their work,
and are paid full time. These classes are inaugurated for
the special purpose of preparing the girls for their after life
as housewives and mothers, and in the hygienic class infant
management is taught also. Dressmaking, cooking, mend-
ing are also taught, and the girls cut out every garment they
make. In the cooking classes special attention is giving to
teaching bread-making, soups, stews, and wholesome foods-
at a minimum cost. In addition to the day classes there are
night classes which are well-attended. The teaching takes.


.Allotments
Men and
Women.
.. .. 119
Boys and
Girls. Total
— no
Ambulance Classes
24
44
Ambulance Brigade
.. .. 25
Brass Band .. .. .. ..
.... 31
—
3 1
Angling Club
•• 33
—
33
Bowling Club ..
58
1
59
Bookeries ..
.. .. 15
30
45
Camera Club . ... ..
.. .. 27
5
32
■Cricket Club
40.
Choral Societies
20
40
Debating Society
.... 40
—
40
Dressmaking Class (distinct from
dressmaking class)
girls’
30
30
Football Clubs ..
.... 70
—
70
Friendly Societies (sick club) . . ..
1271
2371
Gymnastic Class (male adults) .. . .
.. .. 30
—
30
Horticultural Society
.... 92
—
92
Library ; .. .
. .. 389
685
1074
Mandoline Class
—
20
20
Swimming Class (girls)
30
30
Temperance Society (girls)
120
120
Tennis and Croquet Club
.. .. 23
19
42
"Wednesday Class (dinner hour) .. . .
220
220
Self-help Medical flub
■ • • • 312
573
1031
Savings Funds Club
459
684
Boys’ Club . 4 ..
45
■the form of a demonstration and practice class alternate
weeks. Intelligent economy is taught, and if in one class
.a nourishing dinner is produced at a low cost, another class
will try to reduce the cost, while retaining its nutritive powers.
There can be no doubt that these domestic classes are doing
good work, which will be of great value to students in after
life. All girls and boys under the age of .17 have to attend
.gymnastic classes which are under the supervision of instruc-
tors, in some cases the doctor advises as to the best
kind of training.
PHYSICAL TRAINING.
This physical training is made a condition of their em-
ployment, and at the time of my visit there were 220 boys on
the register and a larger number of girls. The sports grounds
.are as follows: —One sports and cricket ground seven acres
in extent; new football grounds, two bowling greens, five
tennis courts, and the rose garden which I have mentioned
before. The following is a summary of clubs, &c., and mem-
bership of same:—
CLASSES, SOCIETIES, CLUBS, &c.,


In my next article I will deal with the Joseph Rowntree
village trust, known as New Earswick, which is situated about
■one mile from the Rowntree Cocoa Works. This village
covers an area of 120 acres.
SUNLIGHT SOAP INDUSTRY.
Following up the references made to the Sunlight Soap
industry I shall now add a few more particulars of this suc-
cessful experiment in prosperity sharing. Sir William Lever
the founder of these works holds the opinion that prosperity
sharing is sounder in principle than profit sharing, and in an
address given at Birkenhead in 1900 he said;—"One of he
best methods for the application of the principle of prosperity
sharing is to be found in building cottages to be let a low
rentals.” Acting on this principle he caused to be built
out of the profits of the company a very large number of
houses of two types—the cottage and the parlor design. In
the former there are three bedrooms upstairs and living room,
kitchen, scullery, bathroom, and larder on the ground floor.
The parlor type have four bedrooms, and in addition to die
accommodation on the ground floor in the cottage there is a
parlor. The original cost of these buildings was £2OO and
but in 1902 the cost had risen to £330 and Now
under the prosperity sharing scheme it is not intended to
charge in rent the capitalised cost of the building, but on
the cost of upkeep, with 1 per cent, added for depreciation,
and under this computation the rentals for the smaller class
of house is 5/3 per week, and with rates and taxes included
it comes out at 7/5 per week. All these houses are of ex-
cellent design and have all modern conveniences, with flower
gardens in front and vegetable and fruit at the rear. The
upkeep of the flower garden is looked after by the company’s
gardner, and the cost per cottage is 3d. per week. The fruit
and vegetable garden is looked after by the occupier and -.he
products grown reduce the cost of living very much.
SCOPE OF THE WORK.
The original works were started in January, 1886, in
Warrington, Cheshire, and had only a capacity of 20 tons per
week, but the present factory is at Port Sunlight, and has a
capacity of 4000 tons per week. The works and village
cover 231 acres—96 acres taken up by the factories, wharfs,
and sidings and 135 by houses, gardens, village institutions,
recreation grounds, and other spaces. At the time of my
visit there were between 700 and 800 houses erected. The
capital value of these lands and buildings, including the fac-
tories, stands in the books at and the authorised
capital of the company is The manufacture and
distribution of Sunlight Soap are carried on in Japan, South


Africa, United States, Australia, New Zealand and many other
countries, and the company has extensive oil mills and plan-
tations in other parts of the world. The village scheme at
Port Sunlight differs from Rowntree and the Cadbury schemes.
In those it was not necessary to be a worker in the works
to be able to get the occupancy of a cottage as those schemes
are open to all in so far as their number will permit, but in
the Sunlight the occupants of the houses are in every case
employees, and the housing is looked on as being part of an
industrial betterment scheme. It does succeed in sharing
with the employee’s wife and children at any rate the advan-
tage of comfortable homes—one of the best forms of environ-
ment. The population of Port Sunlight is 3,600, and to show
what a marked effect on the stamina and health of the chil-
dren the modern housing scheme has I would mention that
the birth and death rate of 1910 was—birth rate, 26.4; death
rate, 9.4; and it has also been ascertained that the Port
Sunlight children are taller and heavier than the children
attending the Liverpool schools.
COMFORT OF EMPLOYEES.
In my last I referred to many things done for the em-
ployee’s comfort such as clubs and useful institutions, bat I
don’t think I mentioned the benefit fund, which provides that
employees who have served 20 years are on retirement entitled
to an old age pension, 65 being the age for men and Oo for
women. Benefits are also under the scheme obtainable in the
case of breakdown of health, and provision is made for widows
and orphans. There is also the co-partnership trust, which
is another phase of the prosperity sharing scheme of the
company. This has only been in operation for the past three
years, and last year there were some 1500 who came in for
dividends under this head on a basis of 5 per cent, on the
employee’s wage, and when inaugurating this partnership
scheme in 1909 it was dated back to the beginning of 1900,
and the result was that many employees who had been in the
employ since or before 1900 participated in this retrospective
dividend. All overalls used by the girls in packing are pro-
vided by the firm at firm’s cost. There is also every pre-
caution taken to protect the packers from dust, and this is
done by dust extracting machinery. All overalls are also
worked by the firm. There are 1250 children attending the
schools which have been built by the company, the art ex-
hibition, cottage hospital, technical institute, schools, and
Christ Church are excellent buildings, and all of these have
been built at the company’s expense. The plan of the village
is on good lines, and the great variety of the design of build-
ing—there are no two alike—lends a further charm. Recre-
ation ground to suit all tastes of sport is amply provided, and


general comfort and content was the order of the day when
I was there, and I was told there never had been a serious
trouble since the industry was established. I almost forgot
to mention that there is a holiday club, and on all funds sub-
scribed the firm grants liberal interest, and allows full wages
for a week’s holiday. The upkeep of all the recreation
grounds, parks, gardens and school extension is at the com-
pany’s cost, while many of the public buildings, together with
the large open air swimming bath, gymnasium, cottage hos-
pital, library, social and bowling club, and the church were
the gift of the founder.
THE CADBURY WORKS. SOME MORE PARTICULARS.
This industrial betterment scheme is, like the Rowntree
venture, being built up on the most approved lines, and may
be said to have for its base some fundamental principles
which permeate the undertaking and can be classified under
the following heads:—Facilities for cleanliness, education, re-
creation, and rest with a maximum of comfort at a minimum
of cost, coupled with a living wage or log rate. To this end
the land on which these important works and village are situ-
ated is divided up in such a way as to prevent crowding-.
Houses, are erected on land sufficiently large to allow of
flower, fruit and vegetable gardens, recreation grounds for
males and females on the most extensive lines, the girls
having some ix acres, and 12 for the men. Apart from the
most up-to-date bathing facilities at the cotaage homes
there is a large plunge bath in the centre of the factory works
for the use of employees, and a certain number of baths' are
compulsory. Good, healthy sport of all kind is encouraged,
and benefit clubs of many kinds are in a flourishing condition,
and innocent amusements get the hearty support of the pro-
moters of the scheme. Suggestions for improving any part
of the machinery are invited, and last year some 6000 sug-
gestions were sent in, many of which were approved, and he
originators rewarded.
VILLAGE TRUST.
The Bournville Village Trust is, I think, of sufficient im-
portance to justify my giving you some of the main features
of the scheme. This village trust owes its existence to Mr.
George Cadbury, and in deed by which the estate is handed
over to the trustees, the founder has clearly set forth his
object. The following is an extract from the “Deed”:—
“The founder is desirous of alleviating the evils which
arise from the insanitary and insufficient accommodation sup-
plied to large numbers of the working classes, and of securing


to the workers in factories some of the advantages of out-
door village life, with opportunities for the natural and health-
ful occupation of cultivating the soil.”
Another clause is as follows: —“The object is declared to
be the amelioration of the working class and laboring popu-
lation in and around Birmingham, and elsewhere in Great
Britain, by the provision of improved dwellings, with gardens
and open spaces to be enjoyed therewith.”
The founder recognised that the greatest factor in moral
and physical improvement was in housing, and it will generally
be admitted that it is impossible to get a general
high standard of character and physique in localities
such as obtain in many of the large towns in the
•older world. Therefore the founder in his scheme of
housing said in effect:—“There shall not be any crowd-
ing either of cottages on the land or people in the
cottages,” and in a little more than a year he had 200 cot-
tages erected. The first 140 houses built were sold, -nd
created a number of small freeholders, but it was found that
this was not producing the best result, and it was decided
to lease, not to sell, the balance, giving the lessee a 99 years’
lease. The total number of houses built to date has been
906, and the following is a statement of the rents charged:—
31 houses at 4/6 per week; 156 do. at from 4/6 to 5/3; 144
houses, 5/3 to 6/; 99 do. from 6/ to 7/ per week; 86 7/ to
8/ per week; 170, 8/ per week (including shop); and 160
sold and occupied by the owners. To each house there is
allowed about 500 square yards for gardening purposes, and
all gardens are prepared and laid out by estate gardeners,
and are planted with well-assorted fruit trees.
GIFT OF MONEY.
Up to the present Mr. Cadbury has presented to the trus-
tees of this village and the gift is so absolute that
no part of the capital or revenue returns to the donor or to
any representative of the family, and in course of time ;he
income will so expand as to enable the housing of many more
people. There is a clause in a deed which prohibits the sale
of any intoxicating liquor unless there is a unanimous consent
of the trustees, and providing that all profits arising from the
sale of intoxicating liquor be devoted to securing for the vil-
lage community recreation and counter attractions to the
liquor trade. However I understand that up to the present
the unanimous consent of the trustees has been withheld, but
it is an open secret that intoxicating liquor does get into
this model village. That is not surprising, as there
are many licensed houses ' around the village. At
these works, as at Rowntree's, every consideration is
given to the employees’ comfort and health. Doctors,


trained nurses, and dentists are retained at the cost
of the company, and can be consulted free by any of the
employees. The girls’ dining room will accommodate 2500
employees and all kinds of foods are procurable at cost price.
There is a well trained ambulance corps and first aid appli-
ances are to be found in all the principal rooms.
EDUCATION.
The class fees for boys and girls under ig years attend-
ing the Birmingham local technical and evening and continua-
tion classes are paid by the firm up to 7/6 per session. Classes
of qualified teachers are held throughout the year both for
.boys and girls who cultivate their own allotments. Interest
at the rate of 3 per cent, is paid on the amounts paid into
the saving fund for the first year, and it is then transferred to
the post office. There is also an old age pension fund, and
•for every 1/ contributed by the employee, the firm gives a like
amount, and any employee can withdraw any sum paid into
the fund plus compound interest. The age of 60 is fixed to
qualify for pension. At the start of this scheme the firm
to give a lump sum of £60,000 to pay up the contribu-
tions of old employees for half the period of their past ser-
vice. There are 38 almshouses for old people of 60 years
and upwards having all living and other rooms on the ground
■floor. These houses were the gift of Mr. Richard Cadbury.
The wages and piece rates paid to employees far exceed any
rate paid in the district, and the result is the firm have the
pick of the best labor for many miles around. Those at
work at Cadburys’ are considered to be very fortu-
nate indeed. In conclusion let me say that my visit to the
firms of Cadbury, Rowntree and Lever Brothers will ever be
green in my memory.
OPINIONS SUMMARISED. SOME SERIOUS MISTAKES.
It will be a fitting finish to my "letters if I should state
in brief some cardinal opinions arrived at as a result of my
observations, and to that end let me state my conclusions
with regard to Canada and the United States.
MIXED RACES AND LANGUAGES.
The Australian States have been wise indeed in retaining
for the people the chief public utilities. I am also of the
opinion that it is fortunate that the great proportion of
the Australian population are English, or of English origin,
and that only one language is recgonised, and not like Can-
ada where the French language is placed on the same footing
as the English, the result being the assimilating of the French
Canadians is the more difficult. The same be said of-allowing


the Dutch language being taught in the national schools in
South Africa. The experience gained by having an oppor-
tunity of seeing a mixture of the colored and Asiatic races
in other parts of the world strengthens my opinion that '‘he
White Australia policy is a wise and far seeing one. lam
also of the opinion that owing to the great influx of foreigners
and the race suicide is complained of by President Roose-
velt, together with the great increase of the colored popula-
tion, the original Yankee is a fact diminishing quantity, and’
that the time will come when America will lose her original
identity. This can be said of Canada also, owing to her in-
discriminate immigration policy, which results in the English
speaking immigrant being considerably outnumbered by the
alien and the Asiatic. lam strongly of the opinion that when
our waste spaces are adequately filled Australia’s natural
production will surpass that of any nation of the world. I
am also convinced that the climatic conditons of Australia
will produce the finest race of people in the world, and with
an extension of advanced and scientific education the Aus-
tralian men and women will hold their own against all nat-
ionalities in all classes of manufacture or industry.
BRITISH WEAKNESS.
I hold strong views that the weakness in the United
Kingdom is the indifference with which the average English-
man values humanity in East London and other sweated parts
of the Kingdom. There is an old saying that familiarity
breeds contempt, and there is appalling evidence of this in
the slums of all parts of the old country. Every child born
is an asset of a nation if properly looked after, and this ap-
plies with much greater force in all slum localises. The one-
absolute certain way of getting the maximum result out of
every unit of our race is by creating a good environment.
This statement will be challenged by many on the grounds
that environment is not so much to do with character as here-
ditary inheritance, but I am not of that belief. Ninety-eight
per cent, of Barnardo’s children, the waifs and strays of slum-
don, turned out to be good men and women. Had these
children been left in the slums the greater majority would
have been criminals. On the other hand, place 100 of the
children of what is looked upon as the better class of society
under similar conditions to the children in the slums of Eng-
land, and the majority of them would turn out to be criminals.
In England there is without doubt a great and real uneasiness
about what Germany will do in the near future, and yet in
their midst there is a much greater danger, which is treated
with comparative indifference. All the pick of her yeomanry
sons and daughters are going to Canada, Australia and South
Africa, and the parts which breed more children to an acre


than any part of the United Kingdom are allowed to remain
under such social conditions as to become a positive menace
to the nation. On the one hand, you have the better class
of citizens leaving the country in hundreds of thous-
ands, and counter to this the breeding grounds of the hun-
dreds of thousands of paupers and criminals are allowed to
remain. Surely this is the policy of madmen. From 30,000
to 60,000 children in London get free meals daily. One out
of every fifteen workers has to accept poor relief, and there
are three millions continually on the verge of starvation.
During the time of my visit the chief topic was the strength-
ening of the Empire, and much anxiety was in evidence as to
what part the oversea dominions would play in strengthening
the Empire, yet the one great plague spot which is in their
midst and can be seen daily by the English statesmen, no
.real and earnest effort is being made to eradicate.
THE SWEATER.
The sweater, the real danger to England, is allowed to
carry on his hellish business without the slightest interfer-
ence. He is allowed to prey on the poverty of the thousands
that he and his fraternity may fatten; yet we sing that
Britains shall never be slaves. Yet, notwithstanding all the
shortcomings of the old country there are many things which
appeal to one’s admiration. It is the centre of the greatest
empire in the world, and although it is but a speck on the
world’s surface, it holds in check the aggressiveness of all
other nations. It is in London the price of the world’s com-
modities is fixed. This same centre dominates the financial
world. It is to the supremacy of the British navy that we
are indebted for the occupancy of this rich territory, and it is
to the same power we must depend for many years at any
rate to make it possible to retain this rich inheritance. It
is to this same power that we are indebted for our liberal in-
stitutions, and it would be the blackest of ingratitude, apart
from suicidal policy, if at any time the various dominion par-
liaments should cut the silver thread that binds us together.
We are flesh of their flesh, bone of their bone, and Wood of
their blood, and if there is a tolerant spirit exercised by both
parties to this great family connection, I see no reason why
as the years go by we should not arrive at that period cf
mature affection which is strongest in evidence in our hour
of dire necessity.
NOTES ON CORNWALL.
Among the places visited when on my tour were Tywar-
dreath, St.. Blazey, Newquay, Par, and Colant. The chief
industry of these parts is preparation and export of china-
clay, which is being exported to all parts of the world, - nd


during the time of my visit there were a large number or
vessels being loaded with the product. The locality from
which the raw material is obtained is some miles from New-
quay, but a most economical method has been initiated to-
lessen the cost of haulage by reducing all material to a liquid
form and then carrying same through pipes to the coast,
where it is emptied in vats to solidify. From the vats it is
taken to the wharfs in trucks, and deposited in large bins,
under which an endless belt constantly travels to any part of
the ship or steamer which is being loaded. It is quite a
simple matter for a man at the bottom door of this bin to
regulate the quantity of clay to the endless belt, and :he
boats are soon loaded at a minimum cost. I noticed also
that all shunting on the wharf is done by electricity.
CORNISH CHURCHES.
At the little town of Colant, I was shown a small Metho 2 -
dist Church where the present Postmaster-General preached
his hrst sermon when quite a boy. I also saw a church in
Newquay, the foundation stone of which was laid by our
Postmaster-General. In St. Blazey’s, and on the other side
of the road, which was originally built by the Romans, I c avv
the famous church built by the Cornish miner evangelist.
Billy Bray. I was also shown the house he qsed to live in
and the mine in which he used to work. When looking on
this noted church I remembered the story of this cornish
miner, who as a youth and up to the age of a young 1 , man
was a great drunkard. When converted he became a most
enthusiastic preacher, possessed of great faith, a faith which
knew no limit. He was so charitable that he often gave
away the whole of his wages on pay day, and when his wife
complained he replied by saying he had only lent it to the
Lord and that the Lord would not be in his debt long, but
would repay with good interest. In my mind’s eye I could
see this man of great faith bringing home the two orphan
children he had heard of when on a visit to a neighboring
mining town. He handed them over to his wife with no
other explanation than that the Lord would fill six mouths as
well as four; he had four children of his own.
It was this same enthusiast who started to build the
church referred to without a penny in hand to pay for it, but
he believed that if the: Lord wanted the church He would tind
money to pay for it. To the surprise of all except Billy Bray
the money did come along. It is said of him that when the
church was completed all but the roof, three men with two
loads of thatching grass were passing on their way to 'he
market, and while Billy looked with longing eyes at the
thatching grass he said it would do fine to complete the roof.
But as usual, being without any cash, he had to trust to the


Lord, and the loads proceeded to the market, which was not
a great distance from Billy Bray’s church. On arriving there
the men were offered a ridiculously low price for the grass,
and the result was they refused to sell, declaring that L hey
would sooner make a present of the grass to Billy Bray to
thatch his church. Back came the thatching to Billy. Again,
it is said of him that he attended an auction sale io buy an.
auctioneer’s desk, which he thought would make a good pul-
pit, but the desk was knocked down to another gentleman,
who upon taking it to his home found that they could not get
it into his building without taking it to pieces. Sooner than
do that he carried it across the fields to Billy Bray and gave
it to him for a pulpit for his church. In St. Blazey there
are many old Cornish people who delight to talk of this most
extraordinary man.
AN ANCIENT TOWN.
I learned when at Newquay that there was a time when
this town took an important part in the' affairs of the nation,
and at one time sent two of its citizens to Parliament, but
for some reason this privilege was taken from them. At
the entrance on each side there are the remains of fortifica-
tions, from which a chain was so arranged that it could either
fasten in the enemy or keep him out. It was from this
port that some of the ships were built which were dispatched
to meet the Spanish Armada, and many Spanish and French
ships came to grief in and near Newquay.




During last night and part of this morning we were pas-
sing the province of Alberta. They are not called States
here, but provinces. We are now passing through the pro-
vince of Saskatchewan. Two long trains of immigrants
passed up this morning on their way to Alberta, to settle on
some of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company’s land, where
improved farms are waiting for them. There are also huge
numbers of immigrants coming daily to settle on Government
lands. Immigrants are granted by the Government 160 acres
of land free, and are bound to reside on it for three years.
They are then entitled to a Crown grant, and may sell or do
as they please with it. Under the land laws they can take
up another 160 acres from the Government at three dollars
per acre. A great number of the immigrants hail from the
United Kingdom, while there are large numbers coming from
the United States. The bulk of them from America are pos-
sessed of a good many dollars, having sold their farms in
different parts of America. The immigrants from the United
Kingdom are mostly possessed of fair means. The lowest
amount an immigrant must be possessed of is 25 dollars before
he or she is allowed to land. As we pass along we see town-
ships, some small and others of fair size; but owing to the
scarcity of stone, the streets are in a dreadful condition, mud
and slush pools being much in evidence. There are a few
brick and stone buildings, but the greater bulk are of wood,
and the average cottage is very small. The lot of these
tlers, so I am told, is a very hard one for the first few years,
but after that they can be in a position to obtain many more
comforts.
The winters are very cold here, and for several months
the temperature is many points below zero. At a place called
Edmontown, which is a new and large settlement in Alberta,,
for three and four, and sometimes five months in the year,
it is from 30 to 45 degrees below zero. There is no timber
for fuel or other purposes, and with all food requisites at high
prices you can understand the lack of comforts and hard living
that early settlers have to endure. Stock of all kinds have
to be housed in the winter and hand fed, the glround being
all covered with snow. All waters with the exception of well
waters, are frozen up, and the ground for ten feet deep is
frozen as hard as a rock; so .much so that the burial of the
dead is an impossibility for several months in each year; and
to meet the difficulty of housing the dead large public morgues
are provided, and the coffins containing the corpses are
mounted and put on shelves until the ground thaws sufficient-
ly to allow of the bodies being put under ground. Funeral
arrangements are made, and the usual funeral procession fol-
lows the deceased to the public morgue and then disperses.
In most cases this is the last public recognition of the de


'ceased, but among the well-to-do a second procession follows
the body from the morgue to the cemetery, and thus pay their
last respect to the dead.
On each side as we cross the prairies, at sh6rt intervals
there are large wooden breaks erected to prevent ' the snow
from drifting on to the railway. The land looks fairly good,
■■and when free from snow looks fair ground; but I am informed
that some of it contains a good deal of alkaline which is not
good for the land. Excepting. some fences on each side of
the railv/ay and some in the township, I have not seen a fence
during the whole of this day’s journey. These huge mow
harriers ferected on each side of the railway look very unin-
teresting and most ungainly. I have not seen a haystack or
any other visible evidence of production since I have been in
Canada. It is true I have seen some trussed hay which has
been railed from some other part of Canada. We are now
passing what looks to he a dirty heap of straw .which is the
first I have seen on the route except what can be found in
packing cases. In the trains, trams or hotels the general talk
is real estate and the number of dollars somebody has made
out of the sale of real estate; but when I look for evidence of
production there is little to be found. In the shops at Van-
couver or Victoria yom see for sale New Zealand mutton or
butter; potatoes and onions, also from New Zealand; fruit and
vegetables from the irrigation districts on the west coast of
thednited States; bananas and pineapples from Honolulu; and
tinned meats, frozen beef and lamb, and other products from
Australia. The country is now improving, and for the first
time I see a few hay or wheat straw stacks and a few farm-
houses now in sight are more substantial, and old stubble can
be seen with ,a fair number of cattle and horses in the pad-
docks. the stock are in fair store condition, but look very
dirty, and many of them look as though they werfe mangy.
The dirty appearance is probably due to housing. The roads
are terrible; I have not seen a metal road all day.
Moose Jaw, a fairly large town is now in sight, and the
train will stay there 30 minutes, so I will have a chance to
stretch my legs." The population of this place is 12,000 and
its altitude is 1767 ft. above sea level. The name is an
Indian one, and is so called, so tradition says, because at
one time a white man mended a cut limb with a moose jaw.
This is quite a substantial place, it being the junction of seve-
ral lines and in the centre of a g'pod agricultural district.
The buildings are good, many being two and three storeys,
and of brick. The footpaths are made of concrete and the
roads and streets are much better than those of the average
town on the prairies. One notable feature of the railway
stations is that there are no raised platforms, they being on
a level with the rails, and are made of concrete. The out-of


door dress of the ladies is verv comiortable, well-made of
good material and nicely fitted, and in no case do they touch
the streets or footpaths, and the people of both sexes look
very healthy, and the great majority are young to middle-
aged, a large proportion being from the United Kingdom.
There is much more evidence of prosperity here, well-kept
farms on both sides of the line, and unlike the farms to be
seen for the last 200 miles, many of them are fenced and
have good stacks of hay and straw. The ploughing and seed-
ing has hardly started yet as the ground is too wet, but will
be in full swing 111 a few weeks. Wheat is not transported
in bags here, except for bringing it in from the farms to the
railway station, where wheat elevators are erected and handle
the wheat whence it is/ railed in bulk to the slfipping ports.
The stubble of last year’s crops is visible from the train, and
indicates heavy crops, and from enquiry made the average
was 18 bushels per acre. The land is a rich black soil, and
the price per acre is from £j to i/8. Alberta, Saskatchewan,
and Manitoba are the three wheat provinces of Canada, little
•or no wheat being grown in the others, and from information
given to me, the total yield of last year was 104,000,000
bushels, so that with all the Canadian blow about their great
wheat yield, it is very little higher than Australia’s produc-
tion.
Regina is the next important town we passed, and the
population of it is about 14,000. This also is in the centre
of a good wheat area and has made great progress the last
few years. There are numerous small towns on the route,
and these are arranged about eight miles distant from each
■other. There is no fruit of any kind grown on these prairies,
and there should be an excellent market for our Australian
productions. This is the third day and night I will have in
the train, and I will be glad when to-morrow morning comes
so that I can stretch my legs. We are due to arrive at Win-
nipeg between 7 and 8 to-morrow. On the whole I have
found the train very comfortable, and owing to their great
weight I think they do not roll about as much as do our Inter-
State trains. The attendance is very good and the bottom
berths are very comfortable, and owing to the system of heat-
ing the train from end to end, one does not feel that we are
passing through country where at nights the temperature is
a good many degrees below zero. While writing these notes
I feel as comfortable as if sitting near a nice lire; indeed, it
is better, for one’s back does not get cold when warming
the feet, or the reverse when you are not warming them. I
am not as steady as when in my own chair, but I am getting
much more used to writing while the train is in motion, and
I think it tends to improve my writing by an extra flourish
-or two.


I have now (Monday) arrived at Winnipeg, which is the
capital of Manitoba. The population of this place is over
150,000, and the city is a very substantial one. The main
street is as wide as King William Street, and is well made.
The footpaths are wide and are made of blocks of concrete,
and the streets are made of asphalt. The electric tram sys-
tem is a very fine one, but like all other systems is owned by
a private company. The same company owns the gas and
electric lighting rights. Manitoba is without doubt a great
wheat and grain district. The land is very rich and produces
heavy crops of wheat, barley, and oats. Flax is largely
grown in this province, but the straw is not used as in other
parts. The grain is used in the manufacture of oils and"
paints. Land in the agricultural areas of Manitoba is from
40 to 50 dollars per acre* if within reasonable distance of a
railway. The crops are sown here in this month and are
reaped in September. It only takes 90 days from date of
sowing to reaping. During the summer here which is in the
months of August, September, and October, the days are
very long, and in part of the summer there is only six hours’'
darkness. This is what causes the crops to mature so
quickly. The great many hours of light, a fair amount of
heat in the sun, and the moisture in the soil make the crops
grow and mature with great rapidity. Up to the present,
ploughing has hardly started, there being too much snow and
water on the land, yet the crop will be harvested before
September, and at the latest October. The city of Winnipeg
is in the centre of an immensely rich area, and the junction
of many lines, and consequently is a great business place,
being the chief centre of the immigration influx. There is a
considerable number of foreigners and to-day the streets are
full of immigrants, being Italians and Galatians. These
people are coming here in thousands daily. Many of them
are going out to Alberta and Saskatchewan to work the Cana-
dian Pacific Railway land or Government land. Wages for
general labor are 2 dollars per day and men to find them-
selves. Carpenters, masons, and bricklayers get 4 dollars to
41. Owing to so much lost time with wet weather, the wages
of laborers, who only get two dollars per day, are very low,
and I really don’t know how they manage to live on it. All
articles of food and clothing are dear, but not so dea* as in
Vancouver and Victoria, in British Columbia. I am staving-
at an hotel which is named “Billy , T ’ a rather peculiar title.


SWEATED INDUSTRIES OF THE UNITED KINGDOM.
HALF-STARVED SLAVES AT WORK.
I think it will be generally admitted that with no check
on the sweater, that he and not the humane employer will
determine the log rate to be paid for the making of any
article. Therefore dunhg my limited time in the United King-
dom I have examined some of the sweated industries with a
view of ascertaining the minimum rate paid where freedom
of contract has its fullest scope. The sweater in all countries
is the same. He fattens on the poverty of the workers.
Therefore to ascertain the minimum log rate one must make
the examination in these localities where the maximum of
poverty exists. These submerged districts are to be found
in every large city, and they become the grounds on which
the sweater makes his greatest harvest. Hence we find that
in East London, the chief location of these parasites, who
are in the bulk of cases Russians or Polish Jews, who were
but a few years ago refugees from their own native countries,
and under the cosmopolitan policy of England they were freely
admitted. Their modus operandi is to take contracts for the
make up of various articles of apparel, footwear, and! some
other lines of goods. Having obtained the contract, they
proceed to advertise for, say, coat, vest, or trouser hands,
and they are to appear in person at an office in
some slum locjality. In answer to these advertise-
ments, hundreds of men and women—but chiefly wo-
men—call at this office, and as the applicants are
chronically on the verge of starvation, they are easy vic-
tims to the avarice and greed of these human parasites. The
question usually asked is—“ Have you a sewing machine?”
And in such cases as the answer is in the affirmative they
are supplied withi the material for the work. In other cases
the sub-contractor may hire them a machine or advise where
machines can be obtained on the hire system, which is gene-
rally at exorbitant rates. I would like to mention that most
of these machines are on the hire system. The material hav-
ing been obtained, it is carried by the various applicants to
their homes to be made up.
WORKMEN’S HOMES.
Perhaps it would be well to describe here what these
homes are like. Many of them consist of one room, and the
best has but two. In either case, they are but poorly fur-
nished, and in many instances boxes constitute tables. There
are from two or three to five or six children in each of these


so-called homes, ranging in age from a baby at the breast
to boys and girls of 14 to i 5 years of age, and in some cases
even older. There is no yard room to many of the houses,
and the front of the house generally is flush with the foot-
path, and the streets are not more than 10 or 12 feet wide.
All houses are attached and are two or more storeys. In
many cases the houses are only one room deep, and the rents
are from 4/6 to .7/6 per week in East London, but in some of
the country city slums, such as Glasgow, Edinburgh, Belfast,
and Birmingham, the rent of one room is as low as 2/6 per
week. The only playgrounds of the small children in many
of these localities is in the narrow streets, which are made of
cobble stones, and being very uneven are anything but
pleasant to walk on in your boots. The dear little kiddies
of these parts, however, are mostly bootless and hatless,
while many of them are almost naked, and most of them
hungry. Their lot is indeed a sad one, and yet there are
thousands of These children, and if they lived under a better
environment they would become good citizens and be a valu-
able asset to the nation. But under present conditions very
few of them will be better than the scum of society, and in-
stead of being a valuable asset all will sooner or later become
a charge upon the nation. I know there are some who will
say that these slum people are hereditary victims of vice, and
as such cannot be moulded into good citizens; but is that so?
There is in the result of* the Barnardo Homes abundance of
evidence to prove the reverse. That institution has since its
inception saved some 70,000 of these waifs and strays, and
the Barnardo experience is that' These children, if given l a
wholesome environment when young, grow up to be good men
and women. But I must not pursue this line any further at
present as I set out to tell your readers what my own ex-
perience was when personally inspecting the prices paid by
the sweater.
PRICES FOR WORK.
Accompanied by Mr. David Bowman (the Leader of the
Labor Party in Queensland), and under the charge of a guar-
dian of the poor and a member of the local corporate council,
we visited many of the homes of these, the sweater’s victims,
and the prices paid for many classes of home work is too
dreadful to contemplate. The first case inspected was a
wretched two-roomed home, in which a man and his wife and
four children lived together with the grandmother. The
general room of all work would not be more than 8 or 9 feet
square, and in this they were working, when we called, at
making boxes which are subsequently used to contain wax
matches. Sitting at a box table was the mother of the chil-
dren, assisted by two of the children and the grandmother.


The youngest of the children would not. be more than five-
years old, and the combined earnings of this family were from
7/ to 9/ per week. This case is typical of hundreds of other;
families in the same trade. They work from 5 or 6 o’clock,,
a.m., to 9, 10, and 11 p.m. When they have done the work,
it has to be tied up in bundles, placing the printing on the
top of the boxes the one way, and then carried to the middle-
men, and much delay takes place in getting the goods passed,,
and a fresh supply of raw material for the next day’s work.
We visited many homes and found the inmates employed in,,
this industry, and with the same results. Addressing of en-
velopes is another occupation on which some find work; and
they are paid 2/ per 1000 envelopes. The addresses are to-
be clearly written and taken from the general directory. A.
good hand at this work, with assistance from his wife, will
do 1000 envelopes per day, working very long hours. As in
the matchbox making, there is also much loss of time in me-
passing of the work and getting a fresh supply. We also
visited many homes where coats were being made up, and.
the price for men’s and youths’ coats was each, and the
earnings per day, working 15 to 16 hours when in constant,
work, were from 1/ to 1/6. Here again was the usual delay-
in delivering goods and getting fresh supplies. Men’s and
youths’ trousers are made up at two shillings per dozen. Im
both cases for these prices they have to do aU the work, in-
cluding lining, but do not make the buttonholes or sew om
the buttons, that being done by another lot of sweated
workers. All of these workers have to get assistance in the
shape of food at many times in the year from the Guardians
of the Poor, and we were informed that during the long win-
ter, when work is slack, nearly all of these people are next
door to starving.
THE GRIP OF THE SWEATER.
From information given, we ascertained that the sweater-
is gettinc more grasping from year to year. For instance,
in 1906 there was an exhibition of these and many other
sweated industries, and at that time the matchbox makers
used to get per gross of boxes for the making, but at:
the time we visited the matchbox makers the price was ,2|d.
for two gross of the size of the ordinary safety matchbox
and about double rates for the large ones. According to the
evidence produced at the exhibition referred to above, the-
following industries are the prey of the parasitical sweater,
viz.—Nailmakers, flower makers, confirmation wreath mak-
ers, cardboard boxmakers, hook and eye carding, pom-pom
making, sack making, chain making, shirt making, cigarette-
case making, children’s overalls and pinafores, babies’ bonnet
making, doll making, trouser finishing, coat making, match


•box making, match and tin tack box makers, military em-
broidery, boot upper making, girl’s button boot upper makers,
baby boots and shoes making. When on our inspection, we
saw some of this latter work in children’s shoes being made
up and the price being paid for children’s shoes; size 5 was
from gd. to lid. per dozen pairs. For this wretched price,
leather soles had to be hand-sewn on each upper, and button-
holes had to be sewn in the straps; the shoes had to be
pressed into shapes and polished. The weekly earnings of
.a family, consisting of mother and daughter and an aunt,
working from 5 a.m. to 10 p.m., was 9/ per week.
Time nor space will not permit me giving details of the
many sweated, at present, but if you would like some further
particulars I will do so in some future letter. In my next
I purpose showing what can be done by a thorough consi-
deration of the interests of the workers generally. Of course,
I fully expect the moralist will say that if' these people would
-exercise more thrift and drink less intoxicants, they would be
better off. But there is not much chance of extravagance on
the daily or weekly earnings I have given above, but one of
the most impressive facts that came under our notice when
-visiting these homes was that during thb whole of an inspec-
tion we never saw one person the worse for drink. But if
it is agreed that they do spend some of their little earnings
*on intoxicants, it is but the natural result of such dreadful
environment.
&pp
(Sen
toy
PC
