



FOREWORD
To write this short note, as a means of helping to
introduce the present volume to the public, is one of the
most pleasant duties I have been invited to discharge.
My friend, the author, John MacLennan, is one of the
best known of the small remnant yet remaining of the bards
who sing in Soots Gaelic.
Throughout a life, which has been very strenuous, he has
devoted any leisure hours he had to the study of Highland
traditions and folk-lore and the composing of Gaelic poetry.
These are pursuits which, in our day, are not calculated to
produce any financial reward, and which had he indulged in
them in his native land, would undoubtedly have earned for
him recognition by way of a Civil List Pension.
A few years ago our author issued a Gaelic volume, con-
taining songs and stories. That book, by reason of the
language in which it is written, is not available to the
great majority of Mr MacLennan*s friends and acquaintances,
who are speakers of fhglish only.
His object therefore, in putting this new work before
the public, is to enable a wider circle than formerly to share
in the delight that so many have enjoyed by reading his
Gaelic book, and also, if possible, in the time of his nation*
danger and difficulty, to contribute a little to the funds
being raised to help the national cause. A son of his, who
fought in the Great Tar, passed away suddenly, not many years
since, apparently from injuries received in course of his
military duty. Mr MacLennan now having no son young enough
to join the forces who are fighting for their country, is
eager to do his bit in providing comforts for those who are
so engaged. . I commend his book to the public and wish
it a good circulation.
ALLAN MaoKILLOP F.S.A. Soot.
Ex-President, Aberdeen University Celtic Society,
Hon. Member of Ceilidh na’n Gaideal, Glasgow.
o— oO—


MY TWO TRIPS TO SCOTLAND
IN HONG AND 'STORY
- By -
lain .MaoLerman.o
IN AUSTRALIA.
lain Dubh Mao Dhornhnull io lain was born at Inverasdale in
.the Parish of Gairloch Wester Ross eighty years age* and at the
age of emigrated to Australia, In lea's than a year
he met and married a schoolmate who arrived in Australia a few
months previous to himself. Ciorstaidh Ruadh was an admirable
help meet, and in-the ordinary course of events became the mother
of three sturdy boys. The first two were twins* Donald and
Roderick named respectively after lain and Ciorstaidh ? s fathers*
and William was named after one of Ciorstaidh*s brothers, who
died young. ’ ■ - .
They settled down at first in a place called Taringa, in the
neighbourhood of Brisbane, where lain was employed by the Shire
Counoil. Subsequently they removed to a place called Kenmor©..
a few miles further out where they carried on a small Dairy farm
for many years, lain took up as a hobby, t had imposing of Gaelic
Poetry at which he was more or less successfulo A collection of
his poems was lately published by Alex. MaoLaren of Glasgow? and
sprinkled among them are a number of English pieces* and my pur-
pose hare is not only to give his English speaking friends the
poems themselves but also a brief outline of the incidents that
brought them into being.
lain and his wife took a deep interest in Church matters and
were members of the local Presbyterian Church at Toowong almost
from its inception in 1887, lain was a Sunday School teacher
between Toowong and Kenmore for over forty years. He served on
the Committee of Management for a number of years, and subse-
quently was elected ruling elder, an office he still holds, being
now senior elder, and probably the oldest member, his name being
first on the present communion roll. lain also took a deep
interest in everything pertaining to the Highlands of Scotland,
was a Joint founder wath Mr, ’J. Go McGregor, of the Highland
Society of Brisbane, and became its first President, an office
he held for many years.
He was also the prime mover in getting.the Rev. Alan
MaoKillop to hold a quarterly Gaelic service in Brisbane, this
Service is greatly appreciated by the Gaelic speakers of Brisbane,


AUSTRALIA IN THE WAR*
The gallant part the Australians took in the Great 'far of
1914-18, is a history of which every Australian may well be
proud. Two of lain’s sons, Donald and William, were among the
first to enlist, were among the first to sail overseas, and were
at the landing at Gallipoli, William subsequently served in
the Light Horse, and went through the Egyptian campaign as far
as Gaza, when he was invalided home. Donald was among the
last who by a modern miracle, escaped from that most dangerous
position, and served in France to the end. This poem was
written by lain, when the first Expeditionary Force sailed over-
seas :
Young Australia now is ready.
And her heart is beating warm.
To convince the Kaiser Wilhelm
Of the prowess of her arms.
When she signs a scrap of paper
She’ll discharge its full demands.
Strict adherence tc her contracts
Is the glory of cur land.
It is for our Country 1 s henour
That our sons are going to war.
To protect the weak and helpless
Prom a mighty tyrant’s power„
We invoke God’s holy blessing
On our expedition band.
And we ask the world to witness
To the justice we demand.
Bless them, rank and file and captain j
They have all dur best regards.
May the shield of"faith protect them
And success be their reward.
Bless their colonels and their generals
And their chaplains in their wards
Who are daily without ceasing
At the throne of grace as guards ;
Bless our Empire altogether ;
May her flag for ever stand.
Breathing freedom and protection
To our race on sea and land.


Hasten Lord the Prophet's tidings
When thy peace on earth shall fall.
And the King of Kings triumphant
Reign supreme as Lord of all*
THE HOUSEWIVES UNION AND PROF ITEERIKG *
During the depression that took plaoe after the disastrous
flood of 1893, the Housewives of Brisbane formed themselves into
a union. For a considerable time this union exerted great
influence on the trading community, especially the State Enter-
prises, which came into being about that particular time.
Come all ye housewives far and near
And burnish all your armour clear.
We’ll surely chase the profiteer
How we have formed a union*
The time has come to make a stand
And push ahead with our demands.
We*ll make the world to understand
The mighty power of union.
We must secure our butter cheap
Though "cocky" farmers wail and weep.
It’s only justice that we seek
Like others with their union.
We*ll make it new quite plain and clear
The middlemen must disappear.
And what we want we*ll commandeer
In spite of farmers* union.
The squatter's all may rave and squeal.
To arbitration courts appeal.
But we’ll have cheap roast beef and veal
Conceded to our union.
A SONG TO MR, J. G. MoGREGOR
A great fr£en3T“6f the' Highland Society
(Translated from the Gaelic),
The Griogairaoh fair most handsome in mien,
A Gentleman rare and great philanthropist.
CHORUS
Ho ro the Griogairaoh true and generous.
Sing to his praise the rarest melody.
Ho ro the Griogaraoh true and generous.


His knowledge in law surpasses by far
Each Judge in the land and all the Barristers,
Chorus•
The Griogairach’s fame as friend of the Gaels,
Is now proclaimed through lane and avenue.
Chorus.
In pleading their cause in court at the Bar,
McGregor’s the lad that’s always champion.
Chorus•
The Senechie can trace his royal race.
Through nobles of chase and ancient warriors.
Chorus,
lie’s” the phrase that gathers the tribe
To battle array and dare their enemieso
Chorus,
In drinking his health we wish him success.
And may he possess health wealth and happiness.
Chorus.
A HIGHLAND WELCOME TO SIR HARRY AND LADY LAUDER,
Hall, Sir Harry Lauder and his Lady partner,
Scotland’s greatest charmer greet his band with glee.
CHORUS ;
Welcome to our Harry hi o hu o Harry,
Welcome to cur Harry hu o Harri hi.
Kilties from the Highland’s Glen and Dale and Island,
Give to him. the trident of the Lyric S^a,
Chorus,
He’s a blithsome laddie, joyful tuneful chatty,,
Making others happy is his only plea.
Chorus,
You should see his canter, hear his cheery banter.
With his vocal chanter sounding full and free.
Chorus,
He will cure your crossness, fill your heart with gladness.
Make your dopey sadness all at once to flee.
Chorus,
When he _casts hie anchor in his dear Glen Branter,
Bless his closing chapter 'with long life, at, ease.
Chorus.


MY DEEM.
After being over forty years in Australia, lain and his
wife decided that they would take a trip to the land of their
birth, before the end of their days, for they were now getting
well on in years.
They were held in high esteem in the community, and the
citizens gathered together to bid them good-bye, and presented
them vdth a travelling rug and other useful articles for their
comfort during the voyage. The Church Session gave lain a
gold mounted fountain pen to enable him to write about the
various incidents that would be happening during the tour, and
lain did not neglect to make good use of this valuable girt*.
Accompanied by their son Donald, who had just received Ms
long leave of six months from the Railway Department, they booted
their passage by the Hobson Bay to sail on the 17th May, 1924,
For in May we sail for Scotland by the gallant Hobson Bay,
Leave the land of our adoption after forty years of stay.
For we long to see the mountains and the valleys and the
bay,
"Where we used to play at truant when from school we stayed
away.
There are vacant chairs and hammocks in the Clachan "by the
shore.
Many ohanges there have happened since we left-in eighty-
four,.
But we’re going: back undaunted, though our hearts be full
and sore
For we’ll miss some fond oaresses shower’d upon us there
before.
Still there will '66 happy greetings, still are friends on
Scotland’s shore.
Who remember happy meetings we had there in days of yore.
There’ll be shaking hands and kisses clenched by Highland
toasts galore.
And to welcome back ihe wanderers there’s a fatted calf in
store*
When we say to you, goodbye-, we con do so without pain.
For we know that your good, wishes without ..stint ws still
retain, ~ .J. ' . .
And through all our wandering journeys,” well we know it will
remain, ' " " ’ ,V
And we think we hear you spiering "’Will ye no come baok
again ?"


THE FIRST TRIP.
ALONG TSETCOSST OF" AtJST'RAIIA.
Many incidents happened on the -voyage round the coast, and
across to Hobart, which would be of no interest to any one who
could not speak Gaelic, for during this period lain mat many old
cronies in the various seaports, to whom he could talk in the
language of the Garden of Eden, so that an English poem oould
not get a look in. One incident, however, is worth relating*
7/hen the ship was being let loose from the wharf at Sydney
lain" took particular notice of the mode of speech of one of the
sailors,-and he came to the conclusion that he could speak the
Gaelic. So he whispered in his ear in Gaelic, "pull lad, pull,
as hard as ever you can." The sailor looked up with a High-
land grip. on his face, and exclaimed also in Gaelic, "Where the
Ddvil did you come from ?"
When the day's work was over the Sailor came to lain and
informed.him that himself and two others of the crew hailed from
the Isle of Skye, and five of six more were from the various
other Islands of the Hebrides, and that the Saloon Deckmsn was
a Highland piper from Argyleshire* lain made the acquaintance
of these men and needless to say had many a crack with them in
Gaelic during the voyage*
THE HOBSON BAY MENU CARD.
After leaving Fremantle, the passengers began to settle
down to the habits and customs usually obtained on the high
seas, for they we re new entering the Indian Ocean and would not
see land for a fortnight. Groups of the same taste and
fancies were gathered together here and there in close confab,
while the crew were busy in their own particular sphere. lain
was well satisfied-with the general conditions obtained on
board, but at the same time he could not hold back the urge of
the poetical spirit within him, and he found the ship's menu
card a fit subject to express his opinions* The card was most
elaborately got up, with the Australian flag at the top, and
underneath in all the colours of the rainbow was written a
detailed account of the various entrees (most of them in French
or other foreign names) for each meal, so that every one would
get his or her own choice*. the second steward was always
standing at one corner or other, scruitinising the serving and
the consumption of each meal, a practice not very much relished
by the passengers. He was very fat and more or less devoid of
common manners, and nobody liked him, and lain nick-named him
Fatty*


The Commonwealth flag at the top.
The red white and blue with, the spots.
Appealing to you to be British true blue.
And cheerfully bear with your lot.
At breakfast there’s porridge and milk.
The delight of the Scots and that ilk.
Reinforced with good steak, most tenderly baked.
It will tighten the belt of their kilt*
At dinner the stewards are nice.
In tendering timely advice.
If you don’t like rcast beef, or the chop of a sheep.
They will serve you with curry and rioer.
At tba there is plenty cold meat.
With lettuce, tomatoes and leeks.
No fault could be found Width the many compounds.
So gracefully typed on the sheets.
On Friday we*re pestered with fish.
Three times it is daintily dished.
Some boiled and some fried, and kippers at times.
But the flavour is all you could wish.
There’s one thing I dare to admit.
There’s scarce time enough for to eat
The many good things they so cheerfully bring.
So your grinders must always be fit*
"Patty" stands at the corner and looks ;
Sometimes he will write in a book.
With a twdnk in his eye, he thinks in his mind
That he’s feeding a parcel cf rockss
CROSSING THE LINEo
A very important event happens when a ship is crossing the
line. It is supposed that Neptune, the God of the Sea, comes
on board to hold a court of inquiry into the character of those
who are entering his dominions for the first time* The orew of
the Hobson Bay are experts in this momentous event, for many a
time they took part in this jollification, and on this occasion
wdth. the assistance of some of the passengers it is said that the;
have exceeded all records*
At four o’clock in the afternoon it is supposed that His
Majesty Neptune, wdth his, retinue of court officials, consisting
of Judges, Magistrates, Lawyers, Advocates, and all other attend—


ants necessary for a court of this kind came on board. His
Majesty presented the Captain with a string of herrings. This
most unique assembly marched round the deck, following the
Captain with his string of herrings, and led by the Argyleshire
piper playing "Cook of the North", Eventually the court sat,
and some of the most prominent among the passengers were charged
with the most heinous crimes, while others were only charged
with the most trivial offence, such as sleeping too long in the
morning, or eating too much at dinner, and other unimportant
things like that," The judge had no respect of persons, each
was punished according to the degree of crime rath which he was
charged, the sentence being from two to ten dips in a large
trough of water erected for the occasion. For over an hour this
huge pantomime created great fun for all on board, lain and
his wife and a few others escaped this ordeal for they held
certificates to show that they had passed through His Majesty's
dominions on a previous occasion.
THE SUEZ CANAL AND THE GIPPOS.
Colombo in the Isle of Ceylon, was the next place of call.
This city is a fair sample of all the other cities of the east
where people of all nations and of all colours congregate in the
most cosmopolitan fashion. Many of the passengers went ashore
here, and whatever loose money they took with them, was lured
from them by the native traders who seem to be possessed of a
certain amount of bewitching influence, that enables them to pass
off their -wares at a far higher price than their intrinsic value.
They carry on their bargaining with such persistent persuasion
that hardly any con escape their cunning wiles, A company of
them also came on board the ship and greatly disturbed the
peace of those who desired to have a little respite from the
confusion generally on board ship. But their troubles only
started at Colombo, for things there were comparatively mild
compared with the trials that awaited them in the Suez Canal,
The ship entered the Canal at Sundoxvn, and nothing of
interest could be seen before morning. The Egyptians (Gippos)
came on board with their particular merchandise, and they greatly
exceeded the people of Colombo with their bold immannerly tactics.
Their useless paltry wares were exhibited before the passengers
with such undiluted audacity that their patience was in the last
stage of exhaustion. At Port Said the noise was greatly inten-
sified, for seme of the cargo was to be discharged here, and some
of the natives came on board to assist in the work. Now these
people are totally devoid both of morals and manners, and their
complexion is most disagreeable. Their colour resembles that of
a bunch of wool which was steeped for a night or two in a pot of
indigo dye. They kept up such a din that no one could sleep.


and lain, sick and tired of it all, jumped out of bed and penned
the following lines. This eased his mind considerably, and when
he went back to bed he quietly fell asleep.
We entered the Sues at night
There was nothing of wonder in sight.
But strewn on the deck, both forward and aft,
A profusion of Turkish delight.
Next day with my lens in my hand.
The view was unlimited sand.
The most desolate place ever known to the race
There is surely a curse on this land o
But still there are various sights.
To cheer thee on left and on right -
Ismalia’s palms and Kantara * s sweet balm
Are oases of which I could write.
The w Gipps" like a neat of meat ants.
Profound in their heathenish cant.
Came trooping on board, got round you in hordes.
To empty your pouch with their chants a
And now that we’re rid of the pest,
We ? ll all have a glorious rest.
But if e’er you meet Turk, put a string on your purse.
And hide it secure in your breast.
BONNIE GAIRLOCH,
When lain was visiting his native parish of the
local Horticultural and Industrial Society*s exhibition was held*
It was most encouraging for lain., to note the advance made in all
branches of industry in the Parish' since he left. The large
variety of exhibits was an earnest of what.the crofters can doj
and the number of competitors, many of them, known to himself,
proved conclusively that the people are waking up to the possi-
bilities of theim Parish. lain composed an appropriate Gaelic
poem on the Fair, and when L3.oyd George was on holiday in Gair—
looh he, lain, composed the following verses in praise of Gair—
loch, for which he received the thanks of the Laird of Gairlooh,
Sir Kenneth MaoKenzie,
Land of wizards, land‘of fairies
Rich in nature’s tones.
Land that is still like Eden’s garden
Far from the trains and ’phone s 0


CHORUS :
Oh, the charms of bonnie Gairloch
Land of firs and oaks.
Land of the snipe, the grouse, the salmon.
Land of the stags and roes.
There were giants once in Gairloch,
Fierce, strong and bold.
And their descendants Clan MacKenzie
Are still in their old stronghold.
Chorus.
Fingal*s -white oow T s bed recalleth
An ancient Sabbath scene ...
When I have seen the folk pray standing
And.then.sit down to sing.
Chorus o
’Twas in Tigh Dige’s historic parlour.
Our Lloyd George supreme
Thought out in peace and calm retirement
The note that made Ireland free.
Char us o
When I shall reach my native harbour
I’ll greet the Land with glee.
And I will see Sir Coinneaoh Ghearrloch
The Chief of the Clan is he.
Chorus*
SWEET IWERMo
It was the shooting season when lain was in the Highlands,
and Duncan his brother was gillie to Lord MaoKenzie, who had the
shooting rights of the Inverasdale hillso Both his Lordship
end Lady MaoKenzie took a great interest in lain and his wife.
On one occasion he came with his own oar to Inverasdale and took
them up to his Lodge at Inveran, and from there took them for a
sail on Loch Maree s and visited the historic burying grounds on
Isle Maree, of which many interesting tales are told, When
they returned they were treated to a sumptuous lunch, and after
resting a while, their distinguished hosts took them round the
garden to see the enormous variety of trees, shrubs and flowers,
including a bed of strawberries, which was a practical object
lesson to lain, who himself is more or less a keen horticul-
turist, After having afternoon tea they were motored home
again in his Lordship l s oar.


Inveran House ’midst its bowers and trees.
Is a picture of heav ! n altogether unique.
Without there is health from a life giving breeze.
Within there is comfort and rest from fatigue*
CHORUS j Air faillirinn illirinn uillirinn 0,
Air faillirinn illirinn uillirinn 0,
Air faillirinn illirion uillirinn 0,
Sweet Inveran*s beauty is worthy of note*
There Ben Airidh Gharr with its lap on the shore,
Ben Lair and Bon Tarsuinn majestic in tone.
The Slioch in the distance towering over them all
In exquisite grandeur it-'s all on its own,
- • ' 1 Chorus*
Ben Eighe with its stags on the right in the lea,
Ben Edin and Ben Dearg and Ben Cheircall you see.
And down at their feet girt with gorgeous heath
Lies peaceful in splendour the grand Loch Maree*
Chorus*,
At the"end of the Loch is a mansion most fair
It’s inveran Lodge in surroundings most rare ;
If you travel the world through its mountains and
dales, ;
There is never a spot that with this can compare,
..Chorus*
BACK HOKEe
The time was r how drawing near when lain and his wife would
have to return to their home in Australia * Themselves and
Domld their son who was escorting them round, thoroughly
enjoyed themselves during their visit, They mat many old
friends and acquaintances and you will understand hew hard it
was to part when-it was most likely they would never meet again
in the land of the living. They gave their many friends and
their beloved Highlands a last farewell, and like the apostle of
old commended them to God and the word of His grace* lain gave
expression to his feelings in one of his choicest Gaelic pieces*
The following is a translation which, however, does no credit to
the original j
We were happy every hour as we journeyed on our tour.
Midst the hills end glens and dales and the Islands,
When they sang their Gaelic songs we with all our hearts
respond.
To the pure sweet tuneful muse of the Highlands*


CHORUS :
We are now going to sail by the gallant Jems Bay,
We are now going to sail with much ardour.
We're returning home again with our health and strength
repaired
By a -visit to our dear native harbour*
We were welcomed on the shore by our friends of long ago.
They still are high bom in their nature.
They are clannish to the core, as their fathers were of
yore.
Each one always helping forward his neighbour.
Chorus.
dive my blessing to the bens, and another to the glens.
Thousand blessings I will sing to them always.
To each corrie, craig and tarn, meadow field and
waterfall.
And the mountains and the cairns of their highways.
Chorus «
May the blessings of God's Son rest upon you old and young.
Till you reach your Journey's end beyond Jordan,
Till anon we meet again in that Palace bright and fair.
May the Saviour be your guide and your guardian.
Chorus,
I'M SORRY„
On the voyage back nothing of importance happened to make up
lain's poetical genius, only that unfortunate phrase that crept
into our English language "I'm sorry". The chivalrous express-
ion "beg your pardon" has evidently lost its legitimate place in
our vocabulary and to a great extent mars that polite courtesy we
should extend to one another and which is the inherent preroga-
tive of our race.
If the King of the race came aboard of this Ship
And you knocked off his hat in a flurry.
You would not 'pelogise, but simply look wise
And politely exclaim;"! am sorry y*
Should you tread on the corns of a crusty old boor.
You simply declare you are sorry.
And if in his ire he should curse for a while
Repeat once again you are sorry.


Should you hustle or maim a stately old dame
And kindly declare' you are sorry
She’ll forgive you at once, for she pities your cant.
And knows by your gait you’re not sorry.
If you callously play with the lassies^ so fair
By telling your neighbour they’re bonnie,.
And happen to stare at the "bob" of their hair.
You’ve simply to say ; "I am sorry".
When the sailors at night, away from the light.
Are hugging their Lizzies and Mollies,
If it happens by chance that they squeeze a bit tight.
They whisper "My dear, I am sorry".
"Beg pardon"’s a phrase that’s losing its place
In this marvellous age it is folly*
Politely good taste is lost to the race :■
For chivalry’s sake I am sorry.
OUR SOI.
Roderick kept the home fires burning while the others were
on tour, and now they were back home all were agreed that it
was his turn now to have a holiday, Donald’s leave was ended,
and time to resume work, but at that particular time the great
depression was on, and many employers were reluctantly com-
pelled to reduce their hands. The Railway Department however,
decided that instead of dismissing any of their staff, they
would give any who desired it six months' leave of absence
without pay, at the end of which time they could resume work
with their position and status in the department unimpaired.
Donald, among many others, took advantage of this leave
also, so as to take up Roderick’s work on the farm while he was
on holiday.
Roderick was well liked in the district, always taking
part in any project that was for the benefit of the community.
He was chairman of the Shire Council when the Greater Brisbane
took over, and was recently appointed a J.P, At a social
meeting the people presented him with a pair of field glasses,
a set of pipes, and a bible, surely a very useful combination,
and wishing him a happy trip and a safe return while his father
instinctively composed the following ditty in his honour.
When our son was made a J.P,
We hailed the announcement with glee


We 1 re proud of the lad.;, he's a chip off his
And some day may be an M O P.
Aud now that he's joining the Masons
A step higher up you'll agree.
We hop© he will prove himself worthy
And climb to the top of the tree*
His manners are most unassuming.
The soul of all honour is he j
Those virtues he learned from his mother
When prattling about at her knee*
He is leaving us now on a journey.
Other parts of this great world to see j
We are wishing him joy on his travels
Till we welcome him back on the quay*
With a pair of field glasses from Kenmore,
He will view all the sights and the scenes.
While two sets of pipes he can smoke day and
Putting all earthly troubles at ease.
night.
And then there's the Bible from Phyllis,
The best of all gifts he received ;
If he follows this chart, it will guide him
Over mountains and valleys and seas#
aright.
WHEN ROD IE COMEG MARCHING HOME.
•When Rodie comes marching home again,
• . Hurrah, hurrah.
When Rodie comes marching home again,
.. Hurrah, hurrah,
; We* 11 welcome him with open arms.
To give our home its wonted charm,
we'll all feel gay when Rodie comes marching
home.
When Rodie comes marching home again.
Hurrah, hurrah.
When Rodie comes marching home again,
Hur rah , hur rah ,
He'll take my place when ends the tour.
To milk the cows at midnight hour,
we'll all feel gay when Rodie comes marching
heme.
When Rodie comes marching home again.
Hurrah, hurrah.


When Rodie comes inarching home again.
Hurrah, hurrah.
I’ll cuddle down by mother’s side.
And sleep in peace till morning tide.
And we’ll all feel gay when Rodie comes marching home.
When Rodie comes marching home again.
Hurrah, hurrah.
When Rodie comes marching home again,
Eurrah, hurrah.
He’ll plough the fields and till the ground.
While I’ll be only looking round.
And we’ll all feel gay when Rodie comes marching haras*
When Rodie comes marching home again.
Hurrah, hurrah.
When Rodie comes marching home again,
'•Hurrah, hurrah.
My lave and I at eventide.
Will now and then take joy rides.
And we'll all feel gay when Rodie comes marching home.
OLD PEOPLE’S WELCOME
TO THE HIGHLAND" SOCIETif OP BRISBANE.
After their return lain most assiduously continued his pet
hobby* He composed many Gaelic songs an a variety of subjects.
Now and again he would produce a few verses in English, and
sometimes would translate one of his Gaelic pieces, of which the
following is a sample. Our Gaelic friends oan sing this to the
tune of Eilean an'Fhraoich.
THE ISLE OP THE HEATHER.
If your step’s getting short and your lock’s turning grey.
And old age with its shadows creeping fast on your way.
Come down to An Gommunn, slake hands with the clan.
Stiff joints mil forsake you and you’ll feel a young man.
Rich or poor your condition, high or humble your lot.
Hospitality waits you from true friends on the spat.
Their songs and their bardaohd will gladden your heart.
And pipers will hail you with strains of their art.
Highland welcome awaits you, be you peasant or peer.
You’ll be greeted in Gaelic with a friendly good cheer.
As your memory wakens hearing tales of lang syne.
Your father’s traditions will come back to your mind.


Are your sentiments Highland, kind, loyal and true.
Their crafts and their customs appealing to you ;
Fraternise with the Gaels, to the ceilidh resort.
And partake once again in their plays and their sport.
THE BRISBANE SCOTTISH ORPHEUS CHOIR,
It was once the pride of our race
To have minstrels and bards in the chase,
■Who justly laid claim to poetical fame.
That no other nation could face.
CHORUS
Oh come let us join the choir.
Oh come let us join the choir.
With might and with main our talents display.
And help to maintain the choir*
Our songs which were once our proud boast
For a time were lamentably lost •
Now the Orpheus Choir have discovered the rhymes
And will have them preserved at all cost.
Chorus.
The harmonioal side of the Scots,
Deep pathos pervading the lot.
With music and time neatly set to each line.
Is portrayed in the sweetest of notes.
Chorus,
The Hebridean songs are the best
For soothing a Highlander’s breast j
Their melodious strains, with plaintive refrains.
Are sweeter by far than the rest.
Chorus,
Let Governments go on the bout.
And pile their deficits en route.
But the Orpheus Choir will flourish and thrive
While there’s scions of Clan Donald about.
Chorus o
THURCO HOSPITAL AND MY OPERATION,
lain had to go under a very serious operation. This was
private hospital in Brisbane, and in reading lain’s poems one
gets the impression that this experience of lain’s happened
while he was on tour in Scotland some years before.


Thare were two doctors, tho matron, and two Sisters, and
when they tad lain ready for the operating table, lain asked
them to join him in a few 'words of prayer, asking God s s guid-
ance and blessing on their work. They wrere deeply impressed
with this unique procedure,, The doctor told lain’s minister
that it was the first time' he ■■sms ever asked to join with a
patient in prayer.
The operation was very successful, and by tho kind attention
of the matron and staff lain made a good recovery. During his
convalescent period lain presented them with the following poem,
and afterward' until his discharge ho suspected that he was
receiving special attention.
It was this day three weeks I was near my last kick.
Mien I called Dr, Williams to tap me ;
With the skill of a leech he gave instant relief.
And handed me over to Aunty, (The Matron)•
CHORUS
Oh, the matron is so friendly, and the sisters are
like fairies.
And since I’m in their care'l’m very cosy.
For they treat me like a baby, and from head to foot
they bathe me.
And I feel as fresh as daisies in the morning.
Sister Greenwood took pains to get me prepared,
I cannot explain how she’acted ;
Being buoyed by faith I put up with the strain
But we-nearly fell out when she started*
I was sure in my breast it would be a success
When Dr. MoLelland addressed me ;
His skill with tho lance I perceived at a glance.
For his candid expressions impressed me.
Chorus.
There’s an Angel of light about through the night.
Her robes are resplendent in whiteness.
As she trips on tip-toe from door to door.
She sheds forth a radiance of brightness.
Chorus o
My kind-hearted nurses are sweet little lassies.
As cheerful and bright as a starling,,
When smoothing my sheets they are tidy and neat.
And will not leave a crease in the margin.
Chorus®


lay God bless them all who have taken a hand
In restoring my health to perfection 5
May He strengthen their hands in humanity 5 s cause
Till we meet at the end of the section c
THE FA3SHKJ OF DOH»
Donald 5 s'passing was very sudden.. On Communion Sunday at
'the morning Service he took the Sacrament from his own father*s
hands® At the evening Service he sang the solo In That Land and
had tea with his minister before he came home, On Monday
morning...he got up hale and hearty, had his breakfast as usual
and'left for his work singing at the top of his voice "Rolling
Home, to. Bonnie Scotland", and before twelve o'clock he entered
That"Land 9 the Bonnie Scotland above, to take his part with the
Angelic Choir in the Heavenly Mansion above,. Soon after start-
ing work a blood vessel broke in his brain. His life’s blood
drained away and within a few hours time he quietly passed over
to Tir-nan-tig? The Land of the Ever Young®
Our Don has passed within the veil.
His sudden call we oan*t detail.
But He who las a prior claim.
Has taken all.
In robes of white, with palm in hand.
He sings the solo in that land.
As with the great angelic band.
He takes his part,,
We listen still at eventide
To hear his smart and sprightly stride.
But with his bright and cheery smile
He 5 11 not arriveo
He loved his home, his church, his choir.
His club and lodge he oft inspired.
And by his voice from time to time
He cheered them all.
His pals and comrades loved him dear.
They piled their bouquets on his bier.
And shed with us a friendly tear
" ; ,As healing balm®
Committing all to God‘s own will.
Our faixh and hope sustain us still.


And now we east our care on Him,
Serene and calm.
SISTER FLORRIE
- or -
THE LADY BF "WHITE.
A few weeks after Don's passing, his mother accidentally
fell and broke her thigh, and for seven long weeks was in
hospital where her life was often despaired of. She however
recovered sufficiently to be able to come home, when lain himself
who under ordinary circumstances is a fairly good nurse, was able
to look after her. She seemed to rally for a while, and hopes
of at least partial recovery were entertained, but unfortunately,
having suffered so much for so long a time, she began to decline,
and soon it became quite evident that she would need a more
practical nurse than lain to look after her. He did not know
of any trustworthy person that he could call to his assistance,
and to send her back again to hospital ivas altogether repulsive
to him. He resolved one evening tint tomorrow morning he would
have to make arrangements one way or another. After tea a knock
came to the door and lain went out, and there stood before him a
young lady who without any introduction, asked if she could do
anything for him. lain who at once recognised the voice, almost
exclaimed, "Yes, Florrie, my girl, you can, and you are sent here
tonight in direct answer to prayer,”
Here was a girl who was once a pupil of lain in the Sunday
School who, when she grew/ up, chose nursing as a profession,
passed all exams successfully and became a fully qualified
sister® She was away from the district for over fifteen years,
and was now home on an extended holiday which she gladly
ficed to come to the assistance of (whom she said herself) * ; my
dear old Sunday School teacher".
She got a friend of her own to assist her, taking lain out
of the most difficult position he was ever in in his life.
The Mrs, Watt mentioned in the rhyme from a friendly point
of view, attended to the necessary laundering before and after
Christina's illness, and still out of the goodness of her heart
sees to it that Roderick and lain are alwjays kept spick and span.
A Lady in white paid a visit last night.
And noted my tight situation.
With a clarified brain she took hold of the reins.
And practised at once he. vocation o


In the nursing domain she’s a practical dame.
Knows from A to the Z about babies.
With a tap on your lung, and a look at your tongue.
She diagnoses the trouble that ails you*,
Like an angel of light, she attends on my mfe,
And uses great tact with her patient.
When disturbed in her peace she’s at hand with relief.
And soothes her to sleep with her cadence.
The sister at night is of Florrie’s own type.
No more need be said in her favour.
The profession she loves is a gift from above.
And is practised with Christian fervour.
There’s dear Mrs, Watt, a friend to the last.
She’d never desert nor'forsake us.
Our linen is washed and made spotlessly white.
It’s surprising how smart she can make us.
AN ELEGY-,
THE PAS3TM“OF CHRISTINA,
Within eleven months of the passing of Don his mother was
laid beside hint, A granite headstone marks their resting place
in a quiet corner of the Toowong Cenetery 0 with the following
Gaelic inscription ; Aig Fois Gus am bris an la agus an teioh
na Sgailean, Translation - At Rest, Until the day break and
the shadows flee away.
Just as I prayed at her death-bed side,
I felt that Jesus was standing by.
And with a smile He said "Let me guide her
To heavenly mansions beyond the skies o "
I pleaded hard with an open mind
That she be spared to me for a while j
He smiled again, saying, "Don’t detain her.
I’ll bring her safely across the stile".
Before the close of her earthly time.
Just for a moment lift up her eyes.
And let us plant on each other’s forehead
A parting token before she dies.
With open arms she looked up and smiled
And recognising me by her side ;


Our love unfeigned was seal*d with pathos,
A scene too sacred for human eyes*
Her visage glowed.with a peace divine,
The Heavenly portals were opened wide,
I heard the usher say, "Come up higher".
And on the threshold we said good-bye®
I heard a voice as I horned aside.
And there was Jesus close by my side.
He said serenely "I*ll never leave thee.
Come now with me and in mo abide"*
AN OLD AGE LOVE SONS
Translated from the Gaelic*
In anticipation of the approaching fiftieth anniversary of
their wedding lain had the following lines prepared to be recited
at their golden wedding* You can appreciate his great disappoint-
ment when this would-be happy event was cut short by only seven
months, through the demise of his beloved wife*
When we were young and tender, immune from guile and sin
Our youthful aspirations were all the while akin.
In play and sport, each striving the trophy prize to win,
*Twas then by cupid ! s parley my heart succumbed within*
How fifty years have passed us since the Padtor joined our
hands.
And over devotions trysted by a golden finger band.
Through thick and thin we plodded, though our for - tune was
but small j
We had God*s unbounded blessings and contentment with them
all.
Though thy locks are getting silvered, and thy cheeks are
wrinkled so.
And old age has marred the beauty and the bloom of long ago.
Yet your embrace*s as charming and your kiss has all the
glow.
That it had when first I hugged you beneath the mistletoe*
A MODERNISED VERSION OF THE 121ST FSALM*
Mine eyes are uplifted to the hills in the distance
Whence cometh my help when depressed and forlorn j
From Him that created the earth and the heavens
Come safety and shelter from tempest and storm*


My footsteps He guidoth, He keeps me from sliding,
He-s always at hand keeping guard at the goal.
My God v.in not blunder nor will He e’er slumber
As He pilots my barque through the shallows and shoals.
In the heat of the noontide the sun shall not wound me,
A stroke from the moon in the night He withholds.
My Lord and Redeemer has my soul in His keeping
And henceforth will lead ms straight into the fold.
With my Leader beside me no ill can come nigh me.
In His bosom I s ll hide ’when there*s danger abroad.
When troubles and trials will oloud my horizon
1311I 3 11 trust Him entirely - my Guide on the road.
Tune : Ye banks and braes.
lain often song this old song after putting it in its new
setting during his time of trouble.
THE SECOND TRIP.
BACK TO BONNIE SCOTLAND.
After lain T s troubles had subsided and calm again brooded
over the troubled waters, he felt very much dejected and down-
hearted and was actually on the merge of a nervous breakdown.
His bosom friends advised him to take a holiday. Now there was
no other place in the world where lain could enjoy a holiday but
in the Highlands of Scotland, where he and his late beloved
Christina used to play together on the hill side when as boy
and girl they tended the cattle and sheep of their respective
parents.
lain hesitated for a while, being more or less doubtful
whether at his age his constitution would stand the strain of
such a long voyage. However, after consulting his Doctor who
gave a very favourable report, he set out, and from the time ho
went on board ship his health began to improve, and after nine
months came back to Australia again with his health and spirits
fully restored.
Without delay I ! m sailing homeward.
To that beloved ethereal shore.
To the land of lakes and mountains.
Firs and larch and birch and oaks.
Where there*s deer and grouse and partridge.
Snipe and woodcock to decoy.


With my bag and gran and cartridge*
King of sports I will employ*
In my dreams I see a vision
Of the Clachan by the shore*
And the glen where I meandered
In the palmy days of yore j
And I’m longing for the pleasure
Of a vis it-there once more.
To .renew my old acquaintance
With those haunts I still adore*
Prcan the top of yonder mountain
I will view a glorious scene *-
Bens and lochs and crags and valleys
Right before my very ee’n j
There below me are the Trossaohs
And Loch Lomond all serene.
With the Clyde in all its beauty
Flowing smoothly out to sea.
To the north and west expanding
Lie the Hebridean ,isles.
Where the bravest of earth’s manhood
Have their homes by Firth and Kyle.
There with love and pure affection
Modern birth-control is banned.
And by nature’s own tuition
Still'produces Highland Clans*
A most happy time awaits me
In the Strath where I was born.
Where I’ll have a Gaelic ceilidh
: With my friends of long ago.
Singing songs of sweetest cadence
And with Highland toasts galore.
I’ll be welcomed by the Baillidh
Once again to Scotland's shore*
ALONE WITH THE PRIEST.
lain booked a berth in a two-berth cabin, so as to have as
much peace ond> comfort as possible* From Brisbane to Sydney he
had the cabin to himself, his companion was to come on board at
that Port : . When lain went down to his cabin to see what sort
of a mate. he was to have, behold here was a Roman Catholic Priest
busy arranging his luggage* lain at once recognised, who he had
and, in introducing himself, asked what branch of the Christian


Church h© represented* He said he belonged to the Roman
Catholic Church, lain quite frankly informed him that he be-
longed to the Protestant Church of Scotland, and said that
under the circumstances both of them would have to keep very
quiet* lain and the Priest were the best of companions even
to the length of occasionally having a friendly discussion^ over
some phases of their respective religions. At the same time
lain felt mors or less lonely while the Priest was at his
devotions, and while he was at his prayers lain most assiduously
paid particular attention to his own of rhyming*
Alone in the crowd that is surging around.
Alone in the streets of the city.
Alone on the deck walking round with the rest.
For there’s no one that takes on me pity.
Alone with the Priest in my cabin I sleep.
Alone though he prays with precision.
Alone I’m indeed when he’s counting his beads,
But I always behave vdth discretion.
When darkest the hour through a break in the cloud,
I see a most glorious vision.
For close by my side, a companion and guide,
Not alone, for Christ Jesus is with me.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS,
TOien the ship was going through the Australian Bight the
weather was very stormy and, to make matters worse, one of the
blades of the propeller broke, which not only hindered the
progress of the ship, but was in imminent danger of foundering
until they oame near land at Fremantle where they anchored.
The Chief Engineer got himself fitted out in a diver’s outfit
and went down to see what was really the matter, and when he
discovered the break he worked himself single handed a whole
day and night, until he "thoroughly mended the blade and got the
ship on the way again.
lain, being of an observant turn of mind, took stock of
the principal events that were happening on board, and recorded
many of them in rhyme both in Gaelic and English, He took
particular notice of how scantily some of the ladies were
dress, and how frequently they patronised the liquor bar, and
hew fond they were of smoking cigarettes. The ship’s barber
was kept so busy bobbing and curling their unruly tufts of hair
that he had no time to attend to the male passengers many of
whom, lain included, resorted to the sailors’ quarters -where


they found an amateur barber to attend on them, after hours. All
the other officers from the Captain downwards including the crew
were of the best, and on the whole the passengers were well
looked after. The following lines sum up lain’s observations.
I view from my perch all the crowds on the deck.
In their various frolics engaging.
The shorts and the slacks, semi-nudes and bare backs.
Are sights that are truly degrading.
There’s a nice cosy spot for the ladies to smoke
And whore, cocktails are served by the barman.
For those out of gear there is plenty of beer
And a whisky for dear old MaoFarlane.
All the stewards on board are gentlemen bona
And attend to your wants with much ardour.
But in most every flock you will find a black spot.
The one in this lot is the barber.
Our ship’s of the best, her crew are experts
And we greatly respect her Commander,
With his compass and chart he will steer her aright
Till at last she’s made fast in the harbour.
lain gave a copy of these verses to the Chief Engineer who
remarked that they were very nice indeed, but, says he, there’s
nothing here about the man that mended the propeller. Next
morning lain gave him the following lines all to himself :
With the propeller out of gear
He steered her through the Bight,
Although he thought the end was near
His brain was clear and bright.
When near the shore he went below
To see what ailed the shaft
And what might be a month’s delay
He mended in one night.
With might and main he worked away
Disdainful of the shark.
Without delay he fixed the blade
And sailed, again his bark.
When he went down, he looked a clown.
Enshrouded in his mask.
But such a feat was ne’er performed
Since Noah built the Ark*


THE LARGS BAY TEA PARTY.
Although Taints health ms improving he was not as yet up
to the mark, and as things were settling down for the voyage
proper after leaving Fremantle he selected for himself a quiet
possie to be as far away as possible from the general confusion
usually obtained on board ship. He fixed up his deck chair
and ms beginning to feel quite comfortable, when three ladies
intruded bn his quiet cosy corner., and each planted her deck
chair quite close to lain’s, It was evident that they also
were in quest of comparative quietness, and lain felt satisfied
that these ladies would not molest him in the least. They soon
discovered that lain was not quite well, and in many ways shewed
him much kindness, lain discovered that these ladies’ sym-
pathies were akin to his own, and found them to be the very best
of shipmates, and also good sailors. In due time lain intro-
duced the Minister a who also was a kindred spirit. Those ladies
had supper every night at ten o’clock, and the Minister and lain
were always invited as their guests.
■When they were near their journey’s ends, and the time came
to say good-bye, and in all probability they would never meet
again, lain gave each a copy of the following lines.
There was a happy little party
On board the Largs Bay,
They hailed from every quarter
From Queensland to far Bombay,
■You should hear their cheery chatter
Cracking jokes and telling tales.
While the cup that cheers ms passing
And the Padre blessed the tray.
A few more nights, my comrades.
And we’ll be far away
With our burdens greatly lightened
On this voyage by the way.
For the bonds that have been fastened
On the gallant Largs Bay
Will day by day grow tighter
Till we meet in haven* s Bay*
IN THE HIGHLANDS.
One fine morning in early Autumn lain took the train from
the great City of Glasgow to visit his native Highlands. He ms
charmed with the scenic beauty of the country up to Inverness.


Every ben and strath and meadow wakened in his mind a new sense
of respect and admiration for his native land. Every looh and
river and plain brought to his remembrance the time when as a
young man, he travelled that way before on his way to far off
Australia, more than fifty years before. Next morning he took
train again from Inverness, by the Dingwall and Skye Railway as
far as Auchnasheen, From there he took the mail coach to
Poolewa, travelling by the lonely Dlen Docharty, through the
secluded aristocratic village of Kinloohewe, and along the shores
of romantic Loohmaree to "She Loohmaree Hotel, and the no e over the
hills to Bonnie Gairlooh, passed by the Gairlooh. Hotel, and
thence over another stretch of hills to his destination at
Poolewe, From there he took a taxi for a distance of four or
five’miles along the shore of Loohewe to his native village of
Inverasdale, where he was most hospitably received by Duncan
his brother, and his wife. Here he rested for a few weeks,
dwelling under the same roof where he was born and brought up.
The people of Inverasdale, like all the other inhabitants
of the Western Highlands, are quite happy with the lot destiny
has marked out for them. The crops which their crofts produce
and the few cattle and sheep they possess, together with a few
weeks of casual employment in the season suffice for all their
needs. Nothing in the world worries them. From morning to
night they go about their daily tasks in their own inimitable
way. They get up in the morning when they wake up. They take
their meals when they get hungry, and go to bed when -they feel
sleepy. Surely there is not a more contented condition to be
found anywhere else in the world. lain in the following linos
gives his own vie?/ of this happy situation.
THE INVERASDALE TIME TABLE.
At eight I get morning tea.
And then have a walk by the sea.
Making sure from the start that digestion is right
For breakfast and dinner and tea*
Now just take a note of my rhyme.
The time for my breakfast is nine.
But sometimes it’s ten before ringing the boll.
Even then I can just take my time.
My dinner excels in its prime,
It*s served between two and five (any time)
I then take a smoko, and a look round the croft
Till the mail from Poolewo arrives.


I then take up my North Star,
With news from near and from far.
My mind is at ease till time for my tea
3y reading the puns and the pars*
For my tea there is no stated time,
And you may be a little surprised,
¥hen I candidly tell I’m never in bed
Till after the day I arise 9
THE SLIGACHAN HOTEL.
lain already visited all the notable places of interest
from Edinburgh and Glasgow in the South to Inverness and Dingwall
in the North, Stornaway, Portree and Oban in the West. Trav-
ellers from all over the world have written profusely in
describing the scenic beauty of Scotland’s bens, and glens, and
dales, and lochs, and to try and describe then here would be an
insult to your intelligence. lain however visited many out of
the way places which the general globe trotters (to their loss)
never visit.
One of these is the Sligachan Hotel, in a most obscure
corner on the east coast of the Isle of Skye. lain was more
interested in this place because of the fact that every one of
the staff, from the proprietor downwards, with the exception of
the cook who hailed from Glasgow, could speak the Gaelic lang-
uage. lain most gladly overlooked this lapse of the cook,
because she seemed to have gauged his gastronomic capacity with
a tact that was all her own, "Wien the waiters discovered that
there was an Australian lodging in the house who could speak
Gaelic, and that he was also a bard, they invited him to their
quarters in the evening, and, taking with him a copy of the
book of Gaelic songs ho was about to publish, they never went to
bed till all hours in the morning, reciting or singing one or
other of lain’s compositions.
lain was delighted that ho found at least ono place in the
Highlands where the Gaelic language was still having its hon-
oured place. Y\lhen leaving, he left them a copy of the follow-
ing lines in English, on condition that they would translate
them into their own mother’s tongue.
I found a home in Sligachan
A place fit for even Angels,
It’s a perfect Highland Hostel
When viewed from every angle.
For peace and rest and comfort
It’s a ; plaoe to be commended.


And it’s managed to perfection
By a oertain Hr* Campbell.
There’s a staff of charming lassies
In this home beside the shore,,
When they greet me in the morning
I detect their Highland lore.
There is only one exception
And that fact I quite ignored
For she gauges my digestion
By a tact.that’s all her own.
For their kind and close attention,
I will get a bill of fare.
As my purse is rather scanty
I.can’t make a lengthy stay.
But the service that they rendered
Is worth all I have to pay.
And a grateful happy pilgrim
Goes rejoicing on his way.
When you’re feeling tired and weary
And entirely out of tone.
And you’re worried by your business
In the office or the store.
Be you King or Prince or peasant
You don’t need to go abroad
For in this most omrming valley
You can get your health restored.
THE EDINBURGH MOD 1835*
A week or two before lain’s return to Australia, the
annual Gaelic Mod was being held in Edinburgh., and,, as he was
a competitor for the Bardic Crown, he received an invitation
from the Lord Provost, to be present at a social gathering to
be held in honour of the Mod,
When loin got into a railway carriage at Glasgow on his vray
to the Mod, another man trailing an enormous bag of luggage
after him was trying to get into the same compartment as lain
when a porter came rushing along the platform, and in rather a
rude fashion ordered him away to another carriage. Addressing
lain also he said, "You come out of there too, if you want to
go to Edinburgh". lain’s would-be companion stood up and v
addressing the porter in one of the most expressive phrases in
the Gaelic language said, "You son of the will you :wt
have patience till I gather my luggage togethe:' 5 * lain burst


out laughing, and said to his mate also in Gaelic, "Give it to
him, lad, as hard as ever you can, and I mil help you,"
Whether the porter understood the indiotive vituperative express,
ion hurled at him or not, I cannot say, hut, all at once he
■became as quiet as a iamb, and, instead of bullying them about,
turned round and helped thorn.
Tfhen lain and his mate got comfortably settled, they began
to converse in Gaelic. lain narrated the fact that ho was over
fifty years in Australia, and that at present he was having a
tour round Scotland, Ho ms nor.'- on his my to the Mod, for he
ms a competitor for the Bardic Cram, Hand," says lain, "I am
hoping I will take it with ms to Australia," The other lis-
tened to lain very attentively, and then turned round with a
smile on his face and said that he also was on the same errand,
"The people of the Isle of Skye to which I belong think there is
not another bard like me, and they persuaded me to come along so
as to bring the Crown to their belored Island," But woe’s me,
Ueither lain Dubh from. Australia nor the Bodach Ban from the
Isle of Skye has got the Bardic Crown yet.
lain spent a most enjoyable week in Edinburgh, attended all
the sessions of the Mod, listening to an excellent profusion of
Gaelic literature in music, song and story, and viewing the
enormous collection of Celtic Art on exhibition - conversing in
Gaelic with Ladies and Gentlemen from all parts of the British
Empire - attending the evening concerts and Ceilidhs in the
company of Her Royal Highness the Duchess of York, and listen-
ing to her crooning the choruses of Gaelic songs. During his
stay in Edinburgh lain composed tho Gaelic version of his song
"The Edinburgh Mod", and on his my back to Australia trans-
lated it into English as follows :
CHORUS : Oh come and sing about the Mod
A song of sweetest cadence.
It ms worth while to cross the sea
To hear it in Dun-Eideann,
Oh, come and sing about the Mod,
By Lords and Dukes and Esquires
I was welcomed to Dun-Eideann,
The Provost and his Lady
Gave my hand a hearty shaking.
Chorus ,
How Queenly looked York’s Duchess
At the concerts and the ceilidh.


With her .sash of Stuart Tartan
And as happy ns a fairy.
Chorus*
The mild and gentle Gaelic
At the Court is finding favour.
Her music and her literature
Are now becoming famous.
Chorus*
There wore orain-mor and duanagan.
And and danachd.
And young and old were singing them
To violin and olarseaoh.
Chorus,
When the junior Choirs came forward
Their performance was most charming.
And most exquisitely joyous
Ware the strains of the piano.
Chorus,
The designs in Celtic handicraft
Were highly recommended.
For the Bardic Grown one Sugra
And a Bodach Ban contended.
Chorus*
■Give my respects across the sea.
To those with whom I trysted.
And tell them though I got no prize
1% not the least excited.
Chorus »
Next year I'll send a brand new song
And Sugra will not sight it.
And you will see me crowned a Bard
Before I*m quite exhausted, ,
Chorus,
MY BONNIE TRIPLET DAUGHTERS,
When lain was returning homo by the Esporanee Bay, the
first he met when he came on board were the three ladies who
were in his company on the voyage over. They gave him a most
hearty welcome and expressed their great joy that he was to bo
in their company again. They discovered a man and his ’wife


who were also among the Largs Bay passengers. They clubbed
together s.nd found accommodation at a table by themselves, and
there was net a happier party on board, The Tea Party was
again established, and every night at ten o’clock this merry’
company gathered together to their social-cup of tea. Some-
times they would have to dig up lam out. of some obscure corner
where he would be-busy composing a sarcastic rhyme about some-
thing or other on board, At the end of the voyage he gave
each of his companions a copy of the following verses.
My Bonnie Triplet Daughters were born on the Largs Bay,
’While leaving Melbourne harbour on the 25th of May,
They proved.the best of shipmates as we cruised across
the main.
And be it calm or stormy they were always bright and gay.
They espied a fellow mortal, downhearted in his chair.
Who was left by all and sundry to his sad and lonely
fats.
But these kind-hearted lassies gather’d round him day
by day
And to proclaim him father these trio were no blate.
'We were once again united on the gallant Esperanoe Bay
And here we found a mother that conducted cur affairs.
At a meeting in the parlour* the tea party was proclaimed
And night by night they gathered to a rich and
sumptuous farCo
'When they were all assembled at ten o'clock for tea.
Their hearts were full of gladness and as happy as
could be.
And when they called up father from his bardio reverie.
The group around Miss Lawrie was a charming sight to see.
A JUBILEE SOUS
for the
KENMORE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
While lain was on holiday the Jubilee of this Church was
celebrated, and from somewhere abroad he .sent this song as his
contribution to this happy function.
God bless the little Eenmore Church
In. this its Jubilee,
Long may it stand a' beacon light
To lead the way to Thee o


CHORUS
0 come and bless this little flock.
The faithful two or throe,
Who bravely hold this lone outpost
A witness still for Thee,
The non of Ulster gathered round
With Scats of high degree.
And «vith tho aid of Highland men
Built up this Church debt free.
Chorus .
For fifty years the seed was sown.
In varied soil may bo.
But some who yield a hundred fold
Around us we can see.
Chorus.
Though some are lost, some scorched, some choked.
And nothing seems achieved
By faith we still keep plodding on
And leave results -with Thee*
Chorus.
Revive thy work we pray 0 lord,
S souls converted bo,
may the Kenmore Church be filled
With crowds to worship Thee,
~ Chorus,
Tune s "Auld Dang Syne".
THE KENMORE BUS
ITS CONDUCTORS.
When lain settled in Kenmore over fifty years ago, tho only mode
of transport was a dray or a springoart| perhaps one or two in
better circumstances could sport a buggy or a sulky. Tho roads
were mere tracks and in wet weather almost impassable* Bub
now the transformation is amazing, Thoro is a first class
bitumen settlors travel in thoir motor cars and
transport their produce by various kinds of motor vehicles; a
regular line of buses runs to and from Brisbane every hour of
the day. The efficiency and courtesy of the bus drivers is
worthy of all praise which lain endeavours to express in the
few lines that follow.
There*s a Bus that runs to Kenmore which is really up to date.
And for comfortable travelling oan*t be equalled in the State,
Its conductors are all civil with most gentlemanly traits.
And will carry you in safety from the City to your gates©


Hew there's charming Cliff, the tall one, with a anile upon his
face
Who con talk to all the fathers about everything in space.
Always helps the kids and women,- sees them safely in their
place.
And assists in their departure with the utmost of good grace.
The young ladies like Charlie so handsome of gait.
They* chat and they talk to him early and late.
They display their many charms with*an ardour far from faint.
But the one who captures Charlie would need almost be a saint.
Jack always will greet you with a most kindly air.
His modesty strikes you as something that , s rare,
Be always says "Thank-you", when taking the fare.
And guides your alighting with attention and care.
In supporting this Bus you’re' advancing Kenmcra,
’There the ridges and valleys &ro sights to adore.
If in search of & site for a modern abode*
Take a trip on the Bus and- alight at the store.
THE KILTIES CHOIR,
Jennie MacParlane, one of Brisbane’s leading singers,
organised and conducts tins choir, consisting of boys and girls
of Scotch descent all dressed in Highland costume. One of
Brisbane’s outstanding entertainments is the annual concert of
the Kilties Choir, This song can be sung to the tune of "The
March of the Cameron men".
Have you heard of the Choir that Scotch instinct inspired,
TJhich (Jennie EacFarlane has taught.
You can.easily scan their descent from the Clans
TTOhioli their various Tartans denote.
CHORUS
l%en the Choir in the Kilts with distinctive display
From the platform their items perform.
Their chorus and actions and dancing and plays.
You will hoar Jennie’s Kilties encored, encored, encored.
You will hear Jennie’s Kilties encored.
'Adorned .in tlieir bonnets and feathers and kilts.
The most picturesque dress that’s in voguo.
Cairngorms in gold sotting to fasten their plaids.
And buckles to tie up their brogues.
Chorus,


Though born and brought up in an alien land
Far away from their ancestors * shores.
The pure Celtic blood tint runs in their veins
Brings their Highland descent to the fore#
Chorvis,
Jennie's Choir has discovered the dominant strain.
That appeals to the Scotsman abroad.
When they sing "Soots are wa" and "Bonnie Dundee”,
They are hailed with a treble encore*
Chorus•
To the skirl of the pipes they perform the sword dance.
The flings and the reels of renown.
And when acting the rites of a brawly Scotch Hioht
Jonnio's Kilties are out on their .own.
Chorus•
TIR-NAH-OG-,
LAND OF THE EVER YOUIJG,
lain still mourns for his beloved, but he often finds
comfort in crooning the following linos which indicate the
Highlanders' firm belief that their doar onos who have already
passed ever are anxiously waiting until they also will come to
join them in that happy land*
When anon I'll cross the ferry
What a gladsmoe song I'll sing.
For old age will ne'er assail mo
In the Land of Ever Young,
CHORUS : I will cross with tuneful spirit.
With my harp already strung,
I will cross in full assurance
To the Land of Ever Young,
I\3y belov'd left me lamenting
With my vospors yet unsung,
But : I'm glad sho's anchored safely
In.the Land of Ever. Young,
Chorus ,
With bright cheerful, face she's waiting
Till my raoo on earth is : run.
Beckoning mo to hor boudoir
In the Land of Evor Yeung,
Chorus*


When I*ll reach my home in Pharos
Where old age is always young,
I will meet my dearest darling
In the Land of Ever Young.
Chorus.
On the shore my friends will greet me.
Highland welcome on their tongue.
Time will hover end our ceilidh
In the Land of Ever Young*
Chorus.
With what joy 1 join the chorus.
When from David.*s Psalms they sing
For.still they worship in the Gaelic
In the Land of Ever Young. ,
. •. Chorus,
A BIRTHDAY GREET DIG
To. a Lady Friend of the
Highland Society of Brisbane.
This was recited by the Society* s Bard at a meeting
Society .when this friend ms present.
In a sheltering aloove at Appin,
There resides both a saint and sage.
She is eighty-nine years on her journey
Give respect t.o a dame of her age*
She is calm and secure at her anchor
Till the steersman the password will say.
And we wish her each year as it passes,
limy happy returns of the day.
As a-token wo send bit heather
For this veteran Pilgrim to wear
To remind her that somebody loves her.
And that always somebody cares.
Her Christian modesty wa-s exhibited when she demurred at
being cal’led a saint, for in hor own mind she considered herself
more a sinner than a saint. The Bard settled the matter to her
satisfaction when ho instantly added 'the following verso s
There goes a poor wandering sinner.
Tilth her burden shots weary and faint
But when washed in that fount flows from Calvary*s
mount :
That sinner- eooometh a saint.


THE GAELIC LANGUAGE
Yesterday and To-day.
In the following rhyme lain deplores both in Gaelic and
English the decline of the Gaelic language in the-Highlands.
This ditty, if I may call it so, can be sung to the well-known
time of "Coming Through the Rye”.
Yesterday
In every Clachan glen and Strath
The Gaelic was so plain.
From young and old you'd hear it flow
In gentle modest strain*
And when the lassies waulking cloth
Stood round the bench so gay.
The chorus of a Gaelic song
Would speed them on their way.
When fishermen vdth lines and not.
Were sailing from the shores^
A love song rose above the din
They're making vdth their oars.
Those on the beach in that sweet speech
Of Eve and Adam* s lore -
Would shout. "Hurrah 11 and clap their hands
In ringing gla<J encore.
There's not a language in the world
Sc sweet to woo your love.
The cosy niche where sweethearts moot
Is hallowed from above,
When ilka.lad would greet Ids lass
In simple Gaelic so,'
Their hearts would leap by pure instinct
And loving-speech would flow.
The gallant.lads would press their suit
In Gaelic's kindest tone.
The mem. with pride spoke to their wives
The only language known.
The youngsters playing.hide and seek
Intoned a Bardic coo.
And your good neighbour by the gate
Enquired "how are you ?"
At Ceilidh time the host as Knight
Would tell a tale or two.
While all the rest took turn about
In putting riddles through.


With cheerful hearts they sang and danced.
Inspired by Gaelic muse.
And if a word of English dopp’od
Tho culprit got his duos,
The grandoms there with, silvery hair
Would tease tho wool so fine.
The .maidens with a pair of cards
Would build neat rolls in lino t
While matrons with their spinning wheels
Would twist them into twine.
And all around tho crowd would sing
The songs of Auld Lang Syne,
To-day
Such were the customs in the Glen
Whon I was .just a youth, - ..
Naught now I hear save foreign tongtip'
At wedding, ball and booth.
At school and mart and rcund-tho hearth
There*s naught but English known,
And should this shameful practice last
Long will the Celts bemoan.
But Highlanders are nop - : awake
To things that matter-more.
Their precious language is astray
Midst modern English lore.
And now the chiefs are on her trail
To save her is their aim.
And place her in her rightful chair
Midst languages of fame.
An Comunn Gaidhealaoh vrith zeal
Is keeping her alight
By Mods and Ceilidhs everywhere
Still teaching her with might.
By North and South and East and West
She*s spreading far and 'wide.
Soon may purs Gaelic be in quest
Throughout the country-side.
There will be champions at the. Mod,
Competing for the Bard,
And here I*m after it once more
Before my pen retard.
Before I pass with what delight
I strive for this award.
And with what joy I go my way
If I am crowned a Bard,


Olffi. SQOTTISH QUEEN,
This poem was composed when the Duke and Duchess of York
were crowned King and Queen of Great Britain, and her Dominions*
lain met her Majesty when, as Duchess of York, she was Patroness
of An Comunn Gaidhealaoh’s (Highland Association) Mod at Edin-
burgh in 1935, lain being present as a competitor for the
Bardic Crown. He sent a copy of the poem both in Gaelic and
in English to Her Majesty, which she most graciously accepted,
and replied by a letter of appreciation and thanks. This is a
translation from the Gaelic*
Great Britain’s Queen’s a darling in grace and charm
unique.
Her supberb, modest bearing at court and ball supreme.
The virtues that prepared her to be a gracious Queen,
From a humble Highland maiden she learned them in her
teens*
The Commonwealth of Nations all hail her as their Queen,
The Nobles, Lords and Peasants to her their homage hiring.
In all the great Dominions of Britain’s vast domain
There ne’er was born a maiden more worthy of a King*
It was at Mod Dun-Eideann I viewed Queen Bessie’s charms
While crooning at the Ceilidhs I’d fain have kissed her
hand.
Her smile will cure your ailments, make pains and aches
depart.
Oh what a thrill awaits me when I see her in our land*
When we with zest and fervour our Nation’s Anthem sing
To wish our King God’s favour and greatness to him bring.
And when in purest Gaelic we pray "G6d save the King”
We’ll ne’er fear get his partner our Darling Scottish Queen*
THE KING’S CALL TO PRAY*
In his Broadcast to the Nation as reported in the daily
Press, His Majesty expressed his personal trust in God and
enjoins all his subjects to follow his lead# At his behest
wo already have had two days specially sot apart to pray for
our Nation. The result of those- prayers cannot bo foreseen,
but without doubt they will be answered according to God’s own
will and in His own time and way. So with the grace of
patience we wait for the answer*
As this iniquitous strife goes on without ceasing, so our
prayers must be on the same plane. Let us, therefore, follow


the lead, of our King and pray without ceasing until these sad
calamities be wholly over-past.
At bur -Monarch 1 s demand we presented our arms (and our
Prayers)
In.defence of the weak and oppressed
Let tis cease not our prayers till the strife's at an end
■With the mad Hitler orgies suppressed.
May God bies's. our King whose trust is in Him
With his brave Scottish. Queen at his side
The shelters from 'raids with their subjects they'share
And their God is their leader and guide.
Id.ibh ahd T ’lauriitions and wares
'The -poor arid the rich give their aid without stint
And.the,best of their gifts are their prayers.
PRINCESS ELIZABETH'S TALK
TO BRITAIN'S EVACUEES.
With a thrill of delight we have listened last night
To our noble Princess on the wireless
Ths thoughtful address she so plainly expressed
Exhibits her warm hearted kindness*
My sister and I ; send our lore with a smile
Tc our dear 'vaouees where they're stationed
God keep them from ham to the end of the War -
And Hitler will, stop his invasions,
Imbued by our faith we - patiently .wait
And offer our prayers-with much pathos- ■
Till our merciful God whom we daily implore
Will bring victory out of this chaos.* !
You are forced at this stage to seek shelter away.
In a plaoe far remote from the raiders
But time's drawing near when you get the all clear
After Hitler is straafed with the Kaiser,
Till our armies anon will vanquish the foe
In your troubles and woes we're partakers
With our father the King and our mother the Queen
We put absolute trust in our Maker*


When the Nazis are oaged and peace is declared
You* 11 come hack to your om habitations
To assist in the task of repairing the gaps
Of Herr Hitler*s miscalculations.
<J* MacLENNAK*
Brisbane*
Australia *
ommmw» OQO~—
