

AFTER THE STORM
(Nach Dem Sturm)
A PREDICTION
iim«ggo k_
TiTe/IDI NG


NACH DEM STURM
(AFTER THE STORM)
A PREDICTION OF
THE DOWNFALL OF
THE BRITISH EMPIRE
by ARABI PASHA.
TRANSLATED FROM
THE GERMAN
PRATTEN BROS., PRINTERS, SYDNEY


PREFACE.
ARAB! PASHA , as a prophet, is certainly an optimist.
His prediction of the downfall of the British Em-
pire and the subsequent alteration in the map of
the world will be read with tolerant amusement !by Britons
who are closely watching the progress of the great war in
Europe. The Egyptian has expressed in his lecture what
were and are undoubtedly
THE PROFOUND HOPES OF THE
TEUTONIC MILITARISTS.
There is no doubt that such a prophecy—for we must
regard the lecture as such —has been taken more or less
seriously in Germany. The following pages are, in fact, a
literal translation from the German “ Nach clem Sturm.”
(After the Storm) which is frankly admitted to be a lecture
delivered by Arabi Pasha at Alexandria in 1911.
Whilst the theories regarding the probable cause of the
war will no doubt be interesting, one can only marvel at
the gross stupidity of a man trained in warfare propounding
such an outcome as the destruction of
THE NAVY OF GREAT BRITAIN
in so easy a manner.
It is a story worthy of a De Rougemont—a dream
worthy of a Hohenzoilern —but as a theory it would
disgrace a schoolboy.
IT IS A TRAVESTY ON HISTORICAL FACTS,
—a fantasy of the imagination of a fanatic. Yet this man
had stirred Egypt to its very soul and caused much trouble
to Great Britain in the past.
Pie was the son of a Fellah family hailing from lower
Egypt, where he was born in 1841. The family claimed
to be direct descendants of the Prophet Mahommed, from
whom, perhaps, Arabi gained his prophetical propensities.
He studied at Azher, the religious University of Cairo, and
joined the Egyptian Army in 1854.
Subsequently he had charge of the transport during the
Abpsinian campaign. In 1682 he rose to the position of
Secretary for War, and later received his appointment as
Minister for War. At the battle of Tel-el-Kebir
HE WAS DEFEATED BY THE BRITISH,
taken prisoner and exiled to Ceylon on the lOtn of January,
1883, but permitted to return to Egypt eight years after.
Whether this was good policy on the part of the British
Government remains to be seen, but there are indications
that he had much to do with the recent recrudescence of
MAHOMMEDAN FANATICISM
in many parts of the world.
WE TRUST THAT ARABI PASHA’S REFLECT-
IONS WILL STIR THE HEARTS OF OUR READERS
AND URGE THEM ON TO FURTHER ACTS OF
PATRIOTISM.


Nach dem Sturm
(After the Storm).
The historian has been ironically called the
prophet of the past. To the masses it would,
prove irksome and futile to draw reasonable
deductions from the events of the past, and
quite unnecessary in the theme forming the
subject of my lectures, dealing with incidents
which we have witnessed ourselves.
On what questionable foundation superficial
views are based becomes immediately evident,
when a number of persons are asked to explain
the causes which led up to
THE DOWNFALL OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE.
In each reply some side issues are introduced
such as the invention of the dirigible airship,
the inefficiency of the military system, the
happening of a number of unforeseen circum-
stances, a breach of treaty obligations, treach-
ery and others. A lost battle may, no doubt,
unfavorably influence the ultimate result of a
war, and an unsuccessful campaign may force
a nation to agree to the acceptance of a humili-
ating peace; but if a world Empire, as the
result of the destruction of its fleet,


CRUMBLES TO PIECES LIKE A
HOUSE OF CARDS,
the causes of such a catastrophe lie much
deeper, and an explanation can only be found
in the Psychology of the times.
Let us, therefore, to-day, since the waves
of SXGitgmSfit hgyg long disappeared, and
away from the turmoil of party politics, which
find no room in this assembly, approach a
subject which has always been a fascinating
problem for the student of national Psych-
ology.
Unconsciously our attention is diverted to the
past —to the ancient world which has witnessed
the making and unmaking of vast empires.
We search in vain for an identical instance; all
THE GREAT NATIONS WHICH HAVE
DOMINATED IN THE PAST,
through centuries, only to take their exit from
the world’s stage, have always shown signs of
national decay before their downfall. Before
Alexander swept over the Persian Empire, the
10,000 Greeks under Xenophon exhibited
signs of the martial spirit of the race being on
the wane.
The Hellenic world succumbed to the
Roman legions because a life of debauch had
effeminated the descendants of the victors of
Marathon; the tottering Roman Empire, in-
deed, held its own for generations against
THE ONCOMING HORDES OF
THE EAST,
Nach dew Sturm


nor is there an analogy to be found in the
Napoleonic Empire. France stood and fell
with the genius of the man.
Proud Albion had shown the world no weak-
ness nor decay, and anyone who had predicted
its downfall two years ago would have been
branded as one bereft of reason.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Britain
was
A FREE, RICH AND HAPPY
LAND,
in which the citizen from the Prime Minister
to farm laborer felt pride in being a unit of a
world-dominating nation.
At the head of the State stood men whose
political programme had the imprimatur of
the people by means of the operation of the
ballot bos, and whose actions were subject to
the criticism of the electors through the agency
of an uncensored press.
Fashioned by a system of independence of
thought and self government, a race was
created which could not avoid its predomina-
tion. The greatest triumph of English craft
of statesmanship finds expression in the treat-
ment of subjugated races. Few officials suf-
ficed to maintain staple Government in terri-
tories infinitely larger than the motherland.
An immense inflow of capital, due to a careful
exploitation of the soil of subjugated countries,
encouraged trade, and stamped its beneficial
marks on all countries of the world.
The extraordinary birthrate of the country,
despite a steady emigration, conduced to a
lasting increase of population over which
After the Storm


THE PROUDEST AND RICHEST
ARISTOCRACY
of the world reigned supreme.
A decay of manhood, which is usually asso-
ciated with luxurious living, was not noticeable
in the aristocracy and the people, which, due
to the national interest in the sports of Old
England, maintained a healthy state of mind
and bodily vigor. The safety of the country
was secured by this, and its maritime power,
the latter being well supplied with coaling
stations in all parts of the world. With this
aid
ENGLAND DOMINATED THE
TRADE ROUTES.
Her warships cruised in all parts of the world,
ready to emphasise Parliament's dictum when-
ever and wherever necessary. The political
power of the Island State was so far-reaching
that it could humiliate one Great Power after
the other.
Russia was forced to depart from the gates
of Constantin ople at
THE BIDDING OF ENGLAND,
France met the same fate at Fashoda, and Ger-
many looked on sullenly whilst her proud
merchant ships were searched, like pirate ves-
sels, by British cruisers.
Not only did England know how to conquer;
she had the rare gift to hold what she held.
Her keen commercial instinct recognised, that
to assimilate her vast dominions, the partner-
dem Sturm


ship in the Empire must be made worth while.
The granting of self government in its fullest
meaning, to its colonies, and the hard fought
for African Free States, showed a statesman-
like spirit only equal to the endeavor of the
Imperialists to embrace the motherland and its
dominions in a tariff union. The accomplish-
ment of Chamberlain’s tariff proposals would
have
CLOSED THE COMMERCIAL GATES
AGAINST OTHER NATIONS.
And this immense Empire, stretching from
the Cape to Cairo, over the Southern half of
Asia and the major portion of North America
and the whole of the fifth continent could be
swept off the map in twenty-four hours.
This apparently inexplicable occurrence is
due to the very circumstances which made pos-
sible the building of the British Empire, The
real, basis of British world power was not due
to the strength of the fleet, but to the weakness
of her maritime competitors.
The insufficiency, and in some cases non-
existence of navies of other countries made it
possible for the Island people to make use of a
monopoly in the acquisition of territories which
appeared to be of value.
Had it been in England’s power
TO CONFINE THE REST OF
THE WORLD
to the conditions appertaining to the 19th
century, it would have been quite possible for
the British Empire to maintain its prestige
After the Storm


almost indefinitely. The dangers which
threatened the Empire were partly military and
partly economic in nature.
In Asia, the slow but irresistible Russian war
cloud moved southward and would soon reach
India. The people of this curious country
were divided by opposing religious beliefs be-
yond reconciliation.
UNITED THEY WERE ONLY IN
A COMMON HATRED
for their foreign masters, All the efforts of
the Englishmen to win their hearts by efficient
administration and improvements and reforms
of all kinds proved futile. In this country
(Egypt) where they were not permitted to
marry and beget children, they remained
strangers and only British arms kept them in
check.
Another danger threatened in East Asia—
the awakening of Japan. This trade com-
petitor, it was feared, would conquer the
markets of Asia by the cheapness of its pro-
ducts and geographical position. Moreover,
Japan might prove inconvenient in other direc-
tions.
In Egypt, the civilising influence of England
did not stem the national movement with its
HATRED FOR THE FOREIGN
INTRUDER.
It waited to drive him out of the country. In
South Africa, the acquisition of the Boer Re-
publics had the undesirable effect of encourag-
Sketch dem Sturm


ing the Dutch element and raising the cry of
“Africa for the Africander.”
Canada still showed some affection for
England, because it was to her interest, but it
became an open secret that the greedy Trust
magnates were working for the incorporation
of this rich land into American Union.
Difficult commercial and economic problems
disturbed the country and added to England’s
anxiety regarding the future. The monopoly
which it had so long enjoyed in the world’s
market became illusionary, owing to the enor-
mous industrial development of the Continent,
and particularly of Germany. In all the British
Colonies
THE GERMAN MERCHANT FLAG
appeared, and German goods competed keenly
with the productions of the motherland. But,
still. Great Britain had an indisputable advan-
tage in the world’s markets. Her fleet was
superior to all others, and the Empire’s power
for expansion was not yet exhausted, which was
shown by her annexation of Arabia whereby
Egypt and India were joined to the Persian
Gulf.
And what was the position of other States
with which England had to reckon?
FRANCE, ONCE HER DREADED
RIVAL,
had lost its leading position, but despite the
waning sentiment of her people for military
glory, the desire for revenge of Sedan re-
mained, and every effort was made to keep
After the Storm


the army to the highest standard of perfection.
This, of course, became more and more diffi-
cult, because a love of enjoyment and luxury
resulted in a decline of the birthrate. As there
were no laurels to be won in Europe, her atten-
tion was directed to Africa and Asia, and with
the approval of Germany, France acquired
considerable territory elsewhere to compensate
her for
THE LOSS OF ALSACE-LORRAINE.
But, instead of being grateful for this sign of
friendship and accepting Germany’s outstretch-
ed hand, France went on sulking, and from
time to time made it clear that it had not
forgotten its former humiliation. And so it
came about that Germany found herself in an
awkward position, although she had fought in
two great wars for the unity of the Empire,
Situated in the middle of Europe and
SURROUNDED BY ENVIOUS
NEIGHBORS,
who could not reconcile themselves to the fact
that this parvenu amongst the nations had
equal rights with others, Germany had the one
object constantly before her—to be strong
enough to face any coalition. The wise treaty
introduced by the first Chancellor was con-
tinued after his downfall, but, instead of a calm
determination to obtain the object in view, the
business of the country was badly managed as
manifested in the alternately high-flown
speeches and professions of friendship towards
other nations. In consequence of this,
Nach dem Sturm


A GENERAL MISTRUST OF
GERMANY
was created, although the latter only acted as
spectator while the world was being divided.
The few territories in Africa, which England
had not occupied because they were worth
nothing and handed over to Germany, could
only be maintained by incessant wars in which
England supplied the enemy with arms. How-
ever, the acquisition of these territories had the
effect of directing German eyes to the sea. A
strong movement for
THE CREATION OF A POWERFUL
NAVY
'3 ' A||
set in, and an efficient mercantile marine
carried the products of the rapidly-growing
industries to all parts of the world, particularly
to South America where British trade made
room for German. Abdul Hamid who felt
flattered by the friendly advances of the great
German Empire, opened the bazaars of the
Orient to her trade.
The domestic conditions of the Empire were
influenced by the extraordinary increase of
population, particularly amongst the lower
classes, which supplied recruits to the Social
Democrats. But the Prussian Junker still held
sway, and the rural population and the army
were still under hereditary influence and guid-
ance of the aristocracy.
THE EASILY SATISFIED
POPULACE
After the Storm


was content to be governed, paid taxes, served
in the army, grumbled and hoped for belter
times.
Whilst the western powers confronted one
another with suspicion, Russia, which had won
the Turkish war with the aid of Roumania was
enabled to strengthen her dominating political
status.
Alexander 111. who had crushed the revolu-
tionary spirit of the people could boast of a
power which made him arbiter of Europe.
The “civilising influence” of Russia pene-
trated into Asia without resistance, and
MO POWER HAD THE COURAGE
to seriously oppose the colossus. In contrast
to this aggressive expansion of barbarian des-
potism, Austria-Hungary showed signs of dis-
integrating influence which internal dissensions
have on foreign policy.
Austrian Statesmen, were for the time, satis-
fied with Russia’s assurance that the status quo
in the Balkan States would be maintained.
The fact that
RUSSIA WAS MERELY
MARKING TIME
for the purpose of acquiring a slice of China,
prior to a renewed attack on the Balkan pro-
blem, escaped notice.
In the meantime, frictions occurred amongst
the Balkan Stales, which were secretly fanned
by Russia and England. Turkey, although in
possession of a strong army which had been
Nach dem Sturm


BEFORE THE STORM
AFTER THE STORM (Germany's Dream)


organised by German officers, did not have
the courage to secure peace by energetic inter-
ference.
Italy, after Tunis had been snapped up by
France, reluctantly
ATTACHED HERSELF TO
GERMANY.
Her colonial undertakings in Africa failed,
owing to local circumstances and the secret
opposition of England.
In the Far East, Japan showed in her war
with China, that the lessons she had learnt in
Europe had not been forgotten, but the fruits
of her victory were denied her by the threaten-
ing attitude of Russia, which was diplomatic-
ally supported by Germany. All these coun-
tries, with the exception of France, were com-
pelled to send their surplus populations to
America, as they had no colonies of their own.
These various dangers which confronted
THE SECURITY OF THE
BRITISH EMPIRE
did not escape the watchful eye of the English
people. Britain was not prepared to abandon
her historical position as mistress of the seas,
and the endeavour of other nations to secure
freedom of action in commerce and politics
was considered a high-handed presumption
affecting the pride of the British people.
But to engage in single combat with any of
the Powers which had made themselves incon-
venient would have been a daring undertaking,
despite the superiority of the fleet. The Empire
After the Storm


was vulnerable in so many points and had
secret enemies. Moreover,
ENGLAND COULD ONLY WIN
ON THE WATER,
whereas her chief opponents, Russia and Ger-
many after the destruction of their fleets, would
still remain effective.
This being so, British statesmen decided to
discard the long-cherished principle of a
splendid isolation,” and to enter into adroitly
arranged treaties and ententes. The plan
demonstrated the diplomatic genius of England
and, had it succeeded, would have assured the
continuity of the Empire for a time at least.
The purpose of this change of British policy
dawned slowly upon the startled world
THE GREAT POWERS
were to be played off, one against the other,
and after their mutual alienation disposed of
one by one.
To enable Great Britain to embroil herself
m war in Europe without endangering her
status in Asia, it was imperative that her com-
petitor in that part of the world should be
weakened. With this end in view, the French
Meet was kept at bay by Britain.
RUSSIAN SEA POWER WAS
DESTROYED
and any offensive action on her part in India
was crippled by internal risings which were due
to her defeat. Japan was forced into a peace
tA£ach dem Sturm


which brought it honor, but not the desired,
money she expected from England.
On the other hand, the weakening of Japan’s
sea power, which was another of England s
objectives, did not eventuate.
Subsequently, British diplomacy busied her-
self in the adjustment of
THE BALANCE OF POWER
in the Pacific by affording protection to Japan-
ese trade and admitting Japanese immigrants
in Canada, a policy which was not supported
by the United States of America. While
America and Japan watch one another sus-
piciously, England was in a position to con-
solidate its strength against Germany and,
after the latter’s humiliation, crown its work
with the destruction of the Japanese Fleet.
England had further outlets for subtle dip-
lomacy. The next victim selected to fight her
battles was France, Being land hungry, this
country was clumsy enough to allow herself
to be
DRAWN INTO THE MESHES
of British diplomacy by accepting Morocco as
a gift for non-interference in Egypt, although
everyone was aware of the fact that English
suzerainty in Pharaoh’s Land was onfy secure so
long as the British Fleet could enforce it.
Germany could not quietly accept the con-
ditions involved in the transfer of Morocco,
and in the convention of Algeciras, France re-
treated from the attitude she had taken up,
much to the discomfiture of England.
After the Storm


War clouds, however, were still threatening
on the horizon of Europe, but
ENGLAND OBSTINATELY
PROSECUTED HER
PLANS.
The next move was to compromise with her
old enemy Russia by renouncing British inter-
ests in Persia and withdrawing from East Asia.
Russia was also to have a free hand in the
Balkans, where Austria, the ally of Germany,
had established the balance of power.
Such was the position in 1 908, but England,
though sure of the military help of France and
Russia, in the event of war, hesitated in the
hope that an estrangement would eventuate
between
AUSTRIA AND GERMANY,
and thereby strengthen the power of the coa-
lition.
In the meantime, Germany followed. English
intrigues with watchful eyes, and fearlessly
awaited developments, ready for war. Every
year added to the increase of her fleet, whereas
England, for the want of personnel, lagged
behind.
During this period of high, political ten-
sion, the solution of a problem, which had
engaged the attention of inventors for a hun-
dred years or more—
THE MASTERY OF THE AlR—
became an accomplished fact. A new factor,
on which the far-seeing British diplomacy had
Nach dem Sturm


not counted, entered into the question of
national supremacy. Science was to be the
exploding mark of the highly-charged war
cloud.
The powerful war party in England, which
had been impatient for quite a time to cross
swords with Germany, gained the day, because
further delay would make the preponderance
of the British navy illusionary. The plan was
TO DESTROY THE GERMAN
AIR FLEET,
and by a swift attack put the maritime fleet out
of action.
Remembering the long suspense in which the
world was kept by the exhibition of nervous-
ness in England regarding the predominance of
her naval power, we can quite understand the
relief which the outbreak of hostilities pro-
duced. You all remember how one event
rapidly followed the other. On the 12 th of
June, English spies reported the disposition
of the German fleet during the manoeuvres in
the North Sea. Instructions were given to
British naval engineers to proceed to Kiel and
Berlin for the purpose of blowing up German
airships and their hangers. During the night
of June 12th and June 13th,
200 BRITISH MEN-O’-WAR
proceeded to the North Sea. It will always
remain a mystery why the destruction of the
German fleet was not effected. The suppo-
sition that treachery was responsible must be
After the Storm


dismissed, because the British spies, wearing
German aerial uniforms, and speaking the
language fluently, were all incarcerated, and
the German fleet had withdrawn from the
North Sea.
THE ENGLISH WAR OFFICE
awaited a cyphered message announcing the
destruction of the German aerial fleet with
feverish excitement, but as no tidings came
along, a message was despatched by wireless
to the commanding Admiral with instructions
to suspend operations. Whether this message
reached the Admiral too late or whether cir-
cumstances permitted him to act in accordance
with the instructions was never known, as no-
body who may have been able to give the
information returned home again.
It is, however, certain that all the German
Marine stations were fully informed of the
movements of the British fleet.
On the morning of June 3 4th, however,
events hastened.
The fleet was thirty miles west of Heligoland
when it sighted German Ironclads, although a
slight fog obscured the view. It was just on
the point of changing its front when suddenly,
in quick succession,
TREMENDOUS EXPLOSIONS
OCCURRED
on three of the battleships. Explosion after
explosion followed, and an incessant bom-
bardment by an invisible enemy proceeded.
A panic ensued amongst the fearless sailors,,
there was no doubt the fleet was in a direct
s\{ach dem Sturm


line of fire below the German airships, which,
favoured by weather conditions, had escaped
the attention of the English balloon scouts.
Then something occurred of which
SURVIVORS ONLY SPEAK WITH
BATED BREATH,
A grey object descended with lightning rapidity
from the sky, and with a detonation as if the
whole world had exploded,
THE FLAG SHIP WAS TORN
TO ATOMS,
and at the same time about twenty ships, which
were close by, foundered. But what had
happened? English air scouts had perforated
the gas bag of a Zeppelin, which compelled
the commander to release the whole of his
ammunition. Many hundredweights of explo-
sives were dropped from a height of a thousand
feet and fell on the ill-fated flag ship.
A general panic resulted, and those of the
warships which remained still seaworthy scat-
tered in all directions.
In the meantime,
THE GERMAN SQUADRON
SLOWLY APPROACHED,
and, under the cross-fire from Heligoland’s
batteries, the warships and the aerial fleet, the
pride of England vanished. On the 15 th of
June, the landing of a German army corps
confirmed the destruction of the British Fleet.
After the Storm


Mutual support between England and France
was not out of the question,
THE GERMAN ARMIES SWEPT
OVER FRANCE,
and Russia s treaty obligations became ineffec-
tive. Japan proved herself an apt pupil of
England. She had promised to send 10,000
soldiers whenever required and to any place
where England needed them.
On the 1 sth of June,
THE DOWNFALL OF BRITAIN
was announced in Tokio, and ten days after
Hongkong was in the possession of Japan, the
English garrison failing to offer serious resist-
ance.
A mutiny broke out in India, with the result
that thousands of British lives were lost, and
order was not restored until Cossacks arrived
who were, as in previous times in the Balkans,
hailed as liberators.
In Egypt, Italian troops were landed, osten-
sibly for the purpose of preventing a massacre
of the “rightful owners.” On the 21st of
June, South Africa declared its independence
under the designation of the United States of
South Africa, and on the same day, Congress
at Washington approved of Federal troops
being despatched
TO PRESERVE ORDER
IN CANADA.
Nach dem Sturm


The hour of Ireland’s freedom had struck,
English Administrators were dismissed and a
Republic was declared.
The war, which was decided, after
AN HOUR'S NAVAL BATTLE*
only lasted three weeks, and famine forced
Britain to accept peace. Germany s conditions
were moderate, besides an indemnity in propor-
tion to the wealth of the country. Germany
was satisfied with the acquisition of the South
African Colonies, with the exception of the
South African Republic. The new possessions
were
DIVIDED BETWEEN THE MEMBERS
OF THE TRIPLE ALLIANCE.
The war had ended Britain s might, and one
battle alone proved the flimsy foundation on
which it had been built by British diplomacy.
It had collapsed under the first serious test.
But it may be asked, would the course of the
world’s history have been altered had British
arms been successful'? Let us assume for the
moment that the plan of English statesmen to
destroy the fleets and the oversea commerce
of the Great Powers had been accomplished,
what would have been the result?
The surplus population, of Middle Europe
and its industrial over-production would have
been forced to find an outlet elsewhere.
The sea being closed to them, the line of
least resistance would have been in the direc-
tion of the South East of Europe, towards Asia.
After the Storm


~We would have then witnessed the interesting
spectacle of the Asiatic hordes, which once in-
vested Europe, being swept back to their cradle
of origin. 1 hrough Asia Minor the people of
Europe would have paved their way to Syria
and Persia, and the great naval power of Eng-
land could not have prevented the occupation
of India and Egypt by these people. The
East Asiatic possessions would also have been
wrested from England by the awakening of
China.
Nor could the intended
DESTRUCTION OF THE
JAPANESE
have delayed its accomplishment for more
than a decade or two.
The declaration of independence by the
South African States was the natural result of
historical evolution, as it was in the case of the
United States of America, and Canada was
bound to become, in time, the victim of the
Imperialistic spirit of the Union.
In summing up the above reflections, we
cannot but conclude that the downfall of the
British Empire was due to the immutable
LAW OF HISTORICAL
EVOLUTION.
The Empire had to fall as the supposition
that its existence merely rested on the fact that
its possessions were immune against attack by
sea and land, and the national inferiority of
the subjugated races held good no further.
Nach dem Sturm


The existence of
THE EMPIRE HAD BECOME AM
IMPOSSIBILITY,
because it did not represent a homogeneous
federation, but was built up on the results of
piratical exploits extending over centuries.
It was psychologically inconceivable that the
virile powers of Europe would quietly submit
to little England taking possession of the world.
Nor was it feasible to assume that the fanatical
people of the Orient would never take the
opportunity to
CAST OFF THE BRITISH YOKE,
although her wonderful administrative capacity
had been fully recognised.
The solution of this sudden collapse of Eng-
land, however, can only be found in the
national psychology of her proud people. Had
this nation of conquerors reconciled itself to
the immutable law of evolution, and viewed
the rise of other nations without suspicion, her
existence as a world power would have been
prolonged, and by virtue of her great wealth
she would have retained her title of “Primus
inter pares” for centuries to come. But the
haughtiness of the British citizens prevented
such a desirable state of affairs. They were
used to look down upon the people of the
world with contempt, and Great Britain re-
fused to let others share in the ruling of the
world.
It will be noted from this that the very causes
After the Storm


which conduced to Britain’s greatness also
brought about
HER NATIONAL HUMILIATION.
But the wonderful civilising work of this
great nation has not been in vain, her memory
lives in the annals of history as a great teacher
of nations. Whilst France has been reduced
to the pleasure seekers of the whole world,
London still remains the dignified place for
worshippers when, on the Forum Romanum,
they honor
THE MEMORY OF THE GREAT
WORLD POWER OF
THE PAST.
Nach dem Sturm
