





THE DISRUPTION
or THB
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
KTeto goutj)
BY THE REV. WILLIAM M'INTYRE, A.M.
“ The Synod, recognising that it is very desirable that a narrative
of the disruption in this colony should be published, and the Rev.
William M'lntyre having undertaken to draw up such a narrative,
the Synod, without, however, making itself responsible for the
document thus prepared, authorises the payment by the general
treasurer of the expense of printing it.” —Proceedings of the Synod
of Eastern Australia, November, 1858.
WEST MAITLAND;
PRINTED BT HENRY THOMAS, HIGH-STREET.




NARRATIVE OF DISRUPTION.
For a considerable period there was but one
Presbyterian Church in the colony, an offshoot
and representative of the Established Church
of Scotland, of which the Government was ad-
ministered by the Presbytery of New South
Wales; but on the 11th December, 1837, the
Rev. Dr. Lang 1 , in conjunction with several
ministers, who had arrived with him in the colony
eight days before, formed the Synod of New
South Wales, and a second Presbyterian Church
was organized under the spiritual superinten-
dence of that court. We have an instance in
each of these cases, and another followed, of a
church left without a name, and, from this
omission, capable of being designated only by
a reference to its Supreme Court, for which a
name had been provided. This restriction and
consequent defectiveness of the nomenclature
adopted are to be traced probably to the in-
fluence of the view or of an impression, that the
Colonial Church was but a province of the
Church of Scotland, and that, accordingly, to
give it a distinct name would be the same thing


as giving a distinct name to the portion of that
Church within the bounds of a particular Pres-
bytery or Synod. They must, therefore, it is ap-
prehended, be regarded as an indication that it
was not adequately, if at all, recognised, that
the Presbyterian Church in the colony, while it
ought to occupy, by its own choice and deter-
mination, must occupy, from a necessity created
by its distance from the mother-Church, the
n'osition of an independent ecclesiastical body,
if it would not surrender and abandon its Presby-
terianism. Its office-bearers and members could
not, of course, consistently with that parity, of
which the recognition and maintenance are
essential to Presbyterianism, be subject to
Church courts, of which, from distance, they
could not be members, or of which, if they
might be members of them occasionally, they
certainly could not be members on equal terms
in all respects with office-bearers resident within
iheir “ bounds.” And, though this difficulty
could be removed or might be disregarded, it
would be evidently impossible to exercise dis-
cipline or to administer the government of the
Church under an arrangement, that recognised
a right of appeal to an authority at the dis-
tance of sixteen thousand miles.
The Church under the spiritual superinten-
dence of the Synod of New South Wales was
formed on the alleged ground that, under exist-
ing circumstances, it was impossible otherwise
to make satisfactory arrangements for “ meeting
the spiritual destitution of the colony.”* That
body, having thus been called into existence for
Latter to the Marqais of Normamhy, by Dr. Lang, pp. 8 to 11.


the purpose, not of maintaining' any distinctive
testimony, but simply of getting rid of certain
alleged disadvantages and obstructions in sup-
plying ordinances and administering ecclesiasti-
cal affairs, the spectacle was presented of two
Churches, exactly the same in respect ot consti-
tution and testimony, and yet maintaining within
the same territory separate organizations and
agencies. This was a state of things which,
it was evident, ought not to continue ; and, at
the same time, there were no formidable diffi-
culties in the way of a union of the two bodies
—none which could not he removed, without the
least compromise of principle, by the exorcise
of forbearance and by the sacrifice, in a few
eases, of personal interests to some little ex-
tent. Accordingly a union was soon sought, and
was ultimately effected on the sth October,
1840, when the members of the Presbytery of
New South Wales and of the Synod of Now
South Wales respectively, in pursuance of pre-
vious resolutions of those courts, constituted
themselves “ the Synod of Australia in connec-
tion with the Established Church of Scotland,”
and signed a document, called “ the bond of
Union,” in which they engaged “to pass over
and bury in oblivion all matters, which, in time
past, had been the subject of mutual complaint
and accusation,” and “ in the exercise of disci-
pline to follow the laws of the Established
Church of Scotland, so far as applicable in this
colony.”
Here we find a recurrence of the mistake of
giving a name to the supreme court of the
Church only, while the Church itself was left


without a name. But the erroneous conception
of the position and relations of the Colonial
Presbyterian Church, in which the mistake ap-
pears to have originated, while it seems to have
been partially corrected, was not only retained
but distinctly enunciated in the modified form
which it had thus assumed. Indications may be
perceived that it was more distinctly recognised
that the Presbyterian body in the colony must be
independent; but, while the idea of subjection to
transmarine jurisdiction was rejected, the feeling
remained and operated, that connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, —though the
nature of the desiderated connection it would be
difficult to define, —was, in the case of a small
and recently formed body, a necessary means,
or at least a means that ought to be employed,
of preserving that body from errors and innova-
tions into which it might otherwise drift. Under
the influence of this feeling, it was determined,
though not without opposition, that the newly
erected court, instead of bearing, like those that
were merged in it, a merely territorial name,
should be described in its designation as “in
connection with the Established Church of
Scotland.” In the adoption of a designation in
which this determination was carried into effect,
there was a clear deviation from the legitimate
procedure in the case. An independent Church
ought to adopt a name in harmony with its in-
dependence ; and, of course, this rule is none the
less to be observed, though, as in the case under
consideration, such a church, instead of adopting
a name for itself, as it ought to do, only adopts
a name for its supreme court. But “ the Synod


of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland’' is not a name in harmony
with the independence of the body by whoso
supreme court it is borne. When a church
describes itself in its very designation as in
connection with another church, and still more,
pei haps, when it so describes itself, as in the
case with which we are at present concerned,
in the designation of its supreme court,
something else and more must be intended than
that it sustains the relation to that other church,
which one sister church bears to another. '1 his
relation the-Church under the spiritual superin-
tendence of the Synod of Australia in connection
with the Established Church of Scotland bore or
might have borne to other churches, as well as to
the Established Church of Scotland, but it is with
that Church alone it described itself as “ in con-
nection.” Besides, in thus describing itself it
adopted a procedure towards the Established
Church of Scotland, which that church did not
reciprocate ; while the Colonial Church described
itself, or rather its supreme court, as in connec-
tion with the Scottish Establishment, and, of
course, as bearing the relation to that establish-
ment, whatever that relation may be, which the
description represented it as sustaining, the
Scottish Establishment did not, by adopting a
similar description of itself or otherwise, repre-
sent itself as sustaining, and it did not sustain,
the same relation to’the Colonial Church. r l he
relation it sustained to it was different. The
Colonial Church occupied a position of inferiority
and dependence in relation to the Scottish Estab-
lishment, —the position of a body that held on


and clung 1 to It for guidance and stability ; and,
of course, therefore, the Scottish Establishment
occupied in relation to the Colonial Church the
correlative and very different position of the body,
to which thatchurch thus held on and clung.
Thus, at the very outset, the Church under the
spiritual superintendence of the newly-formed
Synod assumed a false position. It failed, not
only to maintain and secure, but even to recog-
nise its rights and powers, and its proper relat-
ions, as a church. Every church, not only has a
right, but is under obligation, to occupy the
position of an entirely independent body, and
is, accordingly, guilty of a grave violation of
duty, if it more or less surrenders its indepen-
dence, whether to another Church, as in this
instance, or to the State, as in others.
And, while, on theoretical grounds, the
adoption of such a designation was open to the
objection now urged, subsequent events have
afforded disastrous evidence that it was attended
with great practical danger and disadvantage.
By describing its supreme court as in connection
with the Established Church of Scotland, the
colonial Church virtually committed its testi-
mony to the keeping of that establishment.
This, Indeed, was substantially the design of its
adoption of the obnoxious designation for its
supreme court. It intended by this expedient,
as has already been indicated, to place itself in
such a relation to the Established Church of
Scotland, that it should paiticipate in the sta-
bility of that church. It was not considered,
for the authors of such devices, as is evident
from the fact that they icsort to them, are not


guided by comprehensive views,—that, sustain-
ing a relation, from which it might derive
the anticipated advantage of stability, it
should, also and equally, participate in any
change as to testimony and distinctive charac-
ter as a church, which the Established Church
of Scotland might undergo. The idea, Indeed,
that that church could undergo an unfavourable
change, does not seem to have occurred to those
whose counsels prevailed on the occasion. Some-
thing like the notion of a central infallibility,
unrevealed of course to their consciousness, ap-
pears to have possessed their minds. To the
adoption and application of this notion uncon-
sciously,or to the conscious adoption and appli-
cation of a modification of it, there is a strong
tendency, particularly on the part of small
churches that are recent offshoots from churches
much older and larger. A small and newly
formed church, from a sense of its own weakness
and of the difficulties and the dangers of its posi-
tion, and failing to recognise adequately the
true source of a church’s strength and safety, is
very apt to regard unduly, as the source of
strength and safety for itself, the church that
historically sustains the relation to it of its parent
church. The church under the spiritual superin-
tendence of “ the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scot-
land’’ fell into this error, and the consequences
afford a sad but instructive illustration of the
folly and danger of adopting for the accomplish-
ment of our purposes, however desirable it may
be that they should be accomplished, any ex-
pedient beyond the employment of strictly legiti-


mate means, or that involves a deviation from
the faithful and thoroughgoing application of
the principles applicable in the case.
In less than two years and a half after the
adoption by the Colonial Synod of its injudicious
designation, the Established Church ot Scotland
underwent a great and radical change. During
the struggle that issued in the disruption of
that Church, the civil power made serious and
extensive encroachments on its spiiitual inde-
pendence. To the spiritual Independence of a
church it is essential, that its office-bearers be
in circumstances to administer its government
and dispense its ordinances in Christ’s name and
according to his laws. If the civil magistrate,
or any power external to tlie Church, assume and
exercise authority over its office-bearers in the
discharge of their spiritual functions, then the
Church is not spiritually independent, but in
subjection to the power, whatever it be, that
assumes and exercises such authority. The Church
is a spiritual institution,governed by office-bearers
appointed by Christ for that purpose, and re-
sponsible to him alone as regards the exercise of
the powers with which he has invested them.
If, therefore, ti e civil magistrate assume a right
to direct authoritatively, or if he intimidate,
coerce, or supersede, in the government of the
Church, the office-bearers to whom the govern-
ment of it has thus been committed by Christ,
lie thereby encroaches upon or destroys its spiri-
tual independence. Now the civil magistrate has
done all this in his dealings with the Church
of Scotland.
There are four points at which encroachments


may be made upon the spiritual independence of
the Church, or there are four classes of functions
with respect to the exercise of which its liberty
may be invaded. These are, the admission of
ministers and other office-bearers to be members
of Church courts, and to exercise spiritual
rule as members of them agreeably to Christ’s
institution, —the formation of the pastoral rela-
tion and the allotment of pastoral work, —the ex-
ercise of discipline—and, finally, the preaching of
the gospel, and admission to the sacraments and
the administration of them. At all those points,
and with respect to all those functions, the civil
power assailed and destroyed the spiritual inde-
pendence of the Established Church of Scotland.
1, At the first of them, the Court of Session
repeatedly invaded its spiritual independence, by
granting interdicts prohibiting Presbyteries from
exercising discipline, on the ground that they
were vitiated by the presence as members of quoad
sacra ministers, —thus assuming a right to deter-
mine who should and who should not be members
of Church courts. Such an interdict it granted
to Mr. Wilson, minister of Stranraer, who was
charged with fraud and swindling, prohibiting
the Presbytery from proceeding with the trial of
his case, —and to Mr. Clarke, presentee to Leth-
endy, prohibiting the Presbytery of Dunkeld
from investigating a charge of
obscenity, and. profane swearing, which had
been preferred against him. On the same
ground, it interdicted the proceedings even of
the General Assembly, in the case of Mr. Liv-
ingstone of Cambesnethan, who had been found
guilty on a charge of theft. The principle, on


which these individual cases of encroachment
proceeded, was at last broadly asserted in the
decision of the Stewarton case. In that decision,
the Court of Session denied, in express terms,
the power of the Church to admit ministers of
quoad sacra parishes to be members of its courts ;
thus laying down the doctrine, —a doctrine which
evidently is utterly subversive of the spiritual
independence of the Church, —that i is by the
civil tribunals of' the country, and not by the
Church herself, that (he constitution of Church
courts is to be determined and regulated.
2. It was at the second of the points men-
tioned that (he encroachments of the civil power
first took place. In the Auchterarder case, it
was decided by the Court of Session and the
House of Lords, that the Presbytery had acted
illegally in refusing to ordain and induct Mr.
Young, and afterwards, that for so refusing,
(hough the fruits of the benefice had already
been awarded to the Patron, they were liable to
an action for damages at the instance of the
patron and the presentee. The Presbytery of
Auchterarder decided that the pastoral relation
should not be formed between Mr. Young and
tlie people of Auchterarder, or, in other words,
that Mr. Young should not be ordained and in-
ducted as minister of that parish; and the civil
courts reviewed this decision, pronounced it ille-
gal, and found that it exposed the Presbytery to
an action for damages. Thus the independence
of the Church Courts in forming the pastoral re-
lation and ordaining to the sacred ministry was
not only invaded but wholly destroyed. A
Church Coi rt ia not independent—it does not


possess the least shred or semblance of indepen-
dence, if a civil court may reverse its decisions
and punish it for pronouncing them.
In the Marnoch case, the Court of Session
issued an order to the seven suspended ministers
of the Presbytery of Strathbogie to induct Mr.
Edwards ; and, in the Lothendy case, it first
granted an interdict prohibiting the Presbytery
of Dunkeld from ordaining Mr. Kessen to the
pastoral charge of the parish, though the stipend
and other fruits of the benefice were left wholly
at the disposal of the civil courts; and then,
when the Presbytery, disregarding this interdict
as illegal, ordained Mr. Kessen, it summoned the
members to its bar and rebuked them, that is,
it punished the members of a Church Court for
performing a purely spiritual act. At the same
time they were threatened with imprisonment,
if, on any future occasion, they refused, in the
exercise of their spiritual function®, to obey the
mandates of the Court of Session ; and afterwards
an action for damages raised by Mr. Clarke, the
rejected presentee, was decided against them.
At an early stage of the proceedings which
issued in the Stewarton case, an interdict was
granted by the Court of Session prohibiting the
Presbytery from assigning Mr. Clelland, a minis-
ter of the Associate Synod, who with his con-
gregation had just been received into the Church
of Scotland, a territorial district within which he
should exercise the pastoral office.
3. The third of the functions mentioned, with
respect to which the Court of Session invaded
the spiritual independence of the Church of Scot-
land, is the exercise of discipline. In some of


the interdicts to which reference has already been
made, that court prohibited the exercise of dis-
cipline in most flagrant cases, in which the
vigorous exercise of it was urgently called for.
Two additional instances are here adduced. It
granted an interdict forbidding the Presbytery
of Arbroath from excluding from the Lord’s
tab’e a person, who in a state of drunkenness had
disturbed public worship, and presented no evi-
dence of penitence; and it assumed and exer-
cised the power of cancelling the sentence of
suspension which had been pronounced on the
seven Strathbogie ministers, and of restoring
them to the exercise of their spiritual func-
tions.
4. It might be supposed that at least full
liberty to preach the gospel and administer the
sacraments would be left to the Church; but at
this point also its spiritual independence was as-
sailed. The Court of Session issued an interdict
forbidding all ministers of the Church of Scot-
land to preach, even in the open air, in the
parishes of the seven suspended ministers.
Thus there was none of its functions, in the ex-
ercise of which the Church was left in possession
of even a semblance of independence. The Court
of Session issued its interdicts and mandates with
respect to the admission of members of Church
Courts, the ordination and settlement of minis-
ters, the assignment of pastoral charges, the ex-
ercise of discipline, and even the preaching of the
gospel and the whole dispensation of gospel or-
dinances. And these are all the functions of tho
Church—all the offices with which it is entrusted ;
so that the Court of Session invaded its inde-


pendcuce at every point throughout its whole ex-
tent, and assumed an authority in spiritual
matters so extensive, —at once absolute and uni-
versal, —that, if it were conceded, the Church
would be reduced to a state of total and miserable
bondage.
When it was placed beyond question that the
Court of Session claimed such authority, and
that the claim was sanctioned and confirmed by
the House of Lords as the court of last resort,
the Church applied to Parliament for relief and
protection. In the House of Commons, it was
moved that the House should resolve itself into a
committee to consider the Church’s “ claim of
Eights.” This was the very least that could
have been asked, —inquiry, and no more ; but
even this was refused. The motion was nega-
tived by a large majority. It was thus indi-
rectly declared to be in accordance with the will
of the State, that the civil courts should exercise,
in all spiritual matters, the supreme authority
which they had assumed. What could the Church
now do ? There were only two courses open to it.
It must either submit to the usurped authority
of the civil courts, now sanctioned by Parliament;
or maintain its independence, and surrender
the benefits of the Establishment. Or, to speak
more correctly, it must either transfer its
allegiance from Christ to the civil magistrate,
and acknowledge and obey the latter, and
not the former, as its king and head, or-
it must be “ steadfast and immoveable ” in
its allegiance to Christ and in its obedience to
his laws, as its only King, and resign the tem-
poral advantages conferred upon it by the State.


Of these two courses, the “ moderate” section of
the Church, which formed the post-disruption
Establishment, took the former, and the Evangeli-
cal section, which formed the Free Church, took the
latter. “In the exercise of our spiritual func-
tions,” the one said, “we will obey the civil
magistrate, if he only continue to us the benefits
which we enjoy as an Established Church ; and
the other said, “ while in all civil matters we
will obey the civil magistrate, in the exercise of
our spiritual functions w r e will acknowledge no
authority but Christ’s—this we owe to Christ,
whose honour is concerned, and to our own souls,
and to those among whom we labour, for other-
wise we could not expect his blessing either upon
ourselves or upon our ministrations. _
A disruption was thus inevitable, and it ac-
cordingly took place on the 18th May, 1843.
On that day the Assembly met; but, the en-
croachments of the State on the independence of
the Church having affected materially the return
of members, it could not be deemed a free assem-
bly. Accordingly, the Rev. Dr. Welsh, who had
been Moderator of the preceding Assembly, pro-
tested in bis own name and in the name or as
many ’as would adhere to him, against the con-
ditions imposed upon the establishment by the
law as now interpreted, and against the claim
of any assembly constituted in submission to those
conditions to be regarded as a free and lawful
assembly ; and, when he had read this protest
and laid it on the table, he and the rest of the
evangelical majority withdrew, furnishing thus
emphatic and impressive evidence that they
value! the honour of Christ and the prosperity


of his kingdom above their ehiefest earthly joj
and interests. The Church of Scotland was thus
divided into two bodies, —one of which, the exist-
ing establishment, unfaithful to the trust com-
mitted to it by Christ, succumbed to the encroach-
ments of the State; while the other, the Free
Church, maintained unimpaired, though it cost
it the temporalities to do so, the liberty which
Christ had bestowed upon it.
It is evident, from the facts now related, that
the immediate cause of the disruption was the
existence in the Church of a party that submitted
to the encroachments of the civil power. If the
Church as a whole had refused submission to
those encroachments, the sole result would have
been, supposing the civil power still persevered
in them, the forfeiture of the endowment and of
the advantages connected with it. The internal
unity of the Church would have remained un;
broken ; its external relations and position alone
would have undergone a change. It would
have suffered disestablishment, but not disruption.
But, as matters stood, the evangelical majority
only maintaining the spiritual independence of
the Church, while the moderate minority sub-
mitted to the encroachments of the civil powder
on its independence, the result was necessarily
different. It comprehended, indeed, the for-
feiture of the benefits conferred by the State, —
the forfeiture of them, however, by a portion of
the Church only, and not by the whole church
but it comprehended also, in addition to this
forfeiture, the disruption of the Church, the
former resulting from the opposition of those
who incurred it, —the evangelical party, —to the


encroachments of the civil power, and the latter
from the simultaneous submission of the moderate
party to those encroachments.
On the occurrence of the disruption, the
Established Church, consisting now of the
party that, by submitting to the encroach-
ments of the civil power, retained the bene-
fits conferred by it, became distinguished by
such submission. The State not only claimed
supreme authority in all matters spiritual, but
made aquiescence in its assumption and exercise
of this authority a condition of the continued
enjoyment of the benefits of the establishment ;
and in this claim, which, indeed, the moderate
party had urged the State to prefer and which
they had strenuously advocated, the Church, now
composed of that party and dragged down to the
ground it occupied, fully acquiesced ; to the
authority claimed it engaged to submit. While
Christ required of it, as he does of every portion
of his Church, that, without compromise, it
would maintain his claims and obey his laws, it
practically refused to do so, and entered into a
permanent arrangement embodying that refusal.
It thus assumed an attitude of disobedience to
Christ. It is true that, so far as man can take
cognizance, it might still, in its state of Erastian
subjection to the civil magistrate, do the very
same things, which would have formed its employ-
ment, though in spiritual matters it acknowledged
but “one master,even Christ;” but then it sinned
—sinned most grievously—in being in Erastian
subjection to the civil magistrate. The sin thus
committed is, it is evident, peculiarly dishonour-
ing to Christ, and, at the same time, of such a


character that it is not merely an individual sin,
but occupies the place and exerts the power of a
principle, and as such imparts a tinge and a com-
plexion to all the activity of the body that is
chargeable with it.
When the Established Church of Scotland had
thus sunk or rather descended to its post-disrup-
tion position of Erastian subjection to the supre-
macy in spiritual matters assumed by the civil
power, the Church under the spiritual superin-
tendence of the Synod of Australia in connection
with the Established Church of Scotland was ex-
hibited, by the designation of the Synod, as occu-
pying the same position, or, if placed in the same
or similar circumstances, prepared to occupy it,
and, therefore, as concurring in the Erastianism
implied in the occupation of it. Its concurrence
and identity with the Established Church of Scot-
land in this respect the designation clearly pro-
claimed. Its testimony was thus vitiated. By
adopting the obnoxious designation for its su-
preme court, it declared, and intended to declare,
its own identity in respect of testimony with the
Established Church of Scotland, and at the same
time sought to render this identity permanent;
and now, the Established Church of Scotland
having become Erastian, in declaring, by con-
tinuing to bear a designation of such significancy
and adopted for such a purpose, its own identity
with the Established Church of Scotland in res-
pect of testimony, it of course declared its con-'
currence with it in its Erastianism. Besides,
by this designation the Colonial Presbyterian
Church singled out the Established Church
of Scotland, and intended to single it out,


as the church with which it chose to associate
itself most closely. It thus declared that
it preferred that church to all other churches,
and, of course, therefore, that it preferred it to
them on the only ground on which it could thus
prefer it, on account of the peculiarities by which
it was distinguished from them. Now, the pecu-
liarity by which it was distinguished from the
Free Church was its Erastianism : and, accord-
ingly, the Colonial Presbyterian Church, in.
declaring, by the designation of its supreme
court, that it preferred it to that Church on
account of the peculiarity by which it was dis-
tinguished from it, declared that it preferred it
thus on account of its Erastianism. It thus dis-
tinctly testified in favour of Erastianism, and,
by doing so, virtually adopted it into its own
testimony.
It thus became necessary, for the purpose of
preserving, or rather of restoring, the purity of
the Colonial Presbyterian Church’s testimony,
that the designation of its supreme court should
be changed, by the rejection of the words “in
connection with the Established Church of Scot-
land.” And, as the designation of a church might
be changed without any reference to its testimony,
so that after the change its testimony might con-
tinue the same as it had been previously, it was
necessary further, for the purpose specified, that
the change of designation should be made with
the express design of effecting the necessary rec-
tification of the vitiated testimony, or that, after
it had been made, the vitiated articles of the tes-
timony should be emitted in their uncorrupted
form. At the meeting of the Synod, in October,


1844, —the first meeting of that court after official
intelligence of the Scottish disruption had reached
the colony,—some of the members proceeded upon
a recognition of this two-fold necessity. From
the necessary emission of testimony, no danger to
the temporalities could be apprehended ; and,
thus, the Synod was in a more favourable position
for dealing with this matter, in the exercise of an
unbiassed judgment, than it would have occupied
under the warping influence of that apprehension.
Occupying that position, whatever it might have
done if its position hud been different, it adopted
a series of resolutions, in which it sot forth and
asserted the supreme headship of Christ, the
spiritual independence of the church, and the
rights and privileges of its members.* It was
felt, however, that the doctrines, thus professed
and proclaimed, were contradicted by the opposite
testimony implied in the designation. It was,
indeed, an inconsistent, and, to a great extent, a
nugatory, proceeding on the part of a church,
whose supreme court bore a designation that
implied a testimony in favour of Erastianism,
to have issued a declaration of the opposite
doctrines, without first changing that designation.
The proper course for it would, clearly, have been
to have changed the designation, by which its
testimony had been vitiated, and then to have
• See Appendix A. These resolutions were
drawn up by the late 'Reverend James Forbes, of Mel-
bourne, who afterwards made great personal sacrifices in
maintenance of the doctrines asserted in them. Victoria
was then under the spiritual superintendence of the
Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, and Mr. Forbes was accordingly a
member of that court.


emitted its testimony restored to its original
character ; in other words, to have first, by
changing the designation, got rid of the cause of
the vitiation of its testimony, and then to have
got rid of that vitiation itself, by emitting its
testimony purified from the foreign Erastian
element which the designation had imported into
it. But, though the different parts of the work
to be accomplished were not taken up in proper
order, still, it was attempted to perform the
whole of it.
With respect to the changing of the designa-
tion, the part of the work that remained to be
accomplished, different positions were occupied by
different sections of the Synod. Some held that
the change was indispensably necessary for the
rectification of the church’s testimony; while
others maintained that the testimony of the
church was in no way vitiated, and that, conse-
quently, the proposed change of designation for
the purpose of rectifying its testimony was
wholly uncalled for. These latter, indeed, cor-
dially approved of the post-disruption testimony
of the Scottish Establishment, and were, there-
fore, desirous to preserve unchanged a designation,
which had all the force of a declaration that the
Colonial Presbyterian Church was identical with
that establishment in respect of testimony.
Others, again, while they did not admit that the
designation had more or less the effect of identify-
ing the testimony of the church, by whose supreme
court it was borne, with that of the Established
Church of Scotland, and did not, therefore, admit
that it was necessary to change it, perceiving
that it might be regarded, as most assuredly it


might, as representing the Colonial church as
“holding exclusive communion with the Church
of Scotland as now established, or more intimate
connection with it than with the Free Church,”*
deemed it advisable that it should be changed.
The views of this last section were embodied in
resolutions submitted to the Synod by the
Kev. William Hamilton, then of Groulburn.f
Those resolutions provided that, on the ground
just indicated as recognized by the middle class
from which they emanated, the designation
should be
they would have been less objectionable j but
they provided further that the Synod, or more
properly the Church under its spiritual super-
intendence, should “ maintain communion and
friendly correspondence with” the Free Church
and the Established Church alike, “if consent
should be given on their part,” and should
“ receive co-operation and assistance” from botb,§
or, in other words, that it should make no
account of the faithfulness of the one or of the
unfaithfulness of the other, but should offer to
sustain the most intimate and precisely the same
relations with both. By adopting this policy, it
would distinctly declare, that it considered the
Erastianism of the Established Church of Scot-
land no obstacle in the way of its entering into the
closest relations to it, that one Church can bear to
another, and that, notwithstanding its Erastian-
isra, it would gladly receive " such assistance ”
from it as a supply of Ministers, and that it even
* .Appendix 8., Kcs. 6. Appendix B,
J Appendix 8., lies, 0. § Appendix 8., Res. 4.


placed it, as to eligibility as a source of such
supply, on exactly the same level with the Free
Church; and, by declaring all this, it would
further declare that the Erastian and anti-
Erastian doctrines are wholly unimportant, and
that it is a matter of utter indifference which of
them a church holds. But the policy under con-
sideration, while open to grave objection as being
thus grossly latitudinarian, must be admitted to
be a legitimate carrying out of the principle on
which the resolutions are based. That principle
is stated in the following terms : “It is the first
duty of the Synod to use all lawful means to
preserve its own unity and peace.” When we
speak of “ the first duty,” whether of an indivi-
dual or of a body of men, we mean a duty to
the claims of which, as paramount, all conflicting
considerations must give way 3 and, in the state-
ment just quoted, the preservation by the Synod,
or, more properly speaking, by the church of
which it is the supreme court, of its own unity
and peace, is represented as a duty of this kind.
That statement is, indeed, so far limited or
restricted that it is the use of “ lawful means”
alone that is sanctioned; but this restriction serves
only to render the language of the statement
inconsistent with itself, if not self-contradictory.
It is the uniform and lofty peculiarity of the very
few results which it is our Jirst duty to seek,
that they cannot be secured or promoted by un~
lawful means. Accordingly, when we say that it
is our first duly to pursue a certain object, if we
add by “all lawful means,” we eat up our own
words, and virtually deny that it is our first duty
to pursue it. When a result may be reached by


unlawful means, the possibility of thus reaching
it must arise from the fact, that there are higher
considerations than those which are involved in
it, for it is only as being forbidden by such con-
siderations that the means employed could be
unlawful; but that fact clearly implies that it is
a result of an inferior order, and that endeavours
to encompass it cannot, therefore, be our first
duty. Accordingly, as the preservation by the
Synod of its own unity and peace is still described,
notwithstanding the restriction to the use of
lawful means, as “ the first duty” of that court,
it is evident that the restriction was not regarded
as materially affecting the precedence claimed for
the duty im-question. A duty contemplated as
under the full legitimate operation of such a
restriction could not have been spoken of as “the
first duty” in the case, whatever it might be, in
which the performance of it might be called for.
What may be called the doctrinal portion of
those resolutions, —the portion of them in which
the views of duty are stated by which it is sought
to justify the course proposed for adoption,—
affords other instances, although perhaps less
glaring than the one to which attention has been
directed, of the embarrassment and faltering,
and of the intermixture or rather combination of
assertion and retraction, which naturally, perhaps
necessarily, attend an attempt, however uncon-
sciously made, to impart to expediency the char-
acteristics of principle. Thus, in making the
statement with which the secondresolution begins,
—“ that this Synod is under no imperative obliga-
tion to adhere to the one of these bodies, (the
Free Church and the Established Church,) to


the repudiation of the other as seems to bo
expected and desired by both,” —the writer seems
to have felt that it might be too much to say
that the Synod was under no obligation what-
ever in the matter to which he referred, and,
therefore, while this was the assertion which he
required, and while, accordingly, he retained it as
far as possible, he retracted it somewhat by intro-
ducing the terra “ imperative,” before “ obliga-
tion”; so that he asserted, not, absolutely, that the
Synod was under no obligation of any kind in the
matter specified by him, but that, whether or not
under some sort or degree of obligation, it, cer-
tainly, was not under “ imperative obligation” in
that matter.
To Mr. Hamilton’s resolutions three different
amendments were opposed. Two of these
emanated from the section of the Synod that was
desirous to retain the designation unchanged,
one of them having been moved by the Rev. Dr.
McGarvie, and seconded by the Rev. Robert
Stewart, and the other moved by the Rev. Mr.
Atchison and seconded by the Rev. Mr. Gil-
christ. The former was to the effect that the
Synod did not deem it necessary to change its
designation or to abandon its connection with the
Established Church of Scotland; and the latter,
which, however, was withdrawn before the vote
was taken, set forth that the Synod having
“ given an explicit declaration of its principles*
on the subjects of the supreme headship of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the right of the Christian
people to elect their own pastors and other office-
bearers, and the independence of the Church,”
* See appendix A,


deemed it unnecessary to deal any further with
the matter under consideration, but, at the same
time, considered it “a duty and a privilege to
hold communion with all Christian bodies ad-
hering to the Westminister Confession of Faith,
the Catechisms Larger and Shorter, and the First
and Second Boohs of Discipline.” The remain-
ing amendment,* moved by the Rev. Mr. Tait
and seconded by the Rev. Wm. MTntyre, called
upon the Synod to express, on the one hand, its
“deep regret and sorrow” that the State, by its
encroachments, had practically denied “the great
principle of the Supreme headship of Christ
over the Church, and the rights and privileges
which be ha£ bestowed upon her rulers and peo-
ple”, and that “ a portion of the Church,” by
“acquiescence in and submission to” the encroach»
ments of the State, had “ virtually surrendered
those principles;” and, on the other hand, its
“devout thankfulness to God, that so largo a por-
tion of the Church’s office-bearers and people had
been enabled to maintain the principles in ques-
tion, in all their purity and entireness, first to
the imimnent peril and ultimately to the actual
loss of all the civil privileges which the State
bestowed, and had come out from the establish-
ment, in which they could no longer govern
the Church agreeably to the mind of Christ.”
Having thus unequivocally testified for the truth,
it followed up this testimony by providing that,
inasmuch as “ the relation, in which the Synod
stood to the Established Church, implied such
a preference for and approval of that church, as
* See Appendix C.


was inconsistent with the declaration” of ad-
herence to the principles surrendered by it which
had just been emitted,* the Synod “ did not feel
warranted in longer continuing” that relation to
it, “or in retaining a name which was calculated
to misrepresent it, to give offence to many of its
ministers and people, and to lead to new dissen-
sions in the Colonial church.” And in conclusion
it sought to determine that the Colonial church,
having, on the ground specified, withdrawn from
its connection with the Established Churchy of
Scotland, should place itself in communication
with the Free Church, as the church to which it
would look for aid in supplying the Presbyterian
population of the territory with religious ordi-
nances.
Mr. Atchison’s amendment having, as already
stated, been withdrawn, the Synod proceeded to
dispose of the three motions still before it;
and Mr. Tait’s amendment, having been put against
Dr. McGarvie’s and carried, was put against Mr.
Hamilton’s motion, when the latter was carried
by a majority of nine to six, Mr. Atchison, Mr.
Gilchrist, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Eipper, Mr.
Hetherington, Mr. Mowbray, Dr, Fullerton, and
Mr. Adam, ministers, and Mr. John Stewart,
elder, having voted for the motion, and Mr.
Plain, Mr. MTntyre, Mr. Forbes, Mr. Tait, and
Mr. Colin Stewart, ministers, and Mr. Bowman,
elder, for the amendment. Dr. M'Garvie, Mr.
Purves, and Mr. M‘Fie, ministers, and Mr.
Anderson, elder, declined to vote.
The position, which the Synod assumed by the
adoption of Mr. Hamilton’s motion, was by no
* Sec Appendix A.


means satisfactory to those who really held the
views embodied in Mr. Tait’s amendment; and
they had now to decide whether the grounds, on
which they objected to it, were such that it was
their duty to secede. In dealing with this ques-
tion, they distinguished between the Church’s
testimony and the administration of its govern-
ment. If the Synod had resolved that the desig-
nation should remain unchanged, and, conse-
quently, that the testimony of the church should
continue to bear the Erastian character which the
designation impressed upon it, they would, in
that case, have been constrained to secede. Mr.
Hamilton’s resolutions, however, provided that the
designation should be changed, and thus, especially
when taken in connection with the declaration
of principles previously adopted, effected the
necessary rectification of the vitiated testimony.
But they provided also that the Colonial church
should offer to sustain, and, if permitted, should
actually sustain the very same relations to the
Established Church of Scotland as to the Free
Church, and these the most intimate relations
that one church can bear to another. This pro-
vision was very offensive to the minority, at least
to all who intelligently and honestly concurred
in Mr. Tait’s amendment. But, still, they con-
ceived that the adoption of it by the Synod,
though certainly inconsistent with the church’s
testimony, did not vitiate it, and did not
therefore render it necessary for them to secede-
from a body of which they were members,
though, if they had not been members of it, it
would have prevented them from becoming such.
They were most anxious, as they certainly ought


to have been, to avoid secession. They were alsc
well aware that, if they seceded, except in cir-
cumstances in which secession was the only means
left to them of preserving purity of testimony
and liberty of conscience, they should be guilty
of schism; and Mr. Hamilton’s resolutions did
not, they conceived, place them in such circum-
stances. They failed to perceive that the pro-
posal with respect to communion with the Es-
tablished Church of Scotland had the effect of
undoing the rectification of their testimony, and
of restoring the vitiating element of Erastianism.
Viewing it too exclusively as a matter of
administrative arrangement, they did not estimate
correctly its significance and effect in its bearing
on their testimony. They accordingly concluded
that it was not their duty to secede.
It soon appeared that even Mr. Hamilton’s
motion went too far for some of those who
voted for it, and that their votes intimated,
accordingly, not that they approved of it, but
that they objected to it less than they did to Mr.
Tait’s amendment. The adoption of the motion
closed the proceedings on Saturday, and on
Monday morning Hr. Fullerton moved “ that, as
the resolutions passed on Saturday (Mr. Hamil-
ton’s) might, in some degree, affect the constitu-
tion of the Church, the last of the said resolutions,”
—which provided that the designation should be
changed,—“ should be sent down, in conformity
with the Barrier Act, to the several Presbyteries,
and remitted to the Synod, with the reports of
the Presbyteries, at the next annual meeting.”
This motion, if it had been carried, would, of
course, have had the effect of rendering the reaolu-


tions inoperative, at least for a year. It was not
carried, however ; a majority voted for an amend-
ment, asserting that the Barrier Act did not apply
in the case, which was moved by Mr. Forbes, and
seconded by Mr. Hetherington. The attempt
to suspend the operation of the resolutions till the
next annual meeting having been repelled, it
remained that the Synod should arrange, as far
as it could, to bring them into operation during
the interval and with as little delay as possible ;
and, accordingly, it was entrusted to a committee
to take the necessary steps to procure such an
amendment of the Temporalities Acts, as would
render their provisions applicable to the church
under a new- designation.
It was, of course, necessary that the resolutions,
defining as they did the relations, that the body
from which they emanated was desirous to sustain
to the Free Church and to the Established Church
of Scotland,should be submitted to those churches,
without whose concurrence the proposed relations
could not be established. They were accordingly
submitted to them, and they received from both
the treatment they deserved. In a minute, dated
23rd April, 1845, the acting Colonial committee
of the Established Church of Scotland “expressed
their opinion, that it was impossible for them to
continue to maintain communion and friendly
correspondence with the Synod of Australia, on
the basis of these resolutions, in which the Synod,
while professing a wish to continue such commu-
nion and correspondence with the [Established]
Church of Scotland, held out the hand of fellow-
ship and encouragement’’ to a body formed by
secession from it and antagonistic to it, and in


which also measures were sanctioned, on the part
of individual members and of the Synod itself,
apparently inconsistent with honesty in making 1
that profession. The committee further, hold-
ing that all the members of the Synod, who
adhered to the offensive resolutions, forfeited all
the temporal advantages and privileges, which
they enjoyed as members of a body “in connec-
tion with the Established Church of Scotland,”
resolved to send information to this effect to the
principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, that
he might be prevented by the possession of it
from giving his sanction to the proposed amend-
ment of the Temporalities Acts. The matter,
however, was too grave to be finally disposed of
by the committee. It was, accordingly, sub-
mitted to the General Assembly, and a deliver-
ance, quite in accordance with the opinion ex-
pressed by the committee, was pronounced by that
court. The General Assembly of the Free Church
was not in a position to threaten the Colonial
church with a representation to a Secretary of
State, that might endanger the temporalities ;
and, besides, it could not, consistently with the
principles in maintenance of which it had in-
curred the disadvantages of disestablishment,
invoke the interference of the civil magistrate,
as a means of coercing or controlling an inde-
pendent ecclesiastical body. It testfied, how-
ever, no less decidedly, though more legitimately,
than the Established Church had done, its dis-
approval of the resolutions. The proposal made
in them it instantly and emphatically rejected.
It even treated it as altogether absurd. While
the Colonial church adhered to such a proposal,


it would not recognise it as a sister church, and
would not afford to it the assistance which it
announced its readiness to receive.
A decided and full declaration of the anti-
Erastian doctrines had been issued, and Mr.
Hamilton’s resolutions provided that the desig-
nation should be changed; but, still, the Colonial
church, though its testimony was thus rectified,
proposed to fraternise with the Established
Church of Scotland, and with a church, that
made this proposal and adhered to it, the Free
Church on its part declined to fraternise. No
value could be attached to the profession of anti-
Erastian principles made by a church, that was
desirous to Sustain the closest relations to the
Erastian Scottish Establishment, that one church
can bear to another; and, indeed, a church, that
appeared to be so little under the influence and
control of its own professed convictions, and that
was capable of deliberately contradicting them
so glaringly in practice, could not be regarded
with confidence. Besides, by fraternising with
the Colonial church, while that church sought to
fraternise with the Established Church of Scot-
land, the Free Church would have compromised
its own testimony and position, and have been
drawn indirectly into a relation to the Establish-
ment inconsistent with the protest under which
its founders had withdrawn from it.
Nor was it only by refusing to become a party
to the incongruous alliance, which the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland sought to form, that the
Free Church indicated its view of the manner
of dealing with the circumstances, into which the


Scottish disruption had brought the Colonial
chnrch, which it was the duty of that church to
adopt. The Colonial committee of the Free
Church, in the report which it submitted to the
General Assembly in May, 1845, and which was
adopted by that court, referring to a minute
conveying Mr. Hamilton’s resolutions, which is
described as shewing that the Colonial church
sought “to remain in alliance with the Free
Church of Scotland, and with the Establish-
ment,” stated that it looked forward to a dis-
ruption at the next meeting of Synod, and that
“in the meantime, it was extremely anxious to
strengthen and encourage those who might be
prepared to maintain the principles of the Free
Church.” Proceeding upon it as a fact, that the
Colonial church in the position it then occupied
did not maintain the principles intended, and
considering that there was but little ground to
expect that it would maintain them as a body, it
hoped, though, it is evident, not confidently, that
a minority would maintain them, in the only way
in which a minority could maintain them, —by
secession.
Exception may justly be taken to the designa-
tion of the great principles of Christ’s headship,
the independence of his church, and the rights of
its members, as “ the principles of the Free
Church.” If this mode of designation occurred
only in the report to which reference has been
made, or if it were of rare occurrence, it might
be unnecessary to remark on the use of it; but
the state of the case is, that it is the mode of
designation usually, if not uniformly, employed
on the part of the Free Church, in the instances


■which fall to be noticed iu these pages. It may
indeed be urged in defence even of this prevalent
use of it, that it is convenient as securing brevity
of expression ; but, in asserting the claims and
contending for the full recognition and operation
of fundamental principles, care should surely be
taken, that the terms, in which they are desig-
nated, do not in any way degrade them from
the exalted relations which they sustain as their
own proper relations, and in which they should
ever be exhibited and viewed ; and one cannot
but feel, however great may be one’s respect for
the Free Church, than which no church better
deserves to be respected, that the disadvantage
of such a degradation is inflicted on the great
doctrines of the Bible with respect to Christ’s
authority as the Head of his church, his church’s
exclusive responsibility to him, and the rights he
has conferred on his people, when they are desig-
nated “ the principles of the Free Church.”
Besides, this mode of designating them was
fitted to convey an erroneous impression of the
position occupied by those who maintained them
in the colony, and of the obligations under which
they acted in maintaining them. These recog-
nised indeed the duty of sympathising with the
Free Church, and of giving both to that church
and to the great principles it maintained the
support of an explicit declaration of their cordial
concurrence ; but, besides, they were themselves
called, in the providence of God, to contend for
the very same principles. Under the operation
of circumstances which have been already traced,
the opposite principles had been introduced into
the testimony of the church of which they "were


office-bearers. They were thus brought into a
position in which it was their duty, in the first
place, to rectify, if possible, the vitiated testi-
mony, by expelling the principles which had been
introduced into it and restoring the principles
which these had displaced, and, if they failed in
their attempts to rectify it, then, in the next
place, to secede from a church that continued to
bear it. They accordingly addressed themselves
to the discharge of the duty thus imposed upon
them, or, in other words, contended, as the
position in which they found themselves de-
manded, for the principle of Christ’s headship
over the church and the principles which flow
from it; and, contending for them under such
circumstances and in obedience to such a call,
they contended for them, not at all as principles
for which the Free Church had contended and
which it held, but solely as principles of the
word of God, which the course of events had
expunged from the testimony of their own
church, and of which the restoration was opposed
by a portion of the office-bearers of that church
that ultimately proved a majority. Though the
Free Church had ceased to exist and had been
wholly forgotten, it would still have been equally
their duty to have contended for those principles,
for it was the fact that the Established Church
of Scotland had become Erastian, and not the
fact that the Free Church maintained anti-
Erastian principles, that determined their duty in
the case. If they merely reiterated what the Free
Church had done, reiterating it because the Free
Church had done it, the procedure would not only
have been unworthy, but, in the circumstances and


in the face of such consequences, highly reprehen-
sible, and the position assumed by adopting it
ought never to have been assumed, and, of course,
therefore, ought to be abandoned. But they
dealt, not at all with what the Free Church had
done in maintaining anti-Erastian principles, but
solely with what the Established Church had
done in submitting to the encroachments of the
civil power; and their object, in the part they
took in the proceedings which issued in the
Colonial disruption and in that disruption itself,
was not in any way to reiterate or re-echo the
former, but to undo the effects of the latter upon
their testimony and position.
The committee appointed to prepare a draft of
a bill to amend the Temporalities Acts prepared
such draft, and, having transmitted it to Pres-
byteries for approval or disapproval, received
returns from four Presbyteries, of which two
approved and two disapproved. The Presby-
teries, so far as they made returns, being thus
equally divided, the draft prepared by the com-
mittee was virtually rejected, and the arrange-
ment made to procure the necessary amendment
of the Temporalities Acts became ineffectual. In
these circumstances, the Rev. Mr. Hamilton, at
the next meeting of the Synod, held in October,
1845, moved that a fresh committee should be
appointed to prepare a draft of a bill, that,
besides other clauses, “ should contain a clause
by which a change of designation would be
ratified —that such draft should be transmitted
to Presbyteries, “not for approval or disapproval,
but that they might suggest corrections or amend-
ments and that the draft and the suggestions


of Presbyteries should be taken into considera-
tion by the Synod at a meeting to be held on the
first Wednesday of June, and should then be
“ finally revised and perfected, preparatory to its
being brought before the Legislative Council.”
This motion, which was seconded by Mr. Mow-
bray, did not affect the position of the Church,
but merely provided, so far as it falls within the
scope of the present narrative, that, in taking
the necessary steps to carry into effect the reso-
lution with respect to the change of designation,
such precautions should be adopted as expe-
rience had shewn to be necessary. Dr. M'Garvie
moved and Mr. Robert Stewart seconded an amend-
ment in the following terms, —“ it is not expe-
dient at present to apply to the local legislature
for any change in the designation of this Synod.”
This amendment betrays a total misapprehension
of the application which it was proposed to make
to the legislature. It was not proposed to apply
to that body “ for a change in the designation.”
The Synod and the Synod alone could legiti-
mately make such a change; the legislature
could only give civil sanction and effect to a new
designation when adopted. Mr. MTntyre moved,
as a second amendment, the following resolutions :
1, " That, inasmuch as the present designation
of the Synod of Australia in connexion with the
Established Church of Scotland, clearly implies
a decided though indirect testimony in favour of
the submission of the Chnrch of Scotland to the
encroachments of the civil power on her spiritual
independence, and the liberties of her constitu-
tion, while the Synod wholly disapproves of her
submission to those encroachments, and looks


upon it as involving a grievous surrender of the
great and fundamental doctrine of Christ’s solo
and sovereign headship ; and, inasmuch as the
said designation may convey to some an idea
altogether inconsistent with the perfectly inde-
pendent position which the Synod ought to oc-
cupy, and is calculated to be offensive to the nu-
merous Presbyterians in the colony, and under
the spiritual superintendence of the Synod, who
were never in communion with the Established
Church, and not a few of whom were dissenters
from her, it is resolved, that the Synod change
its designation, and that it be called ‘ The Synod
of New South, Wales,’ so soon as the issue of an
application to the Colonial G-overnment to give
civil sanction to the new designation is ascer-
tained.” 2. “ That a committee be appointed
to prepare a Bill to amend the Temporalities
Acts, 8 William 4 No. 7, and 4 Victoria No. 18,
in such respects as may be found necessary, and
especially so that they will apply to the Synod
under the new designation as fully, to all intents
and purposes, as they now apply to it under the
present designation; and that this Committee
shall take all proper and necessary steps to en-
sure the passing- of such Bill during the next
session of the Legislative Council.”
In th's amendment the change of designation
is, on three distinct grounds, represented as
necessary, and not merely expedient. In main-
taining this view and urging the Synod to proceed
upon it, the mover insisted chiefly on the first of
the grounds alleged,—the vitiating effect of the
des'gnation on the testimony of tho church.
“ The designation clearly implies,” he said, “that


the Established Church of Scotland is the religious
body that the Synod prefers to all others. Pre-
ferring it thus, it must prefer it on account of,
what distinguishes it Irom others. It might
regard it with esteem, but it could not regard it
with preference, on account of what is common
to it with other bodies. Take then the Free
Church and the Established Church of Scotland.
The Synod, by its designation, declares that it
prefers the latter; and, therefore, declares that it
regards as excellencies the peculiarities by which
it is distinguished from the former. The Synod
may have adopted resolutions condemnatory of all
that distinguishes the Established Church from the
Free Church ; but still the designation tells its
owm tale; and, surely, though a faithful testimony
may have been borne in such resolutions, this
does not set the Synod at liberty to bear an op-
posite and unscriptural testimony by its designa-
tion. It has been said that the designation con-
nects the Synod with the Established Church of
Scotland, as that Church existed at the time of the
formation of the Synod; but the designation itself
says otherwise. ‘ln connexion with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland’ describes the present
position of the Synod, and declares that it is,
not that it was, in that connexion. In main-
taining this position against an opponent, one
labours somewhat under the disadvantage which
would be felt in defending a self-evident truth.
Such a truth, from its very nature, does not
admit of being established by argument If any
one chooses to deny that two and two make four,
you can only refer him to the intuitive percep-
tion which he must have of the contrary, if he


only understands the terms. So, in this case,
that ‘ in connexion with the Established Church
of Scotland’ means that the Synod is now, not
that it was formerly, in that connexion, is so
evident that it does not require, and almost pre-
cludes proof. We hold it then to be evident
that the designation of the Synod implies a dis-
tinct and decided testimony in favour of all that
distinguishes the Established Church from all
other bodies, and, among others, from the Free
Church. Nay, that it implies more especially a
testimony in favor of what distinguishes it from
the Free Church ; for it is with that Church
it stands contrasted in the eyes of the Christian
world. What then are the characteristic fea-
tures by which the Established Church is dis-
tinguished from the Free Church ? The sum of
them is, that the former submitted to the en-
croachments of the civil power on its spiritual
liberty and independence, while the latter main-
tained its own spiritual liberty and independence
against those encroachments. And it is in favour
of this submission, which distinguishes her from
the Free Church, that we, by our designation,
bear testimony. Now the ground I take is, that
it is necessary for us —not merely desirable as a
matter of expediency, but necessary as a matter
of principle —to cancel this testimony, and for
this purpose to erase from our designation every
letter of the clause by which it is conveyed.
The determination to change the designation
must therefore be a final determination—a de-
termination to change it be the consequences
what they may. Even though the change were
to be made on grounds of expediency only, the


determination to make it would need to be final j
for if the Synod recede from this determination,
it must be on the colonial Government refusing
to sanction the new designation that it will
recede, and by receding, therefore, it will sur-
render its own spiritual independence. I have
shown that the change of designation is neces-
sary, for the purpose of correcting the testimony
of the Synod. If we change it on othei grounds
alone, we thereby intimate that hut for the ex-
istence of those other grounds, we might with
propriety and should continue to bear it, and
thus declare that the testimony in favour of Eras-
tianism, which it implies, forms no objection to
it, and is not a testimony which we desire to
withdraw. And, besides, when great and vital
nrinciples have come into direct collision with
the opposite errors, so that a large body of
faithful men have been under the necessity of
suffering for them the loss of all things, and so that
the attention of the whole visible Church has
been called to the conflict, does it become us to
maintain a strict and cautious neutrality—to
avoid,with prudent watchfulness,uttering a syllable
that would discover a leaning in either direction?
It is urged,” he added, “ that the consequences
of a change of designation would be injurious to
the interests of religion. We are very ill qualified
to calculate consequences, particularly within the
province of religion ; but, surely, the consequences
ofourdoingour duty cannot be, ultimately and up-
on the whole, injurious. And, at any rate, duty
is ours and events are God’s. In this case,
before we proceed to calculate consequences, it
should be borne in mind that the highest object


of the Gospel ministry is to exhibit Christ and
assert his claims. Whatever advantage’might be
gained by sacrificing this object, even in the least
degree, it would be a disadvantage, and should
be rejected.”
Mr. Tait, in seconding the amendment, re-
marked “ that he could not acquiesce in the pro-
posal of Mr. Hamilton, because it proceeded on
grounds that were not sufficient to warrant the
change required, and supported the amendment
of Mr. MHntyre for the reasons set forth in it.”
Each of those reasons he presented very fully and
forcibly. “ The strongest reason of all,” he pro-
ceeded, after he had urged the other two, “ is that
which is placed first in the amendment, viz.,—
that the present designation of the Synod implies
a decided though indirect testimony in favour of
the submission of the Church of Scotland to the
encroachments of the civil power on her spiritual
independence and the liberties of her constitution,
while the Synod wholly disapproves of her sub-
mission to those encroachments, and looks upon
it as involving a grievous surrender of the great
and fundamental doctrine of Christ’s sole and sover-
eign headship. This Synod gave forth at its last
annual meeting a very full and explicit declara-
tion of the principles it holds in regard to the
spiritual independence of the church, and the rights
of the people in the formation of the pastoral tie,
—principles the very opposite of those which the
Established Church of Scotland acted upon -in
submitting to the encroachments of the State,
and the very same as those which the Free Church
contended and suffered for. Before the division
of the parent Church we were content to hold


forth to the world that our principles were con-
tained in the standards of the Established Church
of Scotland; hut, now that a twofold interpreta-
tion has been put upon these—that one party
interpret them in a loose and accommodating
sense, and another in a strict sense, —we have
come forward and declared that the latter is
our interpretation—that we hold the principles
laid down in the Confession of Faith and Books
of Discipline in regard to Christ being the
only Head of the Church; and, consequently,
that the rulers whom he has appointed to
govern her have a supremo and independent
authority within their own province, with
which no other power can interfere; and that
the Christian people have rights which these
rulers themselves cannot take away; we have
come forward and declared that we hold these
principles in their strict and proper meaning ;
and we solemnly pledged ourselves that by
the grace of God we will stand to and maintain
them. Now, where is our consistency, if after
Laving done this we still continue the peculiar
and close connexion in which we formerly stood
with the Established Church of Scotland, though
that Church is, on our own principles, a totally
different Church now, and though we have
publicklyand solemnly renounced and repudiated
the peculiar views she has adopted and acted
upon? It has been said that the connexion is
merely nominal, and that it is not worth while
to make so much ado about a name ; but there is
often a great deal in a name. It is one way of
confessing Christ in the world, and all the
Christian profession that we make may some-


times be summed up in it. Many a Protestant
martyr might have been unbound from the stake,
and have saved his life by giving himself a false
name—a name inconsistent with his principles.
Either blot out the solemn declaration you have
given forth from your minutes, or change your
name. Either go along with, the Established
Church of Scotland, or come out of your special
and peculiar connection with her. In no other
way than by breaking this connexion, and chang-
ing our name, can we be consistent with our-
selves or faithful to the profession, which as a
church we have given forth to the world.” Mr.
Tait then, referring “ to the great evil of again
dividing thd church, and to the blame those
incurred who rendered that inevitable,” added,
u while our ordination vows bind us to seek the
peace and unity of the church, they bind us also,
and above all, to maintain our principles in spite
of whatsoever trouble or persecution may arise;
and, having solemnly pledged ourselves to main-
tain these, we must do so even at the risk of
being separated from those who will not unite
with us in this struggle, and in that case the
guilt of the schism does not lie with those com-
pelled to separate, but with those who compelled
them.”
At the close of the discussion, the vote was
first taken between the two amendments, when
Mr. Mclntyre’s was carried. That amendment
being then put against the motion, was again car-
ried—the majority in this case being eight to six.
Mr. MTniyre, Mr. Colin Stewart, Mr. Tait, and
Mr. Blain, ministers, and Mr. Ferguson, Mr. Peter


Stewart, Mr.HughM‘Donal4, and Dr. Hill, elders,
formed the majority; and Mr.Eoss, Mr. Hamilton,
Mr. Adam, and Mr. Mowbray, ministers, and Mr.
Kelman and Mr. M'Master, elders, the minority.
Dr. M'Garvie, Mr. M'Fie, Mr. Robert Stewart,
Mr Eipper. Mr. Gilchrist, and Dr. Fullerton,
ministers, and Mr. Gill and Mr. Smith, elders,
declined to vote, as being unable to concur in
either the motion or the amendment.
Of the position thus assumed by the Colonial
Church, and of the considerations, as set
forth in the amendment and in the speeches
of Mr. MTntyre and Mr. Tait, by which it was
influenced in assuming this position, the Free
Church cordially approved. Dr. James Buchanan,
writing as convener and under the instructions
of the Colonial Committee, after stating that he
had “submitted to the members of that com-
mittee. at a late meeting, the substance of the
information contained” in a letter from Mr.
MTntyre, in reference to the proceedings just re-
lated adds “ they instructed me to write to you
in reply, and to express their deep and heart-
felt sympathy with you, Mr. Tait, and others
who adhere to our principles, in the very ditfa-
cult and perplexing circumstances in which you
have been called to act.”* “Immediately,” he
says in the same letter, “on the arrival of the
newspapers containing the account of these pro-
ceedings, and a report of the excellent speeches
delivered by Mr. Tait and yourself, they were
brought under the consideration of our Commit-
• Letter to Mr. M-lntyre, dated 10th May, 1846,
and published in the Voice in the Wilderness of 2nd
November, 1846.


tee, and we have been anxiously endeavouring
ever since to procure suitable men to go out and
aid you in the good work. AH the accounts
which have reached us from the colony concur in
assuring us, that there is no reasonable prospect
of your obtaining the civil sanction of your
new designation, and that in the event of its
being withheld, there are comparatively few who
will separate from the Synod. In these circum-
stances, we do hope that those of the brethren
who may be found to adhere to our principles in
the day of trial, will rely on our disposition to
aid them by every means in our power.”
The committee,appointed by the Synod to prepare
a draft of a hill to Amend the Presbyterian Tem-
poralities Acts prepared such draft ; “ but, before
taking steps to have it brought before the Legis-
lative Council, though authorised to do so by
their instructions, they deemed it their duty to re-
commend to the Moderator to call a pro re nata
meeting of the Synod, that, that court having
thus had an opportunity afforded to it of making
such amendments as it might consider necessary,
the proposed bill might go to the Council in a
form which had received its sanction.”* This
precaution was adopted to prevent the unseemly
and humiliating spectacle of opposition offered
to the Rill in the Council by members of the
Synod, a spectacle which there was reason to
apprehend would otherwise be presented. Be-
sides, it was conceived that the bill would cer-
tainly be rejected, if such opposition should be
offered. The Synod was, accordingly, convened
by the Moderator “to receive the report of the
• Report of Committee


Committee on the Temporalities Acts, and to
make such amendments on the draft of a bill
prepared by them, as might be deemed necessary,
before submitting it to the Legislative Council,”'
and met on the 28th May, 1846.
It was a point already determined, as the pre-
ceding narrative has shown, that the Committee
should prepare a draft of a bill for so amending
the Temporalities Acts that they should be ap-
plicable to the Synod under the new designation,
and should take steps to procure the passing of such
bill with the least possible delay; and the pro-
re-nata meeting was called for the sole purpose
of making any amendments it might deem ne-
cessary on the draft prepared by the Committee.
It was of course incompetent to it to make
any alleged amendments that would divest the
bill of the character, which the Synod at its
annual meeting had expressly instructed the
committee to impart to it; and it was
equally incompetent to it, as involving a viola*
tion of the law which limits the powers of pro-
re-nata meetings to the business specified by the
moderator in calling them, to do anything else
than either make legitimate amendments or de-
cline to make any. It soon became apparent,
however, that a large portion of the members
would pay no regard to any distinction between
what was competent and what was incompetent
to the meeting, but would do whatever they
might consider necessary to prevent the carrying
out of the Synod’s instructions with respect to
the change of the designation.
The purport of the committee’s report has
already been indicated, and, when it was read,


the Rev. Mr, Atchesou rose, and, with an air of
oracular wisdom, which contrasted strangely with
the utterly unreasonable course which he recom-
mended to the Synod, moved the following reso-
lution : “ That the Synod do not think it neces-
sary in the meantime to proceed further in the
consideration of the bill now presented, and they
hereby relieve the committee of their duty in this
respect.” It was quite in character and appro-
priate, that this motion should pronounce it un-
necessary that the Synod should “ proced further
in the consideration of the bill,” when it had not
as yet entered upon the consideration ot it, and
should exhibit one or two other similar pecu-
liarities ; but ,what demands special notice is, that
it called upon a meeting pro-re-nata to overstep
the limits which the circular issued by the mo-
derator in convening it prescribed to its delibera-
tions, and to set aside, by doing so, a resolution
passed by the Synod at its annual meeting. Dr.
M'Garvie seconded this resolution, apparently,
however, not without feeling some degree of
awkwardness, if not misgiving. It was met with
the following amendment, moved by Mr.
MTntyre, and seconded by Mr. Colin Stewart:
That the Synod receive the report now sub-
mittted, and proceed to examine the draft of a
bill embodied in that report, with the view of
making any amendment it may deem necessary.
After considerable discussion a division took place,
and the amendment was carried by the casting
vote of the Moderator, Mr. Hetherington. Mr.
Ross, Dr. M‘Garvie, Mr. Robert Stewart, Mr,
Eij per, Mr. Gilchrist, and Dr Fullerton, minis-
ters, and Mr, Gill, Mr. Whitelaw, and Mr. Inues,


elder?, voted for the motion; and Mr. M‘Fie,
Mr. Purves, Mr. M‘lntyre, Mr. Colin Stewart,
Mr. Adam, Mr. Tuit, Mr. Mowbray, and Mr.
Bl.iin, ministers, and Mr. Peter Stewart, elder,
voted for the amendment.
After a brief adjournment the Synod pro-
ceeded, agreeably to the amendment, to examine
the bill. Now, however, the party, in whose
policy the motion originated, commanded a ma-
jority, and they no sooner discovered this, than
they set to Avork Avith all their might to strangle
the bill, or, as one of themselves expressed it,
to “break its backbone,” expungingAvhole clauses,
and, Avhen they allowed any to remain, rendering
them meaningless and nugatory. When they
had got through the preamble at this rate, they
seemed to have discovered that, in the form to
which they had reduced it, it could not Avell
support enacting clauses, and, accordingly, they
resolved to postpone the further consideration of
the bill till the next annual meeting, or, in other
Avords, for this was the aim and the effect of the
resolution, to retain the designation unchanged.
Mr. M‘lntyre, Mr, Tait, Mr. Mowbray, Mr.
M‘Fie, Mr. Hetherington, and Mr. Plain,
ters; and Mr. Peter SteAvart, elder, dissented.
On the adoption of this resolution, and refer-
ring both to itself and to the proceedings which
it appropriately closed, Mr. M‘lntyre remarked
that the brethren, who pursued the course Avhich
had now been taken, seemed bent on compelling
those to withdraw from the Synod Avho could
not continue members of it under the present
designation, and that, for his own part, if the
resolution that the designation should not be


changed,—for virtually it was such a resolution, —
now irregularly and unconstitutionally passed,
should be confirmed, or any resolution to the
same effect adopted, at the ensuing annual meet-
ing, he should be under the necessity, that he
might not be a partaker of other men’s sins, of
withdrawing instantly from the body; and he
believed those with whom he acted in this
matter were of the same mind,
Thus the thwarting policy of Dr. M'Garvie and
those who adhered to him again prevailed. Ac-
cordingly, at the next annual meeting of the
Synod, held in October, the question of the
phange of designation still demanded, and, having
been pending so long and from causes so vexa-
tious and discreditable, demanded with in-
creased urgency, the attention of the Synod.
It was necessary to determine and to de-
termine once for all, whether the Synod would
faithfully maintain the ground of principle, on
which it had been placed by the resolutions adopted
by the Synod at its previous annual meeting,
or would descend to the ground of expediency,
or to ground still lower. Each of these courses
was advocated. Those who had brought forward
and supported the resolutions of the previous
year, with the exception of the Rev. Mr. Blain,
called upon the Synod to adhere to those resolu-
tions, and to take immediate steps to carry them
into effect; the extreme party in the opposite
direction urged the Synod to retrace its steps,
and to retain the designation unchanged; and
the middle party recommended a middle course,
—that the Synod, without pledging itself to the
change of designation, as necessary on grounds of


principle, should still effect it, os desirable on
grounds of expediency, if it could do so without
loss or risk. On Thursday, the Bth October, Mr.
M‘lntyre moved, in the following terms, the
adoption of the first of these courses: “That the
Synod disapproves of the proceedings of the
pro re nata meeting, held on the 28th May last,
so far as they went to obstruct the carrying into
effect of the resolutions passed at the last annual
meeting, with respect to the change of designation,
and again solemnly determines that it will abide
by and follow out those resolutions at all
hazards; that, with the view of carrying them
into effect without further delay, the Synod now
resolve itself into a Committee, to revise the draft
of a bill prepared by the Committee appointed for
that purpose by the last annual meeting, that it
may be immediately laid before the Legislative
Council; and that the Moderator be instructed
to notify in the Government Gazette , so soon as the
said bill shall be passed or rejected by the Council,
that the Synod shall thenceforth bear the new de-
signation.” This resolution was seconded by Mr.
Colin Stewart. Dr. M‘Garvie, who took the
lead in advocating the second of the courses spe-
cified, moved, and Mr. Robert Stewart seconded
the following amendment; “ That it is not ne-
cessary to proceed further in the consideration of
the change of designation, and the committee ap-
pointed thereanent are hereby relieved of their
duties in that matter.” A second amendment was
moved by Mr. Mowbray and seconded by Mr.
Barker in a series of resolutions* to the same effect
* Appendix D.


With those of Mr. Hamilton, adopted by the
Symod in October, 1844.
After a protracted discussion the Synod divided
at a late hour next day, when Dr. M‘Grarvie’s
amendment was carried. Five voted for the mo-
tion, —Mr. M‘lntyre, Mr. Tait, and Mr. Colin
Stewart, ministers, and Dr Hill and Mr. Martin,
elders; eight for Mr. Mowbray's amendment,—
Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Hetherington,
Mr. Blain, Mr. Adam, and Mr. M‘Fie, ministers,
Mr. Barker and Mr. Kellman, elders; and nine
for Dr, M‘Garvie’s amendment, —Dr. M'Garvie,
Dr. Fullerton, Mr. Eipper, Mr. Ross, Mr. R.
Stewart, and Mr. Purves, ministers, and Mr.
Whitelaw, Mr. Ferrier, and Mr. M‘MLaster,
elders.
The Synod having now cancelled the resolu-
tions with respect to the change of its designa-
tion, which it had adopted at its previous annual
meeting, and having determined to retain its
designation unchanged, and to continue its
special connection with the Established Church
of Scotland, Mr. MTntyre protested, on grounds
to be afterwards stated, that it had placed
the Church under its spiritual superintendence
in such a position, that he and those who con-
curred with him were laid under the necessity
of withdrawing from that church ; and Mr. Tait
made an announcement to the same effect. Mr,
Hamilton and Mr. Mowbray dissented; but, next
morning, with the permission of the Synod, sub-
stituted a protest for their dissent, and seceded ;
a step which, it is evident, was not justified by
the view they maintained. They denied that the
designation imported a vitiating element into


the testimony of the church ; and, according to
this view, the retention of it created no ne-
cessity and afforded no ground for secession.
They sought a change of designation on grounds
of expediency only, and, therefore, to have se-
ceded, because the designation was retained un-
changed, was, on their part, inconsistent and wholly
unjustifiable. If, with even some of their ad-
herents, they supported the motion, as views, that
would justify them in seceding, would, if intelli-
gently held and faithfully carried out, have led
them to do, a disruption would have been pre-
vented, —at least for the time,and probably wholly.
Thus, by adopting a policy determined by con-
siderations of expediency and not by the require-
ments of principle, they precipitated the very evil
they sought to avert, and, while therj is much
reason to believe it might have been averted other-
wise, unwittingly produced a distribution of parties
that rendered it inevitable. From such a policy,
particularly within the sphere of religion,—and it
is to be reprobated everywhere,—no better result
can ever be expected. On the j art of the church
especially, though by no means on its part alone,
any attempt to mould results, otherwise than by
the faithful maintenance of principle and the en-
lightened and zealous performance of duty, is as
unsafe as it is presumptuous.
At 12 o’clock, after Mr. Hamilton and Mr.
Mowbray had ceased to he members of the
Synod, Mr. MTntyre, Mr. Tait, Mr, Colin
Stewart, and Mr. Martin, entered the court, and,
Mr. MTniyre having read their joint protest
and laid it on the table, they also with-
drew. In their protest they set forth “ that


the Synod, having resolved to remain in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland
and to retain its designation unchanged, thereby
declared its approval of the submission of the
said Church to the encroachments of the Civil
power on her spiritual independence and the
liberties of her constitution, and thus concurred
in the renunciation of the doctrine of Christ s
sole and sovereign Headship, which that sub-
mission involves j* and further “that, in
virtue of the connection with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland which the Synod had
resolved to maintain, the unscriptural principles on
which the government of that Church is now ad-
ministered, according to which the civil courts are
invested wit-h power to coerce the judicatories
and individual members of it in the exercise of
their spiritual functions and duties, and other-
wise to interfere authoritatively in spiritual matters,
and Presbyteries are authorised and empowered
to disregard and overbear the voice of the people
in the formation of the pastoral relation, were vir-
tually adopted by the Synod ; and that the govern-
ment and discipline of the Colonial Presbyterian
Church under its superintendence were liable lobe
subjected to the operation of those principles.”
On these grounds, they protested “ that the Synod
had placed itself in a position at variance with
the word of God, and with the standards of the
Church of Scotland in their true and original im-
port, and incompatible with the discharge of its
great duty as a witness to Christ ; that the con-
stitution of the Synod had thus been so changed,
that the government of the church could not be
conducted in accordance with it, without violating


the laws of God, dishonouring the Great King and
Head of the Church, and invading the rights of
the Christian people; and that, therefore, it
was and should be lawful for them, and such
other ministers and elders as might con-
cur with them, to withdraw from the
Synod, and take such steps as might be com-
petent to them and necessary for dispensing the
ordinances of the Gospel, and administering the
affairs of the Church in this land, agreeably to the
mind of Christ, and to the standards and consti-
tution of their Church,”
Immediately on withdrawing from the Synod
they proceeded to an upper room in Hunter-
street,* and followed up their protest by consti-
tuting themselves there, in the name of Christ,
a court of his Church, Mr. M'lntyre having
then been chosen moderator, and Mr. Tait ap-
pointed clerk, the protest, in pursuance of which
they had assumed the position which they then occu-
pied, as a Church court distinct and separate from
the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, was read and
ordered to be inserted in the minutes. After
careful consideration it w 7 as resolved that the
Church, under the spiritual superintendence of
the court which had just been erected, should be
called the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Aus-
tralia, and the court itself the Synod of bastern
Australia, The grounds on which the former of
these designations was adopted w T ere these. It was
conceived that the designation of a church ought
to be appropriate, and ought, therefore, to be
derived from the history of the body that bears
* Second house below Elizaleth-street, Sydney.


it, or from some peculiarity of its testimony, or
from the territory it occupies, or from more than
one of these. It did not appear, however, in the
ease with which the Synod had to deal, that the
historical antecedents furnished a suitable desig-
nation or a contribution towards one, and ac-
cordingly, a designation derived from the other
sources mentioned was adopted. If the body to
be designated had only re-echoed here what the
Free Church had done in Scotland, it might
perhaps with some propriety have been called
after that church. But it had acted a very
different and a far more important and legiti-
mate part, having assumed the position it occu-
pied for the purpose of restoring the purity of its
testimony \ and to have named it after the Free
Church would have been inconsistent with this
fact, and with the still more fundamental fact,
that it sustained, and that it was its duty to sus-
tain unequivocally and without compromise, the
character of an entirely independent ecclesiastical
body. The term, “ free,” as inserted by the
Free Church of Scotland in its designation, was
both appropriate and necessary. That Church,
by assuming the position of a separate body, ef-
fected its escape from a bondage, which the State
had attempted to impose upon it, and to which
the residuary or remanent establishment sub-
mitted. There was thus clear historical ground
for describing it as “ free”, and from the fact
that it claimed, —and it claimed most justly,—
to be the true Church of Scotland, and assumed
a designation in which that claim is preferred,
such a description of it was necessary to distin-
guish it from the Establishment, which also


claimed to be the true Church of Scotland, and
preferred that claim in its designation. But, as
regarded the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia, there was nothing, either in its his-
torical antecedents or in its claims, that would
V render the term “ free.” either appropriate or
necessary as a part of its designation. It was not
for the purpose of escaping from bondage, but for
the purpose of rectifying its testimony, that it
assumed the position of a separate body ; and the
Church, in the disruption of which its assump-
tion of that position originated, had not had
time or been otherwise in circumstances to
acquire,—as the Church, of Scotland had done,
notwithstanding the long eclipse of moderatism
it had experienced,—an inheritance of honour and
influence, to which it concerned it to serve
itself heir.
At a subsequent meeting, the Synod of
Eastern Australia adopted the following formula
of concurrence in the protest of the church-under
its spiritual superintendence :—“We the under-
signed ministers and elders of the Presbyterian
Church, under the spiritual superintendence of the
Synod of Australia in connexion with the es-
tablished Church of Scotland, do hereby declare
our concurrence in the Protest, whereof a copy is
hereunto prefixed, taken on the 9th day of
October, and laid on the table of the said Synod
on the day following, and now give in our ad-
herence to the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia, under the spiritual superintendence of
the Synod formed by those who took that pro-
test.”
Of the assumption by the Presbyterian Church


of Eastern Australia of the position of a separate
body, 'which had now been consummated, the
Free Church most cordially approved. It recog-
nised the necessity and concurred in the object of
it. On the 13th of April, 1847, the Rev. Mr.
(now Dr.) Bonar, addressing the Synod of
Aberdeen, as convener of the Colonial Commit-
tee of the Free Church, referred to it in very
ardent terms. “ This very day,” he said, “ in-
telligence of the long looked-for disruption in
Australia has reached me. That event has taken
place; a Free Church has been formed there,
It is feeble, indeed; it needs and demands our
sympathy, and it will receive it.” The Colonial
Committee In little more than a month after-
wards, in their report then submitted to the
General Assembly, after referring to Mr. Hamil-
ton’s resolutions, as “ approving generally of the
principles of the Free Church, but proposing to
continue in friendly relations both with that
Church and with the Establishment,” and re-
marking that “ several of the brethren were from
the beginning dissatisfied with this state of
things, and earnestly wished for something more
decisive,” but. still, *' continued in connection
with the Synod,” until, in October, 1846, a ma-
jority of that court “ determined to remain in
connection with the Established Church, and
even to retain in their name the badge of that
connection,” announced in the following terms
the disruption thus necessitated. *‘ At that meet-
ing, after three days of painful discussion, our
brethren Messrs. M'lntyre, Tait, and Stewart, —
afterwards joined by Mr. Taylor, —with Dr.
Hill and Mr. Martin, elders, on the 10th day of


October, laid their solemn protest upon the table
of the Synod, and retired to an upper room in
Sydney ; and there, in the name of the one Head
of the Church, for whose royal prerogative they
had been enabled to witness a good and consis-
tent profession, they formed themselves into a
Synod, under the name of the Synod of Eastern
Australia.” In a subsequent part of their report,
they inform the Assembly that, as the news of
the colonial disruption “ had only been recently
received, it had not been possible for the com-
mittee to have done more than write letters of
sympathy and encouragement to their brethren,
who had been called to take that important step.
The General Assembly of the Established
Church was equally decided, in its approval of
the opposite course adopted by the majority of
the Synod. In a special report and reference of
the case of the Synod to the Assembly, Dr.
Clark, as vice-convener of the Colonial Commit-
tee of the Established Church, stated that
“ another matter referred to the Assembly was
the resolution of the Synod of Australia de-
clining to take part either with the Established
Church or the Free Church, but to constitute an
independent Presbyterian Church of itself, and to
hold communion and friendly correspondence with
both. On receiving this resolution,” he continued,
“the Committee resolved to submit it to the Assem-
bly, at the same time expressing their opinion
that they could not continue friendly correspon-
dence with the Synod of Australia on the basis
of their resolution. The General Assembly, in
June 1845 declared that the ministers and elders
in the Synod of Australia who had agreed with


these resolutions wore no longer in connection
with the Church of Scotland. This finding
being transmitted to the Synod, they, at their
meeting on the 9th October last, resolved by a
large majority, to remain in connection with the
Established Church of Scotia id.” With respect
to the case thus submitted by the committee, the
General Assembly adopted the following deliver-
ance : —“ The Assembly are much gratified to
learn that the Synod of Australia have, by a
large majority, resolved to maintain their con-
nection with the Established Church, and the
Assembly hereby cordially renew their relation
with that Synod, and instruct the Colonial Com-
mittee to enter into a friendly correspondence
with the Synod of Australia, and to offer such
friendly advice as is in their power.”
In these proceedings the Synod of Australia
in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland is exhibited in a very humiliating light.
“ This finding,” says Dr. Clarke, referring to the
finding of the General Assembly of 1845, that
all ministers and elders that adhered to Mr.
Hamilton’s resolutions were no longer to be re-
garded as in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, and had fortfeited the ad-
vantages conferred on them by the State, “ being
transmitted to the Synod, they resolved by a
large majority to remain in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland.” Here we have
both cause and effect very distinctly set forth. The
cause was the finding of the Assembly, striking
at the salaries of those against whom it was di-
rected, —so Dr. Clark alleges,—and the effect, ac-
cording to the same authority, was the retreat of


the prudent Synod to its former position. By
this retreat it submissively received upon its
neck, or, rather, placed upon that of the Church
under its authority, the yoke of the Established
Church of Scotland. It had before acquiesced
in the submission of the Established Church of
Scotland to the invasion of its spiritual indepen-
dence by the State, and had thus become a par-
taker of the Erastianism and sunk to the level of
that church, and it now submitted to the invasion
of its own spiritual independence by the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, and thus sank to
a still lower level.
It was, however, to the position, which it oc-
cupied, and occupies still, in virtue of its concur-
rence with the Established Church of Scotland,
and its consequent identification with that
church in respect of testimony, that the disrup-
tion had reference. Those who formed the
Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
deemed it necessary to escape from that position,
to the ground ot a full and faithful mainte-
nance ot the great principles surrendered by the
occupation of it; and they escaped accordingly.


APPENDIX.
Declaration of Principles, adopted by the Synod
of Australia in connection with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, on the 3rd Octo-
ber, 1844.
Ist. That, as, at the formation of this Synod, the various
members did, by their subscriptions to the Bond of
Union then signed, declare their adherence to the doc-
trines of the Confession of Faith, and to the other
standards and formularies of the Church of Scotland,
the Synod think it incumbent on them at the present
time to proclaim their attachment to the great truth so
prominently and frequently held forth in those standards,*
that the Lord Jesus Christ is the only King snd Head
of the Church, which He hath purchased with his blood,
and that his revealed will and authority form the orly
infallible rule of duty to his followers.
2nd. That as “ the Lord Jesus, as King and Head of
his church, hath therein appointed a government in the
hands of church officers, distinct from the civil magis-
trate,”f it belongs to such officers to judge and dispose of
all spiritual questions and matters; and, when assembled
in “ synods and councils, ministerially to determine con-
troversies of faith and cases of conscience, to set down
rules and directions for the better ordering of the public
worship of God and government of his church, to receive
complaints in cases of mal-administration, and authori-
tatively to determine the same,”! Christ’s servants being
bound in all things to obey the commands of Him in
whose name they act.
3rd. That “the civil magistrate ought to assist,
maintain, and fortify the jurisdiction of the church’’ § in
spiritual things, but “neither to preach, minister tho
sacraments, nor execute the censures of the church, nor
prescribe any rule how it should be done; || whence it
follows that, if in any instance the magistrate exact, as
the terms of his support to the church, any conditions
• Conf. xxv 6. t Conf. xxx 4, I Conf. xxxi, 3.
§ 2 Book of Discipline, ch, 1. 15. [) Ditto, ch, 1, 14.


inconsistent with her allegiance to her only King and
Head, or incompatible with the proper discharge of the
duties He has assigned to her, it becomes the church
to decline the magistrate’s countenance rather than
submit to such unlawful conditions.
4th. That the Synod feel called upon to declare their
attachment to another principle set forth in the standards
of the Church of Scotland, and asserted under great
diversity of circumstances, at various periods, “ that no
(pastor) should be intruded upon any congregation,
either by the Prince or any inferior person, without lawful
election, and the assent of the people over whom the
person is placed, as the practice of the apostolical Kirk
and good order crave.”*
sth. That—as the above principles are so clearly declared
in the formularies to which the members of this Synod
have solemnly recorded their adherence; as they were
not only avowed, but acted on, by the established Church
of Scotland at the time when this Synod was formed,
and assumed its present designation; as they were not
only principles of the church, but principles generally
believed to be recognised by the State in the ancient
statutes of the kingdom of Scotland, and in the treaty
of Union with England,—the Synod do now declare their
unaltered attachment to the aforesaid principles, and
their determination, through God’s grace, ever to maintain
them, and to administer the government of this colonial
church in accordance with them.
6th. That this Synod express their gratitude to God
that, in the gracious arrangements of his Providence, they
enjoy that spiritual liberty which is essential to the right
administration of the affairs of a Christian church, —no
attempt having been made to interfere with their treat-
ment of spiritual matters, and there being no statutes
in force here, under colour of which any such inteference
can be apprehended.
7th. That the arrangement of the colonial government,
which requires the adherence of the people as a title to
endowment in favour of a particular minister, is an
effectual guarantee against intrusion; and this Synod
are determined to uphold the right of the Christian
people to choose their pastors ; and in all cases where a
* Book of Discipline, ch. xii, 10,


congregation lias been already formed, to require the
assent, either formal or tacit, of a majority of the com-
municants therein, previous to the formation of the
pastoral relation.
Bth, That as the ecclesiastical equality of all .ministers
of Christ’s Gospel, who are pastors of congregations, is a
fundamental principle of Presbyterian polity, it neces-
sarily follows that the jurisdiction of Church Courts law-
fully extends over those only who are members of them,
or who are represented in them; and that, in like manner,
individual ministers, or bodies of ministers, can be
morally responsible only for the actings of those courts
of which they are members, or in which they are repre-
sented : Whence it follows that the members of the
Synod are subject to none other jurisdiction than that of
the Synod itself, and are not morally responsible for
the actings of any body holding, or professing to hold,
the same standards, over whose proceedings they can
exert no influence.
9th. That the nature of the relation between the
Presbyterian Church in New South Wales and the Church
of Scotland formed a prominent subject of consideration
in the discussions, conferences, negociations, and corres-
pondence which preceded the formation of this Synod,
the independence”of the colonial church from all trans-
marine jurisdiction being made an indispensable pre-
liminary to the union then effected between the various
Presbyterian ministers in the colony. And the Synod
have to express their satisfaction that the entire subject
has been fully investigated, and that the Established
Church of Scotland definitively declared,-more especially
in the “ Report of the Committee, appointed in 1839 by
the Commission of the General Assembly, with reference
to the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,” and
unanimously agreed to, approved of, and adopted by
the said Commission on the 12th December, 1839, and
subsequently by the General Assembly of 1840, —that
this Synod is the Supreme Legislative and Judicial Court
for the colonial Presbyterian Church, and enjoys, in fact,
what it is entitled to of right, the power of regulating
the affairs of this branch of Christ’s Church, in accord-
ance with their views of his will, under the guidance of
his spirit; the Synod, nevertheless, considering them-


selves bouud by the most solemn engagements to adhere
to the doctrines of the Confession of Faith, and the other
standards and formularies of the Church of Scotland,
and to administer discipline agreeably to the laws of that
church, in so far as they are applicable in the circum-
stances of this colony.
MR. HAMILTON’S RESOLUTIONS.
Ist. That it is the first duty of this Synod to use all
lawful means to preserve its own unity and peace, and
avert a disruption of the colonial Presbyterian Church,
which an act of “ adherence ” either to the Free Church
of Scotland or the Church of Scotland now established,
would inevitably occasion,
2nd. That this Synod is under no imperative obligation
to adhere to the one of these bodies to the repudiation of
the other, as seems to be expected and desired by both;
but, existing and recognised as an independent church
court, and not being implicated in and responsible for
the errors of others, further than it shall expressly by
its own acts homologate them, it may lawfully, and
without guilt of any kind, from regard to the best in-
terests of the colonial Presbyterian Church, decline to
give “ adherence” to either the Free Church of Scotland
or the Established Church of Scotland : and therefore
does decline.
3rd. That, —while different opinions and feelings are
entertained by the severai members of this Synod, and
by the people under it, respecting the men and the
measures of the Free Church and the Established
Church, and a large number of both approve of the
former church, and deeply sympathise in its sufferings,
believed to be for conscience sake, —all are agreed that
these churches are portions of the Catholic Church of
Christ, and that communion may lawfully be held, and
ought to be held, by the Synod with the one and the
other; and, accordingly, that this Synod is determined,
if consent shall be given on their part, to maintain
communion and friendly correspondence with both, as
held with the Established Church of Scotland prior
to its disruption in 1843.


4th. That the Synod ia thankful to the God of all
grace, and to the Free Church of Scotland and the
Established Church of Scotland alike, for the expression
they have given of lively interest in the spiritual welfare
of this colony, and of desire, as opportunity shall be af-
forded, to help the Synod and its members in their la-
bours, for the spiritual welfare of the colony ; and it
directs and requires the Moderator of the Synod and its
several ministers, in answer to the communications re-
ceived from the colonial committees of the Free Church
and the Established Church of Scotland, to express the
Synod’s readiness to receive such co-operation and
assistance as they have offered; and in other respects
to write as consists with the foregoing resolutions, and
with the declaration of principles previously passed.
6 th. That if any ministers of this Synod think it
incumbent on them, for the exoneration of their own
consciences, individually to divest themselves, by a
private act of demission, of the right to hold a pre-
sentation to a parish church in Scotland, and of the
other privileges, which, according to law, belong to
them there, as licentiates and ministers of the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, the Synod does not prohibit
them, and shall not on this account subject them to any
disadvantages as Colonial ministers and members of
this court. _ _ .
6th. That the present designation of this Synod, viz,,
Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, assumed in 1840, does not imply
any degree of erastianism, or any approbation of those
proceedings of the Established Church of Scotland, which
compelled a large body of its ministers and elders to
withdraw from it in 1843 ; and, therefore, there is no
necessity for an immediate change of said designation:
yet, forasmuch as the retaining of this designation might
give rise to the misapprehension that the Synod holds
exclusive communion with the Church of Scotland as
now established, or more intimate connection with it
than with the Free Church, that the said designation
shall be changed, and that steps shall forthwith be
taken to procure an amendment of the Temporalities
Bill, to ratify and give civil sanction to such a change.


MR. TAIT’S AMENDMENT.
Ist. That this Synod has watched with deep interest
the struggle carried on in the parent church for the
maintenance of the great principles of the Supreme
Headship of Christ over the church, aud the rights and
privileges which He has bestowed upon her rulers and
people, as these are laid down in her standards, and,
till recently, admitted and sanctioned by the State in
those statues by which she was established. And, while
they have to record their gratitude to God that they
have hitherto been permitted to enjoy, to a certain ex-
tent, the countenance and support ot the colonial Go-
vernment, without any interference whatever with their
rights and liberties, or the rights and privileges of the
people over whom they bear rule, and are not directly
affected by the invasiou which the civil power has made
upon the province of the church in Scotland, yet they
feel imperatively called upon, both as a section ot the
General Presbyterian Church, and as standing in a
peculiar relation to the Established Church of Scotland,
to express their deep regret and sorrow that such an
interpretation has been put upon these standards by the
State, and to such an extent acquiesced in, and sub-
mitted to, by a portion of the church itself, as to be a
virtual surrender of the principles in question ; and
their devout thankfulness to God that so large a por-
tion of her office-bearers and people were enabled to
maintain them in all their purity and entireness, —first
to the imminent peril, and ultimately to the actual loss,
of all the civil privileges which the State bestowed, and
have come out from that establishment, in which they
could, no longer govern the Church agreeably to the
mind of Christ, as revealed in the New Testament, and
rightly interpreted in the Books of Discipline and Con-
fession of Faith.
2nd. That, while the relation in which this Synod stands
to the Established Church does not involve any dependence,
or subjection to interference and control on the part of
the mother church ; and this Synod of right possesses,
and has been fully acknowledged by the parent church to
have, a perfectly independent and exclusive jurisdiction ;


it implies such a special preference for, and approval ol
her on our part, as is inconsistent with the declaration we
have now made of what these standards teach and require
on the points above-mentioned. And that, therefore,
while fhis Synod feel deeply grateful for the valuable
assistance and counsel they have received from the
Established Church in times past, and have marked their
sense of the honour and advantage ot standing in such a
relation by adopting as their official name, “ the Synod
of Australia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland,” they do not feel warranted in longer continu-
ing the peculiar and close connection in which they have
hitherto stood to her, or in retaining a name which is
calculated to misrepresent them, give offence to many of
their ministers and people, and lead to new dissensions and
divisions in our colonial church, and that, therefore,
immediate steps be taken for obtaining the sanction of
the colonial Government to ihe change now resolved upon.
3rd. That a copy of these resolutions be transmitted
to the Moderator of the Established Church of Scotland,
and the Moderator of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Scotland; and that the thanks of this meeting be ten-
dered to the latter, for their generous offer, in the
midst of their own privations and difficulties, to assist
this Synod in supplying our countrymen in this territory
with religious ordinances, and to express our willingness
to receive any aid they may be able to render us.
mb. mowbray’s resolutions.
1. That the Synod renew their adherence to the
declaration of principles set forth on the 3rd October,
1844, respeciing the sole Headship of the Lord Jesus
Christ over his Church, respecting the spiritual inde-
pendence claimed and enjoyed by this Church, and re-
specting its supreme and independent jurisdiction in
spiritual things ; and declare their unaltered attachment
to these principles, and firm determination as a Church
of Christ to maintain them, and in all circumstances to
act in strict accordance with them.
2. That in the important charge, with which they
have been entrusted, of administering the ordinances of
Christ and preaching His Gospel in this land, it is their


earnest desire to secure the support and co-operation of
every faithful and evangelical Church throughout the
world, that adheres to the same standards and main-
tains the same form of worship and discipline.
3. That they rejoice that, inasmuch as they are ex-
empt from the evils of patronage and other causes of
secession in the Mother Country, they are in such a
position as enables them to invite and warrants them
to expect such support and co-operation.
4. That, inasmuch as the present designation of the
Synod is known to be offensive, on various grounds, to a
great portion of its ministers and members, and is apt to
convey to others an erroneous view of its position, and is
thereby calculated to hinder that union and co-operation,
which it is the earnest desire of this Synod to secure and
maintain, they resolve that, instead of the clause, “in
connexion with the Established Church of Scotland,”
the words, “ adhering to the Westminister Standards,”
be substituted.
5. That the Synod during the present session resolve
itself into a committee of the whole house, to prepare a
draft of a bill, embodying the change resolved on, and
other amendments of the Temporalities Acts, in accor-
dance with former resolutions, and also to determine
what steps shall be taken, in order to render the appli-
cation to the Legislature successful.
Protest read in the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scot-
land, on the 10th October, 1843.
We, the undersigned ministers and elders, members of
the Synod of Australia in connection with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland,
Considering that the Synod, having resolved to re-
main in its present connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, and to retain its present designa-
tion unchanged, does thereby declare its approval of the
submission of the said Church to the encroachments of
the Civil power on her spiritual independence and the
liberties of her constitution, and thus concurs in the re-


nunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s sole and sovereign
Headship, which that submission involves,
And Further, Considering that, in virtue of the
connection with the Established Church of Scotland
which the Synod has resolved to maintain, —asserted as
that connection is, not only in the designation of the
Synod, but also by the Bond of Union entered into by
the ministers and elders who united in forming the said
Synod, wherein it is set forth, that they engaged, in every
part of their future conduct towards each other to act
in strict conformity to the laws of Christ, and of the
Scottish Church, declared anew their adherence to the
doctrines of the Confession of Faith, and promised that
in the exercise of discipline they should follow the laws
of that Church, so far as applicable in this colony,—the
unscriptural principles on which the government of the
Established Church of Scotland is now administered, ac-
cording to which the civil courts are invested with
power to coerce the judicatories and individual members
of that Church in the exercise of their spiritual func-
tions and duties, and, otherwise to interfere authorita-
tively in spiritual matters, and Presbyteries are autho-
rised and empowered to disregard and overbear the voice
of the people in the formation of the pastoral relation,
are virtually adopted by the Synod; and the govern-
ment and discipline of the Colonial Presbyterian Church
under its superintendence are liable to be subjected to
the operation of those principles.
We, therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid,
do protest, that the Synod, by its concurrence in the
renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s Headship as
aforesaid, has placed itself in a position at variance
with the word of God, and with the standards of
the Church of Scotland in their true and original import,
and incompatible with the discharge of its great duty as
a witness to Christ.
And we Protest Further, that, by the adoption
of the principles aforesaid, the constitution of the Synod
has been so changed, that the government of the church
cannot be conducted in accordance with it, without
violating the laws of God, dishonouring the Great King
and Head of the Church, and invading the rights of the
Christian people.


And Finally, while wo reserve any right, we, or any
of us, or of such as may adhere to us, possess to the
whole, or any portion of the property, held in behalf of
the Synod of Australia in connexion with the Established
Church of Scotland, we protest that, the Synod occu-
pying such a position, and having adopted such princi-
ples, it is. and shall be lawful for us, and such other
ministers and elders as may concur with us, to withdraw
from the Synod, and take such steps as may be compe-
tent to us and necessary for dispensing the ordinances of
the Gospel, and administering the affairs of the Church
in this land, agreeably to the mind of Christ and to the
standards and constitution of our Church ; and we do
now withdraw accordingly.
BOND OF UNION SIGNED BY THE MINISTERS AND
ELDERS WHO FORMED THE SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA IN
CONNECTION WITH THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF
SCOTLAND.
We, Ministers and Elders, whose names are under-
uniting ourselves together in the Synod of Aus-
tralia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, do bind and oblige ourselves to pass over and
bury in oblivion all matters, which, in time past, have
been the subject of mutual complaint and accusation,
and engage, in every part of our future conduct towards
each other, to act in strict conformity to the laws of
Christ and of the Scottish Church, We declare anew
our adherence to the doctrines of the Confession of
Faith, and to the other Standards and Formularies of the
Established Church of Scotland, and promise that, in the
exercise of Discipline, we shall follow the laws of that
Church, so far as applicable in this colony : and, what-
ever may be our individual opinions, will, so long as we
are members of the Court, submit ourselves to the judg-
ments and determinations of the majority of our number,
regularly met, and sitting in Presbyteries and Synod.
Given under our hand, at Sydney, on the fifth day
of October, 1840,
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, HIGH-STREET, WEST MAITLAND.




» f
