







NARRATIVE OF THE LOSS OF THE ERIG WOODLARK,*
ON THE 18th OP APRIL, 1828, WITH THE SUFFERINGS OF HER CREW FOR
TWENTY-SIX DAYS. BY THE MASTER.
The brig Woodlark, being chartered from Hobart Town to the
Cape of Good Hope, left that port on the 24th of March, 1828, and as
the winds (on her entrance to Bass’s Straits) were favourable, it was
thought probable the vessel might reach sufficiently to the westward of
King's Island, to ensure her arriving by the southern passage at her
place of destination. We had not, however, proceeded above two de-
grees to the westward of the Straits, when there arose hard gales from
the north-west and west, which continued for nine or ten days, and
Dlew at times with such violence, as to render it useless for a vessel of
her description, to contend longer against them, and we were at length
compelled to bear up for the passage round the north end of the island,
called Torres’ Straits. On the 17th of April, at noon, we were in la-
titude 23* 17 S- longitude, by observation, 153° 36'E. the weather
fine and moderate; but as the wind was to the northward of east, we
were unable to take the usual passage outside Wreck Reef, where the
Porpoise and Cato were lost some years since, except by working to
windward, which would have occupied nearly two days; we therefore
* We annex an outline of the localities referred to in this narrative, with the double
view of assisting the reader to trace the course of the shipwrecked party, and to point out
to the navigator a track so hazardous and so often fatal.


chose the passage, which is laid down in Flinder’s charts nearly a
hundred and thirty miles wide, between Wreck Reef and the Barrier
Reefs. We steered for the middle of this passage on the night of the
17th, and were running at the rate of six or seven knots, when at three
on the morning of the 18th, the brig struck on a coral reef with such
violence, that in a few minutes the rudder was unshipped ; both quar-
ters bilged, and all hopes of saving the vessel entirely abandoned. The
preservation of our lives (in number twenty-four) was our first anxious
thought, for which the only chance was our long-boat, of twenty-two,
and jolly-boat, of sixteen feet long : but the uncertainty of our situa-
tion was increased by the absence of daylight, and the sea made a
thorough breach over the vessel, while each succeeding surf lifted her
nearer to the edge of the reef, where it broke with such violence as to
render it doubtful if she would hold together till daylight; the danger
of lowering our boats was too apparent. We continued in this awful
state of suspense until twenty minutes past three, when a heavy sea
struck the jolly-boat and washed her entirely away from the stern.
To describe our feelings at being thus deprived of one of our prin-
cipal means of escape would be difficult; but we endeavoured to con-
sole ourselves in the certainty that our long-boat was still preserved to
us on the booms, although known to be incapable of carrying more
than two-thirds of our number. All our attention was now turned to
providing this boat with what provision we could come at: an eight
gallon keg of water, a large stock of bread, beef, wine, beer, a chrono-
meter, sextant, small arms, and ship’s papers; these, with the boat’s
masts and sails, together with about eight hundred pounds in cash,
were hastily collected and put into her. It was intended that the
passengers (among whom were two females, and an infant about ten
months old) and part of the crew, should have taken to the boat, while
the master and the remaining hands should remain for the purpose of
constructing a raft, upon which they were to depend for their preser-
vation, being at this time, either through some inaccuracy in the chro-
nometer, or unaccountable mistake in the reckoning, under the delusive
idea that the brig was on the Barrier Reef, and consequently not more
than from ninety to a hundred miles from the coast of New Hol-
land ; and this idea doubtless gave strength to our efforts during our
subsequent progress of seven days to the main land. At length, we
succeeded in getting the long-boat over the side, and waited the fa-
vourable moment for lowering her down, when, as if to complete our
misfortunes, a heavy surf upset the boat and carried it (with those who
were in it) more than the brig’s length up on the reef. Thus we were
in one minute deprived, not only of every article which we had pro-
vided for our use and subsistence, but also of the possibility of pro-
curing any thing more from the wreck, which was now fast breaking up
by the violence of the surf.
Deprived as we were now of our last resource, and unable, from the
darkness, to ascertain the fate of the boat or its crew, no common de-
gree of exertion might be thought requisite to prevent our total aban-
donment to despair; and yet it is but justice to say, that this and our
other fast accumulating misfortunes, were met by a cool and determined
spirit of resistance. The appearance of daylight at length discovered
to us the awful reality of our forlorn and hopeless condition : we found


we had struck on the edge of an extensive coral reef; our companions
were providentially preserved, though much injured from the bruises
they received, and were clinging to the boat, turned bottom upwards
on the reef; near to the boat, and directly a-head of the brig, we per-
ceived a small rock, about twenty feet in diameter, affording the only
prospect of a dry footing we could discover in the whole extent of the
reef. The masts were now cut away, and to this rock, as our next
step towards preservation, we directed all our exertions, and here the
hand of Providence appeared in our favour, and we all succeeded in
reaching (through a heavy surf) this much desired spot about noon,
when we immediately commenced collecting all the spars, rigging, and
such articles as chance threw within our reach, and that might be ser-
viceable to us in the construction of a raft, upon which we had now
determined to seek such part of the main land, distant about two hun-
dred miles from us, as the mercy of the winds might drive us to, but
which (when completed) was found incapable of bearing more than half
our number. Our shattered long-boat was now thought of, and it was
hauled under the lee of the rock, when, on examination, her bottom
was found to have two large holes in it; all her planks were torn from
the stem on both sides, her gunwales were stove in, and she was des-
titute of mast, oars, sail, or any one thing belonging to her; and indeed,
in such a worthless state was she considered, that she was at one time
actually cast adrift from the rock, and only recovered by the pruden-
tial foresight of one of the crew.
Here it may be permitted to remark, the fortunate circumstance of
the brig striking in the spot she did, for had she taken the ground a
cable’s length in a contrary direction on either side, not a soul could
have been saved. The preservation of the boat’s crew, the recovery of
the boat itself, and the discovery of a resting-place for nearly the
whole of us, are certainly instances of the kind interposition of a Pro-
vidence which extended its guidance to us through the perils and pri-
vations we were yet destined to endure. In this exti'emity, the long
boat again occurred to us as affording a remote possibility of supplying
the place of the raft; and having hauled the boat upon it, she was, by
means of a few nails the carpenter had luckily saved in leaving the
wreck, with some pieces of copper ripped from a part of her, and a tar-
paulin frapped round her bows, strengthened with an iron hoop down
the stem; and principally through the exertions of the chief-mate
(Mr. Ryan), she was patched up in such a manner as promised to our
joyful surprise (by continued baling) to answer the object. Night,
however, closed upon our labours, when it was agreed that we should
remain in our present situation till the following morning. Thus were
seventeen* human beings, destitute of water or food, at the distance of
nearly two hundred miles from the land, confined to the narrow limits of
a small rock, whose foundation trembled under us at low water with the
violence of the waves, while the sea breaking over us continually
during the night, exhausted our strength, and left us without a hope
but that of daylight. This hope, however, which assists us in our
most trying adversities, lent its influence to support us on this occasion.
* The rock we were in possession of not having room for all our crew, seven of them
passed this night on the long-boat, hauled upon the raft, under the lee of the rock.


during hours of which none but those circumstanced as we were can
imagine the anxious suspense.
Daylight of the 19th at length appeared; and after surveying the
wreck, in the vain hope of procuring some article of food or use, we
left our solitary place of refuge in two parties; eighteen in the boat
and six upon the raft, there being apparently no preference given to
the choice of conveyance. We had now fasted nearly forty-eight
hours, when a sheep, which had been caught in its attempt to swim
from the wreck, was killed, its blood collected in a bucket, and with
this, by means of our hands, we tried to appease our excessive thirst,
while the mutton was divided between the raft and the boat, in pro-
portion to the number on each. With the boat’s bottom boards for
oars, a broken oar for a mast, sail made by stitching a white table-cloth
to a piece of canvass, a compass and quadrant, and without a rudder, the
long-boat proceeded with the raft in tow. This latter had a top-gallant
studding sail boom secured as a mast, with the sail to assist them, and
with fine weather and a fair wind, with the intention to steer directly
before it, varying at times from N.E. to S.E. we entertained hopes of
reaching the land in forty-eight hours, but were doomed to experience
in this, as in many other instances, the misery of disappointment. In
about an hour, we succeeded in clearing the numerous small rocks,
with which these reefs abound, and at noon, with the wreck still in
sight, steering W.S.W. we obtained an observation of the sun, by
which we were in lat. 21° 62' S. Our progress was now at the rate of
about two and a-half miles an hour, with all the advantages of mode-
rate breezes, smooth water, and a clear atmosphere.
At midnight the breeze began to freshen and caused a ripple of a
sea, which made the boat feel the heavy weight of the raft in tow,
and at length (the wind still freshening) it tore away the thwart to
which it was made fast: it was then secured to the stern-port of the
boat, which it started, and at times shook with such violence, as to
threaten destruction to us all. A sense of self-preservation now com-
pelled us to cast off the raft, but with the impression at this time that
there was nothing between us and the main-land, which we hoped
they would reach as safely as those in the boat. The following night
convinced us of our error. In about an hour after we had cast off, we
lost sight of the raft entirely, and when daylight broke, not a vestige
of her was to be seen, though probably not more than two or three
miles from us. We kept on our course through an open smooth sea,
baling the boat, without intermission, during the whole time we were
in her, and beginning to feel the want of water, without hunger suffi-
cient to oblige us to eat the raw mutton, which had now become too
offensive to keep in the boat. From the excessive heat and thirst we
found considerable relief by pouring salt water over the head and neck,
and this practice was continued each day afterwards.
On the approach of the night of the 20th our fears and anxiety re-
turned, nor would our spirits permit us to break the silence which
prevailed, or hazard a conjecture of what might be the fate of our fel-
low sufferers on the raft.* It may be mentioned, that by this time we
* We never saw nor heard more of them, but afterwards concluded they must have
perished on the Barrier Reef.


had contrived to make something in the shape of a rudder, of which we
had long felt the want, with no other instrument but a pocket knife.
The stillness of the scene was broken about midnight, by a voice call-
ing out breakers a-head, which we distinctly perceived to stretch on
both bows, as far as the eye could reach. By lowering the sail and
making good use of our paddles, the boat was got round and kept clear
of them ; but when daylight appeared, our hopes of land also vanished,
and we found that we were among a range of reefs, consisting of sunken
rocks and low sand banks, extending in all directions, except from the
eastward, as far as we could discern.* The water was smooth, but
with some difficulty, and after grounding several times, we effected a
passage through, and about two p.m. we landed on a small sand-bank
in search of shell-fish, or any thing which promised relief to our exces-
sive thirst. A few boobies’ eggs here rewarded our search ; and repul-
sive as they might have been to less tired appetites, to us they proved
a most grateful though slender repast, affording great relief to our
thirst and parched throats, having been now four days without food or
water. It was here proposed to rest our weary limbs, stiff and cramp-
ed from the crowded state of the boat, for the night; but this was
overruled, a fine breeze and smooth water proving too much encourage-
ment to be lost, and after putting two or three birds in the boat for
the sake of the moisture their blood afforded, we left this (to us wel-
come spot) under better strength and hopes than the morning had held
out to us. We had a fine little breeze during this night ; which
passed a little more cheerfully with us than the former ones. The
moon now in its quarter began to be of considerable service to us, by
its light enabling us to see the compass, and dispelling much of that
gloom which the darkness, combined with our destitute situation, was
calculated to impress on our minds. We had also some hopes of seeing
the land in the morning ; but when the dawn of the 22d appeared with
a bright rising sun and a clear horizon all round, strongly visible was
the feeling of disappointment in every countenance, and which nothing
but the well-founded hope and assurance that another day would bring
us in sight of it could destroy ; and as the sun gained its reviving
power to dry our clothes, we renewed our usual attempts at cheerful-
ness, some telling anecdotes of former ships ; but not the least inter-
esting object of our amusement was the little infant, who, though de-
prived of its usual nourishment from the weak state of the mother,
submitted to these hardships with a playful smile, not a little calcula-
ted to produce resignation among those more conscious of their future
prospects. About noon this day we found ourselves in shoal water
again, among sunken rocks so thick that we were obliged to get out of
the boat to lighten her and assist her through them: this, in our ex-
hausted state, proved how little exertion we were capable of, if we had
met with a repetition of these difficulties. This part of the reef we
were on lies in latitude 21° 41' S. by which we found the current had
been setting us to the northward ; for we had been steering W.S.W.
with the intention of making the coast as far to the southward as pos-
* This must have been the Barrier Reef, from the distance we afterwards ran to the
main land.


sible; Morton Bay being at this time about four hundred miles
from us.
Having at length got entirely through the reefs with which this
coast is surrounded, we proceeded to the westward during the night
with little change of scene but that which every two hours afforded,
by relieving the helm and look-out, which station was now much
sought after, as giving occupation to the mind.
Our hopes of the land were not disappointed, while the anxiety
painted in tyich countenance, as the twilight slowly announced the
rising sun, would have been a subject of mirth to men differently situ-
ated to ourselves, and perhaps not less so to have witnessed the joy
among us, as the sun cleared away the mist of the night, on discover-
ing the high mountains of New South Wales, with a number of small
islands, called the Northumberland Islands, between us and the main-
land.
It was quickly resolved to make for the nearest of these islands,
which we succeeded in reaching about six o’clock p.m. but in such an
exhausted state, that when we were within five or six miles of
it, it fell a calm, and though (by our exertion at the paddles) we
gained considerable ground, they were at one time laid in, and the
boat left to drift as it might, while we rested to regain strength to
renew the exertion.
On landing at this spot, the island proved to be a barren rock, co-
vered slightly with furze and grass, but without any thing in the shape
of food to relieve our hunger, and our disappointment at not getting
water reduced us nearly to despair. We succeeded, however, in find-
ing a sandy bay for the boat; and having secured her for the night, we
turned our whole attention to digging wells in the sand, above the
high water-mark, in the hope of finding fresh water. We had no wea-
pons but our hands for this purpose, but we continued digging in dif-
ferent places till near midnight, at times tasting the moisture of the
soil as we got deeper into it (to discover if it was fresh or salt), when
the search was relinquished as hopeless, and we threw our weary
limbs on the sand in silent sorrow, seeking relief from our unpleasant
feelings in rest and sleep. This we enjoyed in its fullest extent, and
at daylight in the morning we found ourselves much refreshed, and
prepared to start for the main-land, about nine or ten leagues from us.
The boat’s sail was repaired a little for the better, a branch of a tree
was cut for a yard, which before consisted of two sticks lashed together,
and we left this bay about noon of the 24th in hope of reaching the
main land before dark.
There was, however, some luck in store for us exceeding our most
sanguine expectations; the boat was in the act of rounding a small
point of this island, when a rocky spot was observed on it, covered
with shell-fish, which we soon found to be rock oysters ; here we
landed, and in less than five minutes a black man (one of our crew),
who had been attracted to a height on the rock, almost inaccessible, by
the circumstance of a crow flying from it, called out Water! Water!
which he had discovered in a cavity of the rock, in such purity and
abundance, that it is doubtful if any one of us have since enjoyed a
happier hour than we did over the feast which Providence seemed to
have provided for us; for it is to be remembered, that we had been
U. S. Journ. No. 10, Oct. 1829. 2 f


since the 17th without one drop of water, and all our food since that
day consisted of a few boobies’ eggs, and the raw liver of the sheep,
which those in the boat used (when they chose) to moisten their parched
palates, in preference to a resource which two or three had recourse to
under this trying extremity.
After finishing our repast, and filling a small keg which we had saved,*
holding about seven gallons of water, we gathered a quantity of the
shell fish into the boat, and left this delightful spot; when, after a night
passed in comparative comfort to our former ones, we landed about
nine, on the following morning, on the main-land, near Cape Clinton,
in latitude about 22° 30' S. We beached the boat here in a snug
sandy cove; and, on landing, our troubles and necessities all seemed to
be at an end, so much preferable did our situation appear to be, even
on a wild barren coast, to the anxiety we had felt while only depend-
ing on our wreck of a boat. Our party divided themselves in search
of water, or whatever the country might produce; and in less than two
hours we all met together again by the boat, some having found fire,
which was obtained from a spot the natives had been burning: and
though we followed in silence the sound of what we supposed to be
wood-cutting, in the hope of cultivating their good-will, they disap-
peared with shrieks of terror the instant we broke upon their view.
A rivulet of water had also been discovered about a mile from us; and
to crown our success beyond example, one of the crew had discovered
a native dog devouring an emu, and seemingly just after having
caught and killed it. The hungry animal was quickly driven from his
prey, after having eaten the best part of one of the bird’s legs, and our
prize was shouldered down to us amidst a shout of joy and satisfaction
more easily conceived than described.
A fine blazing fire was quickly kindled, the emu skinned and clean-
ed, the sound leg (which weighed equal to a good sized leg of mutton)
was laid apart, to be roasted for our future support in the boat, which,
that we might enjoy the feast at our leisure, was hauled well up on
the beach, and the compass-box (which happened to be brass), divested
of the card, was converted into a kettle for cooking. We had still
one piece of the mutton in the boat not much the worse for time, with
which and our emu, and a species of wild lettuce and beans, found
along the beach, a most sumptuous meal was provided for all hands,
the mate standing cook, and providing for four at a time, as many as
our cooking-vessel was adapted for. We indulged ourselves here in
all the luxury this place had so unexpectedly supplied us with; and
after naming it Emu Bay, and filling our vessel with water, we took
our departure from hence to resume our journey along the coast for
Morton Bay.
The fine weather we now had, with a fair wind, was very much in
our favour; and the progress we made this night to the S.E. gave us
great hopes of reaching this settlement in three or four days, though
ignorant how far we were from it, and only knowing there was such a
colony from the fact that one of our crew had been there in a colonial
vessel three years before. In the morning we landed again, in a place
we called Desolate Beach (from its general appearance in the short
This keg had been the half of our life-buoy, with one head out.


range we had of it); and we left it without finding any thing to assist
us in the continuance of our voyage. This was the 26th of April, and
our fare consisted, on this and the following day, of the skin of the emu,
which we had boiled for breakfast; and the roasted leg served eighteen
of us for four meals, with about a pint of water per day to each person ;
so that on the evening of the 27th we found ourselves again out of pro-
visions and water, though it had been distributed out, by general consent,
in the most sparing degree the quantity would admit of. This season-
able supply had, however, strengthened us, and enabled us to bear the
privation of food and water during the time it appeared we were again
destined to be without it.
Continuing our course until the 29th, hugging the land by night
and stretching off in the day-time, and assisted by winds too favourable
to be lost by landing in search of food ; we were at last induced to land
in a fine bay near an opening, which had all the appearance of a river,
and is marked in Capt. Plinder’s charts as Bustard Bay. This spot
we found to be in latitude 24° 18' S. but is laid down in the chart in
24° 10' S. although the run of the coast about here is laid down correctly.
We immediately made for this imaginary river, and without stopping
at its mouth, proceeded a considerable distance up, when, to our great dis-
appointment, it proved to be salt, and in the end turned out to be a salt-
water lake, about five or six miles in extent. In about an hour we again
experienced a remarkable instance of good fortune; in our general search
round, two wells, which had been dug by the natives, were discovered,
so small, and in such an obscure situation, that it was a matter of as-
tonishment to us all how they were found. We slept on the sandy
beach this night, sheltered only by the canopy of heaven; and in the
morning at daylight, to our great mortification, we found the wind
from the S.W. with a settled steady breeze. Here again our distresses
seemed to excite pity from the ever-bountiful hand of Nature ; for on
renewing our search for food, as some of our party were crossing the
lake above-mentioned at low water, the bank chosen for a passage
over was found to abound in small oysters; and as nothing else had
promised us support but a kind of wild sorrel and a dry hard bean
which grows spontaneously along the coast, the news of this discovery
was hailed as a continuance of the protection of that Power which had
hitherto supported us, and inspired us with a well-founded hope of its
assistance to the end of our difficulties.*
On this bank, then, did we assemble for our-daily sustenance, about an
hour each day at low water, our feet torn or cut by the rocks, without
shoes, and a very slender covering to shelter us from the heavy rains
which poured upon us during the night; thus we spun out an existence,
now become desirable only for the sake of objects dear to us all, from the
various ties of nature by which we were bound to them. This state of
things continued until Tuesday the 6th of May, without any circum-
stances worthy of observation. A thought at times occurred to some of
us to relinquish our boat entirely, as each morning added to our disap-
pointment at finding no change of wind, and make an attempt to reach
* Being destined to pass a whole week here by the southerly winds, may justify this
remark; for, the whole coast about here being sandy, it is very doubtful if we should
have found a similar resource within many miles on either side of it.


Morton Bay over land. This proposition, however, luckily met with
little support; for, with the mountains, bays, and rivers to oppose
us, it is next to impossible we could ever have succeeded in reaching
it. On the morning above-named, we were gratified, for the first time
since our arrival here, by observing two natives crossing over from the
opposite side of the lake; and on two or three of us approaching to-
ward them,* they appeared very friendly, and supplied us with fire,
which we had now been without for eleven days, although all our in-
genuity had been frequently exerted to procure it. In the course of
the morning their number increased, including women and children,
and seeming to us to subsist by their dogs and a small circular net for
fishing. The men were armed with spears, while the younger part of
them carried a small waddy, with which they began to amuse them-
selves by beating against the trees to a kind of song and dance, all
which we appeared to be much pleased with, being of necessity inclined
to be peaceable with them, and to encourage a good feeling toward us,
if possible but about noon they began to increase, and shortly after
had collected around us, from various directions, in such numbers, as
to assume a formidable appearance, if they should prove to be hos-
tile. They did not keep us long in doubt of their disposition ; for, after
sending away their women and children, about thirty of them assem-
bled together, and commenced plundering us of the few clothes we
had, first, by seizing the only two blankets among us, the property of
the women, then a red frock or cap attracted their attention ; and,
finding their propensity for any thing of this colour, we endeavoured to
satisfy them by tying a slip of red bunting from the remains of our
ensign round their necks : this seemed to excite great admiration
among them for a while, but would not satisfy, however, their rapacity ;
when a thought occurred that our quadrant might possibly have the
effect of checking them ; and when this was brought into motion, by
moving the index, and playing with the glasses, it had evidently the
desired effect, for they drew back alarmed, conversed with each other,
and eyed the instrument with a doubtful look, which clearly showed
their ignorance of its power.
Their motions now became rather suspicious in other respects, some
of them beginning to examine us by looking at our arms and legs, as if
to see if our skin was the same all over; but the particular notice they
took of the two poor women now began to call for our serious atten-
tion. Our female companions being seated on the boat’s sail, (which
had been brought here for security,) five or six of the barbarians
gathered round them; and from their significant actions, their in-
tention towards these unhappy creatures was but too visible. One of
them, Mary Finis, a girl about nineteen, (who was going to join her
parents at the Cape,) was so terror-struck at the prospect before her,
that she begged of some of us to lend her a knife to cut her throat, —
an act she doubtlessly would have executed, had it been in her power :
they even went so far as to attempt to drag them away by force, but
this was strongly opposed by one among us, to whose prudent conduct
on this occasion these females have since acknowledged themselves
indebted for their safety.
* Care was taken to have the only one of their colour we had among us the first to
introduce to them ; and this man was found faithful and useful to us in many respects.


From all these circumstances, we considered ourselves in a critical
situation, and resolved to take to the boat with any wind, in preference
to remaining among our new acquaintances, who, by their private con-
versation and mysterious manoeuvres, now began to threaten us more
seriously. We accordingly took our leave of them, by shaking hands
and other expressions of politeness, which were doubtless thrown away;
but we were anxious to get clear of them on any terms, being without
arms, and incapable from weakness of making any defence, if they had
proceeded to violence for the sake of what little clothing still remained
among us.
Our boat was about a mile distant, and we chose the beach in pre-
ference to travelling through the bush; hut, just as we were congra-
tulating each other on our escape from these savages, we were sur-
prised to see them on the beach, about half-way between us and the
boat, having taken a short cut through the bush to get to the boat
before us. There happened to be a cloak lined with red on one of our
party, which they had previously endeavoured to get possession of
without success ; and this, with the boat’s sail, seemed to be their prin-
cipal object in following us. They now began to threaten us, by run-
ning before, and, on their knees, pointing their spears at us with one
hand, and stroking their beards with the other, seemingly with much
fury, and perhaps to terrify us into a surrender of what we held now
as dear to us as life—our boat’s sail. All this, however, we affected to
regard with indifference; and it proved in the end the best line of con-
duct we could have adopted. At length we reached the boat, and
having a few nails, the brass handle of a door, and other trifles of this
description, we divided these among them, in the hope of inducing them
to assist in launching the boat; for we found our strength so far gone
that we could not move her. Seeing this, one more benevolent than the
rest set the example, and they all suddenly threw down their arms,
and closing round our boat, she was quickly launched through the surf,
to their great amazement; and it was not until we were quite out of
reach of their spears, that we felt perfectly free from their violence,
which the least irritation would have brought upon us.
After leaving this spot, we were two days before we lost sight of it ;
without venturing to land, having water sufficient to give us about a
pint each person daily, but no food during this time; and we continued
our course until the 10th, when we landed in latitude 25° 8' for an
hour. Here we found water in a small hole in the rock, and also a
species of fruit common to this country, similar in appearance to the
pine-apple, drawing from the stalk in seeds like a pomegranate, but
with very little nourishment.
On Sunday the 11th, we found ourselves embayed in Hervey’s Bay,
formed by Sandy Cape to the southward, by which we lost one whole
day; and although the natives came down to the beach, and even up
to their necks in the water, offering us fruit and other marks of civility,
it was not thought safe to venture among them ;* and we proceeded
until near dark, when, seeing none of them near us, we ventured to
land, and again fortunately found a pond of fresh water, with a plenti-
* It does not appear, on the whole, that the natives of this part of New Holland have
any cannibals among them ; but they are treacherous, disposed to plunder, and would
not hesitate at murder to obtain their object.


ful supply of the fruit above mentioned. But about nine this night, we
were suddenly caught by a strong current, rapidly setting us among
the breakers on the spit off Sandy Cape ;* and this was probably the
most awful moment we experienced since the commencement of our
difficulties. One sea had already half filled the boat, and to lighten
her, our water and every thing we could think of was hove overboard,
when, at the moment our destruction seemed inevitable, and all hands
were probably in silent prayer, we found the current had set us clearly
through an opening of these breakers, the water smooth, and our boat,
as if by a miracle, fast drifting from them in the direction we were
bound. A short prayer of thanksgiving was now offered up to that
Being, whose power alone could have preserved us ; and we continued
our course along the land, our hopes strengthened by this additional
act of mercy, and daily expecting a sight of the settlement we were in
search of. Nothing occurred between this and the morning of the
14th, when at day-light we discovered three remarkable mountains,
known to b 6 near Morton Bay, called the Glasshouses. And about
8 a.m. we hauled in for an opening, which proved to be the entrance of
the Bay; and shortly after landed at Amity Point,f where a corporal
and four privates were stationed as an outpost to the settlement, about
fifty miles from this point, and thirty up the Brisbane river. We
received at Brisbane town every attention from Capt. Logan, 57th
regiment (the Commandant), and his family, which our exhausted situa-
tion required, and which the most delicate feelings of humanity could
point out as contributing to our recovery ; and from every individual
on the settlement did we receive some act of attention, according to
their respective means.
In ten days we found ourselves sufficiently recovered to proceed to
Sydney, in the Government schooner Alligator; and the Commandant
having ordered us a passage, supplied us all with clothing, and ten
days’ provision, being only four hundred miles distant from Sydney.
We left this hospitable spot on the 26th of May; but here again our
ill-luck seemed to pursue us, for we did not reach Sydney until the
21st of June, owing to strong southerly gales, making a voyage of
twenty-six days of one which is easily performed in three. On our
arrival here, His Excellency Gen. Darling was pleased to evince a con-
siderable interest in our misfortunes, by desiring no claim should be
made for the supplies we had received, and endeavouring to provide
employment for two or three among us, who were entirely thrown on
the world by their losses on this occasion.
On our arrival at Sydney, a subscription was entered into for the
relief of the crew, and the soothing hand of humanity otherwise ex-
tended to those who stood most in need of it, while the humane atten-
tions of Capt. Logan at Morton Bay, and the kindness displayed by
the Governor at Sydney, will ever impress our minds with feelings of
gratitude which time alone can eradicate.
London, July 26th, 1829.
* Few but seafaring men are aware of the nature of the surf caused by these sands,
having an interval of three or four minutes between each other, when they form and
break with great violence, and our boat was not more than eight inches out of the water,
t This is Cape Look-out in the Map.




