

NARRATIVE
OF THE
Wreck of the Tayleur,
AUSTRALLAN PACKET-SHIP;
WITH SOME
SERIOUS REPLECTIONS ARISINC THEREFROM.
Published wider the Direction[?]
The Committee of General Literature and Education ,
[?]ppointed by the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORIES:
77, GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Class 2.








NARRATIVE
OF THE
WRECK OE THE TAYLEUR,
AUSTRALIAN PACKET SHIP,
WITH SOME
SERIOUS REFLECTIONS ARISING THEREFROM.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
APPOINTED BY THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FO R THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORIES,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS ; 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE ;
16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


London:
James Truscott & Son, Suffolk-lane, City,
and Nelson-square.


THE
WRECK OF THE TAYLEUR.
Strangers travelling northwards by the
London and North Western Railway, in
the summer of 1853, were surprised, on ap-
proaching Warrington, to observe at no
great distance from the line a large iron
ship in course of building. An inland town,
situated on a river generally navigable to
that point only for barges and small coasting
vessels, seemed a strange place for the con-
struction of so large a ship; and many were
the inquiries and remarks made in conse-
quence by passengers on the line. Still
greater was the interest felt by the people
residing in the neighbourhood; and when
at length, towards the close of the autumn,
the hull of the noble ship was complete, a
dense fog and a drizzling rain did not hinder
a large number of spectators from collecting
to see the launch. The river Mersey at
Warrington is very narrow; but just at the
point where the Bank Quay foundry is
situated, at which the vessel was built, there
B


is a sharp bend in the river, which enabled
the keel to he laid in a line with the stream.
When launched, therefore, as it was with
perfect success at high tide, the stately ship,
looking all the more huge from the narrow
dimensions of the river, shot gracefully into
the water, and pursued its course straight
down the stream, followed by the cheers of
the assembled crowd. The ship was taken
down the river to Liverpool, and there re-
mained several months, for the purpose of
rigging and loading.
The new ship received the name of “ The
Tayleur.” She was intended for the Aus-
tralian trade, and no pains or expense was
spared to fit her for the conveyance of pas-
sengers. She was believed to be the largest
sailing merchant ship ever built in this
country, being of about 2,000 tons register,
but considered capable of carrying nearly
4,000 tons. Her total length was 250 feet;
breadth of beam, 40 feet; and draught with
a full cargo, 21 feet. The hull was of iron,
and her lower masts of the same material.
The utmost attention was paid in her con-
struction, both to form and to strength. Her
model was much admired for its combination
of capacity and speed; all the materials and
workmanship were of the very best descrip-
tion, and she was an amazingly strong vessel.
The health and comfort also of the passengers
were not overlooked in her fitting out; she


was very spacious and lofty, and remarkably
well ventilated. It was said by those who
visited the Tayleur, when complete, that she
was the model of what an emigrant ship
should be for a long voyage.
It was not till Thursday, the 19th of
January, 1854, that the Tayleur sailed from
the Mersey, with a living cargo of about
580 souls, including the crew, bound for
Melbourne in Australia. The passengers
were chiefly emigrants. There were less than
20 cabin-passengers; the rest, in number
about 490, were principally of the class of
mechanics and labourers; there were about
200 women, and many children aboard, and
several whole families. The great majority
had embarked their all. The officers and
crew numbered about 70.
A lively interest was still felt in the
Tayleur by those who had watched her
construction, and the peculiar circumstances
under which she had been built caused a
general and unusual concern to be felt in
her success. A safe, speedy, and pleasant
voyage was expected for her passengers; and
seldom has a ship sailed on her first trip with
warmer interest, or more favourable prog-
nostications. Under these happy auspices,
the ship Tayleur sailed from the Mersey
on the day above mentioned, at noonday.
Great was the consternation felt at Liver-
pool, when, four days only from the sailing
b 2


of the Tayleur, tidings reached that port
that the ship had been totally wrecked on
the coast of Ireland, with the loss of 300
souls.
The following particulars of the melan-
choly event are gleaned from the accounts
given by survivors :
The Tayleur left the Mersey, as has been
stated, at noon on Thursday, the 19th of
January. She sailed with a fine S. E. wind,
in tow of a steamer, which left her at seven
o'clock in the evening with every prospect
of a favourable course down the Channel.
At eight o’clock p.m. the ship was off Ho-
lyhead. But soon after the wind changed,
and during all that night, and the following
day and night, the ship was contending with
a strong adverse wind, and made but little
way. About eleven o’clock a.m. on Satur-
day, land was seen at the distance of five or
six miles. It was then blowing hard, the
sea running high, and the weather thick
and hazy. An hour after, the man on the
look-out at the bows, cried, “ Breakers on
the starboard bow! ” Land was then dis-
tinctly seen by many of the passengers, and
the ship appeared to be fast driving towards
it. Every effort was made to avoid the
threatened danger. The ship’s course had
been altered on the first appearance of land;
but still she drove towards the shore. The
anchors were now let go, but instantly parted.


To use the expression of one of the passengers,
a seaman, “The chain-cable snapped like
glass.” The ship fell off before the wind,
and, at a quarter-past twelve, struck with
great violence on a reef of rocks running
out from Lambay Island, near Dublin Bay.
The shock made the vessel quiver from stem
to stern ; she recoiled, and then rising on the
next wave, struck again, and drove broadside-
on upon the rocks. The sea now washed
completely over her, and soon the stern
began to sink, the ship gradually sliding
off into deep water. Meanwhile the scene
among the passengers was terrible in the
extreme. The first cry of “ Land ! ” had
alarmed many, but great numbers were still
below, and some in their berths suffering
from sea-sickness, until the very moment
when the ship struck. Some few, unable to
rise, were drowned in their berths, but most
rushed on deck. Here all was terror and
confusion. Hundreds were crowded together
on the deck of the sinking vessel, numbers
were still rushing up the hatchway, some
were casting themselves into the sea, in the
hope (in most cases vain) of reaching the
land, some frantically seeking husband, wife,
or child, and a few calmly devising means of
escape. The ship meanwhile lay so close to
the rocks, that some of the crew, a black man,
(one of the cook’s assistants,) two Lascars,
and three others, contrived to jump ashore.
b 3


By their means, ropes, and a spar or plank,
were got across from the ship to the rock,
by which a considerable number were saved.
These, however, could serve but few at a
time, and many were lost in crowding to
avail themselves of this means. All this
time a tremendous sea was breaking on the
rocks; and those who lost their hold of the
rope or spar, and those also who attempted
to swim from the ship, where dashed violently
against the rocks, and many thus lost their
lives. As the stern of the ship sank lower,
the people crowded to the head of the vessel,
which was high out of the water, —still the
waves often reached them, and each in suc-
cession carried off some; and so boisterous
was the raging element around, that it is
believed hardly any of these were saved,
though so close to the land. The ship first
struck at a quarter past twelve, and about
forty minutes after, slid off the rock and
went down stern-foremost in deep water.
The tops of her masts alone remained above
the surface, and only one man was saved in
the rigging; there he remained till the follow-
ing morning, when he was rescued by the
coast-guard.
The total number of persons aboard the
Tayleur when she left the Mersey Avas, as
has been said already, about 580, the num-
ber saved was 280, leaving about 300 who
perished. Very few of the women and chil


dren were saved. The captain of the ship
entreated all to take advantage of the ropes
and spar, put across by the seamen who had
got to shore; but the rough sea, dashing
many a strong man lifeless upon the rocks
before their eyes, terrified the women from
making the attempt, and few ventured. Of
the whole number of women on hoard, not
more than three are said to have been saved.
Amid this fearful general calamity, some
individual incidents were observed, possessing
a peculiar though melancholy interest. One
of the survivors, a first-cabin passenger, gave
the following account:
“ The doctor of the ship, a most noble
fellow, struggled hard to save his wife and
child. He had succeeded in getting about
half-way to the shore on a rope, holding his
child by its clothes in his teeth; but just
then the ship lurched outwards, by which
the rope was dragged from the hands of
those who held it on the lower rocks, and
was held only by those above, thus running
him high in the air, so that the brave fellow
could not drop on the rock. Word was now
given to lower the rope gently, but those
who held it above, let it go by the run, and
the poor fellow, with his child, was buried in
the waves: but in a short time he again
appeared above water, manfully battling
with the waves and the portions of the
wreck that now floated about him. He at
b 4


length swam to a ladder hanging by a rope
alongside the ship, and got upon it. After
he had been there a minute or two, his wife
floated close to him; he immediately took
hold of her, and dragged her on the lad-
der, tenderly parted the hair from her face,
and appeared to be encouraging her; but in
another minute she was washed from his
hold, and sank almost immediately. He then
got up again into the ship, and tried to get his
wife on shore, but they both perished. He
deserved a better fate.”
The same person made the following state-
ment :
“ The scene was now most truly awful. The
most desperate struggles for life were made
by the wretched passengers; great numbers
of women jumped overboard, in the vain hope
of reaching land; and the ropes were crowded
by hundreds, who, in their eagerness, terror,
and confusion, frustrated each other’s efforts
for self-preservation. Many of the females
would get half-way, and then become unable
to proceed further; and after clinging to the
rope for a short time, would be forced from
their hold by those who came after them.
Three women only out of 200 were saved.
One of these had got part of the way across,
when her legs fell, and she hung some time
by her two hands over the foaming waves ;
her husband then came on the rope, and
managed to assist her to the shore. Two


men came on shore with children tied to
their backs ; but of the whole who fell into
the water, not about five were saved.
“ I saw one girl, who, after falling from the
rope, managed to get hold of another, which
was hanging from the side of the ship, and
which she held on to for more than a quarter
of an hour, the sea every moment dashing
her against the side of the ship; but it was
impossible for us to lend her any assistance.
Some one got a spar out, by which several
got on shore, but it soon broke. And now
might be seen hundreds hanging to the
bulwarks of the ship, each struggling to get
on shore. I saw one young woman hanging
on the middle of the rope for some time by
her two hands, but those pushing to get on
shore soon sent her to her doom. The ship’s
stern now began to sink, the ship made a
lurch, and all the ropes were snapped asunder.
The scene now was most harrowing. Every
wave washed off scores at a time; we could
see them struggle for a moment, then, toss-
ing their arms, sink to rise no more. At
length the whole of the ship sank under
water; there was a fearful struggle for a
moment; and all, except two who were in
the rigging, were gone. The coast-guard,
who had been apprised of the wreck, now
came up, but all they could do was to
attempt to save the two who were in the
rigging. They managed to get a line to one
b 5


of them, by fastening two lines, at the end
of each of which was a piece of wood, to a
single line, and guiding it from the rock to
the spot where the poor fellow was, so that
he could reach it: they then dragged him
ashore. There was one fine young man left
on the top, hut they could not reach him ;
and when he saw them going away, his cries
were heart-rending. About two o’clock the
next morning, the coast-guard managed to
reach him, after he had been in the top
fourteen hours.”
Some of the seamen behaved nobly in
trying to save others. One, named Patrick
Bailey, had his arm broken in two places in
his efforts to save a female passenger; another,
named Higgins, received a severe hurt in the
leg while similarly employed. Some French-
men among the crew signalized themselves
by very gallant conduct. One of them suc-
ceeded in saving a little child two years old.
He had undressed to his shirt, intending to
swim; but, seeing so many die in the attempt,
he chose rather to try the rope. Just as he was
getting on to the rope, he saw the child lying
on the deck; he snatched it up, took hold of
it with his teeth, and carried it safe to shore.
This gallant action was witnessed by one of the
surviving passengers. The same gentleman
gives the following account of his own escape,
and of other incidents which he observed :
“ I went to the larboard side of the vessel,


that is to say, the side furthest from the shore.
I sat down for about half a minute, and made
up my mind to swim in rather a different
direction, in order to avoid the dead bodies.
I then dropped quietly down a chain into
the water, I had not swam above a couple of
yards, when I saw a boy about ten years old
clinging to a piece of wood ; I immediately
made up to him. He was crying, and told
me his mother was drowned. He said it was
of no use my trying to save him, for he should
be drowned. However, I was determined to
try, and accordingly took him by the collar,
and placed him on the top of a large spar,
and made him take hold of a piece of iron
which was standing out. I still had hold of
his collar with my right hand, and kept the
broken pieces of wood and spars off with my
left hand. It was then that I experienced
difficulties which required almost superhuman
efforts to overcome them. A heavy sea was
rolling over us every moment, large spars
threatening to crush us, and almost perpen-
dicular rocks, as black as death, staring us
in the face. Well, I was determined not to
have our heads dashed against the rocks, as
had been the fate of so many of my fellow-
passengers. As we neared the rocks, the
boy was washed off the spar, but I still had
hold of him. I put out my hand to save our
heads, and received a cut in the hand; but I
felt the land, and told the hoy we were saved.
b 6


But not so, for we were washed back again.
I made to land a second time, and was
washed back again. I tried a third time, and
was treated in the same way. I was making
toward the rock a fourth time, determined to
save the lad or die with him, when a spar
struck him on the right side of his head—the
side I had no control over —and entered his
skull; it knocked me under at the same time,
but I rose again, and a rope was thrown to
me, which I twisted round my arm twenty
times at least, and with the assistance of a
sailor clambered up the rock. I just got
there in time to see the whole ship go down.
1 found the captain had arrived before me :
he had swam ashore, and the two passengers
who assisted him out of the water were both
washed back again into the sea and drowned.
Several other people were washed back into
the sea, in the attempt to save life.”
The survivors found themselves on the
little island of Lambay, which lies not far
from the Bay of Dublin, distant about five
miles from Malahide and thirteen from
Dublin. Here they passed the night, suf-
fering greatly from wet and cold. Many
were severely cut and bruised, some had a
broken limb, and all were in a destitute con-
dition. It was not till the following day that
help arrived from the mainland. Every
kindness was then shown to the unfortunate
sufferers, numbers of whom had lost their all.


Many sad cases of bereavement had occurred.
One passenger had lost his mother, four
brothers, and six sisters: a German had lost
his whole family; another man told of the
loss of his brother, with his wife and four
children, and three sisters of the wife; a
whole family had perished together, consist-
ing of a husband, wife and several children.
This family belonged to the Society of
Friends, by whom their passage-money had
been paid. Most of the survivors returned
without delay to Liverpool, whence they had
so lately sailed, full of bright hopes.
Seldom has a shipwreck occurred which
excited deeper or more general concern.
The peculiar interest felt in the vessel, the
high expectations entertained of a prosperous
voyage, the fact that so many of the pas-
sengers had embarked their all with them in
search of a new home, the great sacrifice of
life, and the short space of time that elapsed
between the sailing from the Mersey, amid
cheers and good wishes, and the utter de-
struction on the rocks of Lambay, —all com-
bined to make the loss of the Tayleur widely
and deeply felt.
Various opinions were held as to the causes
that led to this fearful catastrophe. It was
alleged by many, that, notwithstanding all
the pains and expense bestowed on the ship,
she was yet deficient in some particulars.
The rudder was thought to be in fault by


some; the compasses by others; and some
laid the blame on the “running gear/’ the
ropes and blocks, which being new did not, it
was said, work freely. Some, again, com-
plained of the crew as insufficient for the
proper management of so large a ship ; and
others considered that there ought to have
been a fuller trial of her sailing qualities
before she was dispatched with such a
freight and on such a voyage.
It is not the writer’s intention to enter
upon this point. If there were ground of
blame in any quarter, it is well indeed that
inquiry should be directed to the subject, in
order to the avoidance of similar calamities
in future. The owners of emigrant ships lie
under a solemn responsibility of human life.
But, entirely apart from all such questions,
the thoughtful cannot but feel that there are
lessons of deep importance to be learnt from
such an event, and it is to these that the
writer would draw attention in a few con-
cluding remarks.
How striking an instance is here furnished
of the weakness of man’s best contrivances
against the powers of nature as directed by
God ! Here is a splendid ship, huge in size,
of scientific construction, and as strong as the
best materials and the most experienced skill
could make her, dashed to pieces on a rock,
like a child’s toy. Trace this vessel’s history
from the time when her keel was laid at


Warrington, to the moment when she was
cheered down the Mersey with her living
cargo; consider the thoughtful minds, and the
strong and skilful hands, that were employed
on her for months ; think of the various con-
trivances for strength and comfort so care-
fully and laboriously put together : let your
thoughts dwell on the tons upon tons of iron
that were dug, and smelted, and wrought, to
form her capacious sides; think of the clang
of hammer upon rivet resounding for weeks
and months; reflect on the intricate calcu-
lations of the designer, the sinewy strength
of the iron-worker, the nice art of the car-
penter, the taste of the painter, the ingenuity
of the rigger, all combining to make this
ship perfect ;—and then see this wonderful
specimen of human skill, a broken wreck
at the foot of the rocks of Lamhay. How
forcible a lesson is here taught against pride !
pride of reason, pride of skill, pride of fore-
thought, science and strength. For, granting
that there may have been defects, yet all these
had been displayed in the construction of the
Tayleur. What did all avail against the
force of wind and wave that drove the ill-
fated ship on the rocks ?
Again, there was not one of those who
perished, nor one who survived with the
loss of all, hut had set out on the voyage
with hopes and plans for the future. These
plans had probably been long considered


and discussed; friends had been consulted,
information sought, and no pains spared to
ascertain the right place to go to, and the
best way of going. It was not the project of
a day; the savings of years, perhaps, had been
devoted to this one object, and weeks and
months spent in preparation for the voyage.
Some there were among the passengers, who
had long struggled with adversity in the old
country, but hoped for better success in the
new; some young men expecting to get
rich quickly at the gold-diggings; some older
and more experienced in life, less sanguine
in their expectations, but still hoping to find
a fair field for bringing up a large and in-
creasing family. There was not one without
his own particular plan, his own individual
hopes and expectations.—How many plans
were upset, how many hopes disappointed,
when the Tayleur struck ! Many, it is to be
feared, had formed their plans with little
reference to the precept of St. James (James
iv. 13—15). “If the Lord will/’ had pro-
bably been in the thoughts of very few.
How striking a lesson to all, that “ye know
not what shall be on the morrow ! ”
A still more solemn truth is brought to the
mind by this calamity; “ There is but a step
between me and death.” (1 Sam. xx. 3.)
Hundreds of ships are leaving the port of
Liverpool continually for all parts of the
world ; hundreds arrive safely at their desti-


nation. It seemed little likely that it should
he otherwise with the Tayleur. Why should
the passengers in that fine ship think that
death was near? Yet, with regard to no less
than 300 of them, those words of David were
actually true, at the time when they sailed
from the Mersey \ there was then but a step
between them and death. Perhaps some out
of those 300 had made many voyages before,
and thought little of the perils of the sea; no
evil had befallen them in previous voyages, —
why should it now ? Yet, in the short space
of two days, all was over ! Often does death
come thus unexpectedly. David said, “ There
is but a step between me and death,” because
he knew that Saul sought his life; but in
many cases it is quite different. No danger
is perceived, no ground of apprehension
appears, death seems far off—when there is
hut a step between. “In such an hour as ye
think not, the Son of man cometh.” (Matt,
xxiv. 44.)
Of those 300 souls, who hut God can
tell how many were ready for so sudden a
call, how many unprepared ? They are gone;
their time of grace and trial came to a sudden
close j no change can now take place in them;
“ In the place where the tree falleth, there it
shall be.” (Eccles.xi. 3.) The mind dwells
with a sad and solemn interest on their case,
and shrinks from the inquiry, “ Where are
they ?”


But, reader, turn your thoughts into a
more profitable channel; from considering
their case, think of your own. Ask yourself,
“Where am/? in what state before God?
in what stage of spiritual progress? are my
sins forgiven? am I at peace with God? am
I ready?” Realise in your mind the awful
scene of the wreck, not to gratify a morbid
curiosity, but to receive through grace a
salutary impression. If you had lain sick in
your berth, and there had heard the hurried
alarm, or felt that fearful shock that shook
the vessel from stem to stern, what would
your feelings have been? Should you have
had a friend to flee to? could your heart
have gone up instantly to Jesus, in the con-
fidence of faith? trembling with fear, yet
knowing a helper was at hand, would your
first words have been such as theirs in the
storm of old, “ Lord ! save us, we perish?”
(Matt. viii. 25.) Or, on the other hand,
would a horrible dread have overwhelmed and
unnerved your soul? In that awful moment,
would the recollection of past neglect, and
the thought of death near, and God un-
reconciled, and sin unpardoned, have filled
you with dismay and despair ? With no
Saviour known and loved to flee to, no
promise for your soul to stay itself on, no
sweet witness of the Spirit within, no peace,
no trust, no hope,—is it thus that you must
have faced a sudden entrance into eternity?


Oil, reader! to one struggling with death m
the waves, how different must all things
seem from what they ever seemed hefoie.
No shutting out the truth then, no self-
deception, no putting off, —all is real, true,
quick, and imminent: that is the time tor
revealing the souks secrets.
Suffer the word of exhortation. All who
got on the rock were saved; hut not one
besides. Do you now, while the tempest of
God's wrath is restrained in mercy, set your
feet on the Rock, that, when the storm arises,
and the waves beat, you may be safe, i e
Rock of the soul is Christ Jesus. Lay hold
of Him, and stay your soul upon Him.
Never think yourself safe till then : yon are
not, and cannot be. But he who has a good
hope in Christ is like the wise man in the
parable, who built his house upon a ioc ,
“ and the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house ; and it fell not, for it was founded
upon a rock." (Matt. vii. 25.)
Oh I how earnest were these shipwrecked
people to reach the rock! how they struggled
for life. One lady, it is said, offered 3,000/.
to any one who would save her; timid women
trusted themselves to a rope or a spar,
thrown across the yawning chasm and shaken
by every wave that rolled; and men cast
themselves into the sea, to be dashed sense-
less on the rocks —all in the hope of saving


life. Reader, if you had seen all this, and if
you had witnessed, too, the earnest up-turned
face, and heard the frantic cry, of those who
had lost their hold of rope or spar, and were
struggling in the waves, you would have had
some idea how strong is the love of life, and
what desperate exertions men will make to
preserve it. None thought then of money or
goods, all former hopes and objects were now
absorbed in one; if that bare rock might but
be reached, if life might be saved, they asked
no more. No unconcerned spectator (if
such there could have been) would have been
in doubt as to what was their aim; their look,
their words, their whole conduct showed it,
there could be no mistake: these people were
striving for life. Oh ! how is it that men,
thus earnest for the life of the body, are so
careless about the life of the soul? When will
immortal beings learn the soul’s true value,
the unspeakable importance of life eternal!
Did they but feel for the soul as they do for
the body, in proportion to its worth, what
earnest zeal, what hearty endeavour, would
their whole conduct show! It would be plain
to every observer that the soul was their
great concern: salvation would be sought as
the one thing needful, —all things else would
freely be parted with for this “ pearl of great
price;” riches, honours, ease, pleasures, would
be as nothing to those seeking salvation;
their whole behaviour would show, —their


actions, their words, their very looks, —that
they were in earnest for eternity, that they
were seeking a country. (Heb. xi. 14.)
Dear reader, how is it with you ? Are you
in earnest ? are you putting your soul first ?
are you wrestling for life? are you striving
to enter in at the strait gate ! Ah! do not,
like thousands, care all for the body, and
nothing for the soul! Do not make the fatal
mistake of living for time, instead of for
eternity! Soon, soon will life be over, care
for it as you may: a little more buffeting
with the waves of an unquiet world, a little
more eager desire and bitter disappointment,
a few more years at most of “ vanity and
vexation of spirit,” —and all will be over.
But eternity, eternity , there is no end to that.
Oh ! put this solemn question to your heart,
“ What is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world and lose his own soul ? Or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul ?”
(Matt. xvii. 26.)
It is a noble thing to save life, —the life
of others. We admire the conduct of the
French sailor, the doctor, the passenger who
tried so hard to save the boy, and of all who,
whether successfully or not, exerted them-
selves for the safety of others. It was
something even to hold a rope, or stand at
the end of a plank, and lend a helping hand.
We almost envy the feelings of those who,
standing on the slippery rock, caught hold


of each exhausted and terrified person that
came within reach, and swung him up to a
place beside them. But how much more
noble a thing it is to be instrumental in
saving a soul! a soul that is of more value
than worlds, —a soul that must live for ever,
—that was in danger of eternal fire, but is
now redeemed from death, and made an
heir of glory. Oh, noblest of works! oh,
highest of human enterprises ! oh, greatest
honour that God puts on man, —to be the
instrument of salvation to a soul! Here is a
work that is indeed worth living for. When
kingdoms have fallen, when all things earthly
have passed away, when even those noble
actions that were on every tongue are
forgotten, when those once rescued from
death by the hands of others have at length
gone the way of all flesh, —these saved ones
will still live, this work will still endure;
augels rejoice over it, God is glorified by it!
Header, are you taking part in this work?
Standing on the Bock, are you stretching
forth your hand to help others ? yourself safe
in Christ, are you doing your utmost to
bring others to Him? It seems that all who
reached the place of safety began at once,
by a sort of instinct, to employ themselves
in helping others. While on the wreck, or in
the water, they could do little or nothing for
their fellow-sufferers; but, once on the rock,
they began to work in earnest. There is a


similar instinct of grace. Ilewlio has tasted
that the Lord is gracious, cannot but desire
that others should taste the same: the soul
that has obtained a saving interest in Christ,
longs that every soul shall have a share.
Is it so with you ? Have you this proof (for
it is a proof) that you yourself have passed
from death unto life ? Oh, I beseech you,
by the example of these brave men, by the
infinite worth of the soul as compared with
the body, by the misery of those who are
without Christ, by the free grace which has
made you to differ, by the mercies of God,
by the love of Christ,—think of those who
are perishing around you, tell them of Jesus
as the Rock of their salvation, stretch out a
helping hand to every soul within your
rGcicli
“ Brethren, if any of you do err from the
truth, and one convert him, let him know,
that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins.” (Jas. v.
]9, 20.) “ They that be wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; and they
that turn many to righteousness as the stars
for ever and ever/ (Dan. xii. 3.)
THE END.


London:
James Truscott & Sod, Suffolk Lane, City,
and Nelson-square.






