

NARRATIVE
OF AN
EXPEDITION INTO THE INTERIOR
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA
ALBERT FREDERICK CALVERT,
F.$S.. M.E., F.R.S.A., F.R.G.S.A.,
Leader of the Expedition.
PRINTED BY GILLINGHAM AND HENRY,
257, KENTISH TOWN ROAD, N.W.




NARRATIVE
OF AN
EXPEDITION INTO THE INTERIOR
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA
ALBERT FREDERICK CALVERT,
F.f.S., M.E., F.R.S.A., F.R.G.S.A.,
Leader of the Expedition.
bonbon:
PRINTED BY GILLINGHAM AND HENRY,
257, KENTISH TOWN ROAD, N.W.




To JOHN CALVERT,
(The Veteran Hold Miner,)
Author of “ The Gold Rocks,” “ The Universal Distribution of
Gold,” “ Cryptothemic Balance : Tri-Solar System,”
“ Genesis of Life,” Sfc., Sfc.
I dedicate these few humble lines to a man who has devoted his
whole life to science, and the greatest portion of the last sixty years to
investigating the question of the precious metal—in all its phases. There
are few ranges in the world where gold is to be found that he has not
visited, and he has gone deeper into the subject of the chemistry of
gold than anyone else. I agree with him in the condemnation of all
the thousand processes that have been put before the public up to the
present date by so-called inventors, which always result in such
disastrous losses.
He was the first discoverer of gold in Eastern Australia in 1836,
and also the re-discoverer of the rich gold outcrops of Western
Australia in 1847.
ALBERT E. CALVERT.
London.




NARRATIVE
OF AN
EXPEDITION INTO THE INTERIOR
NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA,
UNDER THE COMMAND OP
ALBERT E. CALVERT,
F.J.S., F.E.S.A., F.E.G.S.A.
Before giving a description of the North-West Australian Explora-
tion Expedition, I think it advisable to preface it with a brief
narrative of the work done previously for The General Exploration
Company, Limited.
Mr. John Calvert, in his various mining exploral ions in
company with Mr. Henry Heuland and others, became strongly
impressed with the wide-world distribution of the precious metals, and
after visiting North Wales and various other countries, where he
found the precious metal in every instance, he voyaged to Australia
for the express purpose of proving the existence of Gold by actual
personal observations.
He first discovered it in New South Wales, and afterwards in
New Zealand; but he had a great desire to verify the early Dutch and
Portuguese Maps referring to the AVestern territory of the
Australian Continent, where, about two hundred years previous,
certain districts had been clearly marked “ Terra Aurifera and
“Provincia Aurifera.” In 1846 for that purpose he fitted out a
vessel, and after having investigated the Western range of Tasmania
from Port Macquarie he cruised up the coast of "Western Australia.
He then went into the interior, following the course of a river north
of Shark’s Bay, and swerving to the N.E. came upon an auriferous
belt, in which the gold appeared on the face of the rock untouched by
human hand.
One outcrop was particularly rich, as specimens were knocked off
containing half gold and half quartz by weight.


*
During this expedition very great hardships were endured, and
horses and men perished one after the other, until at last the
indomitable leader made his way to the coast in the North and joined
his vessel at the appointed spot, Turtle Bay, having lost all his men
and leaving his last horse fifteen miles from the coast.
The bad state of the country, and great scarcity of water, and
also distrusting his own men, prevented him from returning at that
time.
At the Hull meeting of the British Association in 1853, he read
several papers relative to his discoveries of gold in Australia, in
which he claimed to be the first discoverer of gold in New South Wales,
and turning the tables upon Sir Eoderick Murchison, called him to
account for neglecting the gold in the Silurian Schists of North
Wales, that gentleman challenged him (Mr. Calvert) to show it
broken off the rock, which he afterwards did to the entire satisfaction
of Sir Eoderick and all present. In one of these papers he laid
particular stress on the fact that in Australia, and more particularly in
Western Australia, beyond the ancient coast workings of the
Portuguese, he found the blows of quartz untouched, just as Nature
had produced them, the only part of the world where they had escaped
the savage or the civilized miner; in fact, the very low type of the
Aboriginal is no doubt sufficient reason for their having escaped.
I his extraordinary rich find was again alluded to in his work,
“The Gold Eocks,” and again in his Scientific Conversazione of 1853.
The numerous mining engagements, together with opening gold mines
in South America, caused this extraordinary discovery to remain
untouched for many years.
On December 28th, 1887, in one of several letters written to the
“Times,” connected with gold in Wales, this treasure vein is alluded
to in the following words :
“ Some extraordinary and glorious evidences of packing occur in the
** Western ranges of Tasmania, also New Zealand and New Guinea, but
“in Western Australia I found the most wonderful evidence of the
“ surrounding country having been robbed to the benefit of a small area
“of about 50 yards, the gold being packed against a stop which had
“ arrested it during its charge while in solution. No bunch of gold I
“have ever seen in North or South America, or in any other part of the
“ world approaches in richness or value to this outcrop ; but, alas, no
water for nearly two hundred miles protects this bank of wealth
“up to the present time.”
Negotiations followed this last notice, and an offer was received


from a City firm to supply any sum up to £20,000 that might he
required for plant, outfit, and purchase of camels, to go in from the
Northern Kail way in South Australia, to bring hack the hulk of the
richest of the gold outcrop. This was intercepted by urgent letters
from Capt. C. J. E. Troup, who asked to have the preference of
allowing himself and friends to supply the necessary funds as a
speculation, taking half the produce for their share in the adventure.
A Syndicate was formed on these lines and an Agreement entered
into, dated June 4th, 1889.
Mr. Calvert, who is very much advanced in years, about this time
began to fail in health, and it was arranged that Mr. Frederick
Calvert and Mr. John Wallace should carry out the expedition, and that
Mr. John Clarke should supply all the animals required for draught,
and meet the plant, which was to be disembarked at a port in the
North. This arrangement was acquiesced in by the Syndicate, and a
printed circular issued by the Company to the shareholders to that
effect.
Under their joint supervision a very complete plant was manu-
factured and sent out—Clarke, true to time, met the consignment and
conveyed it, by stages, in company with John Wallace, to the depot at
Windjerkok, the appointed spot, -where Fred. Calvert, the head of the
expedition, was to join them.
bred. Calvert arrived in Australia, and it was arranged that when
certain moneys were paid into the Adelaide Bank to meet Clarke’s
contract and wages of men that he had hired for the purpose, that he
should start up to join John Wallace and take charge of the expedi-
tion across.
Although Mr. John Calvert called upon the Company under his
agreement to pay that money into the Adelaide Bank, week after
week, and I, myself, wrote to the Directors showing how one of the
best laid plans and schemes to carry out the object of the Convpany
would be jeopardized by the neglect and delay to pay that money,
still, from some cause or other, great delay ensued.
That delay was the cause of the entire collapse of the expedition
for that season. When at last the money -was paid into the Adelaide
Bank, Fred. Calvert started for Windjerkok, but Clarke’s men, thinking
they had been fooled, and being thoroughly worn out by the long
delay, -withdrew the relay of horses by which Fred. Calvert was to
travel the last three hundred miles into Windjerkok, and broke up


the camp. John Wallace dies, and no doubt the charringe and dis-
appointment of the disastrous failure might have had something to do
with it. Fred. Calvert returned more than disgusted with everybody
connected with the undertaking.
A man better fitted for the expedition perhaps could not exist,
born in Australia in the forties, splendid physique, and few could
come up to his standard, both as a bushman and a traveller.
In the meantime Mr. Calvert and myself, accompanied by a small
staff, had arrived in Tasmania, only to hear of the breakdown of all
the well laid plans ; he immediately applied to the shippers to charter
a small steamer to go round to the coast of West Australia and make
an attempt to bring out what he could.
Fifty pounds per day was demanded by the Tasmania Steam
Navigation Company, but the funds he had at his disposal would not
meet such a demand, nor would it start a new outfit, seeing that the
plant and provisions were hopelessly out of reach at Windjerkok for
that season. We then proceeded to Melbourne, but the shippers
declined to make an arrangement, unless at our risk, with the
impending strike, and on attempting to board the regular coaster for
Western Australia, two thousand men turned out to stop her leaving,
and Mr. Calvert got knocked down in the affray, and is still suffering
from a blow he received; the Riot Act was read, the Government was
paralyzed for the time being, and all locomotion and transit was at a
standstill. This closed the attempts for the season 1890.
The next attempt was to hire camels and go across from the
Adelaide side and fetch the gold, the treasure reef being very nearly
half way between the boundary line and the West Australian coast.
Negotiations fell through by delay, the camels being taken up for
other work.
Being a servant of the General Exploration Company I received
instructions from the Directors to proceed to Australia, with full
powers to deal for the camels and accompany them, and personally
superintend the expedition.
On my arrival at Adelaide 1 was too late, the camels having just
been engaged in other work.
At a meeting of the Directors in London it was arranged that I
should proceed to Roebourne in preference to my suggestions that I
should make my way to the depot at Windjerkok, where I should have
hired camels and gone in with the plant already in existence.


MR. JOHN CALVERT, F.Z.S.,
Mining Geologist.




Very much to my disappointment, I received instructions by wire
to proceed to Koebourne, and journey into the interior direct from
the North West coast, through some of the worst country that can
perhaps he found in any part of the world.
I proceeded to Eoebourne without any loss of time, and then my
trials and anxieties began. The season was far advanced, and to make
matters worse, the money that was to provide my expedition was
delayed; week after week I received telegrams to say it was coming,
and after a delay of over two months the money was at last sent, and
the season was almost at an end, in fact, after I had been a few days
on the road, I met numbers of natives coming towards the coast as
the interior was completely dried up.
Since I have returned Mr. Calvert has shown me a letter addressed
to the Company saying as they had delayed it so long, it was too late
to send the expedition this year, and requesting them to stay my
going into the interior, and to forward me sufficient money to meet
any engagements that I had entered into on the strength of the
cablegrams that I had received from the Company. In direct opposi-
tion to his letter the money was sent to me and I was too far advanced
in my preparations to break the engagements that I had entered into,
so there was nothing for it but to proceed.
One of the many difficulties that I had to encounter was the
excited state of nearly the whole community, from the Government
downwards, through the very extraordinary and exaggerated reports
that had been sent out from England, and had found their way into
the local papers, as to my intended plans, by which I became an object
of intense interest and was watched in everything I did.
I had already engaged a trusty companion, and upon careful
consideration I determined to send him on secretly in advance, by this
means dividing my expedition into two parts.
I found afterwards that it was quite as well that I had taken these
precautions, as I had many applications from men offering themselves
who were in fact nothing more than spies, and I had great satisfaction
in knowing that Mr. George Turner had got away without being
noticed. I had a very different fate ; from the starting all eyes were
upon me, and to a great extent I was followed and watched.
Having received information that the whole country was dried up
and there was not an atom of food for the horses, I engaged teamsters
to cart fodder to certain depots, which had been previously shipped


from Adelaide, as this uncanny corner of the globe does not grow
anything better than spinefix.
While waiting for the completion of my outfit I made several
excursions in various directions, not the least important of which was
my visit to the Nicol goldfield, twelve miles from Koebourne; here the
predominent associations were gold and ironstone, and many things
are at present in embryo, which no doubt time will develop. I attach
some importance to this outcrop as helping to show the wide distribu-
tion of the precious metal over such an extensive area, and during my
expedition I passed over hundreds of miles of country where the
colour of gold could be obtained in the dish, without the aid of science
for selection, proving that the whole country is saturated with gold
to a very great extent.
I started from Roebourne on Thursday, the 18th of September,
1891, and journeyed due east. The first thing of interest that we
came upon was a copper mine, which had made a great show' on the
surface through the decomposition of the true lode, and making into
the limestone a beautiful green carbonate.
Someone from London had recently visited this place, but not being
able to find the true lode, through not understanding the natural
order of things, which very few of these self styled experts know
anything about, had condemned the property ; the lode was there all
right, and a strong one too, but they didn’t know how to look for it.
Continuing our journey we came to Mallina. This district is
highly charged with gold, more or less associated with antimony; this
mine has been worked by inefficient means and inefficient brains, and
although they had millions within reach, for want of the proper
metallurgical knowledge, mother earth still hoards its treasure; yet up
to the present time, for the reasons already given, the success has
been meagre, but the owners are holding tight to the property, in
hopes of better days, as they have a great idea as to its value.
We now come to Egina, which has been worked after the half-
hearted style in which the rich resources of this country have been
treated. The tremendous reports that came in from the Upper
Murchison of half gold and half quartz deprived this promising spot
of the best part of its diggers.
A few miles further on we arrived at Pilbarra; this has been a
most extraordinary blow, and when the reports reached here about the
treasure vein, everybody said that it must have been Pilbarra that


Mr. Calvert discovered in 1847. There is no doubt that this spot is
a counterpart of the treasure reef, as the gold was here all blown up
to the surface in immensely rich patches, and several hundred diggers
made an immense harvest while it lasted, and the most energetic
helped themselves to thousands of ounces of pure gold which they
had simply knocked out of the quartz.
If this had not been so near the coast I should certaiidy have
considered that this answered the description of the treasure reef that
I was in search of. But alas ! Pilbarra shows no sign of holding down,
it was all surface, and the further they go down the poorer it becomes,
therefore, its days are past, and we leave it in search of more profitable
finds.
Before bidding it adieu I purchased a specimen for my own
reference and collection, which is certainly very pretty to look upon,
and, although it is below the Pilbarra average, it is far above the
average of usual quartz specimens—and you might travel a long way
before it could be matched.
We now continued our journey in a more south-easterly direction,
and crossed the bed of the Yule Eiver, which is five miles wide, sand
and shingle all the way, and shows signs of having been traversed by a
volume of water, at what period it is impossible to state, at the present
moment it is perfectly dry. We now passed the spot where a horse
belonging to Mr. Shell, an important squatter in the district, accidently
kicked up a fine nugget, which I saw him weighing up on my third
days’ stage. I journeyed on till I arrived at Cunicasiua Pool, where I
formed a camp. In examining the surrounding country some six or
seven miles north-west of this camp, and in washing for tin (of which
I found some fine specimens), I detected some crystals of ruby,
sapphire and tourmaline.
The tin that I found was a rich oxide, and about half-a-mile away
in the ranges, I discovered portions of a very rich tin lode, more or
less crystallized; we may consider that the tin may run here pretty
strong for a few miles, and no doubt will intermix with the alluvial
gold.
lieturning to Camp, I explored a little to the South, having some
time on my hands, while my horses were taking a necessary spell. On
a tributary of the Shawr Eiver I discovered a very rich leader of gold
and quartz, occasionally interspersed with lead ; this crops out in a very
steep and rugged mountain, and I had some very awkward climbing to




earth’s crust is being traversed with solutions of gold, it requires a
eheck to keep it within bounds.
Now, as gold abhors oxygen, and manganese has the greatest
affinity for it, we have the two opposites, and the most favourable
conditions are then presented for packing or making bunches of gold.
Travelling in a more easterly direction, I came to a creek with a
little better feed on it, where I formed a depot, marked on the map
“ Wild Dog Creek.” I now started from this depot with two horses
and a native, leaving the camp in charge of my men, and struck across
country, with a view of joining my other party under the charge of
Turner, and after travelling two days I crossed his track, and it was
not a difficult task for even a less experienced bushman than myself to
run down his trail; I overtook him in camp on a river. The next
morning I was struck by the extraordinary conditions of a mount
rising in the range bordering the river, from its wonderful value and
richness for gold I proposed and christened it Mount Caledon, after
our worthy and noble Director, The Earl of Caledon, and strongly
recommend this extraordinary thing to his notice; it consists of many
thousand tons of conglomerate, more or less, passing into ironstone
and saturated with native gold throughout. Wherever I washed a pan
I got a good result.
Much as I was struck with this enormous bulk of treasure, I was
hardly prepared to realise the fact that it extended for miles, and I
was induced to diverge a little from my course to follow the line of
this natural dynamo, for I can compare it to nothing else.
About two miles from my first striking it I broke from a leader
in the conglomerate a piece of rich metal, more gold than quartz,
having touched it with my hammer, the fryable quartz fell out and
left a flattened piece of pure gold.
Two miles further on I made a halt at some native wells or clay
pans, which were quite dry, but I found a soakage, and on removing
the rocks I got some muddy water. I then turned my attention to the
main point, and knocked off a few rich quartz specimens, and also
washed a few pans of dirt, which gave me a very pretty light gold.
Some enormous results might be got here by dry-blowing, or if we
went to the trouble of making some water tanks, large quantities
might be saved by the ordinary Cornish huddle or sluice box, without
the use of any of those deceiving mercurial machines.
The weather was very hot, and the privations were getting very
