









NARRATIVE
OF THE
CAPTURE, SUFFERINGS, AND MIRACULOUS ESCAPE
OF
MRS. ELIZA FRASER,
’Y S t ,h,g C ° StU -
Eliza Reef, on her passage Ironf’New Sou.'l, fvats o"! ivf “*« °"
crew having taken to the loner hnaf i.• / ° Enerpool—a part ot the
island, inhabited by Savages by whom fW-Ii l ° a ° d t l rown 011 an unknown
barbarously murdered, and Mrs. Fraser ('the wife nTtT f lllS fSt mate were
SX'K u nd b*®' been
. one ofthe Chief, CF.wt Sj
An Indian Chief in the act of forcibly conveying Mrs. Fraser to his hut or wigwa m.
NEW-YORK :
PUBLISHED BY CHARLES S. WEBB.— 1837.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1837, by
Charles S. Webb, proprietor, in the Clerk’s Office of the District
Court of the United States, for the Southern District of Ncw-
York.


NARRATIVE, &C.
Since it pleased the Father ofMercies to deliver
me from the hands of barbarians, and to restore
me to the arms of my surviving friends, I have
been strongly urged by some of them, to furnjsh
for the press, a Narrative of my Capture, Suffer-
ings, and Miraculous Escape from Bondage ; to-
gether with other remarkable events, that have
attended me since the fatal period of my unfortu-
nate shipwreck ; a request which I now attempt to
comply with, with no small degree of reluctance,
through fear that more may be expected from me,
than what I shall be able to perform ; having never
received but an indifferent education, and having
been by the hands of unmerciful savages deprived
of my husband, and thereby of that aid that would
have been of essential service to me in this my
undertaking, I cannot therefore but flatter myself
that for reasons mentioned, my readers will expect
no more from me, than a plain, unvarnished tale ;
exaggerating nothing, but recording truly and faith-
fully the particulars of such events as most deeply
impress my mind at the present moment, and which
are esteemed by me the most worthy of record.
It was by the solicitations of my poor, unfortu-
nate husband, that I consented to accompany him,
on a voyage to New South Wales, and from thence
back to Liverpool, on board the ship Sterling Cas-
tle, of which he was the commander. The voyage
was one, which he, as well as others, represented
would probably prove in no way unpleasant to me,
and which, indeed, did not so prove, until the 25th
day of May, four weeks from the day of our em


barking, when it was our misfortune to experience
very boisterous weather. On the 24th, the wind in-
creased to a heavy gale, the like of which I had
never before experienced—the sea indeed run
mountains high !” and our precarious situation
at that moment, demanded so much of the atten-
tion of my husband, in giving orders relative to the
management of the ship, that he could pay but lit-
tle or no attention to me. The close of the day
(the 24th) presented to our view an aspect the most
dreary ; not the least appearance of the gale abat-
ing, on the contrary it seemed every moment to
increase. Although all on board appeared willino-
and ready to obey the orders issued by my hus*
band, and to do every thing in their power for the
safety of the ship, as well as their own lives, yet,
to add to our horror and dismay, early the next
morning the sound of breakers was distinctly heard,
and in less than half an hour afterwards the ship
sti uck with gieat violence upon a hidden reef.
The poor affrighted crew, conceiving from this
moment that the ship was lost, little else was now
thought of but the preservation of their lives. As
much of the ship’s provisions as could be hastily
collected, together with some other necessary ar-
ticles, were thrown into the boats, with which the
crew quit the wreck and put to sea, with the inten-
tion, if possible, of reaching Repulse Bay. The
two boats succeeded in keeping company until the
evening of the third day from that of our departure
from the wreck, when the one which contained my
husband, the two mates, the steward, and myself,
was unfortunately separated from the other, and
which was driven by a strong current and wind far
to the east, and three days after the separation of
the boats, was about midnight driven on an un-
known island, inhabited by a savage race of peo-
ple. 1
Drenched with the sea, and nearly famished with
lunger and cold, with one of the sails a temporary
6
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


tent was erected upon the sand, beneath which we
spent a wretched night, anxiously awaiting the re-
turn of morning, unconscious of what our fate
might be, but, fearless that our condition could be
rendered still worse than it then was ! The day at
length dawned, and presented to our view a band
of frightful looking savages, approaching us, ap-
parently with the ferocity of wild beasts ; all arm-
ed with knives or dirks, and long spears. On their
near approach, my husband suggested the propri-
ety of our quietly surrendering ourselves prisoners
to them, as we possessed not a single weapon with
which to defend ourselves. There appeared ap-
proaching .us three different parties of different
tribes, or clans, one of which seized and made pris-
oner my husband, another Mr. Brown the chief
mate, and a third, Mr. Baxter the second, and the
ship’s steward. These they strongly pinioned and
marched off to one of their settlements, then full
in view, leaving me alone on the beach ! The
reader cannot have but a very faint conception of
what my feelings must have been, at this alarming
moment, thus to be left alone, separated from my
dear husband, and he, perhaps, doomed to endure
whatever tortures the savage monsters might bd
pleased to inflict upon him.
I was not, however, suffered long to remain thus
alone, or unconscious of the fate of my hus-
band. About half an hour after the departure of
the savages, I w T as visited by a very great number
of their squaws, accompanied by their children,
who first commenced with a close examination of
my person, then to beating and maiming me with
clubs, and, at the same time encouraging their
children’ to follow their example, to pinch me, to
pull my hair and to throw dirt into my face and
eyes ! When they had become weary of thus tor-
menting me, they put into my arms one of the
most deformed, and ugly looking brats, that my
eyes ever beheld ; and then by signs gave me to


understand that I must follow them ; which I did
and was conducted to one of their ullages com’
I prised of a few huts of the meanest constriction
and where I found my husband and the two mates’
who informed me that they had received from the
I repreientedTh 4 ? 111 m °- e Severe than that which
represented I had experienced from them. After
being permitted to converse a few moments I was
l f“l n Se P aratecl f rom my husband, and conducted
O the miserable hovel of one, whom I supposed to
tte'-Tbu'! tf ' e r yO ,! m ! ri'° OSC g i-„ P Tn m y
itamfthfli i °/ whlch 1 was g iv <jn to unde/
>ldncl that I was not very soon to be relieved b.it
mt a principal part of my time was to be devoted
imusement/ “ Walking about with il for its
tate ofmvT'r 6 f ° r ™f, ‘° describe what was the
tate of my fee mgs at that moment, by so sudden
nd unexpected “ transition, from a state of con-
f 1 and enviable happiness, to that of inconceiva-
le wretchedness ! Nor was this deg/dhig and
nmented state of bondage to which I was thus
Jomed, my greatest affliction. To be torn from
P Coffld 6 l°b f my dear husband, was still great-
*. Y IJiave been permitted to enjoy his so-
if 1 C ° UM h£ *, Ve m ° re willingly/übmit-
to the severe trials with which Providence
emed pleased to visit me ; but this was an in dub
nee not allowed me. He was compelled to de-
rt by the savage who claimed him as his proper-
to a remote part of the island, where, as laf-
/ribut wa" ed ’ i° ',: as not o,l doomed to hard
or, but was made the subject of much ill treat-
Phe island on which we were thus unfortunately
’ZI :‘r d f" , from ,he " sual track of 4s-
, was extremely low, but three or four feet
we he level of the sea, and apparently but a
miles in circumference ; which,probably /as
cause why ,t was seldom, if ever before /sited


by the whites ; as the natural savage disposition of
the natives, rendered it probable that they nevei
had much intercourse with any of the civilized
race. There was indeed something in the appear-
ance of those savage islanders, that was, to me,
truly frightful. They were extremely filthy, never
cleansing themselves with water, and almost all,
without scarcely an exception, were covered with
vermin. They were small in stature, and then-
features resembling more those of
those of that class denominated savages, iheir
complexion was of a dark copper color, ana t«eir
hair, long, black, and somewhat curley ; their only
dress was a strip of course cotton cloth wove by
the women, and which was worn by both male and
female, in form of a scarf, over their right shoul-
der, and extending to a little below their knees ;
the chiefs wearing upon their heads a turban, or
cap, decorated witli a wreath of feathers. Then
food was principally fish, which they caught m
small nets, and a kind of land crab, or snail, with
which the island appeared in some places greatly
to abound. The males were naturally very indo-
lent leaving the most laborious duties tor their
squaws to °perfoim ; and which they appeared
cheerfully to do, without a complaint or a murmur.
Their cooking utensils were but few and mean,
and their habitations but miserable hovels, fit only
for those whose customs and habits degrade them
to the level of the dumb beasts !
It was in a small filthy cabin, as described, that
I was compelled to take up my abode, and with no
other society than that of half a dozen or more ot
the detestable wretches, male and female, that 1
have described ; and from some of whom I was al-
most daily in the habit of receiving the most harsh
and cruel treatment; being seldom allowed suffi-
cient food to satisfy the cravings of nature ; and
that of a quality not to be eaten under any other
circumstances than that bordering on starvation .
2
9
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


Alas, it is impossible that I at the present moment
can reflect on what I have endured, and the scenes
ot horror that I was doomed to witness, without
the severest shock! but, amid my sufferings, I
tried all in my power to reconcile myself to my sit-
uation, believing that He, who had witnessed them,
wou c yet make use of some one as an instrument
of mercy toward me. For the space of twenty
days 1 lived in the manner as represented, my time
mostJy devoted to attending upon the filthy and
aecripid young one committed to my charge ; and
in ail of which time I was scarcely permitted to re-
tire to the distance of three rods from the place of
my confinement.
The fishing of the natives failing them, they be-
gan to suffer so much for the want of food, that
they were compelled to seek for it in another part
of the island ; which I found was not an uncom-
mon practice with them, that, when water and pro-
visions failed them in one place, to seek for it in
another ; and it is a remarkable fact, that in this
a time of the greatest scarcity of provisions, and
when the savages could scarcely obtain for them-
selves a sufficient quantity to sustain life, and con-
sequently, as might be expected, to me but a scan-
ty pittance was allowed, yet I felt no extraordinary
sensations of hunger or thirst! and did not so
much suffer on account of the small quantity of
food allowed me, as that of the place assigned me
within which to repose at night, which was ex-
tiemely filthy, and overrun with vermin !
J he party of savages with whom I had dwelt
and by whom I had been by threats and blows
in ™, P p e f ? obey and re S ard as m y superiors, hav-
wlfinh t? d ° n “ remova, > Packed up the mats on
'"7 were wont to repose, and the few rude
in " wl,lch ! ,ad them us cook-
o/abodeft and S6t °," t 111 search of another place
noS hn, ”• Gn takl " g “ ,e lead ’ and carrying
nothing hut their spears and dirks, followed dose
10
mrs. eraser’s narrative.


by me, bearing my usual burden ; while the squaws
with their children or papooses brought up the
rear, the squaws bearing the almost worthless con-
tents of their deserted cabins. In this manner we
travelled to the distance, as I judged, of seven or
eight miles, when they reached an opposite point
or shore of the island, when they came to a halt;
and having held a short consultation, commenced
preparations for erecting another habitation, after
the form of the one they had last occupied—a task
which was left altogether for the women to per-
form, and in which 1 too soon found that 1 was
myself to be engaged, although by reason of the
privations and hardships that I had endured, I pos-
sessed at that moment strength hardly sufficient
to bear the burden of my charge —of this, however,
I was for the first time since that of my captivi-
ty, relieved ; but, immediately thereupon, in lieu
thereof, a sharp pointed stick was put into my
hands, with which I was ordered to dig holes in
the ground, for the reception of the posts or poles
of which the hut was to be constructed ; as I well
knew that every sign or ple.a that I could make, of
an inability to perform the task, would be disre-
garded by them, in compliance with their com-
mands I commenced digging, and continued so to
do until my hands became blistered, from my
wrists to my fingers ends! I was more than one
hour in performing the labor in a manner satisfac-
tory to those by whom I had been compelled thus
to toil. Their squaws had not in the mean time
been permitted to remain idle, but had been en-
gaged in collecting moss and sea-weed with which
to thatch the hut; while, during the whole of the
performance of this labor their lazy husbands had
remained idle spectators, not even, as I could per-
ceive, lifted a finger to assist in any part thereof.
At about the close of the day the hut was finish-
ed in the rudest manner, and at a little past sunset
was so crowded with savage occupants, (men, wo


men and children) as to leave no room for me ;
and finding it impossible to obtain entrance, I was
compelled to remain without, and with no other
covering than that afforded bv the canopy of hea-
ven, and which I considered far preferable to that of
attempting to seek repose with those who were ap-
parently the most disgusting and filthy of the hu-
man race ; and, although the bed improved by me
that dismal night was no better or other than a bed
of sand, yet so completely exhausted was I from
the fatigues of the day preceding, that I fell into a
sound sleep, and did not awake until aroused by
the yell of the savages late in the morning.
While both the men and the women were early
engaged in mending and preparing their nets for
fishing, I was compelled to resume my old employ-
ment of attending to and amusing and keeping
quiet the disgusting and ill-humored brat, with
which I had been almost constantly burdened ever
since it was my misfortune to be deprived of my
liberty. Whenever it happened to cry (for I could
not always prevent it) I was sure to receive a sharp
reprimand and sometimes a severe beating from
my squaw-mistress, who professed to be its moth-
er. Great was the abuse that I received from this
savage monster, who, in her fits of rage, would,
beast-like, gnash her teeth, and sometimes seize
me by the throat until I became nearly strangled!
and at other times would seize me by the hair,
which she would pull to that degree as to prostrate
me upon my back. To have offered any resist-
ance, would have only increased her fury. She
was more ill-looking and disgusting than any of
her companions, and none who manifested so great
a, share of deep rooted malignity in their disposi-
tions. Her husband was the least savage of the
two, and apparently disposed to treat me with
more humanity, but was evidently governed by his
squaw, and dared to do nothing to cause her dis-
pleasure. One whom it was represented to me


was his brother, and belonging to the same clan,
was a much more independent spirit, and one to
whom I feel myself much indebted for the protec-
tion that he afforded me at times when nearly sink-
ing under severe pains, produced by blows inflict-
ed upon my person by his infuriated sister ! This
man, although a savage, evidently possessed abet-
ter heart than many who claim a rank among a
more humane and civilized race. The poor fellow
was indeed deserving of a better fate, for it was,
as the reader will hereafter learn, in defence of me
that he lost his life.
It was now more than three weeks since I fell
into the hands of the natives, in which time 1 had
been permitted but once to see and converse with
my husband, when he bitterly complained of the
great hardships that he had and was still enduring
and the barbarous treatment received from the na-
tives.
The party of savages by whom I was more par-
ticularly held in bondage, having become once
more short of provisions, preparations were made
by them for still another removal, which were very
similar to those already described by me, being
compelled to bear my burden and to perform my
portion of the labor.
The savages now took a more inland course and
traversed a part of the island that was more thickly
covered with briars, and low brush, which render-
ed the travelling very difficult, and to me extreme-
ly painful, insomuch that before they reached the
place of their destination, I became so much ex-
hausted as to be obliged to drop my burden, and
by signs represent to my mistress that I could pro-
ceed no further ; upon which she became, as usual,
greatly enraged, and seizing me by the throat,
commenced beating me, and continued so to do
■with so much violence that it would probably very
soon have put a period to my existence, had not
her husband’s brother humanely interposed in my
13
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


behalf! It was by his entreaties that I was per-
mitted to remain where I was until the succeed-
ing morning, when, having gained a little more
strength, I was compelled once more to put for-
ward, and to accompany my truly savage mistress
by whom I had been closely watched through the
night—a night which I had passed with extreme
misery and horror! expecting that nought but
death would be my portion should I be found still
unable to travel the succeeding morning. My only
resource was my prayers, which I did°not fail to
repeat night and morning during the period of my
captivity, nor have I since ceased in the perform-
ance of that all-important duty, in obedience to the
commands of that merciful Being who supported
me under my most severe afflictions, and finally
most miraculously delivered me from the hands of
my cruel oppressors.
About the middle of the day proceeding that on
which we left our last encampment, we reached a
cluster of inhabited tents or huts of another and
inoie numeious clan of savages ; and where, to my
inexpressible joy, I once more met and was per-
mitted to converse with my husband, after a sepa-
ration cf thiec weeks ! Alas, how great the change
in his appearance in this short period ! What a
sad and melancholly spectacle did his emaciated
body and pale countenance present! His employ-
ment since that period, he informed me, had been
that of dragging a heavy slab or board, and had
been while thus engaged, so frequently made the
subject of the insults and abuse of those whose
hearts were callous to every humane feeling that
he felt little or no anxiety longer to Jive ! and, in-
deed, at that very moment he was reduced to that
state of extreme debility, as to be no longer able
to perform the task assigned him, and begged me
to assist him therein—but this my Indian mistress
would not permit me to do, and on perceiving me
14
MRS. FRASER’S NARRATIVE.


weeping, compelled me to depart to a greater dis-
tance from him.
The morning ensuing, by the intercession of my
master’s brother, I was once more permitted to
approach and to converse with my husband, which
was the last interview that Heaven had ordained
that I should have with him. The final separation
was now about to take place ! his strength having
in the course of the night so far failed as to render
him unable longer to obey the commands of his
savage task masters, who, to revenge themselves,
had most inhumanly stabbed him with their knives
—a spear was thirst into his body in my presence,
which caused me in a fit of despair to exclaim (as
I seized and pulled the spear out of his body) “ Je-
sus of Nazareth I can endure this no longer!”—
he retained his senses until a few moments before
he expired. The last words he uttered were,
“ Eliza, lam gone !” 1 was permitted until the
melancholly moment when the vital spark took its
flight, to remain with him, and to impart to him in
his last and expiring moments every consolation in
my power ; enjoining upon him not to mourn on
my account, but to put his trust in One, who had
not only the power, but whom I had faith to believe
would finally deliver me from cruel bondage, and
restore me to the arms of my surviving relatives.
No sooner had ray unfortunate husband breath-
ed his last than they conveyed me to a distance,
beyond view of his mangled body, which, as they
represented to me, they soon after deposited in a
hole dug in the ground for that purpose. I ought
here to mention that Mr. Brown, the chief mate of
my unfortunate husband, and who had been held
with him in bondage by one and the same master,
and who too had witnessed the savage tortures in-
flicted upon his beloved captain, for whom he had
always manifested great regard, and a disposition
to protect him in his last moments—which was
viewed by the remorseless demons (for they are


deserving of no better name) as cause sufficient to
inflict similar tortures upon him (Brown) and for
no other offence a few days after they put to death
in a manner still more cruel! ’I hey applied burn-
ing brands of fire to his legs, which burning up-
wards, Utterly roasted him alive, his whole body
being burned to a crisp, and presenting an awful
proof of savage barbarity ! ‘
By the death of my husband and his chiei mate,
and the unfortunate escape of the steward, there
were but two of us of those who were cast upon
the island remaining in captivity (Mr. Baxter the
second mate and myself,) and we were far separa-
ted from each other ; Mr. Baxter being, soon after
the death of my husband, conveyed across a deep
river, to a remote part of the island ,* and, although
since my captivity I had suffered much from hard-
ship, as well as by reason of hunger and thirst, yet
I too soon found that after having been deprived
of the only earthly friend on whom I could depend
for protection, I was to be made the subject of still
greater hardships, and that new and more severe
duties were to be imposed on me, and although
relieved by the sudden death of the child, with
whose charge I had been so long burdened, (which
expired in my arms,) yet I found that my employ-
ment now was to be no other than that of cutting
down and carrying wood, fetching water, and fish-
ing for my Indian master and mistress.
Unaccustomed as I had ever been to hardship,
until the period when I was unfortunately deprived
of my liberty, to be compelled now to labor like a
beast of burden, and that too without either shoes
or stockings to my feet, or (although exposed to
the powerful rays of the sun) any covering to my
head, and otherwaysbut miserably clad, my readers
cannot but suppose my situation at that unhappy
moment wretched in the extreme ; and, such as to
lead them to conclude that no additional affliction
could render it more so—but, not so, my cup of


wo proved not yet full to the brim, and I was to
be doomed (if possible) to still greater tormfents.
Although I had now been more than six weeks in
the power of the savages, and in that time suffered
much, not only by being compelled to perform tasks
that my strength would hardly admit of, but by
reason of being exposed to the scorching rays of
the sun by day, and the damp air at night, and with
an allowance of food (if food it can be called)
hardly sufficient to satisfy the calls of nature ; yet,
during the whole period '"independent of the hard
labor and privations to which they had subjected
me) I had neither experienced from or discovered
any disposition on the part of the savages to sub-
ject my person to brutal insult, until a few days
after the death of my husband ; when, the reader
may imagine how great must have been my sui
prize, as well as disgust, to be visited by one of
the most ugly and frightfnl looking Indians that
my eyes ever beheld or that the whole island prob-
ably contained, with proposals that, “ as I had lost
my mate, I should become his squaw!” Having
made every sign possible significant of the detest-
ation and abhorrence in which he was held by me,
and that death by his hands would be far prefera-
ble to my becoming his companion or “ squaw,’’ as
he was pleased to term me, I endeavored to repre-
sent to him my willingness to become his slave,
and to obey him in all his reasonable commands
but, this would not suffice. I must (he represent-
ed to me) either voluntarily become his “ mate,
or become so by compulsion ! that he was a chief,
and that my late master and mistress had relin-
quished to him all claim to me ; and, that but a
short time would be allowed me to considei of it,
and to decide ! I was now indeed placed in a sit-
uation more horrid than I had ever any previous
conception of! yea, even so mush so as to be com-
pelled to decide, and that too immediately, wheth-
er to become the willing companion and associate
3


„ ‘ Wlkl al ’d barbarous savage, or voluntarily suf-
myself to become the defenceless victim of bru-
tal outrage ! In this dreadful dilemma, kind prov
' l®" ( J e f ° ne f, m ? re directed me to apply to and
hrnti °* 10 .mterposition of my late master’s
coed f»’ , 1 T C f tlng l " m . that if lle should not suc-
ceed i H defeating the designs of the old chief, who
'“f “PPutently between sixty and seventy years of
t P\ l 10 me die kindness either to stab me to
tomaffi ° r !? k , nock me 0,1 ‘he head with his
wonhlTl ’ as r de ?lh’ epen 111 ‘hat savage manner,
would be preferable to that of yielding to the de-
sires of him who professed to have power to do as
lie pleased with me !
Soon I had the satisfaction to see that my ap-
after'to" f ° r rellef was not made in vain ; and Lon
attei to my sorrow that I had but very little more
of inter?er eJ °' Ce i '',‘ *° ™ ourn ’ as b ) bis kind act
nteifcrence my benefactor lost his life ! The
savage chief finding himself opposed in his de-
signs by one of inferior rank, a challenge ensued
which being accepted by him by whom I had been
uniformly treated with much humanity. They met
and fought with their knives, but the contest with
uch weapons, was as short as it was fatal. My
blend received a wound from his antagonist, which
leachmg the heart, produced almost instantaneous
death! and accompanying his last dying groan
ight be heard the hideous and exulting whoop of
the savage monster by whose hands he fell I Jho
°'lrf nC " lg all ° bstacles removed and no one who’
‘ cd oppose him, without further ceremony or
delay seized me by the shoulder, and fiend like
Joined me within the enclosure of his dismal and
b d y e:.ts’ther1 0re f 1,0 hBd ,ime to accomplish
s designs the God of mercy interposed, and sent
one, as if commissioned expressly for the purpose
bHa vsT 1 ’ t 0 IeSCU ? notf ™ toffi
a favale r,l T™ 8 110n ’ but from tbe bands of
i savage nifiian, far more to he dreaded !
18
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


The steward, who had been so fortunate as to
make his escape from the island, and in an Indian
canoe to reach the main land, from thence succeed-
ed in reaching Moreton Bay, and there gave infor-
mation of my situation, as well as that of my hus-
band and unfortunate companions. Whereupon,
a Mr. Graham, a man of great bodily strength and
courage, and one who had been once a prisoner
among the savages, and knew something of their
language, volunteered to head a party who would
(guided by the steward) proceed as soon as pos-
sible, by land and sea, in search of the island ;
pledging himself; if the island could be found,
either to rescue the unfortunate sufferers from the
hands of the savages, or perish in the attempt.
A party comprised of thirteen resolute young
men, under command of Lieut. Otter, and the said
Mr. Graham, presented themselves to engage in
the expedition. They were accompanied by the
ship’s steward, and after a passage of seventeen
days, in a direction pointed out by the latter, they
were so fortunate as to fall in with the island—it
laying but a very little above the level of the sea,
and covered with nothing but low bushes, and a
bold shore, they were almost on it before it was
discovered by them. Nine of their number imme-
diately landed, and with no one but the steward to
guide them, were providentially directed to the
spot where I was then held in bondage —and, as a
most remarkable instance of the interposition of’
Divine Providence, they arrived in season to frus-
trate the designs of the savage brute, who had se-
lected me as his victim, and to rescue me from one
of the most alarming situations in which an unfor-
tunate female could be placed ! lat that instant
was held fast by the savage a few paces from the
hut, and was first discovered by Mr. Graham, who
was a short distance ahead of the others, and was
attracted to the thicket by my moans and entreaties
for mercy ! The first knowledge that I had of his


approach was by the sudden flight of the savage by
whom I had been seized and held with an iron
grasp, and by whom Mr. G. was first discovered.
He made no attempt to intercept the affrighted
savage, but caught me in his arms, and hurried me
to the boat, in which we all immediately embarked,
bef re the savage islanders had time to collect in
sufficient numbers to oppose us.
We had a short and safe passage to Moreton
Bay, and after a detention there for a few days, I
was so fortunate as to obtain a passage from thence
to Liverpool, where I met with and was welcomed
home by my sympathizing friends, to whom I bore
the sorrowful tidings of my misfortunes, as well as
the particulars of the death of my beloved husband.
Many accounts have been presented the public
of the captivity and state of bondage of many of
our unfortunate fellow-beings, among savages, but
there probably have been but few instances in
which the sufferings of any have exceeded those
experienced by me for so short a period as I was
in their power ! For some days after my deliver-
ance, I felt the species of mental derangement
which adverse fortune frequently produce ; my
mind was in continual agitation, and when at night
I lost myself in sleep, I frequently awoke, thinking
myself still in the power of the savages, whose ter-
rific yells I imagined I distinctly heard ! and at this
moment, while writing and recalling to memory
the dreadful scenes to which I have been witness,
they present themselves to my imagination like a
frightful dream ! but, thanks be to Divine Provi-
dence, through whose kind interposition I have
been restored to, and once more permitted to en-
joy the society of my surviving friends, I feel that
it is a blessed reality, and that all thanks and
praise are due to that Supreme Being, who gave
me strength to bear my afflictions with becoming
fortitude. ELIZA FRASER.”
“ Liverpool , July 2, 1837.”
20
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


There is one important fact relating to the ex-
treme sufferings of Mrs. Fraser, which, probably
through modesty she has failed to mention in her
narrative—four days after they had committed
themselves to the care of Providence, Mrs. Fraser
was delivered of a child, while up to her waist in
water in the long boat —the infant was born alive
but after a few gasps was drowned, and the Ist
mate wrapped up the body in a part of his shirt,
which he tore from his back for the purpose, and
let it go with the tide.
It may be somewhat gratifying to the readers of
the preceding Narrative to learn that soon after
the miraculous escape of Mrs. Fraser was effected
a second expedition, under the command of the
intrepid Graham, was fitted out for the purpose of
effecting the liberation of Mr. Baxter, who was
still held in bondage by the savages ; which at-
tempt was attended with more difficulty, and at the
very great risk of life. Graham and his followers
succeeded in reaching the island, but, when about
to land, they fortunately discovered a number of
the islanders concealed in the bushes, apparently
well armed and prepared to give them a warm re-
ception. Had they at the instant attempted a land-
ing, the probability is that not one of them would
have escaped capture or instant death, as they af-
terward learned from Baxter, who succeeded in
making his escape and reaching the boat by swim-
ming, that the boat’s crew had been espied by the
savages early in the morning, at a very considera-
ble distance from the island, which gave them time
to collect and equip themselves, and to the number
of one hundred or more had repaired to and con-
cealed themselves in a thicket near the point where
they supposed the whites would disembark.
In conclusion, we would remark, that Mrs. Fra-
ser, the narrator, very justly attributes her mirac-
ulous escape to the interposition of a kind Provi


clence, of which we believe no reasonable person
can ioi a moment doubt. Agreeably to her own
declarations, she had unceasingly looked to and
no d ( 7i'::\ leaVei ‘ for * hathel P wllich it appeared
ot then in the power of any human being alone to
afford her ; and to be thus s 0 suddenly and unex-
pectedly rescued from the power of one who was
about to plunge her into a state of inconceivable
wretchedness, must be admitted as proof posftive
that in whatever situation we may be placed how-
ever forlorn and apparently hopeless our condi
tion, wc have still a friend, whom, if in Him we
put oui trust, we shall find both able and willing
to stay the assassin’s hand, even at the instmu
when raised to inflict the fatal blow! That He
does thus sometimes reveal himself to his crea-
ures m their dark hours of adversity, we have been
nade acquainted with in other instances besides
that recorded by Mrs. Fraser; and .he one which
we at this moment recollect of having but recentlv
perused, was the loss of the ship Blinderhall and
the miraculous preservation of the crew, the nar
e7by Mrs Frate" 6 Ve ' T Simi ' ar 10 ,h ° Se ~-
The Blmderhall free trader, bound from London
to Bombay, with a full compliment of hands and a
number of passengers, male and female, on board
Willds 011 “^accessible’
1 d, so called, and soon went to pieces. Hun-
gry, cold, and comfortless, thousands of miles from
their native land, the shipwrecked voyagers retired
to a rock, the only shelter that could be
found, some devoutly to prostrate themselves in
humble thankfulness, before that merciful Being
who had so wonderfully delivered them from de?
stiuction, others to rest, after the dreadful fatigue
by which they were exhausted. Destitute of food
of evciy kind, famine soon began to threaten—ev-
eiy stone near the sea was examined for shell fish
but in vain, in this extremity, three days from
22
Mrs. eraser’s narrative.


that on which they were cast on the island, as the
quarter-master’s wife was observed sitting on a
sand bank, with her little babe crying at her breast,
faint and exhausted, a group of half starved sea-
men passed by, when one of them pointing to the
infant, exclaimed to the others, “ that will make
us a drop of broth, if nothing else turns up !” The
observation, as might be expected, spoke daggers
to the poor mother ! On the return of night, as the
poor hungry wretches were squatting in sullen de-
jection round their fires, on a sudden hundreds of
birds from seaward came actually flying through
the flames ; many fell dead, scorched and suffoca-
ted, and thus were the sufferers rescued for a time
from the horrors which so imminently beset them.
But when their stock of wild fowl had become ex-
hausted, each began to fear they were now ap-
proaching that sad point of necessity, when be-
tween death and casting lots to see who should be
sacrificed to serve for food for the rest, no alterna-
tive remains. While horror at the bare contem-
plation of an extremity •so repulsive occupied the
thoughts of all, the horizon was observed to be
suddenly obscured, and presently clouds of pen-
guins lighted on the island; and before the even-
ing was dark, the sand could scarcely be seen for
the numbers of eggs, with which the surface of the
earth was covered! The penguins continued on
the island four or five days, when, as if by signal,
the whole took their flight and were never seen
again. The eggs were collected and dressed in
all manner of ways, and supplied abundance of
food for upwards of two weeks.
In the mean time the carpenter with his gang
had constructed a boat, and four of the men had
adventured in her for Tristan da Lunha, in hopes
of ultimately extricating their fellow-sufferers from
their perilous situation. Unfortunately the boat
was lost, whether carried away by the violence of
the currents that set in between the islands, or was
23
mrs. fraser’s narrative.


dashed to pieces against the breakers, was never
ve 0 1 Te’en r B ZTt ° r tL
to ,il Bef ° re u heir l ,rovls,ons began however
to tail, a second boat was launched ; and in this
temnf , an u d S T e s^amen "«de a second at-’
npt, and happily succeeded in effecting thpir
irnor Dg Glf er ,abor ’ 011 the o? Gov-
and with h IJC rec ®. lved th em most cordially
and w th humanity, which neither time, nor place
or impaired. He"ls^ntly"’launched hi bolted
wrecked countrymen from the calami they tad
inqm ? re C 0 T Uer WOuld be ? tl,e liberty to
particular Pro d W d ° Ubt -P-inteldeTcf ofa
particular Providence, operating by second causes ?
24
mrs. eraser’s narrative.


