

Narrabri Jubilee Celebrations
Municipal Jubilee
Sept. 5th
1883 - - - - 1933
Back-to - Narrabri
Week
Sept. 4th-loth, 1933
OFFICIAL SOUVENIR


NARRABRI JUBILEE CELEBRATIONS
Back-to-Narrabri Week
sept. 4tb~lotb, 1955
Official Souvenir ,
To Commemorate the Jubilee y J
of the Narrabri Municipality Oy y
1555 sept. sth \l 1955


PREFACE
IN compiling the Souvenir Booklet for the Narrabri Municipal
Jubilee, sth September, 1933, it has been our aim to
record, in an attractive form, the history and progress
of the town and district, so that residents, old and new, may
be tempted to preserve this booklet amongst those things
treasured for old times sake.
We have included a little of the old, with much of the
new; we have interspersed interesting pictures with equally
interesting story, and we have endeavoured to present the
whole in an artistic form. We have compiled for the first
time, we believe, the complete story of Narrabri from the days
of its first house to the end of the last century, thus, we hope,
bringing happy recollections to the oldest residents and a
sense of pride and achievement to the younger people of
Narrabri.
The completion of our first half century of municipal status
almost coincides with the centenary of the arrival of the first
pioneer settler in this gateway of the North-West —and even
the most cautious would pardon a little effervescence of pride
in the hearts of those, and their descendants who have par-
ticipated in the work of creating a new town in a new world.
We have to express our thanks to The Mitchell Librarian,
The Royal Australian Historical Society, The Under Secretary
for Lands, “The Sydney Morning Herald,” “North-Western
Courier,” J. M. McDonald, Esq., Lex. Cousins, Esq., Dr. de
Lepervanche (since deceased), Mr. Joe Marchand and many
other old-time residents for the most useful and inspiring as-
sistance in compiling the story of Narrabri, and to our adver-
tisers for their assistance in its publication.
For all errors omission! and commission we crave
your pardons.
W. J. MULHOLLAND,
Narrabri
14/8/’33
B. Litt. (Oxon), 8.A., L.C.P.
Editor.
QUEEN COMPETITION CANDIDATES
MISS JOYCE CAMERON
BUSINESS
MATRON PETTIT
HOSPITAL
MISS THELMA ELLICOTT
SPORTS


Early History of Marrabri
Discovery
ALTHOL’GH lying in the North-West, the first
view of this district was the direct outcome of
the crossing of the Blue Mountains by Blaxland,
Lawson and Wentworth in 1813, and the problem raised
by the discovery of the Macquarie and Lachlan Rivers.
“Where did these rivers flow?” In 1817 Oxley followed
the Macquarie to Mount Harris and, turned back by the
marshes, decided to journey eastward to the coast. He
crossed the Warrumbungles about twenty miles south
of Earadine, and pushed almost to the centre of the
Pilliga Scrub, in an effort to reach what he called the
Hardwicke Mountains (Nandewars) which he had seen
from a high peak in the Warrumbungles, probably
Siding Spring Mt., south of Bugaldie. He was forced
to turn back by rocks and quicksands, and passing al-
most through the present site of Curlewis finally reached
the coast at Port Macquarie, discovering the Liverpool
Plains and Peel River en route.
The next visitor was Allan Cunningham, the dis-
coverer of the Darling Downs, who on his way from
the Upper Hunter in 1827, passed a little east of
Gunnedah, thence up the Manilla Valley, and on his
return trip came close behind the Nandewars near where
Carodah and Cobbadah now stand.
The honour of first setting foot in the district,
perhaps even in the town itself, belongs to Major
Thomas Mitchell (afterwards Sir Thomas Mitchell),
Surveyor-General of New South Wales. Jealous of
Sturt’s success in discovering the Darling River in
1829, he asked permission to investigate the story of
a runaway convict, George Clarke, who claimed he had
discovered a fine country and a large river, “the Hin-
du r,’’ north of Liverpool Plains.
Leaving the Upper Hunter towards the end of
1831, Mitchell reached the Peel River near where Oxley
had crossed it, and then followed it to its junction with
the Mulverindie, near the Carroll Gap. He ascended
a peak, near the junction, called Perimbungaq (now
Pyrambung), and towards the west detected a possible
pass through the hills. A journey of sixteen miles took
him through the pass and, on ascending a small hill
nearby, he saw, for the first time, that strange hill,
Tangulda, so often mentioned by the escaped convict
as the key landmark to the great river.
Fifteen miles further westward he reached the Nam-
moy, 1 December 16th, 1831, and following the river for
about six miles he found an excellent camping place
with fine water in a lagoon, two miles south of Tan-
gulda. The lagoon is now Barber’s Lagoon, and Tan-
gulda is now Barber’s Pinnacle, near Boggabri, both
named after the convict, George Clarke, alias “George,
the Barber.” Nearby was an old stockyard, with the
remains of a hut and a few native camps, with bullock
bones in plenty scattered round. Such evidence showed
that George and his native allies had done some raiding
into the Quirindi district.
While making an unsuccessful attempt to follow
Clarke’s directions and cross the range to the north-


BUSINESS PREMISES IN NARRABRI FIFTY YEARS AGO
(PHOTOS LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)


east, Maule’s River was discovered and named on
December 19th. Returning to camp, Mitchell spent
some days assembling his canvas boats, and on Decem-
ber 29th and 30th, set out to navigate the river. The
results were so disappointing that on January Ist the
usual method was resumed, and they reached a spot
on the river a few miles above the site of Narrabri.
The next day, January 2nd, 1832, they reached a red
ridge about one mile east of Little Mountain, and from
the top of the little knoll, lying half a mile north of
Little Mountain, Mitchell had a view of the whole of
the surrounding district. From this spot he made an
excellent sketch of the range, showing Kaputar, Nin-
gadoon and Lindesay. In January 3rd he set off 35
degrees west of north to skirt the ranges and eventually
to discover the Gwydir.
Our first official visitors were therefore Mitchell
and his party, with their native guides and servants,
their drays, horses and bullocks, but it is by no means
improbable that “George, the Barber,” may have been
led by curiosity to venture thus far west, and to have
roamed where Narrabri now stands.
Settlement
It may be safely asserted that this district was
settled in the stages which marked the settlement of
the other outer areas of early New South Wales. In
1824 a survey and valuation of the colony was ordered,
and in 1838 the sale by auction of crown lands, at not
less than 5/- per acre, was instituted. This minimum
price was increased to 12/- per acre in 1838. Governor
Darling, however, under the powers of his commission,
limited these instructions to the settlement districts,
called the ‘‘Nineteen Counties,” which extended from the
“Moruya” to the “Manning,” and from Wellington
and Murrurundi to the sea. Beyond this area all oc-
cupation was without legal basis, (squatting was the
term used), until 1842, when this outer area was divided
into eight pastoral districts of which the Liverpool
plain was one of the richest and best known, and in
1843 a small annual lease fee was imposed on all squat-
ters as permission for little else than continued trespass.
In this way the Western Plains were occupied by a
ferv hundred squatters until in 1861 by Sir John Robert-
son’s Land Act, “selection before survey,” permitted
settlers to select blocks of from 40 to 320 acres at £ 1
per acre, with higher prices for town, suburban and
urban lands. The records at Narrabri Court House
show that this act was, largely availed of in this dis-
trict by men, who were the forerunners of the small
holders of to-day. and the real founders of the district.
The earliest records at present available concern
this grazing lease period, for documents in the Depart-
ment of Lands show that, in 1847, at least six great
areas were leased in this district. 1. East of Bullawa
Creek lay Tarriaro Run, leased by Alexander Mufiro.
2. South of Tarriaro a Mr. Milner Tad an unnamed
lease. 3. Tibbereenah Run, leased by the famous
W'illiam Charles Wentworth, extended from Pillaga
Scrub across the river between Bullawa Creek and the
site of Narrabri, to the Nandewars. 4. Narrabry Run
occupied the next seven miles of river frontage and
eastward to the ranges. It was leased by A. B. and
F. M. Doyle (later of Killarney). 5. Next along the
north side of the river was Gundamane Run. 6. Further
north was Gullatheral Run.


The boundaries are merely described, surveys were
unknown as no fencing was done, and the opportunities
for boundary disputes were amazing. It is most in-
teresting to read that the southern boundary of Nar-
rabry Run separating it from Tibbereenah is thus des-
cribed : “Bounded on the south by a line defined in
1834 and subsequently marked in the presence of Mr.
W. C. Wentworth’s overseer, Mr. O’Brien and Patrick
Quinn.” Note the year 1834! —only three years after
MAITLAND STREET, LOOKING SOUTH-EAST, IN THE EIGHTIES
(PHOTO LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)
Mitchell’s journey ! By 1865 Patrick Quinn had risen
from a station hand to the ownership of Glen Quinn
Station, while Tibbereenah had passed to Mort, Cameron
and Buchanan, and Narrabry to J. F. and A. J. Doyle.
The Town
Outside the reminiscences of the old inhabitants,
often unreliable in detail, the story of most Australian
towns lies hidden in old documents and deeds, and
the following interesting facts have been gleaned from
an abstract of title in the deeds of the “Greyhound Inn.”
This inn stood on the land adjacent to Geo. Long and
Co.’s corner with a garden where Dewhurst Street
now runs. In this garden was buried Isabella Cousins,
aged 16 months, daughter of Walter Cousins who was
mine host from 1866 to 1881, and as the grave was not
moved when the street was formed some years later,
the remains still lie beneath the street. The inn faced
Narrabri Creek where the teams naturally halted.
From investigations it is certain that part of the Grey-
hound Inn buildings must have been the first habitation
erected in Narrabri, and was probably erected by John
Lloyd as a resting place near the centre of his vast
leases which included Burburgate (near Gunnedah),
Tibbereena, Edgeroi and Gurley (near Moree).
By a deed dated 28th March, 1860, John Charles
Lloyd and William Lloyd conveyed the land and
buildings styled “The Greyhound Inn” to Stephen
Henry Humphries for £5OO, and in reciting the claims
of title of the Lloyds to this land it states that it was
part of Tibbereena Run, lawfully leased by the Lloyds,
and that the improvements consisted of “a slab cottage,
accommodation house for travellers, a stockman’s hut
and paddocks.” This slab cottage is referred to by old
residents as the first house in Narrabri, and it may be
assumed that it was standing in 1856 when by a Pro-
clamation of the 9th March, a reserve had been created
for the “township of Narrabri.” Contrary to the above,
certain lands office records say the town site was
reserved from Narrabri Run. A decision is almost
impossible in this case.


VICTORIA HOTEL. NARRABRI, FIFTY YEARS AGO
(PHOTO LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)
In 1861 Humphries sold to Thomas and Richard
Huxley for a consideration of £7OO, and the latter
became sole proprietor in 1862. So far all title was
based on the original Tibbereena lease, but in 1861 the
Lloyds had taken advantage of a proclamation of June,
1858, which allowed lessees to purchase, at upset price
without opposition, portion of their run, and for £2O
had purchased a block of 2 acres 2 roods on which
stood the Greyhound Inn. This is the block from
Long's corner to the Commercial Bank of Sydney. In
1862 this sound title was transferred to Humphries
and thus to Huxley, who became the first resident of
Narrabri to reside in his own property by right of
purchase, and on the first crown land surveyed and
sold within the town. In 1861 the first sale of crown
grants within the town took place, and one reads that
a Mr. Goldman, the first storekeeper, bought the site
of the N.W. Courier Office for £2, while next year
the site of the Bank of Australasia was bought by
Henry Chambers, storekeeper, of Moree, for £7. In
each case there is stipulated “‘a quit rent of one pepper-
corn per annum for ever if demanded.” In 1861 also,
the homestead block of Glen Quinn Run (part of old
Tibbereenah) was bought by Patrick Quinn, and Cooma
Station homestead (another part of Tibbereenah) by
David Morrison Fraser.
It is interesting to note that in 1861 the county
is unnamed, but in the deeds of 1862 it is called Nan-
dewar. Another interesting development is revealed
in documents of this period in connection with grants
of 40 and 16 acres across the creek to Thomas Gordon
Gibbons Dangar in June, 1861. In documents concern-
ing the disposal of some of this land in March, 1869,
one learns that between 1861 and 1869 Dangar Village
had been legally created. T. G. G. Dangar from very
lowly beginnings became a leading citizen of the dis-
trict and its first M.L.A.
The actual site of Narrabri is interesting, and is
redolent of old-time life, centring round the coming
and going of teams and travellers. Permanent water
was the deciding factor in the establishment of camps,
which, in turn, often developed into villages and town-
ships. The secret of the site of Narrabri is found in
the large stretch of permanent water which lies between
the two bridges over Narrabri Creek. Never within
living memory has this supply failed, for the little-known
THE FAMILY HOTEL. NARRABRI, FIFTY YEARS AGO
(PHOTO LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)


MAITLAND STREET, 1933, LOOKING NORTH-WEST
reason that at this part of the creek bed is below the
surface of the sub-artesian basin which underlies this
area of the district. Oxley’s experience of terrible floods
in 1818 and Cunningham’s of equally fearsome drought
in 1827 were the repeated experiences of the early
pioneers, so the establishment of the Greyhound Inn,
and of Narrabri, was perfectly natural—-the permanent
water, the teamster’s camp, the inn, thq blacksmith, the
store, and the small settlement being a logical sequence.
The name Narrabri is apparently of aboriginal
origin, coming from Nurra—a forked stick, and Bria—
water, i.e., the forked waters ; this idea naturally arises
from the anabranch now called the Narrabri Creek.
The word itself is spelt in many ways, as the follow-
ing extracts from the Australian Almanac disclose. The
Almanac is one of the chief sources of information of early
times. In 1858 the almanac, in describing the Police dis-
trict of Wee Waa states : ‘‘The district extends from Nar-
rabry on the east . . . the district is purely a squatting
one.” It should be noted that Wee Waa is the older
settlement. As a settlement or township, Narrabri is first
mentioned in the almanac of 1864, when it is spelt Nar-
ribri. In 1866, referring to its proclamation under the
Police Towns’ Act in 1865, it is spelt Narrabri, and
thereafter is frequently mentioned as part of the Wee
Waa Police district until 1879, when the. almanac refers
to the Police district of "Narrabri (late Wee Waa)”.
In 1869 it mentions “the telegraph wire is in course
of extension to this place and will be opened about the
middle of this year.” The first telegraph office was
situated next door to West’s Hotel which occupied the
site between Mr. M. W. Hardy’s and Dr. Jones’
residences. The post office at that time was run as part
of the business of Goldman’s, which stood practically
on the site of the present Courier office. Into Goldman’s
employ about this time came Charles Collins, a young,
dark-eyed Jew, who later founded the business of
Collins & Co., and became the first Mayor of the Muni-
cipality in 1883, and later M.L.A. for the district.
The almanac of 1870-1 gives the population as 350
(one tenth of the population of to-day), while in the
issue of 1872-6 a decrease to 315 is shown. In 1871
we also read for the first time of the holding of quarter
session and district court sittings. The first resident
Police magistrate was Charles E. Smith, who built
“Wandi,” the first house on the island, early in the
70’s, his example was followed about 1880 when Dr.
de Lepervanche erected his home.
In 1883 the town had assumed sufficient importance
to be proclaimed a municipality, it had already been
planned, duly surveyed by A. Dewhurst, Esq., in
1859-60.


Social Life
The social life of early Narrabri centred round the
activities of the old squatter families, but the coming
of the railway in 1882 and the development of closer
settlement produced an entirely new town life. Families
like the Doyles and Buchanans of Killarney, the Mose-
leys of Tibbereena, the Piries and Browns of Tarriaro,
the Gordons of Edgeroi, the Hamlet Fletchers, and
Brodies of Boolcarrol, the Capps of Millie, the Taylors
of Dobikin, and many others, familities who lived on
their stations (unlike the early squatters) and made
Narrabri their town, liberally supporting every move-
ment for its benefit, have passed away, and their places
have been taken by the small holder, “the cockie” or
wheat farmer. As an example of the men of those
days one may instance Mr. James Moseley of Tibbe-
reena who, for many years, was one of the outstanding
personalities of the district. An Englishman by birth,
an educated and cultured man, he threw himself whole-
heartedly into the management of his run, and ruled
with an iron hand his band of station employees, both
white and black. Equally untiring was he in all mat-
ters affecting the progress of the town. He was one
of the founders of the P.A. and H. Society and for
some years acted as Hon. Secretary; he took a leading
part in securing railway connection with Sydney, and
as an advocate of gas took a prominent part in the
debates which culminated in the town electricity supply.
His chief opponent was Alderman J. J. Piper, who had
had experience of electricity in his home town, Tam-
worth, the first country town to be so illuminated. In
1890 he achieved the distinction of entertaining the
visiting English Cricketers at Tibbereena, on which
occasion the visitors played a local team of twenty-two
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND COMMONWEALTH BANK
players. James Moseley’s dog-cart, with one or two
blackboys in reefer jackets, was for years a familiar
sight in Maitland Street.
It is of interest to recall that the early runs were
wholly, or at best partly, unfenced and that all flocks
were shepherded. The shepherds lived a life of mono-
tony and loneliness, with low wages and coarse rations.
An occasional visit of the overseer or a boundary rider,
and the weekly visit of the ration cart were often the
only relief in a life of utter dreariness. Remittance men
were frequently to be met with, sons of nobility, clergy
or wealthy families, hidden away, usually sinking
lower and lower on the social scale.
Many of the settlers who arrived in the 60’s and
after, came from the Maitland district, which was the
metropolis of the North and North-West (vide Maitland
Street). Some had been teamsters, some station con-


tractors of various kinds, fencers, well sinkers, etc., and
knowing the country well, selected good blocks. In
some cases their ancestors had come from the Hawkes-
bury district, hence the origin of the “Oxboro’ ” names,
like Guest and Eather so frequently met in these parts.
The family register of Walter and Harriet Cousins, re-
produced below, is a remarkable evidence of this mi-
gration. This interesting document is in the possession
of a grandson, Mr. Lex. Cousins of “Aloomba,” Nar-
rabri, and an examination of the details will reveal the
ancestry of a typical Australian family and the remark-
able journeyings to and fro in the days of horse-drawn
vehicles and unformed tracks. Walter Cousins, who
was licensee of the Greyhound Inn in the sixties and
seventies was son-in-law of Alexander Munro who
owned a fine vineyard in the Hunter Valley, the pro-
ducts of which in 1892 gained distinction at the great
Chicago Exhibition. Alexander Munro Cousins married
a daughter of Charles Eather of Hawkesbury descent.
An interesting insight into early life is the story of a
visit to his home district made by Charles Eather and
his family when two of the daughters rode the whole
journey of 350 miles from Narrabri to the Hawkesbury.
The Cousins’ Family Register, the essential details
of which are reproduced below, is an interesting and
valuable document, and is beautifully executed in Indian
ink on parchment, the decorations being delightfully
designed scroll work. Such documents are rare and
really merit the safe keeping of the Mitchell Library.
The Family Register of Walter and Harriet Cousins
Walter Cousins Harriet Munro
Born April Bth, 1828 Born March 25th, 1836
at Heytesbury, England at Singleton. N. S. Wales
Issue
Alexander Munro (Cousins), born September 15th,
1854, at Maitland.
Walter Young, born January 3rd, 1856, at Maitland.
Sarah Julia Sophia, born August 26th, 1857, at Singleton.
Charles Sunday, born June sth, 1859, at Terriaro.
Harriet Emma, born May Bth, 1860, at Terriaro.
Edward Hugh, born June 19th, 1862, at Maitland.
Isabella Mayne, born June 19th, 1866, at Terriaro.
Deaths
Charles Sunday, died June 20th, 1859, at Maitland.
Isabella Maine, died October 17th, 1867, at Narrabri.
Married at By the Rev.
Maitland F. Tuckfield
Sept. 28th 1853
1853
In a brief account such as this, it is impossible to
mention any but Some of the earliest townsmen. Dr.
de Lepervanche, who died on Ist August, 1933, aged
91 years, arrived in Narrabri in 1870. He was on a
shooting expedition and his settlement here was purely
accidental. He was perhaps the first fully qualified
medical man in the north-west, as Dr. Segol who was
here when he arrived, and Dr. Milner who practised
before Dr. Segol, had both received their training under
the old system of “medical apprenticeship,” the latter in
the Navy. In 1866 the Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney opened the first bank in Narrabri, the manager,
C. G. Haydon, afterwards became a barrister and later
a judge. He was succeeded in 1868 by R. Graham.
The principal stores were run by Adolph Goldman
and H. R. Reuben, both Jews, who drew supplies from


David Cohen & Co., in Maitland. The government
school was established in 1868, under the charge of Mr.
—. Porter. It was a one-roomed building, situated
where the school-house now stands. A brother of Mr.
Os. Morath, Ernest, recollects being sent to school at
the age of 4 in order that the number of pupils requisite
to keep the school in operation should be maintained.
In 1884 a new brick building was erected. It is related
that on a visit in 1885 the Premier, Sir George Dibbs,
criticised this building as “too d good.” In the
early 70’s, a day and night school for boys was con-
ducted by Mr. Marchand.
Courts were originally held in the present Police
Office, as also were religious services for many years,
an Anglican minister coming from Gunnedah occasion-
ally, and a Roman Catholic priest from Tamworth about
twice a year. Inns and innkeepers loomed large in
the town life. Richard Huxley, who purchased the
Greyhound in 1862, was succeeded about 1866 by Walter
(“Watty”) Cousins, in which year Huxley Sold to
Charles Eather who immediately sold to Alexander
Munro, lessee of Tarriaro, and father-in-law of the
licensee. In 1877 Munro sold to James Lillyman, who
in turn, disposed of the inn to William H. Gordon in
1881. This interesting reminder of early days was
finally burnt in the nineties.
Other early inns were Thurlow’s (now the Victoria)
and Arndell’s (south-east corner of Fitzroy and Maitland
Streets). West’s Family Hotel, already mentioned,
was the fourth inn to be established. The legal pro-
fession was originally represented by visiting clerks
and solicitors from the settled areas, e.g., Tamworth.
The first solicitors resident in Narrabri were Mr. B.
Hyman and Mr. Chas. O’Connor, a brother of Mr. B.
B. O’Connor afterwards a High Court Judge..
In the old days a once-a-weelc four-page double-
demy sheet, published in Tamworth at 6d. per copy,
competed with the “Maitland Mercury” as the literary
and advertising organ of the north-west. In 1874,
however the “Narrabri Herald” was established. Later
it became the “Narrabri Age,” and finally the “North-
Western Courier.” About 1874 for a short period there
appeared the “Narrabri Argus.”
Travel and Communication
The original rail head was Singleton, the journey
to and from which was a toilsome experience, involving
a journey of two and a half days in a lumbering un-
comfortable coach. There were no formed roads beyond
Willow Tree, and the Breeza Plains were the terror
of travellers in wet weather. The Namoi was crossed
by an old bridge at Tarriaro, and a long straggling street
of pine buildings welcomed the weary traveller. Later
the railhead advanced to Murrurundi, thence to Gunne-
dah, and finally to Narrabri West. This site was dic-
tated partly by the cost of bridging the) river, partly by
the lure and influence of Walgett, and partly by
political influence in the cause of certain landholders.
The advent of the railway marks the hey-day of early
Narrabri, for it became the centre of the vast north-
west. Forwarding agencies were established, hundreds
of great table-top waggons, drawn by teams of bullocks
or horses, came and went without ceasing, whilst the
forges of a large number of blacksmiths and coach-
builders were kept working at high speed.


THE RENDEZVOUS
of the old Pioneers
Established 60 years
VICTORIA
HOTEL
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
The house which has set the
standard for first-class
accommodation in the
North-West.
The Meals are more than Pleasing
Phone 41 MRS. L - M - GREEN,
P.O. Box 10 Proprietress
“First of All - RELIABILITY”
PALMER’S
Established 1914
To build a reputation for excellent service
requires the expenditure of earnest and unremit-
ting effort. To maintain it, when won, requires
constant living up to a standard.
THE statements Palmer’s make are not those
of a firm merely concerned in persuading you
to buy, but are actual statements of fact, open
to verification by a personal visit to our store
and by comparison of quality for quality and
price for price.
SPEND YOU MONEY WHERE YOU
EARN IT
Shop in your own town. See what you buy.
Select what you want. Help increase prosperity.
Spend your money in the town that provides the
privilege of earning it.
F. PALfIIER & ©
F/RST OF FLL PEL//78/L/TY
DRAPERS MERCERS
NARRABRI


The inns increased to the number of twenty-seven
in the two municipalities. The station families usually
came in their private turn-outs, but the general public
were catered for by such coaching firms as R. J.
Nowland and P. B. Orchard. Charters Bros., and Cobb
& Co. Among the well-known drivers were Jack Leary,
Joe Marchand, Sam Broad and Joe Johnson. Four-
horse coaches left for Moree at 7 a.m. daily, arriving
at 10 p.m. Horses were changed at The Ten Mile,
Boggy Creek, Mille, Big Bumble and Tyeannah. Five-
horse coaches also ran to Walgett and Collarendelri,
each being a 24-hour non-stop journey. The Pilliga
coach ran thrice weekly. The extension of the railway
to Moree in 1897, and later to Walgett, marked a de-
cline in the importance of Narrabri, but it has since
re-established its prosperity on more secure foundations.
Of Narrabri of the 20th Century, its citizens and
progress, space forbids any comment. This account is
an attempt to recapture the story of “Narrabri in the
Earlies” from musty deeds and documents, and from
the fast failing memories of still living pioneers, before
it is too late, in the hope that it may prove both in-
structive and interesting to all participating in Narrabri
Municipal Jubilee, sth September, 1933.
/ /<?& ,


LOGAN Sc CO.
<K OU> - c 4 Stale Skill fir tk Time
Fashion commands that LOUNGE FURNITURE must be
artistic as well as useful, smart as well as comfortable.
OUR LOUNGE SUITES
fulfil these demands because of their newness in style and
colour harmony, roominess and care in springing.
Come in and see this for yourself!
LOGAN & Cm
MOREE & NARRABRI
iiiiiiimfliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
iHiiimiiimiiiiiMmiiiimmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiißiiiiiiii
Not many firms have carried on longer
than that under the name of LOGAN in
the North-West. The Founder of the
firm, the late John Logan, came from Kirk-
cudbright, Scotland, with his family in
1886, and in 1888 started in Narrabri.
The firm has grown and later extended to
Moree, and up to the time of the depres-
sion setting in was employing 16 to 20
hands continuously.
The initial hands and those that followed
were instructed in the Cabinet-making
craft in the good old style of mortice and
tenon, where goods are expected to last
a lifetime.
We take the Jubilee opportunity of thanking all
the good folk of the North-West who have pur-
chased our goods from time to time and are still
using same, numbers coming back after many
years to inform us that the articles are as good as
the day they purchased them.
LOGAN 00.
The Leading Furniture and Joinery Specialists of the North-West
at your Service PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE
NARRABRI
MOREE


1883 MUNICIPALITY OF NARRABRI 1933
The town of Narrabri is pleasant-
ly situated on the Narrabri Creek, an
anabranch of the Namoi River, and
is distant 353 miles by r rail, north-
west from Sydney. It is bounded on
the south-west by the Namoi River,
and the Nandewar Ranges the
highest peaks of which are more than
5,000 feet above sea level —are within
an hour’s journey on the north-east
side.
The town was incorporated as a
Municipality and the boundaries pro-
claimed on the sth September, 1883.
It contains an area of 2,560 acres.
Aldermen William J. Coleman,
Charles Collins, Henry Lillyman,
Theodore Morath, James Moseley,
Charles A. Ross, Richard Spencer,
Samuel Thompson, and George H.
Thorley, were the members of the first
Council. The newly constituted body
held its first meeing in the Narrabri
School of Arts on the 20th November, 1883, for the
purpose of electing a Mayor. Mr. C. E. Smith, Police
Magistrate, occupied the chair, and the honour of being
Narrabri’s first Mayor was conferred upon Alderman
Charles Collins.
Mr. George Lane was first Town Clerk; Aid. R.
Spencer, Treasurer; Messrs. J. J. Raddle and B. O.
Taylor, Valuers; Messrs. C. J. Druitt and W. Y.
McKenzie, Auditors ; Mr. C. J. O’Connor, Solicitor ; and
TOWN HALL. SHOWING SOLDIERS'
MEMORIAL TOWER AND CLOCK
the Bank of Australasia, Bankers.
Mr. E. Holst was later appointed Sur-
veyor and Clerk of Works.
After the first meeting the Council
conducted its business in Thurlow’s
Victoria Hotel Building until January,
1884. It then moved to Council
Chambers facing Maitland Street, on
portion of the site now occupied by
the Strand Theatre, and which were
built and leased to the Council by
Mr. W. H. Gordon. It remained in
these premises until the 17th October,
1893, when the first meeting was held
in the present Council Chambers in
the Town Hall, which had just been
completed. The Aldermen present at
the meeting—G. S E. Dale (Mayor),
Theo. Morath, G. Williams, A. M.
Cansdell, H. Stubbs and G. W. Boyle
—autographed the minute book. The
new building was officially opened
by the State Governor (Sir Robert W.
Duff) on the 22nd November, 1893.
The Council’s first year of office was occupied
chiefly in having the streets aligned, which was done
by Mr. A. Dewhurst, District Surveyor, who completed
the work on the 30th September, 1884, and in having
the levels taken, chiefly by Mr. R. S. Bamford, and
generally preparing the groundwork for the proper
development of the area. This work completed, it then
entered upon a works programme, including clearing,


OPENING OF THE TOWN HALL BY SIR ROBERT DUFF, 1893
(PHOTO LOANED BY HENRY LOGAN)


forming and gravelling streets
and footways, kerbing and
guttering, and tree planting,
etc. The work of improve-
ment of the area has been con-
sistently carried on by suc-
ceeding Councils.
The Municipality was
subdivided into North, South
and Dangar Wards, and the
ward boundaries proclaimed
on the Ist November, 1894.
MR. CHARLES COLLINS
FIRST MAYOR OF NARRABRI.
1883-1885
PHOTO LOANED BY H. N. COLLINS
Amongst the more impor-
tant works carried out have been:—
The erection of the Town Hall in 1892-3 at a cost
of £3,000. Messrs. Clifton & Senior were the archi-
tects, and Messrs. Sanbrook Bros, the contractors. The
hall was extended in 1914 at a cost of £3OO/10/-. Mr.
J. E. O’Connor was the architect, and Mr. C. G. Hulbert
the contractor. The tower was added to and a clock
installed during 1930 at a cost of £9OO. Mr. H. H.
McCourt was the building surveyor; Mr. A. J. Hulbert
the building contractor; Mr. H. G. King installed the
clock; and Mr. M. W. Hardy supplied the memorial
tablets.
At the request of the Council, the Public Works
Department put down an artesian bore in the Town
Hall yard, during the year 1902. Rock was encountered
at a depth of 2,007 feet and continued to 2,040 feet, at
which depth it was abandoned, without a flow of ar-
tesian water having been obtained.
An up-to-date Electricity Works and Street Light-
ing System were installed in 1922, the capital expendi-
ture on which now exceeds £20,000. Mr. J. E.
Donoghue was the consulting engineer, and W. G.
Watson & Co. Ltd., the contractors. The opening
ceremony was performed by the Mayor, Aid. P. J.
Levey, and the lights were switched on by the Mayoress,
Mrs. E. N. Levey, on the Bth November, 1922.
The main portion of Maitland Street was tar-sur-
faced in January, 1931, by the B.H.P. By-Products
Proprietary Ltd., in conjunction with the Council’s staff.
Narrabri is now a modern town, having 27 miles
of streets; portion of the main street is tar-surfaced;
portions of the remainder are of waterbound macadam;
but they are mainly of gravel, and are nearly all gut-
tered. There are 18 miles of footways. In the centre
MAITLAND STREET, LOOKING SOUTH-EAST


WELCOME BACK TO
NARRABRI
to all “old-timers” who have come back to see us. Many
of you will see vast improvements in the Old Town—the
electric light, the tar-paved streets and footpaths, the
many fine new homes and public buildings, the War
Memorial, Clock Tower, the improvements to Collins
Park, the new Golf Links, have all come since you left.
The Trading Houses in the town have improved with the
times. At almost any business establishment in Narrabri
to-day you can get the same value and service that you
get in the city.
WELL TO THE FORE as an illustration, are the
MADE TO MEASURE SUITS
of
P. J. MACNAMARA
The Service, the Value, the Variety of Patterns
cannot be beaten by any city house, and the local
public are gradually realising that it is better to
deal locally when they can be served so well.
P. J. MACNAMARA
“Made-to-Measure” Suit King
NO FIT—NO BUSINESS
Buy your attire for the Back-to-Narrabri Week from a
native of your own town.
THE CENTRAL MOTORS L TD
Motor and General Engineers
NARRABRI
Every Necessity for Motorists
Dealers in:
FORD PRODUCTS
EXIDE BATTERIES
A.W.A. RADIOLA Wireless Receivers
WIRELESS Accessories
Agencies:
NEW ZEALAND INSURANCE CO. LTD.
Fire, Motor Car, Workers’ Compensation
DALGETY & CO. LTD. —Machinery Dept.
Wolseley Shearing Machines, Wolseley Duplicates
Wolseley Oil Engines, Roseberry Farm Products
Telephones: Garage and Office 184
Private 130, 173


of the town they are asphalt, but are mainly of gravel.
There are four parks-—Upper Collins (the recreation
ground), Lower Collins, Central, and Newtown, and a
camping site, having a total area of approximately 180
acres. The Narrabri Common, containing an area of
1,009 acres, is controlled by the Municipal Council, al-
though outside the area.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, 1933
BACK ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): ALDS. C. T. SHEARER, F. I. MILLER,
P. J. MC NAMARA, R. L. MANNING, F. T. PALMER, P. E. GLEESON.
FRONT ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): ALDS. H. LOGAN, E. MOONEY (DEPUTY
MAYOR), E. P. HOGAN (MAYOR), MR. W. J. MORRIS (TOWN CLERK).
The Council provides sanitary, garbage, private and
street electric lighting, and street watering services.
There is an abundant supply of pure water available at
a depth of from 15 to 35 feet.
There is a well-equipped and efficient Fire Brigade
in the town.
During the Great War of 1914-19, Narrabri supplied
its quota. The District Honour Rolls in the Town IJall
contain the names of 205 men who answered the call,
including those of Messrs. H. P. Moxham and M.
Fletcher, ex-members of the office staff, the former of
whom made the supreme sacrifice. Narrabri also sup-
plied its quota to the various war loans raised.
The Narrabri District Soldiers’ Memorial Commit-
tee, of which Aid. H. Logan was President and
Treasurer, and Mr. W. S. Hill, Secretary, was instru-
mental in having the Soldiers’ Memorial Clock Tower
and four-sided Clock, together with Tablets in memory
of the fallen soldiers of the district, erected on the
Town Hall. The tablets contain the names of 58 sol-
diers. The official opening was carried out by the Hon.
F. A. Chaffey (Chief Secretary), and the ‘memorial
handed over to the Mayor as the representative of the
Council by the President of the Committee, on the 13th
September, 1930, free of debt.
A census taken in 1881 revealed the population to
be between 800 and 900, which, according to an estimate,
had increased to about 1,000 in 1883; in 1921 it had in-
creased to 2,358, whilst a reliable check made this year
had disclosed that the population now exceeds 2,900.


KROHN
EXCLUSIVE
BOOT & SHOE STORE
BOOTS
SHOES
SLIPPERS
for
Men, Women,
Children
m
Best-known Australian
Makers
REASONABLE
PRICES
40 Years’ Experience in the Boot Trade
W. KROHIM
Opposite Post Office
NARRABRI
Phone 133
Be sure of a hearty welcome from
! - L
Pi
fit
the Original Publican, who is now
Mine Host of
Tatiefsads Holm
NARRABRI
Opposite the Picture Show
PHONE NARRABRI 7
Late of Bingara, Coolah, Penrith and Sydney
Our Motto as usual:
Civility, Service and Cleanliness
First-Class Accommodation
What I buy, you pay for. What you pay for I
get. What Eve got I must have bought, other-
wise I shouldn’t have it.


First 1932
Unimproved Capital Value .. £9,500 £100,862
Improved Capital Value .... * 102,005 430,021
Assessed Annual Value .... 12,992 41,089
Receipts 1884, £998/14/4; Revenue 1932, £12,494/15/6
The following have occupied the office of Mayor:
Alderman Charles Collins, 1883-4, 1884-5, 1885-6; Theo-
dore Morath, 1886-7; J. M. McDonald, 1887-8; G. S. E.
Dale, 1888-1893-4; G. Williams, 1894-5, 1895-6; I. I.
Piper, 1896-7; A. R. Stafford, 1897-8; A. E. Collins, 1898-
1900-1; I. J. Piper, 1901-2, 1902-3; H. V. Mumford,
1903-4; P. J. Levey, 1904-5 ; J. J. Piper, 1905-6, 1906-7;
Charles Martyn, February to July, 1907 ; Luke Malone,
August, 1907 to August, 1910; S. J. Faulkner, August,
1910 to February, 1911; H. G. Spencer, February, 1911
to September, 1917; E. Briscombe, October, 1917, to
February, 1918; P. J. Levey, February, 1918, to Decem-
ber, 1927; H. L. Walker 1927-28, 1928-29 ; E. P. Hogan,
December, 1929, up to the present date.
Town Clerks—Messrs. G. Lane> November, 1883,
to February, 1884; B. O. Taylor, March, 1884, to June,
1884; T. P. Carr, June, 1884, to August, 1884; Edward
Guest, whose period of service with the Council is the
longest one, August, 1884, to 1918 (over 33 years); C.
Gordon McKee, 1918-19; and W. J. Morris, January,
1920, to the present date. The three last-named have
also occupied the position of Clerk of WMrks.
Electrical Engineers: Messrs. F. Newman, August,
1922, to January, 1924; T. McD. Mundle, February,
1924, to October, 1924; R. J. Agnew, December, 1924
to September. 1930; C. Crowley, September, 1930, to
August, 1931; R. H. Miller, September, 1930, to the
present date.
Associated with the road works of the Council as
foreman in charge of jobs have been Messrs. John
Manton, Josiah Wood, and for the past twenty-five
years, Henry Clarence.
ALD. E. P. HOGAN
MAYOR
W. J. MORRIS
TOWN CLERK
Present Council: Aldermen E. P. Hogan (Mayor),
E. Mooney (Deputy Mayor), H. Logan, C. T. Shearer,
R. L. Manning, P. J. McNamara, P. E. Gleeson, F. T.
Palmer, and F. I. Miller.
Town Clerk and -Clerk of Works, W. J. Morris ;
Electrical Engineer, R. H. Miller; Health Inspector,
G. M. Henderson; Works Foreman, H. Clarence.


Ac Eo COLLIN
(Established 1872)
The Big Money Saving Store
NARRABRI
We can supply all your wants for
HOUSEHOLD, FARM
STATION
BUILDING MATERIALS
"Quality” is our Motto
Prices are Bedrock
BE LOYAL ! BE PATRIOTIC !
Spend your money where you earn it
SHOP LOCALLY
A. E. COLLINS Ltd.
The Big Money Saving Store
NARRABRI
Phone 16 P.O. Box 17
A. A.GLEESO
Agent for Chrysler and Austin
Cars
DUCO EXPERTS
Painting and Trimming a Specialty
All classes of
SIGNWRITING
High-class Workmanship. Lowest Cost
SPARE PARTS
for practically any make of Car on hand
Situated in the most central portion of the Town. Most
up-to-date exhibition TENNIS COURT for hire, day or
night. Spacious Open-air DANCE FLOOR for hire.
“Where young and old are always catered for ”
Athol Gleeson, Proprietor


Narrabri Churches
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
Up to the end of the year 1868, the work of the
Church of England in the Narrabri district had partaken
of the missionary rather than the parochial nature.
The district was part of the Diocese of Newcastle,
and the clergyman appointed to the work was an itiner-
ant evangelist, ministering to the early settlers and
widely-scattered stations.
ST. CYPRIANS' CHURCH OF ENGLAND
In 1866 the Diocese of Grafton and Armidale was
formed, and from this time Narrabri became a separate
parish. The first Synod of the Diocese met on May
19th, 1873, at Armidale, and although there were only
twelve clergy on the roll to minister to this vast area
north of the Liverpool Range, one —the Rev. T. G.
Marshall, B.A. —was resident in Narrabri.
Unfortunately, the earliest records of Church work
and activities were destroyed, but from the Registers
and documents available we find the Rev. Edward Wil-
liams, in 1857, at Wee Waa, with the oversight of a
district extending from Therrabri to Walgett. A mar-
riage celebrated by him on the 6th February, 1857, at
Wee Waa, is duly recorded. The Rev. John James
Nash followed, and on 11th February, 1860, officiated
at a burial, the first recorded in the district which a
minister of religion conducted.
Then came the Rev. Enoch Price. No less than
37 marriages were solemnized by him from January,
1862, to February, 1865. In 1867 we note the name of
Rev. C. R. Currey as Church of England minister in
charge. The Rev. Frederick Davis, M.A., was vicar of
Narrabri in 1869.
From 1879, records show that services were held
with surprising regularity in the Narrabri Court House.
AYee Waa, Pilliga, Eulah Creek, Maule’s Creek. Wild
Willows, Yarral Farm, Millie Station, Malaraway,
Bunna Bunna, Boolcarrol, Rosewood, Edgeroi, Gurley,
Mount Lindsay, Coola, Therribri, and Killarney. Later,
from 1887, each Sunday afternoon services were held in
the hospital and at the prison.
Shortly after 1880, a Church School was built on
the land adjacent to the site of the Post Office. This
building was afterwards known as St. Matthew’s
Church? After some twelve or fifteen years’ service a


Nothing is permanent but change. To-day’s methods are not yesterday’s; to-morrow’s will
not be the same as to-day’s
UP
3
\ rv\
\
mj
SAVE! SAVE!!
SAVE!!!
That’s what you’ve got to do these days. Money
saved is money earned. Here is where you can
earn good money by saving.
You cannot afford to deal elsewhere. Study your
own pocket and buy from us.
“Get it fresh daily” is an admonition which can be
carried out to the letter at FOXE’S. We’re pleased
to see you daily, and our supplies are arriving fresh
and pure every day.
REMEMBER . .
We Don’t Profiteer
But YOU profit HERE
Phone 8
for Better Service in GROCERY, HARDWARE and PRODUCE
Phone 8


westerly blow proved too much, and the building col-
lapsed. The Vicarage as it now stands was in existence
at this time.
The present Parish Church of St. Cyprian was
erected in 1895, and dedicated on the 2nd November,
by the Right Reverend A. U. Green, Bishop of Grafton
and Armidale, the vicar of the parish being Rev. T. E.
Fox. Whilst the Rev. T. E. Fox was vicar, the Church
of St. Lawrence, Narrabri West, was dedicated on 17th
June, 1894. At the opening, the congregation
numbered 240.
The first Church at Baan Baa was opened for divine
service on 29th September, 1896.
A fine brick building, well furnished, was conse-
crated by Right Reverend H. C. Cooper, Bishop of
Armidale, on 27th May, 1913, when Canon Villiers
Reid, was vicar. About this time the neat little Church
of St. Barnabas, was built at Bullawa Creek.
The Dangar Village Mission Hall was opened by
the Venerable Archdeacon J. Forster, D.D., on Sep-
tember 15th, 1929.
The following is a list of the vicars in charge of
the parish of Narrabri. Rev. Frederick Davis, M.A.,
1869; Rev. T. G. Marshall, 8.A., 1872; Rev. A. Brown,
1876; Rev. John F. Eaton, 1877; Rev. R. W. Wilson,
1879; Rev. Richard Hefferman, 1883; Rev. S. Gilmer,
1885; Rev. T. E. Fox, 1891; Rev. Alfred Dallas, 1892;
Rey. T. E. Fox, 1894; Rev. Alfred Dallas, 1896; Rev.
T. E. Fox, 1897; Rev. Canon Alfred King, 1897; Rev.
Walter Mantell, 1902; Rev. C. E. Curtis, 1903; Rev.
Canon W. D. Villiers Reid, 1907; Rev. Canon B. W.
Miller, R.D., 1925.
CATHOLIC CHURCH HISTORY
Linked with the history and development of Nar-
rabri and district is the history of the Catholic Church
in North-western New South Wales.
ST. XAVIERS' R.C. CHURCH
In 1860, before the march of progress had warranted
the extension of the railway further than Muswellbrook,
when bullock teams strained under their heavy loads
going to and from outlying stations, and the thought
of trafficable roads across the black soil plains was be-
yond the vision of the wildest dreamer, did Dean
McCarthy undertake a journey from Armidale, once
every six months, with saddle horse and pack horse,
to administer the comforts of their religion to the hand-
ful of hardy pioneers who composed the Catholic
population of the district at that time.


MRS. A. KERR
Maitland Street - Narrabri
High Class Confectionery, Choice
Fruit and Vegetables
Light Luncheons :: Afternoon Teas
ANDERSON’S SMALLGOODS
A SPECIALTY
L. H. E. EATHER
(Established 1891)
Newsagent, Stationer, Tobacconist,
Seedsman, Sporting Requisites
Periodicals and Magazines by every mail
Agencies:
London & Lancashire Insurance Go.
South British Insurance Co.
Waterman, Swan. Conklin and Onoto Fountain Pens
Boomerang Mouth Organs
MAITLAND ST. - NARRABRI
Phone 15
CRAMSIE & McRAE
(Established 1903)
STOCK, STATION, TRUCKING AND GENERAL
COMMISSION AGENTS. VALUATORS
Auction Sales conducted in any part of the District
Agencies:
QUEENSLAND INSURANCE CO. LTD.
ORIENT STEAM NAVIGATION CO. LTD.
“PERFECT” KILLER FUMIGATORS
UNION TRUSTEE CO. LTD.
“VALLO” SHEEP DIP
TETRACHLORIDE SHEEP DRENCH
Phones: Office 19, Private 34 P.O. Box 3
THE ELECTRICAL AGE
The Age of Electricity is here ! Electrical Appliances
and Cheap Electricity are also here to assist you in your
Household duties. Whether it be —
COOKING, CLEANING, WASHING, IRONING
or HEATING
there is an Electrical Appliance ready to do wonders
for you
There is an ‘Electrical Servant’ for every Household Need
The charges for electricity for heating and power purposes
in Narrabi'i are amongst the lowest in the State. Pay
us a call. Advice will be given by the Council’s Officers
free of charge.
THE NARRABRI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
For Everything Electrical


Until 1864 the district was served from Armidale,
but in that year lnverell was made the centre from
which the priest undertook the journey to Narrabri
every two months.
In 1880 the parish of Narrabri was created, and
the building of a Church begun under the direction of
the first resident priest, Father Joseph Doyle. The
first school was opened two years later in charge of
the Sisters of St. Joseph, with an enrolment of 35
pupils.
ST. JOSEPH'S CONVENT, NARRABRI, IN THE 90'S
(PHOTO LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)
The parish at that time embraced a very large area,
extending as far as Mungindi and Collarenebri, with
the Namoi as the southern boundary. During the course
of time, owing to the increase of population and closer
settlement, the greater part of the original parish has
been sub-divided and is now controlled from Moree,
Mungindi, Wee Waa and Boggabri.
From the time of Father Doyle to that of the present
revered parish priest, Rev. M. Ronayne, the parish was
in charge of Fathers Dunham, P. J. McGuiness, J.
Hearn and J. Gibbons.
The original Church still stands to-day, but many
improvements and additions have been made to Church
property, especially during the last twenty years. The
imposing block of buildings, of which the town may be
justly proud, comprising the Church, School, Convent
and Presbytery, all bear evidence of the untiring zeal
and energy of Rev. Father Ronayne and his assistants
during that time, Fathers Condon, McDermott, Mahony,
and T. Leahy, and the generosity of the Catholics of
Narrabri.
At present the school, now in the capable hands of
the Sisters of Mercy, has an enrolment of 230, which
is the best proof of the progress of the Church during
the 53 years of its establishment in this town.
ST. XAVIERS' CONVENT, NARRABRI


PRESBYTERIAN
The first services of the Presbyterian Church in
Narrabri were conducted in the early eighties by the
Rev. H. S. Buntine who worked from Boggabri as a
centre, under the Home Missions’ Committee of the
Church in New South Wales. He visited both Gunne-
dah and Narrabri. Originally the services were con-
ducted in the Court House, but later were held in the
School of Arts.
ST. STEPHEN'S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
In 1888 he was succeeded by the Rev. James Lawrie
who made Narrabri his centre and extended his ac-
tivities to Wee Waa. His successor, the Rev. George
Hay, had a short ministry as the care of such a far-
flung charge was proving too arduous for one man.
The Presbytery of Moree therefore divided the charge
in two —Gunnedah-Boggabri and Narrabri-Moree ;
The foundation of the present Church was laid on
22nd November, 1893 by the Governor, Sir Robert Duff,
but erection was not proceeded with till 1895. The
charge was a Home Mission Station until 1909, under
various ministers, including that of Mr. \\ illiam Taylor,
1899-1909. In the latter year the manse was erected,
and ordained minister (Rev. E. Eldridge) called and
Narrabri-Wee Waa became a “sanctioned charge.’
The first Secretary was Mr. John Manning, who was
also Session Clerk. Mr. Eldridge’s ministry was short,
and until 1922 the Church was dependent on temporary
arrangements. In that year the work of Mr. A. B.
Erskine, a Home Missionary, enabled the Church to
resume its proper standing and call Rev. H. S. R. Innes
who was succeeded in 1923 by Rev. W. Ihompson, in
1929 by the Rev. B. R. Palmer, and in 1932 by the
present minister, Rev. A. G, Wood.
The office of Session Clerk is at present held by
Mr. Henry Hogan, the communicant of longest stand-
ing. The charge, is a large one extending from Baan
Baa to Burren Junction and from Rocky Creek to Pil-
liga Scrub.
-o()o .
HISTORICAL RECORD OF NARRABRI
METHODIST CHURCH 1866-1933
Methodism began at Narrabri as far back as 1866,
and thus the foundation of the first Church to minister
to the needs of the people of the north-west was laid.
In that year, Conference appointed the Rev. A. Kirton
Corner as the first minister of the Narrabri-Wee Waa
Circuit. He was thus the pioneer of the north-west as


far as Methodism is concerned, and, to this day, is held
in affectionate regard by some who remember those
far-off days.
The Rev. K. Corner spared not himself in service
and, during his two years appointment, travelled the
whole area from the Namoi to the Barwon and beyond.
At that time Narrabri “Circuit” extended from Carrol
and Gunnedah to Mungindi in the north, Walgett in
the west, and Bingara in the north-east. There were
no churches of any denomination in this extensive area,
with the exception of a small Anglican one at Gunne-
dah, the minister of which was the only cleric, apart
from the Methodist at Narrabri.
METHODIST CHURCH
In the early days, Methodist services were for some
years held in the Court House. The natural desire of
the people for a building of their own led to enthusiastic
endeavours to accomplish that purpose, with the result
that the first Methodist Church was built in 1876, the
minister being the Rev. R. East. It was a weather-
board building and cost £lBO. Unfortunately, no re-
cords are available of the opening celebrations. The
present Church was built twenty years later (1896) dur-
ing the ministry of the Rev. James Watson.
The Rev. Corner’s immediate successor was the
Rev. J. E. Carruthers, D.D., then a young man of
twenty, just beginning his term of probation.
Then followed the Revs. R. Allen, R. McKeown,
T. Moore, J. Jory, R. East, C. Terrey, J. Bowes, A.
Hutchison, T. Parker, ,G. W. Payne, J. Colwell. B.
Bottomley, J. Calvert, H. P. Grainger, J. Thomas, C. E.
Williams, W. J. Walker, A. T. Huggart, S. Id. Macdade,
G. Williams, J. Watson, J. S. Thomas, S. Gilby, P. S.
Young, H. Price, T. J. Starr, H. H. Allen, S. W. Bon-
nor, R. C. Stranger, S. Bostock Jones, C. L. Connor.
P. M. Waterhouse, H. T. McGowan, J. Wilkinson.
H. C. Howard, A. J. Cutler, Mr. Palmer, Revs. X. H.
Kline, F. T. Walker, J. W. Spencer, G. G. Wood, X. W.
Lickiss, C. Harwood and A. E. Frede.
—oOo— —-
THE HISTORY OF THE SALVATION ARMY,
NARRABRI
On the first day of September, 1887, the Salvation
Army held its first meeting in a small hall then situated
in Maitland Street, opposite the present building of
Ireland’s Bakery. Captain Maggie Pratt was the first
residing officer, and a splendid work was begun. Later
they moved into a small hall near Michael Hardy’s
Monumental Works for week day meetings, and the
crowd was forced to occupy the Town Hall for the
Sunday’s gatherings.


THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR QUALITY
For more than twelve years HOWARDS’ have supplied the public of Narrabri
and district with
GROCERIES
PROVISIONS
and PRODUCE
of the HIGHEST QUALITY at ECONOMICAL
PRICES
Our circle of satisfied customers is larger to-day
than ever
fa
WHERE YOUR POUND
BUYS A POUNDS WORTH
Continuous Growth is proof of Satisfactory Service
Trade with Us and Watch your Savings Grow
QUALITY GROCER and PRODUCE MERCHANT
P\ O il'B 161
AHiR ASH!. i


In 1886 the late Mr. William Hayes, who was an
ardent member of the Corps, put up the hall at present
occupied by the local force. At that time the town
was the proud possessor of a good force of Salvationist
instrumentalists who took a prominent part in the
opening ceremonies. The officers rented small cot-
tages for their quarters from time to time in different
parts of the town. In January, 1924, the then residing
officers, Adjutant Murphy and Lieut. Moyle, returned
from conducting a meeting to find their little home
burnt down, though kind friends had busied themselves
and rescued all their personal belongings and furniture.
In November, 1930. the officers moved into quarters
built on the rear of the meeting hall and can always
be found at this dwelling.
During its existence many citizens have joined its
ranks, its oldest present member being Mr. Hardy
Clarke of Fitzroy Street, Narrabri.
On August Ist, Commissioner Sowton, the leader
of the Salvation Army for New South Wales and
Queensland, visited the Corps and the meeting was
presided over by the then Mayor (the late Aid. H. L.
Walker). In 1931 Commissioner Maxwell visited Nar-
rabri, and the local corps is at present anticipating the
visit of Commissioner Mackenzie (its present leader),
who is also known as “Fighting Mac" of the Australian
Imperial Forces.
The officers at present responsible for the work
of the corps are Adjutant Plumridge and Lieutenant
Leech.
Many are helped through the organisation’s homes,
and only this present year two local residents have
been taken to homes in the city to be further helped
by the organisation’s social work.
SALVATION ARMY BARRACKS


NARRABRI JUBILEE CELEBRAIONS
4rt to 10th SEPTEMBER, 1933
OFFICIAL PROGRAMME
MONDAY, 4th SEPTEMBER, 1933
Welcome to ex-Residents at Railway Station, 10.30 a.m.
Civic Reception to ex-Residents, Town Hall, 11.30 a.m.
Official Opening Cade Memorial Gates, Upper Collins
Park, 2 p.m.
Ex-Residents’ Motor Trips to Country, 2.15 p.m.
Free Open Air Entertainment and Street Carnival,
Maitland Street, 7.30 p.m.
Conversazione Ex-Residents and Old Residents, Town
Hall, 8 p.m.
TUESDAY, sth SEPTEMBER, 1933
Grand Procession, 10.30 a.m.
Civic Reception, Town Hall, 12.5 p.m.
Public Luncheon, Town Hall, 1 p.m.
Scouts’ Display, and Ladies’' Hockey Match, Upper
Collins Park, 2 p.m.
March Past, 3.15 p.m.
Free Open Air Entertainment and Street Carnival,
Maitland Street, 7.30 p.m.
Grand Jubilee Ball, Town Hall, 8.30 p.m.
WEDNESDAY, 6th SEPTEMBER, 1933
Gymkhana, including Trotting, Wood Chopping, Horse
Events and Car Events, Racecourse, 10.30 a.m.
Free Open Air Entertainment and Street Carnival,
Maitland Street, 7.30 p.m.
Musical Revue by Narrabri Musical Society, Town
Hall, 8 p.m.
THURSDAY, 7th SEPTEMBER, 1933
Children's Day Picnic and Sports, Upper Collins Park,
10.30 a.m.
First Day, Narrabri Horse Races, Racecourse, 2 p.m.
Free Open Air Entertainment and Street Carnival,
Maitland Street, 7.30 p.m.
Musical Revue by Narrabri Musical Society, Town
Hall, 8 p.m.
FRIDAY, Bth SEPTEMBER, 1933
Second Day, Narrabri Horse Races, Racecourse, 2 p.m.
Juvenile Dance, Town Hall, 4 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.
Fireworks Display, Upper Collins Park, 8 p.m.
Electric Light Athletic Sports, Upper Collins Park,
following Fireworks Display.
Old-time and Modern Dance and Euchre Party, Town
Hall, 8.30 p.m.
SATURDAY, 9th SEPTEMBER, 1933
Band Solo Competition, Town Hall, 9.15 a.m.
Band Street Marching Competition to Upper Collins
Park, 2 p.m.
Band Contest, Upper Collins Park, 3.15 p.m.
Massed Bands, under Adjudicator, playing Masses
March, 4.30 p.m.
Massed Bands March to Upper Collins Park, 7.30 p.m.
Closing of Queen Competition, 8 p.m.
Band Contest, Upper Collins Park, 8.30 p.m.
Crowning of Jubilee Queen Ceremony, Upper Collins
Park, 10 p.m.
SUNDAY, 10th SEPTEMBER, 1933
Special Services in all Churches, morning.
Each Band to march to Upper Collins Park, playing en
route, 2 p.m.
Band Contest, Upper Collins Park, 3.15 p.m.
Massed Bands march through town from Upper Collins
Park, 5.15 p.m.
Massed Bands march to Upper Collins Park, 8.30 p.m.
Band Contest, Upper Collins Park, 9 p.m.
Results of Band Contest announced, Upper Collins
Park, 10 p.m.


NAMO! HOTEL
FIRST-CLASS
ACCOMMODATION
Visitors Specially Catered for
during
NARRABRI CELEBRATIONS
EXCELLENT TABLE
All Spirits True to Label
T ARIFF -3/- per Day
Phone 147
Alf. Gray, Proprietor
can only be attained through
Truth in Advertising is also a feature
which has helped
Qhe Popular Drapers and Piercers
TO PROGRESS
YOU can help Narrabri back to Prosperity
SHOP LOCALLY and create employment
for everyone
Keep the money in your own town you
can’t do better.
“Serve You Right ”
NARRABRI


NARRABRI JUBILEE CELEBRATIONS-EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
BACK ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): O. GUEST, P. A. MCALISTER (HON. TREASURER), E. R. SCOTT, F. A. TREVILLIEN,
FRONT ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): ALD. H. LOGAN, ALD. E. P. HOGAN (CHAIRMAN), W. J. MORRIS (HON. SECTY. )
ALD. F. T. PALMER
DIRECTOR OF PUBLICITY


ar
.<5
w:
M/r
Mother doesn’t
Bake now* She
Orders CAKES
from US.
It is cheaper, and removes che
uncertainty home cooking entails,
for our cakes are baked by pro-
fessional pastrycooks in modern
ovens.
Purity of ingredients is also assured. We should like to serve you.
Give us the opportunity.
E. P. HOGAN & CO.
Maitland Street, NARRABRI
’Phone 36
Phone 62 Narrabri
Septimus J. Faulkner
(Established 1891)
ICE, Aerated Water and Cordial
Manufacturer
MAITLAND STREET, NARRABRI
FAULKNER’S ICE —because of its purity, because of its
solidity—cuts household expenses by preserving food and
keeping it fresh and palatable at all times. Wnat’s more,
it’s ideal for making Cool Drinks.
TELEGRAPH MOTEL
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Civility and Attention Guaranteed
Only the Best Spirits Stocked, and everything
True to Label.
We don’t keep the Best—we SELL IT
TOM BARRETT,
Phone 50 Proprietor
M. A. EDWARDS
(Established 1900)
The Narrabri Butchery
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Phone 18
THE TASTIEST MEATS
It may not be good manners to “smack one’s lips,”
but you simply can’t help it after having “put away”
a meal that includejd one of our flavoury Meat
Specials.


NAMOI SHIRE
NAMOI SHIRE COUNCIL
BACK ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): D. SKY, B. SC. (SHIRE ENGINEER), CLRS.
K. P. KIRKBY (DEPUTY PRESIDENT). J. A. LAIRD. MR. T. W. WAUGH,
A.L.C.A. (SHIRE CLERK).
FRONT ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): CLRS. L. F. ECKFORD, A. A. COPPLESON
(PRESIDENT), E. R. CURREY, L. W. GUEST.
NAMOI SHIRE
Xamoi Shire, the second largest local governing
area (5.036 square miles), was proclaimed in the Govern-
ment Gazette of 7th March, 1906. Prior to the election
of the first Council under the Local Government Act
of 1905-1906, the activities of the Shire were carried
on by a Provisional Council appointed by the Governor.
This Council consisted of Councillor F. Lord (Chair-
man), Councillor A. A. Coppleson (Vice-Chairman) and
Councillors John Humphries, A. R. Stafford and A.
Powell, and it is interesting- to note that Cr. A. A.
Coppleson who was Vice-Chairman of the Provisional
Council is now President.
The first clerk to the Provisional Council was Mr.
J. Middleton, who occupied the position for some two
or three months. After his resignation the duties were
undertaken bv Cr. Coppleson until the appointment of
Mr.. C. H. Hodson.
The first elected Council comprised the following:
Messrs. R. Shields, A. A. Coppleson. R. Cameron, John
Humphries and J. Breckenrigg, who continued in office
for three years. The present Council consists of six
NAMOI SHIRE COUNCIL CHAMBERS


Footwear Specialists
Rlen's, Ladies' and
Childrens
Bools and Shoes
iiil;
Sole Distributors for DR. SCHOLL’S FOOT APPLIANCES
School Children Specially Catered for in Footwear
SATISFACTION ASSURED
A. E. WOOLLETT & CO.
“Where Quality Counts’"
Maitland Street, NARRABRI
AGENT FOR LEGAL FIRE INSURANCE CO.
Phone 209 P.O. Box 63
A. G. WEATHERALL
M.P.S., Ph.C
Dispensing Chemist
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Well known for the accurate dispensing of
doctors prescriptions from only the purest of
Drugs.
Our stocks comprise Toilet, Perfumery, Patent
and Proprietary Requisites.
Muriel Astor Toilet Supplies.
Harrington’s Photographic
Material
Phone 78 P.O. Box 31


members, Cr. A. A. Coppleson (President), Cr. K. P.
Kirkby (Deputy President), and Councillors E. R. Cur-
rey, L. P\ Eckford, L. W. Guest, and J. A. Laird, who
were elected in 1931.
ON THE NORTH-WESTERN PLAINS. NARRABRI
(BLOCK LOANED BY GOVERNMENT PRINTER)
The first Shire Clerk, Mr. C. H. Hodson, held office
for 7 years, and was followed by Messrs. W. J. Grieve
(1912-1915), Geo. Lee (1915-1916), C. PI. Wood (1916-
1923), W. G. Gibbs (1923-1924), K. Anderson (1924-
1925), C. Cameron (1925-1927), and T. W. Waugh
(1927—).
Air. Chambers was appointed first Engineer to the
Shire, and then came in turn Messrs. Tuxon. J. McKen-
zie. H. Heffernan, L. H. Irvine, J. McGowen, A. E.
Carter and D. H. Sky.
The first Plealth Inspector was appointed in 1919,
when Air. K. Beavis took office, he was followed by
Messrs. Rowe (1920-1921). G. B. Newman (1921-1925),
and G. G. Hingston (1926 —).
As at present constituted, the Shire extends to
Pilliga on the west, Bellata on the north, and Boggabri
on the south, whilst the Nandewar Range forms the
eastern boundary; included in the area are the town-
ships of Wee Waa, Pilliga, Bellata, Baan Baa, Boggabri
and Gwabegar.
After the passing of the 1919 Act the townships of
Wee Waa and Boggabri were proclaimed urban areas
and are now governed by their respective Urban Com-
mittees.
The lands of the Shire are comprised chiefly of
pastoral and agricultural areas, and for the year 19,53
are valued at £1,900.000. As these lands, and lands
of adjoining areas, carry a large number of sheep and
"KILLARNEY" SHEARING SHED


cattle, due provision has been made for watering by the
establishment of public watering places on the principal
stock routes. In all there are 12, with a total area of
7,162 acres.
CHAMPION CROP, R.A.S. FIELD WHEAT COMPETITION, 1931
WALL & CARBERRY, NARRABRI
Out of a total length of 2,392 miles of roads in the
area, 176 miles are main roads, 16 miles developmental,
and 2,240 miles secondary roads. The greater portion
of the secondary roads is partially cleared or in the
natural state, but each year the Council is gradually
improving their surfaces with the object of assisting in
land settlement; 46 miles have been gravelled, 83 miles
formed, and 63 miles cleared. Of the 176 miles of main
roads, 66 have been gravelled, 27 miles loam surfaced.
46 miles cleared and 36 miles prepared for further de-
velopment. The Boggabri-Manilla Road, which is the
only developmental road in the area, has been gravelled
for a distance of 13 miles, and it is anticipated that
the remaining 3 miles will shortly be completed.
The Namoi River runs practically right through
the Shire, and it is spanned at Boggabri, Tarriaro and
Wee Waa with very fine steel and timber truss bridges,
whilst some excellent timber beam bridges have been
erected on the roads under the Council’s control. The
largest of these, which has just been completed at a
cost of £2,770, is that across Coghill Creek at Cuttabri,
This is a twelve-span structure with a total overall
length of 360 feet. The Council this year embarked
upon a large bridge construction programme, and it
is expected that at least 8 bridges at- a total cost of
approximately £lO.OOO will be completed before the
end of 1933.
oOo
NARRABRI PASTURES PROTECTION BOARD
On the occasion of the Jubilee Celebration of a
town one must not overlook the surrounding district,
for after all, what is the town without the support and
co-operation of the people on the land ? The most
representative body of these people is the Pastures
Protection Board. The Board consists of eight prac-
tical stock-owners elected every three years by the
ratepayers of the district, and is a corporate body under
the Crown. The functions of Pastures Protection
Boards are numerous. Travelling stock is controlled
by them, stock and camping reserves are vested in them;
they control the destruction of rabbits and noxious
animals, and the erection of rabbit-proof fences and
the supply of materials for such fences. Diseases of
all classes of stock are also controlled by their officers.


so also are brands and marks and the registration of
all large stock and sheep.
The late Mr. G. R. Watson, of ‘‘Spring Plain,” was
a Director from the inception of the Board to the time
of his demise in 1912, in the course of which he was
the Chairman for twelve successive years. Mr. Robert
Shields, of Edgeroi Station, the present Chairman,
creates another record; he has also been a Director
since the inception of Boards, and was Chairman for
thirteen successive years to 1925, and with the exception
PASTURES PROTECTION BOARD
BACK ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): P. H. HULBERT (SECRETARY), DIRS. A.
BARKER. J. J. MC GREGOR. MR. L. A. W. MACTIER (INSPECTOR OF STOCK).
FRONT ROW (LEFT TO RIGHT): DIRS. J. MC CLINTOCK, R. SHIELDS
(CHAIRMAN), J. HUNT, C. G. CROAKER.
ABSENT: DIRS. T. D. WATSON, A. K. CAMERON.
of one year in each case, when Director T. D. Watson
and Director R. j. McWilliams occupied the position,
has filled the Chair to this date, a total service of
nineteen years.
The present Board consists of Directors R. Shields
(Chairman), T. D. Watson, James McClintock, Alfred
Barker, J. J. McGregor, James Hunt, C. G. Croaker
and A. K. Cameron. Mr. L. A. W. Mactier, B.V. Sc.,
is the Inspector of Stock for the district, and P. H.
Hulbert the Secretary.
OOO
BRIEF HISTORY OF THE NARRABRI P.A. & H.
ASSOCIATION
Realising the possibilities of the fertile soil of the
North-western Plains, the grand old pioneers of Nar-
rabri district, inaugurated an Association called the
Namoi Pastoral, Agricultural, and Horticultural As-
sociation.
In November of 1876 the first show was held.
Entries, which were good, included 160 horses, 288
cattle, and 321 sheep. The financial statement showed
a credit balance of £2OO. Mr. A. J. Doyle was first
President, Captain Moseley, Hon. Secretary, and Mr.
C. Collins, Hon. Treasurer. The Committee consisted of
Messrs. J. Fletcher, D. M. Fraser, A. Goldman, J. W.
James, C. W. Lloyd„ W. Price and C. E. Smith.
In spite of the fact that shows in the early days
were not held annually, the Association was very ac-
tive. In 1882. Mr. W. Pirie was President, Mr. C. A.
Ross, Hon. Secretary, and Mr. C. J. Druitt, Hon.
Treasurer.


Club House Hotel
NARRABRI
Established 50 Years
N.R.M.A. and C.T.A.
Under New Management
Always was, and always will be the Leading Guest House
in town. Try our meals.
R. O. WALKER,
Phone 27 Proprietor
DAVE THOMAS
Hairdresser and Tobacconist
Ladies and Gents’ Private Saloons
3 Chairs
ELECTRIC PACE MASSAGE
A SPECIALITY,
Toilet Requisites, Cigarettes, Tobacco and
Smoking Requisites
Cleanliness, Civility and Service
(Established 1912
CHARTERS & TAYLOR
(E. J. Holtsbaum)
Auctioners, Stock and Station Agents
MAITLAND STREET :: NARRABRI
PHONES: Office and Private Residence, 122
Agencies,:
Atlas Insurance Co.
Cooper’s Sheep Dip
Buzacott & Co.
Dangar, Gedve & Co. Ltd.
Alston Mindmills
National Mutual Life Assn, of Australia Ltd.
“The Greenwood”
Tea Rooms
Light Luncheons : Afternoon Tea
Home-Made Cakes
Wedding and Picnic Parties Catered for
MRS. A. K. CAMERON and MISS R. HANSEN
Joint Proprietresses


With Mr. James Moseley as Hon. Secretary in
1885, a very successful show was held; 1,400 entries
were received.
During 1887, the Show Committee received help
from the Government. The Legislative Assembly voted
to all Agricultural Societies in the Colony the sum of
£5,000 to be used in the proportion of £1 for every
£4 raised by-contribution.. *
The rapidity with which the Association developed
during the early years was to a large extent due to the
enthusiastic endeavours of the late Captain Moseley,
and his energetic brother, Mr. James Moseley, and
among other pioneers whose names figured prominently
were Messrs. H. R. Thurlow, John Riddle, A. E. Collins,
G. S. E. Dale. Charles Collins, A. R. Stafford, Chas.
Eather, J. J. Piper, W. F. Buchanan, G. H. Piggott,
H. C. Taylor, T. M. McGill and Dr. de Lepervanch. All
took a keen interest in the development of the Namoi
P.A. and H. Association.
Then came a time when Dr. A. J. Park was elected
to the Presidency, which office he retained for 25 years.
Running in double harness with him was Vice-Presi-
dent G. R. Watson, who declined at all times to take
office as President. During this period, Secretaryship
was held by Messrs. W. Ross, W. Malone, E. J. Kim-
morley, V. Janes and W. A. McDonald. Mr. P. A.
McAlister was Hon. Secretary for many years.
The Association encouraged district wheat compe-
titions, and the potentialities of the district as a wheat-
growing one were shown to be indeed great. The
Championship of N.S.W., and also of the Commonwealth
were won by members of the Narrabri P.A. and H. As-
sociation. In addition to these honours, members also
secured an honourable position in the World Grain Ex-
hibition at Chicago.
Since its inception the Narrabri P.A. and H. As-
sociation has grown in strength and reputation until
to-day the meetings are perhaps the most enthusiastic
of any public body in Narrabri.
The Association is governed by a Committee of
48, of whom the officials for 1932-33 were: Patron, Dr.
A. J. Park; President, E. H. Bawden, Esq.; Vice-Presi-
dents, S. J. Carberry, Esq., and L. T. Sanderson, Esq.;
Hon. Treasurer, F. T. Palmer, Esq.; Hon. Secretary,
C). Guest, Esq.; Secretary, D. McR. Fraster.
PASTORAL HOMESTEAD. NARRABRI DISTRICT
(BLOCK LOANED BY GOVERNMENT PRINTER)


To-day’s Styles in
Diamond Rings
&
ininiiiuiiiiiiiiniiiiiii
l " ■* l
“Say it with Diamonds”
is a piece of advice that
may well be followed by
the lover, and where is
the maiden who could be
unresponsive when wooed
in this fashion !
The old, old story is ever
the same; but fashions —
even in Engagement Rings
change from time to
time.
The range of Diamond
Rings offered here in-
cludes all the favoured
styles and, at the prices,
full value is assured.
OMB
=»5
!•*&***
JEWELLER and OPTICIAN
Maitland Street,
NARRABRI
Phone 76
“I’ve been to Charlie Shearer’s
An’ I will no’ return
’Til the fruit is in ma tummy
An’ the bag is in the burn;
For everything he sells is guid—
A shilling there is worth a quid.”
Where the Good Fruit is Sold
(Established 1903)
Maitland Street,
NARRABRI
Live up to the White Australia policy, and get
your Fruit and Confectionery from a son of
Scottish Pioneers.
Phone 83


NARRABRI DISTRICT HOSPITAL
A Brief History of its Activities: 1866-1933
The people of Xarrabri and district first enjoyed
the services of a public hospital about the year 1866.
The site was the piece of ground now known as Central
Park, which was occupied until 1896, when the present
building was erected.
Few records are available prior to 1896 to supply
many authentic details, but amongst the old files of
the local journal, a copy of October, 1888, contains a
NARRABRI DISTRICT HOSPITAL
report of the proceedings of a committee meeting which
indicates that the business of hospital management in
those days did not always proceed smoothly.
The report recorded, inter alia, that a hand to hand
combat took place between two members of the com-
mittee, and that in the resultant disturbance a kerosene
lamp was upset, and had it not been for the prompti-
tude of one of the members of the committee, a serious
fire might have ensued. The accident apparently had
the effect of cooling down the tempers of the combat-
ants, for the business of the meeting proceeded after
everyone had recovered from the shock.
The transfer to the new building was effected in
1896, under the guidance of a committee, the president
of which was Jas. Lillyman, Jnr., Escp, J.P.
The next record of the operatioris of the institution
is set out in the report of the committee for the year
NARRABRI HOSPITAL, IN THE EARLY EIGHTIES
(PHOTO LOANED BY GORDON ADAMS)
ended 31st December, 1899. During that year the com-
mittee consisted of 19 members, probably very few of
whom are now living. They were Messrs. G. S. Evans,


J. J. Piper, Chas. Martyn, H. M. Hutchinson, B. Lyne,
L. Malone, Charles Wall, M. Saunders, Thos. Smith,
E. V. Coleman, H. Stubbs, John Doyle, H. L. Walker,
G. Williams, W. J. Walton, R. Spencer, John Goodyer,
G. S. E. Dale, and W. Denham. Mr. H. R. Thurlow
was President, and Messrs. J. W. McDonald and John
Gately, Vice-Presidents. Dr. A. J. Park was appointed
Medical Officer, which position he occupied until 1931
when the position of paid Medical Officer was abolished.
Miss F. Rose Fraser carried out the duties of matron.
The number of cases treated was 198.
DISASTROUS FIRE, MAITLAND STREET, 1917
(PHOTO LOANED BY N. EDWARDS)
Revenue received in 1899 amounted to £697, and
expenditure £703. Receipts and expenditure for the
year just ended as at 30th June last, were £3,445 and
£2,799 respectively.
Various improvements, owing to the expansion of
work, were required from time to time, and in 1900 a
windmill and hot water service were installed, which
added greatly to the comfort of the patients and staff.'
Nine years later a much-needed septic tank was installed
(now obsolete) ; also acetylene gas. Various wards
were plastered and woodwork painted, but owing to
the disastrous flood in January, 1910, much of this work
had to be redone.
In 1912, Mr. P. J. Levey was elected President in
place of Mr. H. R. Thurlow, retired, that gentleman
having held the position since 1900. During 1912 the
present nurses’ quarters were completed and the addi-
tional accommodation was much appreciated. Decem-
ber, 1914, saw the badly-needed isolation block
(Buchanan Ward) completed. This building, with a
re-arrangement of bed space elsewhere, brought the
available accommodation from 23 to 31 beds.


In 1918 Mr. P. A. McAlister was elected as Presi-
dent, and in 1919 Mr. H. R. Thurlow was re-elected.
Mr. A. J. Hulbert occupied the office from 1921 till
1930, when the present Chairman, Mr. H. G. King, was
elected.
DISASTROUS FLOOD IN 1910, VIEW IN MAITLAND STREET
(PHOTO LOANED BY N. EDWARDS)
The inauguration of the weekly contributions
under the systematic contributions scheme and the
appointment of a paid collecter have been responsible
for much progress and has put the finances of the in-
stitution on a fairly sound basis.
From 1921 onwards a fair number of badly-needed
improvements Avere carried out, and the old building
is now looking much better than it has done for many
years. Electric light was installed in 1922, and in 1928
the operating block was rebuilt, and the front \ r erandah
was extended and widened.
In 1927 a modern operating table was installed at
a cost of approximately £lOO. This was only made
possible by the timely gift of the sum of £3OO by T. A.
McGill, Esq., of Mollee Station.
This brief history of the institution would not be
complete without some special mention of the wonder-
ful assistance rendered by the public of Narrabri and
district. This also applies to the various honorary
DISASTROUS FLOOD, 1910, VIEW FROM MAITLAND STREET
TO RAILWAY STATION
(PHOTO LOANED BY N. EDWARDS)


JIM QUIRK
(Established 1898)
MAITLAND ST., NARRABRI
Hairdresser and Tobacconist
Stationer and Billiard Saloon
Toys and Fancy Goods
ALL KINDS OF SPORTING MATERIAL
A SPECIALTY
Phone 12
H.SCHATZ
BOOTMAKER
and REPAIRER
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Old Boots Made New—-
New Boots Made, too !
A. T. PRATT, M.P.S.
Dispensing Chemist
NARRABRI
Prescriptions carefully prepared
and forwarded to all parts.
Phone 179
SERVICE WITH A SMILE
THE BEST PROOF IS A TRIAL
We are pleased to Serve you at Any Hour
Hot Dinners, Grills to Order, Dainty Teas with Cakes
or Scones, Fresh Sandwiches for the Road, Cool Drinks,
Ice Cream, Fresh Fruit, Confectionery.
CHAS. BETTS
Maitland Street - - NARRABRI
Phone 232


officers, particular mention being necessary of the
valuable assistance rendered by the late Hon. Treasurer,
Mr. H. V. Mumford, who carried out the duties of this
position for 31 years from 1900 to 1931.
Some of the efforts of the public of Narrabri are
worthy of mention. The sum of £1,856 was raised in
1923 by a carnival held in conjunction with the Com-
mittee of the Northern Travellers’ Cot Fund. The
hospital’s share was £1,115. In 1925 a “Continental"
was held and the sum of £B6O was raised.
It is pleasing to be able to record that the sys-
tematic giving under the contribution scheme has more
or less supplanted the irregular and spasmodic raising
of funds by soliciting of donations and by entertain-
ments, but the fact must not be lost sight of that this
form of income may have to be resorted to to meet
special expenditure which will be necessary for the new
nurses’ quarters about to be constructed. The building
promises to be a very fine one, and when completed
and furnished will be a credit to the hospital and to
Narrabri.


ASSOCIATIONS
C.W.A.
The Narrabri Branch of the C.W.A. was instituted
in 1926 as a result of the visit of Mrs. Studdy. The
first President was Mrs. E. Cameron, of “Pretoria,”
Narrabri. In 1928 such progress had been made that
the C.W.A. Rest Rooms, in Barwon Street, were erected
at a cost of £4OO, and made available to all country
women whether members or not. The activities of the
Branch, at the moment, are concentrated on the estab-
lishment of a Baby Health Centre. In this matter the
full co-operation of the Gunnedah and Boggabri
Branches has been enlisted, and it is hoped that a fully
qualified nurse will shortly be in charge of the centres
in these towns.
Another noteworthy aspect of the work has been
the support given the Far West Children’s Health
Scheme. While the Association has always been to
the fore in its efforts to assist the local hospital by
every means, the activities too, of the Narrabri Com-
munity Chest in the relief of necessitious cases in the
town and district, have also received unstinted support.
The regular visits of members to the hospital is a note-
worthy feature of its activity. Altogether a notable
record' has been achieved in a rather brief period of
existence, and a more flourishing and praiseworthy
future is the aim and ideal of every member of the
C.W.A.
The officials for 1933 are: President, Mrs. J. C.
Knox; Treasurer, Miss D. Foxe; Hon. Secretary, Mrs.
T. Bolton.
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA
C.W.A. YOUNGER SET, NARRABRI BRANCH
The Narrabri Branch of .the C.W.A. Younger Set
was formed in 1928, and has been most active in as-
sisting charities in Narrabri and elsewhere.
The purchase of a “Sylvia Stretcher” was the
objective of the first efforts of these energetic young
ladies, and at an afternoon tea at the District Hospital
the stretcher was presented to the Hospital for the
use of the town and district. Each year the Hospital
has received a generous donation as a result of dances
and tennis parties, and just recently a number of bed
tables were installed by the Younger Set.
The Far West Children’s Health Scheme has al-
ways had the sympathy and support of the C.W.A.
Younger Set, and on the local committee are two
Younger Set delegates.


NARRABRI CREEK IN FLOOD
Valuable assistance is given the parent branch of
the Country Women's Association, and at present both
committees are working to raise funds to assist in the
establishment of a Baby Health Centre in Narrabri.
Social functions arranged by the Younger Set have
always been most successful both financially and socially
and members are noted for their organising abilities.
Meetings are held monthly, are well attended, and
a source of pleasure to their members who number over
30. The present office-bearers are : President, Miss Nell
Morath; Vice-Presidents, Misses M. Barrett, D. Bray-
shaw and B. Hunt; Hon. Treasurer. Miss B. Wheeler,
and Hon. Secretary, Miss N. Guest.
oOo
NARRABRI BRANCH OF THE RED CROSS
SOCIETY OF N.S.W.
The Narrabri Branch of the Red Cross Society was
reformed by Major Barry on 11th March, 1929, when
fifty-five members were enrolled.
The activities embrace sending a quota of £25 per
annum to headquarters for the various soldiers’ hos-
pitals, together with a parcel of hand-knitted garments
and other comforts for returned soldiers and their
dependants. Distressed returned soldiers in the Nar-
rabri district are also helped. Narrabri Community
Hospital is helped by gifts of various kinds, which are
collected or contributed by the members.
Funds are raised by subscriptions, donations, en-
tertainments and street stalls, all voluntarily undertaken
by the members and executive.
Officers for 1933 are: President, Mrs. N. Lloyd;
Vice-Presidents, Mrs. H. Riddle and Mrs. C. Merry;
Hon. Secretary, Mrs. W. F. Lee; Hon. Treasurer, Mrs.
R. L. Manning.
POST OFFICE, NARRABRI


THE BEST-DRESSED MEN
at the Jubilee Celebrations
will be wearing Suits
Made-to-Measure by
J. HENNESSY
Dress Suits, Sac Suits,
Sports Suits
From Fabric to Buttonhole, Suits made by
J- Hennessy honor the reputation for
character and quality they have merited
for 40 years.
PRICES, too, are competitive with
City Houses
>Y
Jo HEMMED
(Established 1893)
“Tailors of Finer Clothes for Gentlemen ”
Maitland Street - Narrabri
Phone 113
MERRY & BLACKSHAW
Motor and General Engineers
Service Station
Maitland Street
Narrabri
Dealers in General Motor Products
CHEVROLET
BUICK
CADILLAC
OAKLAND
OLDSMOBILE
LA SALLE
PONTIAC
VAUXHALL
G.M.C. TRUCKS
Tyres, Tubes, Petrol, Oils, Greases and
ALL ACCESSORIES
TELEPHONES—BB (Day), 115 (Night)
Agent for the Royal Insurance Co. Ltd.


SPORT
FOOTBALL
Until 1920 the Rugby Union Code was played in
Narrabri, with Gunnedah, Moree, Boggabri and Nar-
rabri West as the chief opponents of the home team.
Sunday matches were held on the racecourse, and as
the ground was unfenced the spectators sometimes took
part in the games. A. Huggins and O. Morath will
be remembered as amongst Narrabri’s first footballers
of note, while the famous 1906 team recalls such fine
players as G. McNamara, H. Hannaford, T. Randall,
C. Lillyman. W. Tranter, W. Sheehan and E. Hogan
(now Mayor).
THE OVAL, UPPER COLLINS PARK
In 1920 the Rugby League Code was introduced
by E. Mooney, Esq. (now Deputy Mayor), licensee of
the Royal Hotel, and by 1922 this code had been adopted
throughout the North-West. In the same year a keen
spirit of competition was aroused by the donation of
the Spicer Cup by W. Spicer, Escp, of Moree. After
being won from Moree in 1922. it was lost to Gunnedah
the same year. It was regained from Mungundi in
1925 and held triumphantly till 1929. In that year it
passed to Moree again, but was finally brought back
from Inverell in 1932, but was regained by that team
in 1933.
On the organisation of the group system Narrabri
became headquarters of Group 12, with J. P. Qfiirk as
President, and W. Boyd, Esq., Secretary. The standard
of play is high, and the game has the whole-hearted
support of the citizens, every member of the Municipal
Council and all the leading business men being mem-
bers of the Club and comprising nine-tenths of the
Narrabri Football Association Committee. The present
Deputy Mayor, Mr. E. Mooney, has always been an
indefatigable worker for the game, holding the Presi-
dency of Group 12 for no less than thirteen years.
Officials, 1933: President, F. A. Trevillien, Esq.; Hon.
Secretary, E. Mooney, Esq.
000
CRICKET
Cricket was undoubtedly the first sport to be played
in Narrabri and 'ruled supreme for many years before
the advent of Football or Tennis; in fact, its earliest
competitor must have been horse-racing or perhaps —
cock fighting !
The romance ■of cricket in early Narrabri centres
round the name of Mr. James Moseley, of Tibbereena,


W. B. McCLINTOCK
Quality Butcher
MAITLAND ST. - NARRABRI
Phone 17
THE TASTE WINS YOU !
Your taste, rather than our words, is a better
“convincer” of the quality of our
Choice Meats !
W. E. BURT
HAIRDRESSER and
TOBACCONIST
Sporting Goods :: Lending Library
BILLIARD SALOON
2 Heiron & Smith Tables
Maitland Street - Narrabri
Phone 210
FRANK COLEMAN
BOOTMAKER
and REPAIRER
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Ladies’ Pumps a Specialty
OS. MORATH
(Successor to T. A. Stirton & Co.)
Stock and Property Agent
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
Local Secretary of the Graziers’ Assn, of N.S.W.
Agent for the Liverpool & London & Globe Insurance Co.
Agent for the P. & O. Steamship Co.
PHONES: Office 13, Private 48


who by means of a turf wicket and a relay of blacks
to bowl and field, could easily create a cricketer’s para-
dise. It was due to - this enthusiast that Narrabri
achieved the unique honour of a visit from an English
team about 1890. Amongst the heroes of the 90’s were,
besides Mr. Moseley himself, Mr. Waduy, a bank
manager, R. J. Taylor, the local dominie, J. Lilly man,
G. Upjohn, G. Neal, and the Fawcett brothers. Their
enthusiasm may be judged from E. L. Fawcett’s defini-
tion of a cricket enthusiast as "one who long-stopped
his own bowling.”
For many years there were three local teams
The Town, The Village, and Narrabri West —but teams
from surrounding towns and districts were constantly
engaged in friendly matches, with all the old-time picnic
charm.
The lack of turf wickets has always been a draw-
back, but in spite of difficulties, much solid progress
has been made in the game. In the return of “sons of
the village”, from the various schools and colleges,
brought the latest methods to the fore, and some of
these old students like Joe Wall, Reg. Stafford, and
Doug. McDonald have taken leading parts in the cricket
history of the town.
The present Narrabri and District Cricket Associa-
tion was formed in 1921, Mr. F. T. Palmer donating
a trophy for competition amongst Ist Grade teams.
The “Palmer Challenge Shield,” as it is known, is
keenly contested for each season, the Old Boys'’ Cricket
Club being the succesful team for Season 1932-33. 2nd
Grade Cricket was introduced in 1926-27 Season. Four
Ist Grade teams and six 2nd Grade teams participated
in competition last season.
In 1925-26 Season, Mrs. L. M. Green and Miss I.
Johnston presented “The Green-Johnston Challenge
Cup” as a trophy in perpetuity for inter-town and dis-
trict Cricket, and many interesting matches between
Boggabri, Gunnedah, Moree and Narrabri have been
played for this cup. Boggabri are the present holders.
Present Officials, N.D.C.A.: President, F. T. Palmer;
Hon. Secretary, C. W. James.
PANORAMA VIEW OF NARRABRI


If you wish to produce a Loaf
Superior to that of your
Competitors, use exclusively
“ Excelsior ”
SIM y S&Ccnl
umm
FlOtf*
The Flour that is Milled from the Primest Wheat
grown on the Fertile Slopes of the Great
NORTH-WEST.
Produces a loaf with a rich brown crust always
(Established 1906)
Flour Millers and Wheat
Merchants
NARR A B R I
Phone 23
Bradley l Will
(Established 1914)
Sawmillers and Timber
Merchants
WEST NARRABRI
Cypress Pine
Cypress Pine
Thousands of feet of it in every wanted
siz,e, shape and length. All of it the better
grade—selected with care and inspection for
quality before being placed on sale !
Phone 98


GOLF
The ancient game of Golf was first introduced to
the town in 1905, the links being laid out on the race-
course. Amongst the pioneers of the game were
Messrs. L. S. McDougall, H. S. Kelman and R. J.
Taylor. The first associate was Miss Haidee McDonald
(now Mrs. R. C. Cramsie).
The original Club ceased to exist after a few years,
but in 1923 or 1924 through the agency of Mr. Gordon
Burrow, the Club was revived with links on Lehane’s
paddock. The annual fee was 2/6 !
The real foundation of the present progressive
Club was laid at the advent of Messrs. Wayland and
Cotterill to the town. The former was instrumental
in again transferring the links to the racecourse, whilst
to the latter’s enthusiasm is due the initiation of inter-
town competitions and the presentation for such com-
petition of “The McDonald Cup” by the Patron of the
Narrabri Club, Mr. J. M. McDonald. This cup became
the object of keen competition, and is at present held
by Moree.
Under the presidency of Mr. Shaw the Club was
removed to the present site in Wall’s Paddock where
one of the finest 9-hole courses in the North-West has
been laid out. The need of a club house is keenly felt.
The Club Champion is Mr. Lachlan Pratt, and Messrs.
Byrnes, Piper. McNamara and Hulbert have the proud
distinction of being all-the-year-round players. Officials,
1933 : Patron, J. M. McDonald, Esq.; President, J.
Conroy, Esq.; Hon. Secretary, W. Roberts, Esq.
TENNIS
During the last ten years the game of Tennis has
become very popular in Narrabri. The number of
clubs and of players increased to such an extent that
a Narrabri District Tennis Association was formed in
the early months of 1931. A competition was carried
out for “A” and “G” Grades, and a tournament held
at the close of the season. In that year there were 300
players registered with the Association. At present,
19 teams are playing in the “A,” “B” and “C” Grade
Competitions, and 8 teams in the Ladies’ Competition.
In 1931 and 1932 a Gents’ Team and a Ladies’ Team
were sent to Sydney to represent the N.D.T.A. at the
Annual Country Week Carnival, and both teams per-
formed very well indeed.
COURT HOUSE


Jeweller & Optician
Watch Repairs a Specialty
MAITLAND STREET
NARRABRI
P.O. Box 48
It Pays to Advertise in
©jcSotHj'eeJcsfftuft'uni-UT.
Incorporated with Narrabri Herald and Age
Maitland Street - Narrabri
Telephone No. 1. Telegrams: “Courier”
Published Mondays and Thursdays
CIRCULATING THRO'UGOUT THE NAMOI SHIRE
an Area of 5020 Square Miles
t.
v/V
Where Baking is a
Sine art—and every
batch a Master-
piece.
Every loaf, every crumb of our
bread is uniformly good because
of the high quality ingredients used and the skill of the bread
specialists, who bake it to perfection.
Its abundance of quality ingredients will build rugged health
and strong physiques.
Order a loaf to-day.
E. P. HOGAN & CO.
Maitland Street, NARRABRI
’Phone 36
B* .1
«: -G
F. W. Vincent & Co.
CASH BUTCHERS
Maitland Street - NARRABRI
We are pleased to meet you, and have Meat to
please you.
Prices in \eeping with Quality
PHONE 168


The great drawback is the need for Association
courts which have not yet been established. Until half
a dozen good courts are laid down there is no possibility
of large public tournaments being held. Efforts are
being made to secure enough space in Central Park to
have this effected. Officials, 1933: Patron, F. T. Pal-
mer, Esq.; President, O. Guest, Esq.; Hon. Secretary,
A. E. Rickards, Esq.
OOO
NARRABRI JOCKEY CLUB
This Club has been in existence over 50 years, and
has always been recognised as one of the leading Clubs
of the North-West. It is situated right at the Narrabri
Railway Station, and it is in the centre of an area
covering the towns of Moree, Inverell, Bingara, Tam-
worth, Gunnedah, Wee Waa, Walgett and Collarenebri.
This Club has done a lot in the way of wartime
and charity work, and during the Great War, through
the efforts of this Club, no less than £1.500/-/- was
raised in aid of various funds..
During the last two years the activities of the Club
have been very limited. The depression practically
made racing an impossibility, but now that the de-
pression is lifting, the Club will again become active
and will no doubt rise again to the standard of being
one of the leading Clubs in the North-West. Officials,
1933: President, E. P. Hogan, Esq.; Secretary, J. P.
Butler, Esq.
oOo
NARRABRI DISTRICT BAND
As far as can be gathered, Narrabri’s first brass band
was formed by a man named Hastings more than forty
years ago. He was succeeded by Herr Wallrabe who
conducted a music shop in the town. The oldest resi-
dent who played in this band is Alderman Henry Logan
who, though not now an active performer, is still a
staunch supporter of the present body, and a member
of the Narrabri Orchestra.
COMMERCIAL BANK
After Herr Wallrabe. Mr. William Miller, now a
resident of Thornton, carried the band along, and many
old residents will doubtless remember the practice
room, a small shed in the lane near the present Sal-
vation Army Barracks. This band also possessed the
first uniform, a navy serge suit with yellow facings of
heavy braid, and a bushman’s hat. Old Bob Cureen,
a bootmaker, next took charge and organised a set of
learners, the present bandmaster, P. H'. Hulbert, being
one of his pupils. Then we had Paddy Ryan from In-
verell, Walter Morrow, H. L. Jewell, and F. F. Dunn.


Except for a period of some six months, P. H. Hulbert
has since been in charge, and the period represents ac-
tivities extending over twenty years to the present
time.
It is understood that on two occasions during the
past forty years, Narrabri could not only boast of two
bands in existence at the one time, but also a Salvation
Army band of no mean order —old residents will re-
member the Hayes family in this connection. During
the past twenty years wonderful service has been given
by the band in every direction. During the war period
not one single occasion was missed in the various ac-
tivities connected therewith, and it was immediately
after the Armistice that the present bandmaster entered
into negotiations with the late P. J. Levey, who was
then Mayor, to municipalise the band. It might be
here noted that each band to this time was self support-
ing, relying only on engagements and public subscrip-
tions for their upkeep. The Council did not entirely
take control of the management of the band but accepted
the responsibility of trustees and subsidised the band,
which has continued to the present time.
Not only have band contests been held in
Narrabri before—at least on two occasions over twenty
years back —but the band itself has taken part in con-
tests at Moree, Inverell, Gunnedah, and quite recently
Coonamble.
Officials for 1933: Patron, F. T. Palmer; President,
A. L. Currey; Bandmaster, P. PI. Hulbert ; Hon Sec-
retary and Treasurer, G. Cafe.
THE NARRABRI MUSICAL SOCIETY
Just over four years ago the Narrabri Musical
Society was launched by a few enthusiasts. A review
of the talents of the members satisfied the conveners
that they were justified in forming a Society, the sec-
tions of which would cater for all those accomplished
in vocal, instrumental, dramatic and dancing. At all
times the young people have gloried in excelling one
another with credit to themselves.
The present Society has been in existence longer
than any previously formed, and is still going strong.
We are proud to say that the personnel of our first
production, the musical comedy, “The Cingalee,” was
drawn entirely from local talent, in fact, the three
principal ladies were natives of the town. All our
properties, costumes and scenery were entirely the
work of local artists.
The productions to date have been the revue, “( hit
of the Box”; the musical comedy, “The Cingalee’ ;
revue. “Happy Days” ; musical comedies, “A Runaway
Girl,” and “Miss Hook of Holland,” and now for Jubilee
Week, the revue, “Crackers.”
The Town Hall seating capacity has always proved
inadequate for the different productions, and the con-
fidence of the public was such that record bookings
made the work of the house management a pleasure.
Narrabri is extremely fortunate in having such a
happy and talented number of young people who join
together with enthusiasm endeavouring to produce the
best in their respective avenues.


The membership of the Society is about 60 or 70,
and a nominal fee of 2/6 for ladies and 5/- for gentlemen
per season is charged.
There is no doubt this is the most interesting, in-
structive, uplifting and economic evening recreation
available for the young people during the cooler months.
Narrabri is justly proud of the Musical Society,
and with increased seating accommodation at the Town
Hall, the improved dressing room and stage convenience,
besides a new Ronisch grand piano, the public may
look forward to even better results in the future.
Officials for 1933 : Patron, Henry Logan; President
and Hon. Producer, A. M. Howard; Conductor, J. McL.
Davis: Treasurer, F. Freak; Hon Secretary, F. T.
Palmer.
This is the badge of the
Narrabri Intermediate
High School
which was designed in
1931 by the Principal
W. J. Mulholland, Esq.
B.L itt., B.A, L.C.P
In it are symbolised the history and characteristics
of the town, as well as the three functions of true educa-
tion. The colours —blue and gold—Symbolise the clear
blue skies and the golden sunshine and harvest. The
forked stick represents the native word “nurra." whilst
the water (waved lines) represents the native word
‘‘bria,” hence the name Narrabri. The other symbols
are: the wreath for sportsmanship, the torch for truth,
the book for learning. The motto, translated, is “Know-
ledge is Power” ; and 1868 is the foundation date of the
school.


MOUNT KAPUTAR.
Although “Kaputar,” supported by his brother and
sister, “Lindsay” and “Coryah,” has been standing out
in the north-west for thousands of years, it is only
recently that any attempt has been made to explore
the possibilities of the wonderful plateau as a health
SUMMIT, MT. KAPUTAR, 5,008 FEET ABOVE SEA LEVEL
resort, as a summer relief medium for the residents of
the hot North-west Plains.
About 50 years ago this . area. was first surveyed
and altitudes noted by John Dowe and party. Strange
to say, even to-day, geography text books and maps fail
to record Kaputar and its 5,008 feet.
None but a few cattle and sheep men, looking for
summer feed during dry periods, ventured to the main
tops, and even they jealously guarded the secrets of
this fertile and well-watered plateau.
The first attempt to investigate the possibilities of
Kaputar was made by an excursion from Black Moun-
tain Creek Valley in January, 1924. The reports of the
expedition, published at this time, of the experience of
the party, made people curious and anxious to investi-
gate things for themselves. In the meantime, through
the advocacy of the Namoi Shire, an area of 1,920 acres
was surveyed and dedicated in trustees, certain con-
ditions and regulations drawn up and gazetted.
The next party to make for the tops was from the
Bullawa Valley, accompanied by A. U. Guy of Robin-
son's Map Publishing Company. Mr. Guy’s report ap-
peared in the “Narrabri Courier” of January 11th, 1926,
and caused considerable interest in Sydney as well as
locally.
Several parties have since made the ascent at dif-
ferent times and all returned with stories which added
interest to the prospects.
The Big Hike was on October, 1932, when about
150 persons of all ages made the strenuous ascent by
foot and horse. These included a Parliamentary party,
accompanied by journalists from the leading Sydney
and local papers, and Mr. Lamble, of the N.S.W.


Tourists’ Bureau. The latter in his report stated that
it was his opinion that the Kaputar Plateau might well
repay the cost of development by the sale of Crown
lands on the route of the proposed road, and in addition
it would undoubtedly provide a much-needed health
resort for rural and urban residents of the North-west
Plains. ,
During the official visit, new names to several
points were dedicated by Mr. Colin Sinclair, M.P., and
later the illustration which appeared in “Sydney Morn-
ing Herald” and the “Mail” astounded New South
Wales and made Kaputar a name to conjure with.
The Namoi Shire now has the matter in hand; their
engineer' has mapped the road, and we are waiting for
a Government Grant to become available, when the first
sod of the projected road will be officially turned and
the prospects of driving all the way to Kaputar will be
within the near future.
RUGGED CLIFFS, MT. KAPUTAR






