

r£>lfa
NARRATIVE
OF THE
EIGHTH MISSION VISIT
TO THE
ISLANDS IN BANKS AND BASS
STRAITS.
BY THE REV. CANON BROWNRIGG
On the 4th February, 1879, we set out
in the Alice Maud for the eighth visit to
the islands situated in Banks and Bass
Straits. Our passengers were Mr R.
Hadfield, Mr G. Storry, Mr A. Reed, and
my eldest son, Master Marcus Brownrigg,
and the crew, Johnny Durant, Anton
Gehardt, and Charles Anderson.
We left the Market Wharf, Launceston,
at about 10.30 a. m., and through the
kindly assistance of Captain Patterson of
the Empress of India, were helped through
the Boat Channel to a little below Fresh
Water Point. By 5 p.m. with a light
wind we worked down to Egg Island,
where we anchored for the night. With
the morning ebb we got under way, and
made the anchorage at George Town.


The next morning (Thursday, Feb. 6),
we proceeded to Lagoon Bay, where we
anchored to await a favorable wind, for
at that time a fresh north-easter was
blowing. Towards sundown the breeze
died away, but there were still indications
that the north-easterly weather was not
yet an an end, and subsequent experience
proved that such was the case. Being,
however, unwilling to spend any more
time in the river than might be necessary
we got under way at about noon on Fri-
day, the 7th inst., with a light breeze
from the westward and cleared the Heads
at 1 p.m. in the hope of getting as far to
the eastward as possible before the wind
should again settle in the north-east.
Our course lay for Waterhouse Island,
but we had proceeded no further than
about 16 miles before we were becalmed.
At about 9 p.m. a heavy bank of clouds
in the north-east betokened a change of
weather, and a few “ catspaws” from that
direction apprized us of the quarter from
which we might expect the wind. Within
a little while a smart breeze sprung up,
and with it a lumpy sea. A long beat
was now before us, and not under the
pleasantest circumstances, for the night
was thick and not improved by the
drizzling rain. By the next morning at
an early hour we had worked into Ander-
son’s Bay, Here again the wind failed
us until mid-day, when a light westerly
air helped us to Waterhouse Island, where
we soon introduced ourselves to our hos-
pitable friend Mr Wm. Barrett, at whose
cottage we had prayers in the evening.
After breakfast next morning we landed
for service, and on returning to the vessel
weighed for Cape Barren Island in the
hope of holding an evening service at that
place, as we could not get to Swan Island,
but we had not been under way half an
hour before the w r ind shifted into the
north-east, and as this placed it beyond
our power to get to our proposed destina-
tion until much too late for holding any


service, we returned to the anchorage we
had just left.
On landing in the afternoon we found
that three visitors had crossed over from
the main land to the island, and
thus an unlooked-for opportunity offered,
of which we availed ourselves for the
ministry of the word and prayer, and for
the same object we assembled ourselves
together before returning aboard in the
evening.
The intention of proceeding to Cape
Barren Island having been frustrated as
already explained, we planned to visit
Swan Island by the first favorable wind.
At our anchorage at Waterhouse Island
we remained all Monday awaiting this
fair wind, but it was not until 7 o’clock
the next morning (Tuesday, 11th) that
the prospect of reaching Swan Island
seemed likely to be realised. With a
fresh westerly breeze we then started, but
ere we cleared the passage between the
island and the main we experienced a
little mishap. In gibeing, the strop of
the main-sheet block carried away and set
the boom free. The sail was, of course,
lowered, and the damage promptly re-
paired. As there was now every appear-
ance of a strong blow from the westward,
we single reefed the mizen, and double
reefed the mainsail before setting it
again, but strangely enough instead of in-
creasing in power the wind soon fell light
until it quite died away. We could
scarcely have been deserted by the wind
in a more undesirable position (except
upon a lee shore), for at this time we were
in the tide rip off Foster Island near Cape
Portland. Some idea may be formed of
the “ rip ” when it is mentioned that the
dingy which hung in the davits over the
tafrail was not only often washed by the
sea, but was also twice lifted clean up in
the davits—in fact was afloat while hang-
ing in the davits. Thus circumstanced
we remained about an hour and a half,
but when released from our position it


was by a head wind, which made it neces-
sary for us to forego for the time the
visit to Swan and Clarke Islands, so we
made a long tack across Banks Strait for
Cape Barren Island. In crossing the
Strait w e experienced a fresh breeze fi om
east-nor’-east, and a high confused sea,
but managed to effect a very good course
to the west end of Cape Barren Island,
not having once had occasion to “go
about ” until we entered Long Island
Passage, and then four short boards
brought us to our anchorage at Cape
Barren at about 5 p. m.
The following day we visited the public
school under the charge of Mr and Mrs
Collis, and gave a cottage lecture in the
schoolroom in the evening, when we also
gave notice of the services of next Sun-
day, and of a meeting of parents to take
place on Saturday, the 16th instant.
The very calm state of the weather on
Thursday, the 13th instant, prevented
our visiting Goose and Badger Islands as
we had proposed, so I took the oppor-
tunity of walking to Thunder and Light-
ning Bay to visit Mr George Everett and
family, and in the evening had a short
service in the schoolroom. On Friday
my visit was to Mr John Maynard and
his family. At our evening service on
Saturday we had a large gathering of
young and old, and at the close of the
service the notified meeting was held, but
as the matters considered thereat relate
solely to the interests of the Islanders
the nature of the business need not here
be detailed.
With Sunday morning (Feb. 16) we
had a threatening change in the weather.
The inconvenience we did
not, however, relate to the fresh S.B.
wind then blowing, from which we were
in a sheltered position, but to the rain
which the very dilapidated condition of
the schoolroom roof would freely admit,
and of this we had some little unpleasant
experience during the forenoon service.


Shortly after II o’clock we assembled
for the first service. This was well
attended, there being present fifty per-
sons (adult and juvenile), exclusive of
our ship’s company. In the afternoon a
children’s service was held, at which
three infants were baptized, and a distri-
bution made of parcels of the British
Workman, Cottager and Artizan, &c.,
and a number of children’s books.
Another service at about 7 p m. was held,
and like that in the morning was well
attended.
With thick weather from the south-
east (usually the precursor of a gale) we
got under way for Yansittart Island on
Tuesday morning (the 18th), and worked
down the Sound to our proposed anchor-
age, at which we arrived by eleven in the
forenoon. At this island we remained
until the next day (Wednesday, 19th),
and at noon left for Big Dog Island and
anchored for a few hours, and left again
to secure a good anchorage at Little
Badger Corner.
With the north-easter and flood tide we
ran quickly up to the little channel be-
tween a reef and a point of Flinders, but
it was a problem whether against tide
and wind we could work our way up this
channel ; however, with the anchor ready
to let go at an instant, if necessary, we
determined to make the attempt. It
need hardly be said that the utmost care
and caution were exercised in taking our
vessel through this very narrow passage
so narrow, in one place, as to scarcely
exceed three times our ship’s length ;
but all went well, and with just wind and
daylight enough for the purpose we came
to an anchor at Little Badger Corner.
Next morning we called upon Mr and
Mrs Smith, after which Mr Smith kindly
guided us to the Samphire River, which
our friends were wishing to see. On re-
turning aboard it was with the intention
of proceeding to Badger Island, but find-
ing the barometer registered 29 "34 and


observing unmistakable indications of an
approaching gale we deemed it advisable
to remain at our anchorage, as being
about the best to be found in the Straits
from a westerly gale, and as a precau-
tionary measure we laid out a second
anchor.
The lapse of about two hours sufficed
to prove that we had acted wisely in not
getting underway. With heavy gusts off
the high lands of Flinders the gale com-
menced and these increased in frequency
and force until soon the quiet little bay
had been became feather white.
Throughout the night the gale freshened,
and a driving rain descended. By the
morning all intercourse with the shore
was cut off', and a wild scene presented
itself all around. About midday of Friday
the barometer again registered 29’34, and
not knowing what additional strength the
gale might acquire before moderating, we
struck our topmasts and lowered the
booms. All Friday night the heavy weather
continued, with smart showers, but its
power was somewhat expended by Satur-
day morning, though the glass was still
very low. To move from our anchorage
was still out of the question, so through
the whole of Saturday we remained where
we were, but indulging the hope that an
improvement in the weather might allow
of our getting underway for and arriving
at Cape Barren Island for the Sunday ser-
vice, according to the notice we had given.
Of this, however, as the event proved,
there was no possibility, for though the
force of the gale had very much subsided,
the wind was strong from the south-west
for the greater part of Sunday. Being
thus prevented from keeping our engage-
ment for Cape Barren Island, we had the
opportunity of spending the Sunday at
Little Badger Corner, and had a short
cottage lecture at Mrs Smith’s in the
morning and afternoon.
By Sunday evening a favorable change-
in the weather took place, and by 8 p. m.


a light air from the south-east succeeded
the strong south-wester of the day. We
had now an encouraging prospect of
getting up the Sound, and so at 4 - 30 the
next morning we commenced to get up
our topmasts, and by 6'30 were under way
with a light northerly air, which gave us
a lead through the very narrow passage
through which we had previously worked.
We were in this respect well off, for
within a short time after starting the
wind veered round to the westward. Had
we not started when we did we should
have been under the necessity of • “ work-
ing ” instead of “leading” through the
passage.
Our destination was now Long Beach
at Cape Barren Island, Could we have
been sure of finding water enough over
the Shoal off Long Island we should have
gained our anchorage much sooner than
we did, but being doubtful on that point
we deemed it advisable to pass
outside Long Island, and enter the pas-
sage at its south-western extremity.
Owing to the unsteadiness as well as the
lightness of the wind our getting round the
Island proved a long business, and it was
I'2o p.m. before we arrived at Long
Beach. On landing we learned that there
had been some and speculation
among the islanders as to our whereabout
in the recent gale. Some of the Straits
boats at Long Beach had suffered by
being driven ashore high and dry, and I
was informed that had we not put in an
appearance by Tuesday morning boats
would have been started to ascertain
whether we were in need of any help.
Under all the circumstances we had clearly
done wisely in remaining at Little Badger
Corner.
The afternoon of Monday was spent at
Thunder and Lightning Bay, where nearly
the whole population of the island, and
many from adjacent islands, had as-
sembled to assist in the launch of a vessel
which had been built for Mr Maclaine, of


■JAFp
b'f&Uo
s F /S^o
Clarke Island. By my visit there I was
enabled to meet Mr Maclaine and others
whom I had not had the opportunity of
seeing before, and also to baptize Man-
sell’s infant.
From Long Beach we proceeded to
Badger Island, and were warmly wel-
comed by Miss Beedon. At Miss Beedon’s
cottage the islanders met in the evening
for service, on which occasion two infants
were baptized.
As the weather did not allow of our
calling at Goose Island, we took advantage
of the north-easter to make a run to the
Tamar Heads, By 130 a.m. we were
under way, and the fresh breeze gave us
a capita] run until we were about 26 miles
from the Heads. Our progress after this
was slow, for we almost becalmed. At
3TO p.m. we entered the Heads, and pro-
ceeded up the river to an anchorage just
above Long Reach, for the night was too
dark and the wind too uncertain to make
it wise to attempt to get through Whirl-
pool Reach against the ebb tide. By
5 ‘3O next morning (Thursday, 27thl we
moved on against tide, but with a fine
breeze, and at 10 30 arrived at Laun-
ceston. Laus Deo.
Printed at the " Launceston Examiner ” office.
