







FRONTISPIECE.


PRICE TWO PENCE.
NARRATIVE
OF THE
Massacre of the Crew
OF THE
SHIP BOYD,
AT NEW ZEALAND, BY CANNIBALS;
Embellished with a Representation
OF THE
REAL HEAD OF WATANGHEON,
The principal Murderer,
AND A,
Frontispiece, copied from the Grand Painting exhibited
in the Royal Liverpool Museum.
TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
Accounts of the following extraordinary Persons, via.—
M)3M WaiLILHASsaSo
A Run-away Convict , at Norfolk Island ,
NEW SOUTH WALES;
John Crossland, the Derby Hangman,
, Who executed his own Brother and Father;
AND
RAVILLAC,
Who King Henry the Fourth, pf France.
LONDON: ’ -
PRINTED FOR JAMES MELDON, MAKY-STHEET.


Explanation of the Frontispiece.
The Frontispiece is a Copy of thetrriginal Paint,
ing. In the centre of the Picture wilt be immedi-
ately recognised, in an upright posture , with a
Lance of the country, made of jasper stone (for
having no metals, it is used as a substitute) is the
figure of IVATANGHEON, one of the chiefs of
the Island of New Zealand, and a principal per-
petrator in the horrid Massacre ; near to him, just
behind a dead sailor, is the Chief Mate, who is
writhing between the deadly grasp of two natives,
one qf whom is about to dispatch him with his awe.
On the left of the Painting is the stem of the skip
Boyd; the leading personage is a Brother qf Wat-
uugheon, who wilt be known by having the head of
Captain Thompson extended at arm's length; near
the htern of the ship, are Canoes, for the purpose of
taking the bodies to different parts of the Island, ns
each Chieftain claims a portion of them.
On the right qf the Picture will be seen the fire,
where a number of the Cannibals are shewn regaling
themselves with the mangled and roasted limbs of
our unfortunate countrymen .
The fore part of the Picture is a part of Murder-
er's-Bay, so catted by one of the Dutch Navigators,
where a basin is formed for the purpose of mooring
the Ship close in shore, to accelerate the lading of
tinder, with which that part of the Island abounds.
4


Narrative, &c.
Perhaps the annals of history cannot produce a circum-
stance more truly dreadful* than tlie-melaocholy fate of
the crew of the ship Boyd,—more strange or fearful in all
it’s circumstances, —or more to be regretted, as arising
from the ignoiance and ferocity of n savage horde.
The Boyd was sent out in the year 1809, by Govern-
ment, with convicts. She arrived in safety at Port Jack-
sou,'and landed the unfortunate transports. At Port
Jackson was a native Chieftain of New Zealand, named
WatangUeon, who had been brought from that piece some
lime before. Being anxious to return, and learning that
Captain Thompson was about to proceed thither for a
cargo of timber, he offered to work his passage if he
might be allowed to go on board, —and this arrangement
was finally agreed to. When, however, the ressel put
to sea, this man positively refused to do any work, which
occasioned .frequent quarrels between him and the Cap-
tain, and was the cause of his being rather harshly treated.
Malignant and Cruel in his dispoaitian, he determined oa
revenge, and calmly waited the arrival of the vessel at
New Zealand, where he took the earliest opportunity of
putting his dreadful resolve into execution. A party of
the crew having gone a little Way into the interior for the
purpose of getting timber, were surprised by the natires,
and the greater part of them savagely murdered. Those
who escaped, made the best of their way back to the res.
sel, bet, alas! no refuge was to' be found there! The
New Zealanders were already in possession of the uufor.
tunate Boyd, and the dreadful work of destruction was
going on! At length all was silent—murder hud been
committed by wholesale, and the murderers were weary
of their labour!
A tire was made a short way from the beach, where
the (sannibal.murderers roasted the bodies of their unhap.
py victims, and regaled and feasted themselves on'our un.
fortunate countrymen.
5


Two days after this shocking massacre had been com-
mitted, an ctficei’s lady, the steward, and a cabin-boy
were found secreted in the hold. Satisfied with their bru-
tality, and glutted with human flesh, they sparerftheir
lives, and allowed them to Two on the island. Ihe Boyd
was totally destroyed.
About twelve months had elapsed, when a vessel for-
tunately came to the island ; the wretched beings who had
been saved from the fury of the savages hurried on board,
where they gave a detail of all the horrid circumstances,
and pointed out the principal author and perpetrator of
the murders, —Watangheon. Having made every thing
ready for sailing at a moment's notice, the Captain con-
trived to entice this man, and two others of the natives
onboard, and immediately put to sea. Nosoonor did be
-tsnd himself entrapped, than he became outrageous, sensed
whatever he could lay hold of, and attacked every person
who came near him. At length it was found necessary
to dispatch him, which was done by knocking him on (he
head. Having (his terrible example before them, the two
others became quiet, and undertook to preserve the head
of their countryman, by a process peculiar to the natives
of New Zealand, so that it might rttain, as nearly as pos-
sible, its original appearance.
The Head of this Murderer was landed at Liferpool,
ard*is now (he property of Mr. KiNn, the Proprietor of
Ute Royal Liverpool Museum, who has placed it in (he
above repository, which contains near 6000 Specimens of
Art and Nature, embracing a very extensive Collection
of (he most astonishing and beautiful productions of Nn.
(ure, with surprising Specimens of Barbarian Ingenuity,
Fine Arts, &c. together with a Grand Painting, (on 35
feel of canvas) of the Massacre of the Grew of ihe Ship
Boyd, at New Zealand, and (be Real Head of Wafan-
gkeon, the principal Cannibal Murderer.
6


WATANGHEON'S HEAD.
Ihr auovp i s a representation of (he Head, as exhibited
m (lie Museum, curiously tatooed ; the hair, beard, and
teeth in the best state of preservation, and the colour of
np skin retained as uhen alive.


JOHN WILLIAMS,
A Run-away Convict, at Norfolk Island, New
South Wales
One of the prisoners belonging to the out-
gangs, being sent into the Camp on Saturday to
draw the weekly allowance of provisions for his
mess, fell unfortunately into the company of a
party of convicts, who were playing at cards for
their allowance, a thing very frequent amongst
them. With as little resolution as his superiors
in similar situations, after being a while a looker
on, be at length suffered himself to be persuaded
to fake a hand ; and, in the event, lost not only
his own portion, but that of the whole mess.—
Fleing a man of a timid natnre, bis misfortunes
overcame bis reason, and conceiving his situation
among his messmates insupportable, he formed
and executed the extravagant resolution of ab-
sconding info the'glens.
Every possible enquiry was now made after
him ; it was known that he had drawn the allow,
ance of his mess, and almost in the same mo-
ment discovered that he had lost it at play -
search upon search was made to no purpose —-
However, as it was impossible he could subsist
without occasionally marauding, it was believed
that he must shortly he taken in his predatory
excursions. These expectations, however, were
in vain, for the fellow managed his business wtb
such dexterity, keeping closely within his retreat
during the day, and marauding for his subsistence
during the night, that, in despite of the narrow
compass of the island he eluded all search. Hi*
nocturnal depredations were solely confined to
the supply of his necessities; Indian corn, pota-
toes, pumpkins, and melons. He seldom visited
fh« same place a second time, but, shifting from


place to place, always contrived to make his
escape almost before the theft was discovered,
or the depredator suspected, lu vain was a re-
ward offered for his apprehension, and year after
year every possible search was instituted; at
times it was considered that he was dead, till the
revival of the old trade proved that the dexterous
and invisible thief still existed.
In the pursuit of him, his pursuers have often
been so near him, that he has not nnfrequently
beard their wishes that they might be so fortunate
as to fall in with him. The reward being pro-
mised in spirits, a temptation to which many
would have sacrificed their brother, excited
almost the whole island to join in the pursuit;
and even those, whose respectability set them
above any pecuniary compensation, were ani-
mated with a desire of bunting in so extraordinary
a chase. These circumstances concurred to
aggravate the terrors of the unhappy fugitive,
as from bis repeated depredations be indulged no
hope of pardon. . J ,* >.
Nothing of this kind, however, was intended ;
it was humanely thought that he bad already
sustained sufficient punishment for bis original
•rime; and that bis subsequent depredations,
being solely confined to necessary food, were
venial, and rendered him rather an object of pity
than of criminal infliction. Of these resolutions,
however, be knew nothing, and therefore bis
terror continued.
Chance, however, at length accomplished what
had baffled every fixed design One morning,
about break of day, a man going to bis labour,
observed a fellow hastily crossing the road: he
was instantly struck with the idea, that this most
be tbe man who was (be object of suafa general
pursuit. Animated with this belief, he exerted
bis utmost efforts to seise him, sind, after a ri-
9


gorous opposition on the part of the poor fugitive,
finally succeeded in his design. It was to no
purpose to assure the affrighted wretch that his
life was safe, and that his apprehension was
sought only to relieve him from a state of exist-
ence, more suited to a beast than a human crea-
ture. * '■ * ' r -*'
The news of his apprehension flew through the
island, and every one was more curious than ano-
ther to gain a sight of this phenomenon, who, for
upwards of five years, had so effectually secluded
himself from all human society. Upon being
brought into the camp, and the presence of the
governor, never did condemned malefactor feel
more acutely : he appeared to imagine tha«t the
moment of his execution approached, and Ireim
bling in every joint, seemed to turn his eyes in
search of the executioner. His person was such
as may well be conceived from his long seclusion
from human society ; his beard had never been
shaved since the moment of his first disappear,
ance; he was clothed in some rags, which he
bad picked op in his nocturnal peregrinations;
and even his own langnage was, at first, unutter-
able and unintelligible by him.
After some previous questions, as to what had
induced him to form such a resolution, and by
what means he had so long subsisted, the governor
gave him his pardon;and restored him to society,
of which he afterwards became a very useful
member.
JOHN CiIOSSLAND.
About the reign of Oliver Cromwell, or the
beginning of Charles the Second, a whole family
consisting of a father and two son*,' of the name
0/ Crosslaod, were tried and convicted, at the
Derby assizes, for horse-stealing. As the offence


was capital, the bench* after sentence, enter-
tained the cruel whim of extending mercy to one
of the criminals, but upon this barbarous con-
dition, that the pardoned man should hang the
other two! When power wantons in cruelty it
becomes detestable, and gives greater offence
than eveq the culprits. The offer was made to
the father, as being the senior. As distress is
the season for reflection, he replied with meek-
ness, —“ Was it ever known that a father hanged
bis children? How can 1 takeaway (hose lives
that 1 have given, have cherished, and which of
all things are most dear 9 ” He bowed, declined
the office, and gave up his life. This noble re-
ply ought to have pleaded his pardon* r It was
then made to his eldest son, who, trembling, re-
plied,—“Though life is the most Valuable of all
possessions, yet even that may be purchased too
dear. I cannot consent, to preserve my own ex-
istence by taking away that of him who gave it;
nor could 1 face the world, nor even myself,
should 1 be left the only branch of that family I
had destroyed !” The proposition was then, of
coprse made to the younger (John) who ac-
cepted it with an avidity that seemed to tell the
Court be would haug half the creation; and even
his Judges, rather than be a sufferer himself.—i
He performed the fatal work without remorse
upon his father and brother; and displayed such
dexterity upon the occasion that be was ap.
pointed hangman of Derby, and two or three
neighbouring counties, and continued to .fill the
office to extreme old age. So void of feeling of dis-
tress, was he, that he rejoiced at a murder, be-
cause it brought the prpspyct of a guinea. Per-
haps he was the only man in court who heard
with pleasure the sentence, of death passed upon
a criminal. The bodies of (he executed were bis
perquisite, signs of life have been known to re-
11


turn after execution, in which ease he prevented
the growing existence by violence. Loving none,
and beloved by none, le spent a life of enmity
With man. The very children petfed him in the
streets. The mother endeavoured to stop the
infant cry With the name of Jbhn Crossland, and
I (Says Holton) have the Irksome task of record-
T* nfR. f ■ W»r ■ -:i
ACCOUNT OF THE ASSASSINATION OF
HENRY -m* OF FRANCE. 1M
Tb* night before this'nnhappydayhismajtesty
could take no rest, and war in continual uneasi-
ness. In the morning he told those about him,
that he had not slept, and that he was very much
disordered. Thereupon M. de Vendome entreat-
ed his majesty to take care of himself, and not
te go out, for that day' was fatal to him. “ I see
(answered the you have consulted the
almanack, and have heara of the prediction Of
La Broese, from my cod sin the Count of Soissons;
hi is ah old fonlj and' yon, Who are yburig have
still < less wisdom." The Duke de Vendbme then
went to the qneen, who likewise begged the
king not to go out of the Louvre that day ; bnt
be made her the same answer.
The coachman-turned from the street St.'Ho*
aava, into that part called Feronnerie, which was
then very barrow, and made more so by the lit-
Hai shops erected against the wall of the church-
yard of St. Innocent. A little embarrasment was
occasioned by the meeting of two carts, bne load-
ed with wine, the other with hay, so that the
coach was obliged to stop in a corner of the
street, over 1 against the study of ift certain nota-
ry, whose name was Poutraln, The footmen
took a nearer way, that they might, with less
difficulty, come op with the coach at the end of
12


the street; so that/there were only two which
followed/, and one of these went to make way
fpr the carriage to go on, while the other in the
meantime look the opportunity l« fasten his gar-
ter. Ravillac,who had followed the coach front
the liOnvre, perceiving that it stopped, and that
there was no person near it, advanced to that
side where he observed the king sat. His cloak
being wrapt round his left arm served to conceal
the knife, which he held in his hand ; and sliding
between the shops and coach, as if he was at-
tempting to pass by, like others, he supported
oue foot on the spokes of the wheel, and the
other upon a stone, and drawing a knife edged
on both sides, gave the king a wound a little
above the heart, between the third and fourth
ribs. His majesty had just turned towards the
Duke of Epernon, and was reading a letter; or,
as others say, leaning towards the Marecbal La-
vardin, to whom he was whispering. Henry,
feeling himself struck, cried out, “ 1 am wound-
ed,” and in the same instant the assassin, per-
ceiving that the point of his knife had been stop-
ped by a rib, he repeated the blow' with such
quickness, that not one who were in the coach
had time to oppose, nor even to perceive it.—
Henry, by raising his arm, afforded a fairer aim
for the second blow, which, according to Pexe-
fijee and L'Eloile, rfent directly to bit heart; and
according to Rigault and the French Mercury ,
near the auricle of the heart; a gush of blood
occasioning the almost instantaneous death of the
unhappy prince,as Matiheiu asserts, pronouncing
with a faint dying voice, these words, —“ it is
nothing.” The murderer aimed a third blow at
him, which the Duks of Epernon received in bis
sleeve.
13


ORIGIN OF THE CORONER’S INQUEST,
i*- • • oi U. •* - —••it ; v ‘ I.
A gentlewoman in London, after baaing buried aiz
hatbands, found a gentleman hardy enough tojnake her
a wife once more, for sereral monthi their happiness
was mutual, a circumstance which seemed to.pay no great
copip lime at to the former partners of her bed, who, as
said, had disgusted her by their settuliness and infi-
delity, jin the view of knowing the real character of his
amorous mate, the gentleman began frequently to absent
himself, to return at late hours, and, w ben he did return,
to appear as if intoxicated. At first reproaches, but af.
terwards menaces, were (be consequence of this conduct.
The gentleman persisted, and seemed every day to become
more addicted to his bottle : one evening, when she ima.
gined him dead drunk, she unsewed a leaden weight from
one of the sleeves of her gewn, and haring melted it, ste
appicached her husband, who pretended still to be sound
asleep, in order to put it into his ear through a pipe ;
corns breed of her w ickedness, the gentleman slart«l up,
and seized her, when, having procured assistance, he se.
cured her till. the morning, and conducted her before a
magistrate, who sSit her to prison. The bodies of her
six husbands were dug up, and, as marks of violence
were still discernable upon each of them, the proof of her
guilt appeared so strong upon her trial, that she was con.
demued and executed. To this circumstance is England
indebted for that useful regulation, by which no corpse
can be interred in the kingdom, without a legal hispec.
tion. ' * ,
-tNI).
fnnttti ty H'. Bethel!, 10, Murthail-ttrcrt, Liverpool.
14
