

Ipswich Series of Friends' Tracts, Co. 19.
NARRATIVES
EXEMPLIFYING THE CONDUCT
OF THE
SOCIETY OF FRIENDS
IN IRELAND,
DURING THE REBELLION OF THE YEAR 1798.
IPSWICH:
PRINTED BY J. M. BURTON AND CO.
The IPSWICH SERIES of FRIENDS’ TRACTS are sold in
I SEPARATE or ASSORTED ONE SHILLING Packets, and sent
FREE OF CARRIAGE, by a remittance being forwarded to Richard
Dykes Alexander, Ipswich.


The deeply interesting Narratives in the'following
pages are extracted, from “ The Principles of Peace,
as Exemplified in the Conduct of the Society of
Friends in Ireland,” by Thomas Hancock, M. 8., with
some Concluding Observations by the same Author.


NARRATIVES
OF THE
SOCIETY OE FRIENDS IN IRELAND.
PART I.
STATE OF THE SOCIETY OF FRIENDS, PREVIOUS TO, AND
DURING, THE REBELLION.
It is generally known that an objection to take part in war,
in any shape, forms one of the tenets of the Society of
Friends, commonly called Quakers. This objection is purely
religious, and is founded upon what they conceive to be the
spirit of the Gospel Dispensation, as it is illustrated in the
precepts of Christ and his apostles, and exemplified in their
practice. They consider that it must follow as a necessary
consequence, that a religion breathing peace and goodwill to
men, cannot, in any case, be supported by the spirit of war.
They believe that, on the contrary, the practice of this evil,
among the professors of Christianity, has tended, more than
any other circumstance, to prevent its propagation in the
world, to tarnish its excellency in the eyes of Jews and
Pagans, tod to confirm their speculative and practical errors.
As it was not by the secular arm, but in direct opposition to
the sword, that it insinuated itself into the minds of men,
and was first promulgated, so they believe that its final
establishment in .the nations of the earth will be effected
through the medium of the softening influence of its pacific
spirit, and by the glorious example of peace and concord
among its followers.
In the year 1798, the state of Ireland afforded a striking
occasion to the members of this Society, who are scattered
abroad in different parts of that kingdom, to put the efficacy


of their peaceful principles to the test. It is, however, to he
presumed, that, even if outward preservation had not been
experienced, they who conscientiously take the maxims of
peace for the rule of their conduct, would hold it not less
their duty to conform to these principles; because the reward
of such as endeavour to act in obedience to their Divine
Master’s will, is not always to he looked for in the present
life. "While, therefore, the fact of their outward preservation
would be no sufficient argument to themselves that they had
acted as they ought to act in such a crisis, it affords a striking
lesson to all who will take no principle for a rule of human
conduct, even if it should have the sanction of Divine
authority, that has not been verified by experience.
When a kingdom is divided in itself, it is difficult for any
to remain neutral. Either the passions of human nature, by
the influence of many private and public bonds, will be
pressed to a near union with one of the contending parties,
or the Christian principle of universal charity must operate
uniformly and powerfully in maintaining a dignified and
amicable relation with all. It is therefore necessary to
subdue the natural propensity which we feel to imbibe the
fears, hopes, wishes, and prejudices of our neighbour, to bear
his reproach for our seeming apathy, and in this way to clear
the avenue of the mind from the seeds of contention, that in
thought and word, as well as in deed, we may be followers
of peace.
Whatever secret and slowly-operating causes might have
conspired to produce the Rebellion of 1798, it is certain, that
different objects were proposed by two great classes of the
Insurgents. By some, civil liberty—a specious pretence in
all ages to the warm and enterprising—by others, uniformity
in religious faith—an imposing object to the dark and
bigotted, were held up as justifiable reasons for erecting the
standard of sedition, and plunging their native country into
the horrors of a civil war. The members of a Society which
neither united with the political nor the religious views of
these factious bands, might naturally be looked upon with
suspicion by both; at least, they were not likely to be
considered as friends ; and, in relation to the government, as
a part of the community which did not exert itself actively
in aiding the power to which it professed duo submission, in
order to suppress a rebellion, the motives and objects of
which it could not in any way approve, the Society seemed to


manifest but a spurious loyalty. It was, in fact, openly
charged, not only with a pusillanimous dereliction of its
civil duties, but with a tacit reliance upon its neighbours, to
step forward in the defence of rights and privileges, which,
while it was as much interested in them as others, it was
alleged that it supinely neglected. Hence, whatever forbear-
ance the government itself was disposed to exercise towards
the Society, the professed loyalists, as they were termed,
regarded its members in no more favourable light than as
drones, unwilling to work, and ready to feed upon the honey
supplied by the industrious bees. Whether some individuals,
who, having the name, were but little bound to the principles
of the Society, might not have deserved this imputation, is
not a matter of much moment. For, were the question to be
decided in the affirmative, the censure could neither lessen
the value of the principles themselves, nor affect the general
character of the body, in its conscientious support of these
principles.
These were a few of the critical circumstances in which
the Society was placed at this period, when private indi-
viduals belonging to it, many of them separated at a con-
siderable distance from each other, very often without an
earthly counsellor to flee to,'and therefore deprived of any
other refuge than the light and law of God in their own
hearts, were engaged to lift up the standard of peace to their
contending countrymen, and, as under one invisible Leader, to
preserve a remarkable consistency on this ever-memorable
occasion.
Long before the awful period, they had seen a spirit of
contention working in the minds of the people; opposed
factions were increasing their numbers and marking out
friends and foes : in the silence and gloomy reserve, which
characterised the multitude, a storm was seen to be gathering;
and it appeared obvious that as deep-seated animosity was
concentrating its forces on either side, nothing short of a
dreadful conflict could extinguish their mutual hatred in
mutual slaughter. If the members of the Society in question
did not anticipate this calamity, they seem at least to have
wisely taken some precautions against it. .One of the means
adopted by the Insurgents in the first place, to prepare for
the struggle, and by the constituted authorities in the next,
to defeat their purpose, was the robbery and the search for
arms in private houses. So early as the year 1796, and in
5
SOCIETY OF FRIENDS IN IRELAND.


one particular province in 1795, the Quarterly Meetings of
the Society were induced to recommend to all their members,
through the medium of Monthly Meetings, that those indi-
viduals who had guns or other weapons in their houses
should destroy them; and the general or National Meeting
of 1796 confirmed this recommendation; in order, as the
document states, “to prevent their being made use of to the
destruction of any of our fellow-creatures, and more fully
and clearly to support our peaceable and Christian testimony
in these perilous times.”
Committees were appointed hy the several Monthly Meet-
ings throughout the Society, to go round to the different
members for this purpose; and it appears that, in most
families, these committees had little more to do than to
communicate their business; some having previously destroyed
all such instruments, and others giving full expectation of
their intention immediately to comply with the recommenda-
tion of the superior meetings, whilst a few, who could not
be prevailed upon to make this sacrifice, were found to have
been generally inconsistent in their conduct in other respects;
so that they soon incurred the censure of the Society, and
suffered disownment. It was certified that, upon the whole,
the labours of the members to carry this wholesome advice into
effect were attended with a considerable degree of success.
It is related by an individual who resided at Ferns, in the
county of Wexford, that, being appointed on one of these
committees, he saw the necessity of first cleansing his own
hands: and he took a fowling piece which he had, and
broke it in pieces in the street opposite to his own house;
an example of fidelity to his principles, and a spectacle of
wonder to his neighbours.
A little after this, when the government ordered all arms
to be given up to the magistrates, it was a source of satisfac-
tion to many, that, in a general way, the members of the
Society were found to be without any such thing in their
possession.
On this head, a circumstance relating to the Friend above j
alluded to deserves to be noticed; as it shows at once the ,
uncertainty of life and the weakness of human dependency:
Some of the neighbouring magistrates, with the clergyman i
of the parish, came to his house, and the Friend being absent, !
expostulated with his wife on the supposed impropriety of !
his having destroyed his gun instead of giving it up to the '


government, for the alleged purpose of defending the loyalists
against the fomenters and plotters of rebellion, and for the
preservation of himself and his family. On •which occasion
the clergyman made this spontaneous remark, “ That he
believed the Friend had put his confidence in a higher
power.” On the day the town of Enniscorthy was burned,
this clergyman was murdered, and his body, with many
others, was exposed for several days in the streets, where
they were left to be eaten by the swine, till party rage had so
far subsided as to embolden a few Friends to bury their
remains. One of the magistrates was also murdered, and his
house was burned over the body.
As the members of the Society, at so early a period as the
year 1796, by taking the precautionary step of destroying
their arms, manifested to the government their peaceable
intentions; so, in the few months of turbulence and dismay
which immediately preceded the Rebellion of 1798, they
were in a considerable degree relieved from the midnight
depredations of the rebels, to which most of their neighbours
were exposed, in the lawless search for destructive weapons;
because it was now generally known that none such were
kept in their houses. And the National Meeting of the
Society was concerned, officially, to acknowledge its belief,
“that this early destruction of these instruments was, under
Providence, a means of lessening in some degree the effusion
of human blood (as these weapons would probably have
fallen into the hands of violent men), and might have also
tended to preserve some of the members of the Society them-
selves from blood, who, if they had had their guns in their
houses, might have used them in an unguarded moment of
surprise or attack, so as to take the lives of their fellow
creatures.”
As the state of public affairs was drawing nearer to a crisis,
the situation of the Society, especially of those who resided
in the vicinity of the contending parties, was a subject of
deep and awful solicitude to its feeling members ; and many
individuals had the efficacy of their religious principles
against war, put, in various ways, to severe proof.
Amongst these, the Friend before alluded to, residing in
the village of Ferns, in the county of 'Wexford, who is repre-
sented to have been constitutionally weak in body and timid
in mind, had to endure a considerable share of close trials ;
and, notwithstanding his natural infirmities, it appears, that,
7
SOCIETT OP PMEITDS El lEELAXD.


in most cases, he was enabled to support his principles with
exemplary firmness.
A party of militia being stationed at Ferns, the Earl of
M , who commanded, came to this Friend, and desired he
would give up part of his house, which was then used as a
store, for a guard-house for the soldiers. The requisition
being sudden, the Friend was put to a stand what he should
answer; and, although he might have refused it on the
ground of its being occupied as a' store, yet, knowing that
this inconvenience could be obviated, he was not easy to cloak
the real cause of objection with any disguise or subterfuge.
Considering, therefore, that this was a fit opportunity to lift
up the standard of peace, and to bear his testimony against war,
he honestly told the commander “that the apartment he
requested was occupied as a store-room—but besides that, the
purposes for which it was wanted were such as he could
not unite with, having a conscientious scruple against war,
and everything connected with it. Upon this, the Earl of
M grew very angry, and desired the soldiers who were
with him to afford the Friend no protection, in case any
disturbance should arise. To this observation, the latter
replied, that “he hoped he should not trust to, or apply for,
military protection.” The commander went away greatly
displeased, and seemed to mark out this Friend as a disaffected
person : so that he did not know how soon a prison might be
his lot; especially, as one of the militiamen who was
quartered at his house for many weeks, and had his entertain-
ment at free cost, propagated many false reports of him with
respect to political matters; so that his situation became more
perilous in consequence.
Some months after this, the military began to act with
great rigour towards those that were suspected to be United
Irishmen,* —burning their houses and stacks of com, etc.,
and fastening caps besmeared with pitch upon their heads. ,
They were preparing to burn a house of this description in ,
the village of Ferns : and the same Friend, feeling pity for !
the man’s wife and children, who would thus be deprived of
an habitation, was induced to intercede with the commanding i
• Those who opposed the Insurgents were sometimes called Loyalists,
Orangemen, Protestants, Yeomen. The Insurgents were also termed
Pikeman, United Irishmen, Rebels, and sometimes they were _ even
termed Roman Catholics, as chiefly consisting of that class, at least in
the South of Ireland.


officer of the militia on their behalf; stating that ho did not
come to intermeddle between him and the suspected man;
hut pitying the poor wife and children, he thought it would
he hard treatment to deprive them of shelter and the means
of subsistence, when the man was fully in his power; adding,
“ though he might be criminal, probably they were innocent
of his crimes.” During this expostulation, the officer became
very warm in his temper, and charged the Quakers with
meddling in some cases, to prevent the execution of justice,
when, in others, they would give no assistance to the govern-
ment.
A short time after this, when the United Irishmen got the
ascendancy in the town, this Friend was enabled to render
the officer some important services ; and, from the grateful
acknowledgments expressed by the latter in return, he had
the satisfaction of thinking, that the prejudice of the officer
was not only removed, but exchanged for a feeling of friend-
ship. This occurrence afforded an interesting example of the
blessed fruits of a peaceable conduct: the same individual
using his influence alternately with those in power,—an
influence which nothing but an undeviating course of bene-
volence towards all his fellow creatures could give him—to
intercede for the depressed and afflicted.
On another occasion, the militia were preparing to hang
some suspected persons, for not delivering up their weapons,
and to fasten pitch caps on the heads of others. The Friend
was fearful of being applied to for ropes, which he had for
sale, as he could not be easy to sell them for that purpose;
and yet he saw that refusal might involve him in some dan-
ger; as martial law had been proclaimed, and life and
property were subjected to military discretion. However, when
some of the military came to buy ropes and linen, he had
the courage to refuse to sell what was intended to torment or
destroy a fellow-creature. The articles were accordingly
taken by force; and though payment was offered he
refused it.
This occurrence took place just before the general rising of
the United Irishmen in that part of the country, and, as it
was probably known to some of his neighbours in the town of
Ferns, he had reason to believe that, under the direction of
Providence, it contributed to the preservation of himself and
his family, at that juncture.
Observing that in the evening of the next day a melancholy


silence prevailed, he inquired of a person if there was any
thing more than usual in prospect, and was told that the
country people were collecting in large bodies. At this
intelligence, a cloud of darkness, as he described it, over-
spread his mind, and he was brought to a state of unutter-
able distress. He knew, indeed, that he had endeavoured to
place his dependence on an Almighty Protector. But the
feelings natural to every human being possessed of a Christian,
peaceable disposition, at the prospect of the gulf that was
opening to thousands of his misguided fellow creatures, of
the ruin and desolation about to fall upon his country, and of
imminent danger to himself and his family, produced for
some hours a conflict, of which he found it impossible to
convey an adequate idea, and almost beyond what he seemed
able to endure.
At midnight the town was filled with consternation:
guards and divisions of the army were placed in different
quarters; and the Protestant inhabitants were in continual
terror.
He prevailed upon his family to retire to bed; but they
could not sleep; yet they endeavoured to attain that solemn
retirement of soul in which it is best prepared to meet the
calamities of life, and to rely upon the mercies and the
power of Omnipotence.
Early in the morning, while he was in much anxiety as
to the event, a person, whom he supposed to be one of the
United Irishmen, came into the house and said, “ Let who
may be killed, the Quakers will be spared.” These words,
trifling as they might appear, seemed to him, at the time, like
the intimation given to Gideon, when he was listening to the
man in the Midianites’ camp telling his dreams to his fellow,
which seemed to dissipate his fears and to fix his confidence.
He then felt his mind somewhat encouraged to hope that
their lives would be preserved.
On that morning, the scene was very awful; the houses
and haggards of com were in flames in every direction around
them, some being set on fire by the yeomanry, and others by
their enemies, so that between the two parties total devas-
tation seemed to be at hand; the Protestant inhabitants were
fleeing into the towns and villages for safety, and the military
guards under arms in all quarters ; persons flying into town,
having escaped from the hands of murderers, in the country;
some of them wounded, and bringing the news of. others that
10
NARRATIVES OP THE


; •were slain. Property was then of little account; for it was
; every one’s concern to escape with his life.
; Being informed that some of the fugitive Protestants were
' much in'want of something to eat, the same Priend had
' victuals prepared, and sent to invite such to allay their
hunger; but it so happened that none of them came to
partake of his hospitality.
The scene now became changed, though the prospect was
still gloomy, for in the evening the military left the town
and marched to Enniscorthy; and, together with the army,
not only the Protestants who came into Perns for safety, but
those who resided in the village. •
He was not aware of their departure till he observed that
the place was almost depopulated. A state of things so
opposite, though it was accompanied with marks of desola-
tion, gave, however, a little time to contrast the quiet of
peace with the alarms of war; and, though short, it was
looked upon as a favour.
But in this interval of calm his mind was not divested of
painful suspense as to the issue, which continued till the
next morning, when the town and neighbourhood became
filled with an undisciplined and ungovernable, multitude,
consisting of many thousands of the United Irishmen, fol-
lowing the footsteps of the army to Enniscorthy, and demo-
lishing the houses of those called Loyalists and Orangemen,
for their owners were fled.
His house was soon filled with these people, when, to his
astonishment and humbling admiration, instead of the mas-
sacre he and his family had dreaded, they were met by
caresses and marks of friendship; the Insurgents declaring
that they intended them no injury, but would fight for them,
and protect them, and put them in their bosoms; adding, that
they required nothing but provisions. They seemed, indeed,
to bo in extreme want of something to eat, and the victuals
which had been prepared for those they called enemies, were now
ready for them. When they had, therefore, eaten up what
was provided, they proceeded on their route to Enniscorthy.
Soon after, in the direction of this town, which was about six
miles distant, the columns of smoke could be seen rising from
the burning houses; and, in the evening, some of the United
men returned with tidings that Enniscorthy was in their
possession, and that their camp was fixed on Yinegar Hill,
over the town.


[ The next day, a man with a malicious expression of coun-
[ tenance, and having a long spit in his hand, came to the
i Friend, and threatened to kill him for some alleged offence,
: saying, “I have killed Turner” (meaning a neighbouring
[ magistrate),* “ and have burned him in his own house, and
; now I will rack f you as I please.” He endeavoured to
convince the man of his mistake, and, being joined by the
' persuasions of a neighbour, with much difficulty prevailed
' upon him to be quiet; so that, at length, he parted in
; friendship.
The day after Ennisoorthy was taken by the Insurgents,
several of the poor distressed Protestants, mostly women,
returned homeward to the village, which they had deserted
when the army left it. Two females, servants to the Bishop
of Ferns, and a woman whose husband was killed the day
before, came, with her children, to tho Friend’s door, as
persons that had no dwelling-place. They stood in the
street, looking up and down in all the eloquence of silent
distress. Though he had but small accommodation, his heart
and his house were both open to the afflicted; and, notwith-
standing the severe threatenings he received from the then
ruling party, he and his family endeavoured to entertain as
many as they could without distinction. Even of the United
Irishmen, such as staid in the town, and their wives and
families (as many as could be accommodated), used to come
to his house at night to lodge, supposing themselves more
secure than in their own houses.
This was also the case in the houses of most other members
of the Society, in any way exposed to the contending parties.
And, in such a state of anarchy, when all laws were disre-
garded, and every man acted according to his own will,
however perverse, it was not surprising that instances of
ingratitude should now and then appear: one of these may
be mentioned. Previously to the breaking out of the rebel-
lion, the military had destroyed the habitation and property
of a neighbouring farmer, who, with his family, sought
shelter at the house of another member of the Society, near
Ferns. He provided them with one of his out-houses to live
• This was the magistrate who called upon the same Friend respecting
his arms. See page 7.
f The term rack was in common use during the Eehellion, to denote
the entire demolition of the interior of the houses of those who were con-
sidered enemies.


in, until they could better their condition. But when their
party got the ascendancy, the farmer took possession of his
protector’s dwelling-house, and manifested his intention of
turning him and his family out of it; and probably would
have carried it into execution, had not the short dura-
tion of the United Irishmen’s power prevented this ungrateful
determination.
It may be noticed that, throughout the struggle, the houses
of Friends appeared to be marked out for places of entertain-
ment. They were almost constantly full, day and night;
and it was wonderful that their provisions held out in Ihe
manner they did to the end of the conflict. The members of
the Society, and some of the then oppressed party, sometimes
conveyed provisions to one another privately. The United
Men sometimes offered part of their own stock; but, knowing
it to be plunder, or, as they called it, the spoils of war, the
Friends always declined to accept it, and it was evident that
such a refusal was mostly taken in the light of an offence.
Indeed, the United Men often discovered their chagrin
because they could not .prevail upon the members of the
Society to unite with them in any of their requisitions.
From the number of United Men who came to lodge almost
every night in the Friends’ houses, these were in continual
danger of falling a prey to the king’s army, if it should make
an attack on the town; and, on the other hand, they were
continually threatened by the pike-men for not turning out
the poor fugitive Protestant women and their children, who
had taken shelter under their roofs. But although they
appeared to bo in danger, according to human apprehension,
from both parties, they were, in fact, alternately protected by
both.
The Friend last mentioned being, at one time, much
threatened for not complying in this respect, told them candidly
that he would not turn out poor, helpless, distressed creatures
frpm his house, whatever might be the consequence; and,
seeing his firmness, they did not enforce compliance, although
they were greatly enraged at him.
Some of them also came one morning to the other Friend, and
told him his house was to be burned that day, in consequence
of his refusal to turn out the Protestant women that were in
his house. He replied, that “if they did so, he could not
help it; but that as long as he had a house, he would keep it
open to succour the distressed; and, if they burned it for
19


that reason, he must only turn out along with them, and
share in their affliction.”
It so happened that this was the regular day on which the
Monthly Meeting of the Society in that quarter was to be
held about a mile from Ferns; and, notwithstanding the
alarming denunciation, he considered it his duty to take his
family with him to Meeting, leaving his home with a heavy
heart, as ho expected soon to be without an habitation, as
well as the means of present support. On his return to
Ferns, however, he was rejoiced to see his dwelling entire;
and his heart was filled with praises and thankfulness to the
good Providence that had preserved it. Whatever was the
reason that prevented them from executing the threat, their
evil disposition towards him on that account seemed to be
changed, for they did not make any requisition of the kind
afterwards.
Throughout the calamity, it was his uniform experience,
that the more he attended to what he conceived to be right in
his own conduct, the more he seemed to be respected by them ;
even when he expostulated with them on account of the
cruelties committed by their party,' particularly at Vinegar
Hill, Wexford, and Scullabogue, where men, women, and
children were burned to death in a barn. They quietly
listened to his remonstrance, and frequently acknowledged
the wrong.
A party of the king’s army, stationed in Hewton-barry,
came to Ferns to disperse the United Irishmen who held
possession of the place. The latter at first made some
demonstrations, as if they would risk a battle; but seeing
that the regular troops opposed to them were provided with
cannon, they fled away from the town. On hearing that the
army were coming in, the Friend stood at his own door, lest
he should be suspected of being an enemy. When the mili-
tary came near his door, one of the soldiers, stepping out ot
the ranks, presented a gun at his breast, and was on the
point of drawing the trigger, when the Friend called to him
“to desist from murder .” The soldier, like one struck
with amazement, immediately let the gun fall from his
shoulder, and presently his officers interfered for the Friend’s
protection, whose life was thus preserved, as on the right
hand and on the left.
Some of the inhabitants of this village, who were found
unarmed in the houses, being made prisoners by the soldiers,


they pleaded their innocence; but, in'such a state of things,
they could not easily prove it. The commanding officer
therefore desired, that if there were any Quakers in the town,
they would get certificates of good behaviour from them,
which, he added, he would be willing to accept, and then to
liberate them. The same Friend was accordingly applied to
on behalf of several, and procured their liberation. Had he
been put to death by the hand of the hasty soldier, it is
easy to see that those who obtained their release afterwards
by his means, would probably have shared the same fate, for
want of credible testimonials ;. and thus one sacrifice would
have been added to another, and death would have multiplied
its victims, without any regard to their innocence. Thus it is
when violence is permitted to reign, and thus it would be on
every occasion, if there were not an over-ruling Providence
to say to the peaceful sufferer in his wrongs —“ It is enough,”
and to the proud oppressor in his fury —“ Thus far shall
thou go.”
OF THE DANGERS TO WHICH THE SOCIETY WAS
EXPOSED IN THE ATTENDANCE OF THEIR MEETINGS.
The events which have just been noticed, as far as they relate
to the Society of Friends, may be considered rather of a
domestic nature, concerning only one or two families. It may
now, therefore, be proper to say a few words as to the situa-
tion of its members in the quarter where the individual, so
often alluded to, resided, with respect to the performance of
their religious duties. In this part of the country, notwith-
standing some of the members of the same Meeting were
several miles distant from each other, they did not suffer their
perplexities at home to interfere with the sacred duty of reli-
gious worship abroad, or to prevent them from traversing the
country, filled with armed men, amidst dangers, if possible,
still greater than those they had left, in order that they
might assemble together for this solemn purpose. Conse-
quently, in going to, and returning from their meetings, they
had to encounter many difficulties, besides the struggle be-
tween their faith and their natural fears, in leaving their
houses and property a prey, perhaps, to pillage, or to the
flames, during their absence. Human prudence, it is likely,
would have induced them, in such an awful extremity, to
remain at home and to look after their outward affairs; but


the sense of what they owed to their Maker, and to the
Society of which they were members, in many instances,
overbalanced these selfish considerations; and, it appeared
that in most cases they left behind them a better care-taker
than human prudence.
Most of the horses being taken from them, the members of
that particular Meeting had frequently to walk to their place
of worship. The first time they did so, some of them met a
man of very terrible character, who had killed a neighbour in
Perns a day or two before. Ho was, however, friendly
in his behaviour to them, and even offered to have them car-
ried to their Meeting. But, though they acknowledged his
civility, they did not accept his offer, pursuing their journey
on foot six Irish miles.
Parties of these people often met with the Friends going
to and returning from their Meeting, and they were some-
times very inquisitive to know whence they came, and
whither they were going; but none of them offered any
molestation, except at one time, when several Friends were
passing to meeting through Camolin (a neighbouring village),
with a horse belonging to one, and a jaunting car to another.
A great number of United Men being in the street, and
conversing about the Society, one -of them said, “It was the
last time the Quakers should ever go that road.” After the
latter had passed the crowd, a shot was fired, apparently to
alarm them. The horse took fright and broke the traces, an
inconvenience they remedied as well as they were able, and
afterwards proceeded quietly to their meeting-place. It .was
a remarkable circumstance, that before the next meeting-day
came round in regular course, the power of these misguided
men was overthrown.
In other parts of the county of "Wexford, some of the
members of the Society, having been observed by the United
Men to persevere in attending their place of religious
worship, notwithstanding the threats and. opposition they
experienced, became objects of their ill will in consequence,
and were apprised that if they persisted, they should be
dragged to the altar of a chapel near which they passed, and
suffer the penalty of their obstinacy. One family, in par-
ticular, received notice, that unless 'they gave up the
attendance, of meetings, and united in the Eoman Catholic
forms of worship, they should individually be put to death,
and their house should be burned.
16
XARHATIVES OP TUB


As the following was to be the day of public worship, the
heads of the family were brought under deep mental exercise,
accompanied with fervent prayers that they might be enabled
to come to a right determination, in this awful conflict
between their duty and their apprehensions for the safety of
their family.
In collecting the individuals together, with a degree of
humble confidence that best direction might be afforded, after
a little solemn retirement, they laid the matter before their
children. The noble and intrepid language of the eldest son,
then a very young man, on this memorable occasion, is
worthy of being recorded. “Father,” he said, “ rejoice,
that we are found to suffer.” His parents were much
affected, and their minds so much strengthened in conse-
quence, that they immediately concluded to attend their
meeting the next day. In the morning, they proceeded to
their place of worship accordingly, without seeking to avoid
the armed insurgents by going through the fields; but,
keeping the public high road, they were permitted to accom-
plish their purpose in safety; and expressed the satisfaction
they felt in having thus fulfilled what they considered to be
their duty. They were not then apprised of the circum-
stance, which had in the meanwhile occurred, viz., that the
Hig’s army had entered that part of the country, which
disconcerted the plans of the insurgents, so that they were
prevented from carrying their wicked designs into execu-
tion.
The father of another large and respectable family of the
Society, living about a mile from the last-mentioned, though
he was often threatened and advised by a priest and others
to stay at home for some time, or at least to go by some
private way, did not feel that it would be right to go to this
meeting by any other than the usual way, along the high road,
through the town of Taghmon, which was inhabited almost
entirely by persons supposed to be friendly to the United
Irishmen. Some of these were heard to say of the Friends:
“They even dare us by going through the streets, but they shall
not go long ” ; and they used many threats both by words
and actions to intimidate the family. The daughters of this
Friend, who were delicately brought up, sometimes walked
to and from the meeting-place at Forrest, in the county of
Wexford, about four Irish miles distant, without any male
attendant, and experienced no molestation, in the very height


of the commotions. The horses of most Friends having been
taken away, the parents of the young women being aged,
were unable to accompany them. On one of these occasions,
having been more than usually threatened, they remarked
that a strange dog, which they could not recollect to have
ever seen before, followed, or rather accompanied them home,
as an escort for some miles; and, on seeing them safe to
the house, which he could not be prevailed upon to enter,
left them.
Amongst the various menaces that were used to alarm the
Society, some of the United Irishmen spoke “of converting
the Quaker’s meeting at Forrest into a Romish chapel ” : and
two boys were heard to say that “ they would burn the
Quakers in their place of worship the next meeting day,”
according to a plot which had been laid in Taghmon. A
member of that meeting, residing near, was also informed that
the meeting house should be burned; and ihit he and his
large family should be destroyed if he attempted to go there
again; and in order to intimidate him the more, a blunder-
buss was presented at him. Another Friend was also told by
a woman, that she heard several persons declare, on the very
day the rebels were driven out of their camp near Ross,
“ that the Quakers should never meet again at their meeting
house in Forrest.” Thus it appears that the same threat was
held out to many families.
It is worthy, however, of notice, that notwithstanding
individuals and whole families were thus threatened, in
different places, few were deterred from the steady pursuit
of what they considered to be the path of religious duty:
and the fact is to be recorded as a monument, not to their
praise, but to the mercy of that Providence which watches
over the weakest of his children who trust in him, that all
the machinations and evil designs of their enemies, in this
as in other instances, were signally confounded; for on the
very evening previous to the next meeting day at Forrest, when
so many were to be devoted to destruction, and their houses
to the flames, the power of the United Irishmen was over-
thrown by a decisive battle near Yinegar Hill. Accordingly,
in the morning of the day appointed for public worship,
when the Friends met together as usual, numbers of these
misguided people, who had been calculating on the possession
of power to effect their own cruel ends—a power they seemed
incapable of using but for the degradation and misery of


their fellow-creatures—instead of carrying their designs into
execution, which there were no outward means at the time
in that part to prevent, were actually assembled about the
door and windows of the meeting-house, not as a building
doomed with its inmates to destruction, but as a place of
safety to themselves; and remained there till the meeting
concluded, and the Friends had withdrawn.
It is not to be supposed that Forrest was the only meeting
where such circumstances occurred—of malignant threats
appalling to human nature, on one side, and of unshaken
firmness in the support of religious testimonies on the other.
The members of Cooladine and Enniscorthy meetings in the
same county, were placed nearly in the same predicament
with those of Forrest. They were threatened; and though
some of them had to lament the loss of their property, and
the destruction even of their houses, in the indiscriminate
devastation, yet the threats of personal violence to them
were found to be impotent, and their lives were providentially
preserved.
The United Men told a Friend of Cooladine, that “if the
Quakers ever attempted to meet again in the meeting-house
there, it should be burned.”
When the town of Enniscorthy was in possession of the
rebels, the time of holding the Monthly Meeting there had
arrived; and different members of the particular Meetings
composing it, except of Ross, which was then in a state of
siege, prepared to attend it. Some came from Fems, Coola-
dine, and Balanclay. Although their horses were taken from
some Friends, on the road, by patroles from the Rebel camp
at Vinegar Hill, they were not themselves prevented from
pursuing their journey on foot many miles; and they entered
Enniscorthy, scarcely knowing whether they would he per-
mitted to go to their Meeting-house or not, and almost
doubting whether they should find it standing. They were,
however, enabled to hold their meeting for worship: hut
were much interrupted by persons walking and making a
noise in a loft or gallery adjoining, who, after a while, went
away. It appeared that these persons came with a malicious
design, but that they were prevented from carrying it into
execution. A large hole was observed to have been broken
in the ceiling, which the Friends were told, was made for
the purpose of setting the house more readily on fire, but
that others of the party interfered.
19a


Soon after this Monthly Meeting of Enniscorthy, the
Quarterly Meeting for Leinster Province was to be held, in
due course, in the same town. As the time approached, it
seemed almost impossible, from the appearance of things,
that it could be accomplished. Yet many individuals, some
from distant places, acting in faith and simplicity of heart,
left their homes to attend it, and the way was gradually opened
before them. The outward aspect of affairs at this time
was, indeed, changed : for the United Men had only recently
been defeated with great slaughter, and their camp was
broken up. Accordingly, several Friends had to pass through
heaps of slain on the road, and in some instances were
obliged to remove the dead bodies of the rebels out of the
way, that they might not trample on them, to the wonder of
the spectators; some of whom exclaimed—“ The Quakers
must be mad.”
It may therefore he noticed, that in the neighbourhood
of Cooladine Meeting, the camp of Vinegar Hill, a mile
distant, was broken up by the battle which took place there
the day before their week-day meeting occurred; and so, a
way seemed to be opened not only for the attendance of that
meeting, but of Leinster Quarterly Meeting at Enniscorthy,
the day following.
At the latter, the members of the Society who attended
were comforted together, under an humbling sense of the
Providential care they had so largely experienced; and, having ■
held their meeting for worship as well as that for discipline ■
quietly, they were favoured to return to their respective i
habitations in safety.
The first class of incidents above recorded relates to the pecu- •
liar trials which members of the Society in the county of \Yex- ;
ford, the principal theatre of contention in the south, experience ■
in consequence of their determination to take no part in the 1
war, and to the manner in which they were preserved. The last <
series relates to the threats and dangers to which they were j
subjected, for the firmness and faithfulness with which j
they endeavoured to discharge the important duty of religious j
worship, and to the way in which these threats were defeated, j
The next class, to which the reader’s attention will he
directed, refers to some awful trials, connected in some degree ■
with the last, when the refusal of many individuals to con- ■


form to the ceremonies of the Romish Church, exposed them,
ip the circle of their families as well as abroad, to the danger
pf instant death. And a fourth class will embrace a more
comprehensive range of incidents relating to the Society in
other parts of the country, which were the scenes of
commotion.
In every place, it will appear, that the same principles of
conduct produced effects of a similar description.
ON THE TRIALS TO WHICH FRIENDS WERE EXPOSED
FOR REFUSING TO CONFORM TO THE ROHAN CATHOLIC
WORSHIP.
A Friend of Enniscorthy Meeting, residing a few miles from
the town, was made prisoner at his own house, and taken by
a number of pikemen to the house of a neighbouring priest,
with whom he was intimately acquainted. The priest told
him that he must become a Roman Catholic, and be christened,
for that no other profession of religion was now to be allowed.
At this the Friend was greatly surprised, and said he had a
better opinion of the priest than to suppose he would force
men to make a profession of religion in opposition to their
consciences. The priest replied, “ there was no alternative,
either to become a Roman Catholic, or to be put to death.”
The Friend remarked, that, “by so doing, they would be only
making hypoprites of such as might be induced to comply;
and, for his part, that ho would choose to suffer rather than
to violate his conscience; that, if there was any crime laid to
his charge, he was willing to be tried, and on that ground
was not afraid to look any of them in the face.” The priest,
who had everything ready for baptizing, according to their
mode, seemed much disappointed, and brought him out to
the pikemen, to be taken to Vinegar Hill. The Friend again
expostulated with the priest and pikemen together, urging
that if there was anything worthy of death laid to his charge,
he was willing to undergo a trial. The pikemen, although
they seemed much displeased that he would not become a
Roman Catholic, acknowledged the justness of his proposal,
and, in obedience to the priest, conveyed him to their camp.
Some other Friends were also made prisoners, from different
parts of the county, and amongst them one from Ulster pro-
vince, and were taken to the camp at Vinegar Hill, where
they all underwent a sort of trial; but, nothing being alleged


against them, they were set at liberty. Their liberation was
not a little remarkable, as many other persons were put to
death, against whom no charge of enmity was brought, nor
any ground of accusation, except that they were Protestants.
The Friend from Ulster was detained at the camp a day or
two; and at the time the rebel army was performing the
service of Mass, as he could not take any part in their form
of worship, they suffered him to remain standing alone, while
they were on their knees, with his head covered, during the
awful ceremony. It was, indeed, an awful spectacle, to see
so vast a multitude, many in a state of brutal intoxication,
and their arms yet reeking with the blood of their fellow-
creatures, presuming to invocate the God of Peace to pour out
a blessing on their recent acts, and to prosper the ferocious
designs they were still harbouring against their unoffending
countrymen. Since the era when the gospel of peace was
first introduced into the world, perhaps it might be said that
Christianity never saw a darker race, using her sacred name to
do God service by the immolation of human victims. Scarcely
did they seem to possess a single virtue to redeem them from
the lowest grade of human depravity. The majority, indeed,
manifested unlimited devotion to their priests. What, then,
must we think of the ignorance or the inhumanity of those,
their spiritual teachers, who played upon such instruments,
with designs so cruel, and with effects so desolating and
barbarous! For the sake of charity, let us _ suppose that
intellectual light has dawned upon the present generation,
so as to enable him who undertakes the office of a Christian
minister, to see the gospel in its native beauty—a system of
love—and him who seeks to be instructed, to know, of a
truth, that it is only the peace-makers who shall be called the
children of God, and that whosoever hateth a fellow Christian
cannot he the Lord’s disciple. Let us also indulge a hope
that such a state of mental and spiritual darkness as then
existed will never return.
Many and lamentable were the instances in which this
dark and cruel bigotry displayed itself during the rebellion.
The elderly Friend, father of a large family, who was in a
declining state of health, and whose daughters used to go
alone to their meeting at Forrest, as mentioned in page 17,
was one who, from the respectability of his character and his
influence in the country, was marked by the neighbouring
priests as a desirable object of their proselytism, in this reign


of terror; for, as they were decidedly unwilling to take the
Ijyes of the Friends, their object was to convert them, by
intreaties or by menaces, to their faith.
In the case of this Friend, they laboured at it very assidu-
ously ; for if, by any means, his conversation could have been
accomplished, it is certain that they would have regarded it
as a signal triumph. He was urged and threatened: but when
the attempt became hopeless, one of the priests told some
of the Insurgents, after inquiring, “Had they not killed him
yet,” that “ they could not go forward until they had dispatched
the old man.” One night, about twelve o’clock, a number of
them entered his house, and, when they had plundered it of
what they wished, they snapped a pistol at him several times,
seeming to he determined to take his life. After some consi-
deration, they then insisted upon his going with them to their
main-guard, which was stationed at a distance. He made an
effort to go with them, accompanied by one of his daughters;
hut, feeling much weakness, and finding himself unable to
proceed, he sat down under a tree in his own lawn. After a
pause, which they did not seem to understand, they inquired,
“ what he had to say ? ” His reply was, that “ should they
be permitted to take his life, he hoped the Almighty might
be pleased to forgive them, and to take him in his mercy.”
Upon this, they were silent, left him', and went quietly away.
A kinsman of this Friend, living in this country not far
from him, had also a large family, which was exposed to much
danger during the disturbances. As many of the United men
lodged in the house, his daughters were obliged to attend
upon them, supply them with food, and do many menial
offices ; for the servants, being generally of that party, were
indifferent-about their work, calculating that all the property
would be their own, and that they themselves would soon be
masters and mistresses. An old woman, who had been a
nurse in the family, gave them much trouble with her frequent
importunities, consisting of intreaties, threats, and pretended
zeal for their welfare and the cause of religion; from time to
time urging them to conform to the Catholic mode of worship,
as the , only thing that could save their lives, or give them
hopes of future happiness. On one occasion, after the family
had been told that they should all be murdered unless they
became Homan Catholics, she fell on her knees in the parlour,
in a posture of supplication to the Deity to convert their
hearts: but her mistress, being favoured with remarkable


firmness, in a tone of authority desired her to rise, and
expressed her disapprobation of such conduct. The house of
this Friend teas situated but a few miles from the noted bam
of Scullabogue, in which a number of Protestants were
collected from the neighbouring country and burnt to death.
Large parties of the Insurgents, armed with guns and pikes,
came, several times, - to the house of this Friend. At one
time, they came to take away the cattle from the farm, for
the purpose of .supplying their camp; but, being informed
that the cattle had been lately taken lor tithes, they desisted
from violence at that time. Some of them came again and
took their horses. Three several times parties came, appa-
rently with the premeditated design of murdering the whole
family; once threatening that, if they did not conform to -the
Popish ceremony of the mass the following day, they should
be killed, or be burnt in the house next evening. This
occurred the day after the massacre at Scullabogue. Accord-
ing to their determination, the women came, on purpose to
plunder the house as soon as the projected murder had taken
place, the men who were to perpetrate the deed being then
assembled in it. Some of them were heard to say to their
comrades, “ Why don’t you begin ? ” to which it was replied,
“ They would shortly.” But, being prevented by a power
they knew not, still they deferred the execution. So that,
when they were again asked, “ Why they did not begin the
work,” their leader said, “ They would come another time .” In
so remarkable a manner were they restrained, that they
expressed to each other their surprise, how it should happen,
that they were prevented from accomplishing their purpose,
seeing the law was then entirely in their own hands. It is
certain that their bloody design was overruled; for, after
venting their rage in damaging the furniture, as, for instance,
by striking their pikes at the dial-plate of the clock, the
windows, and some of the kitchen utensils, they went away,
impotently threatening at last, that they would take the
eldest son with them.* Even this threat they did not
execute-
A female Friend, being desired by a Roman Catholic
clergyman to put up the sign of the cross, which was worn
by their party at that time, replied, that “ she could not do
* This was the young man who had manifested such resolution, when
the family was threatened with death if they persisted in going to their
meeting-place at Forrest. Seepage 17.


( it, but hoped the Almighty might be pleased to enable her
( to bear it." On this he did not urge her any further,
f An elderly Friend of some opulence, who, soon after the
( disturbances, came to reside in England, with a constitution
[ much debilitated by the hardships and persecutions he had
[ suffered, told a Minister of the Society, lately deceased, that
[ several of the United Irishmen entered his house and insisted
; that ho should undergo the ceremony of Baptism, according
' to the form of the-Romish Church. - As he refused it,, they
' behaved very roughly, but left him with the determination,
' as they said, of coming again in a few days; and, if he then
' refused, that they-would certainly hang him. According to
their promise, they came again, and endeavoured, by argu-
ments and threats, to prevail upon him to be baptized: but
in vain. They then said, they certainly would hang him;
but some trifling matter occurring among themselves, the
execution of their design was deferred at that time also, and
they left him. In a few days they returned again, and he
was told that they had now resolved to hang him before they
left the house, if he did not agree to be baptized; and they
actually fastened a rope round his neck and took him to an
outhouse, where there was a beam, and were in the act of
tying him up to the beam when an alarm was given, that a
party of soldiers was coming, which made them run away:
so that his life was providentially saved.
The following instance will show to what an extent the
lower orders were under the influence of their teachers; it
will also show the power of conscience in resisting what they
knew to be wrong. For, though darkness seemed to have taken
almost universal possession of their minds, they ' were now and
then visited by a feeble ray of -light, when they turned from
the outward leader to the inward law of their God.
A Friend, living in a retired part of the county of “Water-
ford, had a large family of young children, and kept several
servants. A little before the battle of Boss, two of the
nursery-maids, Roman Catholics, left the house. This cir-
cumstance gave some alarm to the family, which was,
however, mitigated in degree by their return after the battle,
in which the United Irishmen were defeated. The mistress
interrogated the elder of the servants respecting. their
reasons for thus leaving the family at a time and in a state
of such distress; and represented their ingratitude after
having experienced so many marks of kindness from their


master and mistress, during a period of some years’ servitude.
The girl acknowledged it all with many tears; but added,
“Mistress, if you knew all, you would not condemn us.”
Some days afterwards, her mistress spoke to her again, and
requested her to be more explicit, because she did not under-
stand what was meant by the words, “ If you knew all,” etc.
And upon urging the subject in a very kind manner, the
servant burst into tears, and acknowledged that their Con-
fessor had laid his injunctions upon them, “ that, if the battle
of Boss was favourable to the Irish, they should kill all the
young children; and this,” said she, “ we could not do; you
had been like tender and kind parents to us, and the children
we loved as our own; and therefore we determined to leave
the house, never to return any more, if the battle should be
favourable to the Irish.”
Some idea may be formed of the dangers with which the
members of the Society were surrounded, when it is known,
that, with few exceptions, their domestic servants, being
Roman Catholics, were in secret league with the Insurgents,
and daily anticipating the overthrow of civil and religious
power, as well as an entire change of property in their own
favour. Hence, there was every sordid inducement that could
operate upon a dark and bigotted and interested multitude, to
destroy all who stood in their way. For they were led, per-
versely enough, to think, that the performance of a religious
duty, or what they considered an act pleasing in the sight of
God—the destruction of an heretic—would coincide with
their temporal interest. It is, however, to be noticed, that,
in the South of Ireland, a great number of the Homan
Catholics, in the better classes of society, were distinguished
for their loyalty and good conduct; whilst in the North,
many who took an active part as leaders in fomenting the
sedition, were, by profession, Protestants.* It was chiefly a
political struggle in the North, and religious more than
political in the South. Hence the probability is, that, had
both classes been victorious against the lawful government,
yet with such distinct and incompatible views, they would
soon have turned their arms against each other.
A servant maid, residing with a Friend in Enniscorthy,
* Indeed, some of the leaders in the South were Protestants, especially
the Insurgent General who commanded at the battle of Boss: and it is
supposed that he was in some degree instrumental in restraining the
cruelty of those under him.


who had been instrumental in bringing about the murder of
the male part of a Protestant family, with whom she had
formerly lived, having pointed out to some of the Pikemen
such windows in the Priend’s house ns, she supposed, would
bo most eligible for them to fire from upon the king’s troops,
he said to her, “ I did not think thou wouldst serve me so.”
Upon which she told her mistress, that their children would
be fatherless before that time to-morrow. Her threats, how-
ever, proved to be vain.
It was clearly understood by many of the Society, from
every information they could collect, as well as from concur-
ring circumstances, that a day was fixed for a general massacre
of every class that was not of the Eomish Church. For the
United Men often said, “ One religion only shall be allowed.”*
Put in the evening before that very day which was to witness
so frightful a carnage, the king’s army invested Vinegar Hill,
and early in the morning a battle ensued, in which the United
Irishmen were totally defeated with great slaughter. The
king’s troops pursued the miserable remains of the Insurgents’
army to Wexford, which they entered without resistance,
and rescued numbers of the poor Protestants from present
death, and all, who were not yet made prisoners, from the
horrible massacre that awaited them.
Some idea maybe formed of the evils which war produces,
even to those it is waged to support, when it is known that a
considerable number of the Protestants, who had been taken
to the camp of the rebels at Vinegar Hill as prisoners, were put
to death by the victorious army, through ignorance, or through
the want of discrimination, in the heat of pursuit; as every
one in a coloured coat was supposed to belong to the insurgents.
The following additional facts show the cruel intentions of
the Eoman Catholics towards the Protestants in case of their
being victorious.
When a man named Behon, of Clone, in the parish of
Ferns, was under sentence of death for the murders he had
* On the morning of that day, a standard, or black flag, was carried
through the streets of Wexford, with “ M. W. S.” inscribed upon it in
large letters; the meaning of which was supposed to be, Mcuder with-
out Sis. And the Pikemen were in the act of executing the horrible
deed upon the wretched Protestants who were prisoners in the town, at
the time they were informed of the disasters which befel their party at
Vinegar Dill, It was said, they were then wading in the blood of the
victim Protestants up to their ankles, upon the bridge of Wexford. But
they soon fled in confusion.


committed, having been one of those employed on Vinegar
Hill to kill the Protestants, being affected with remorse, he
confessed that it was the intention of their party “ to cut off
the Protestants smack smooth ,” as he expressed it. He also
stated that, whilst on Vinegar Hill, he was kept almost
continually drunk by those in authority over him, that his
feelings might not prevent him from acting as executioner.
At Carlow, two men, who were taken prisoners on the day
of the slaughter of Pikemen there, being asked by the officer
before whom they were brought, what they would have done
in case they had been successful in the attack which they had
made on the town, candidly confessed, “ they intended the
death of all the Protestants.” “ And what,” said the officer,
“ did you intend to do with the Quakers ? ” They answered,
“ The Quakers were also to have been put to death.” The
officer desired the soijeant not to stain the barrack yard with
their blood. They were accordingly taken without the
barrack-gate, and there shot.
PART II
TESTIMONIES OF FRIENDS FROM DIFFERENT FARTS,
AND A FEW PARTICULARS OF THE BATTLES OF ROSS
AND ANTRIM.
A Feiexd of great respectability in the county of "Westmeath,
living in a wild, thinly inhabited district, not far from the
town of Moate, has given the following striking testimony
from his own observations at that period. There is so much
matter in it, and it is expressed so concisely, that the compiler
of these memoirs has thought it better to communicate the
information it contains in the writer’s own words :—“ All
those in this quarter who professed principles of peace, were
marvellously spared from extreme suffering; some living in
solitary places, surrounded by that class who were very gene-
rally in a state of rebellion. Some, so circumstanced, could
not leave their usual habitations, though strongly urged by
their few Protestant neighbours to flee with them to garrison
towns. 0 the heart-rending scenes some such have witnessed!
their neighbours, running hither and thither with their families
and goods, and calling upon me to flee from certain destruc-
tion. Yet some were favoured with faith and patience to


abide in their lots, conscientiously adhering to the revealed
law of their God; and thus did experience, to their humbling
admiration, the name of the Lord to be a strong tower in
which they found safety. I could, with wonder, love, and
praise, relate some marvellous deliverances mercifully vouch-
safed to me when surrounded by numerous, and, at other
times, by smaller bodies of armed men in open rebellion, and
when no human being of any other description was near ;
yet, through Divine aid, and that alone, was I enabled to
refuse to take up arms, or take their oaths, or join them,
assigning as a reason that I could not fight nor swear for or
agaimt them. They threatened, they pondered, they debated,
marvelled, and ultimately liberated me, though they said I
was in the power of many thousands then assembled. "When
travelling alone, I have sometimes seen such people armed
with pikes; we have looked seriously at each other, and
passed without speaking.”
The following particulars were received from a Friend,
who, during the Rebellion, resided in a small village in the
county of Kildare.
“ We escaped personal injury from either party, but seemed
often in great danger from both. The country people,
especially of our own neighbourhood, generally spoke and
acted friendly towards us, and appeared to be sensible that
though we would not join them, we would take no‘part
against them. I was asked for anything of a green colour.
I refused, and told them, we could not join any party.
“What! not the strongest ? ” “None.” And though they
saw green cloths on our tables, they took none from us.
Sometimes great crowds of strangers caused an alarm; and
one man was very violent, wanting the men of the place
to join them. How these misguided people would have
behaved to us, had they retained possession of the little town
much longer, I cannot say; but I should think it unfair to
judge unfavourably of their intentions, when they did not
show any hostile dispositions, except the man above men-
tioned. They frequently spoke well of Quakers, and
hearkened calmly to advice given them; and when the
soldiers came to quell them, the Priest ran to borrow a
Friend's coat to disguise himself.”
According to the testimony of a respectable inhabitant of
Ross, Friends of this town were placed in a different
situation from some others of their religious profession in


other parts of the county of Wexford; inasmuch as the
town was occupied by a large military force, and not at any
period in the possession of the Insurgents, except partially
and at intervals during the day of the memorable battle,
which continued with but little cessation for nearly the space
of twelve hours. Tor a considerable part of this time, it
was matter of awful uncertainty which party would ulti-
mately prevail. But, at the very juncture when the town was
mostly abandoned by the king’s troops, who, from the violence
and great length of the conflict, together with the intense
heat of the weather and other causes, had become so fatigued
and exhausted, as generally to give it up, and to retire to the
bridge, in order to secure their retreat into Munster, the
assailing multitude, composed of many thousands, were
observed to betake themselves to flight, without any apparent
cause, either then or since discovered. On being assured of
this remarkable circumstance, the king’s troops were prevailed
upon to return; and they took possession of their former
posts, under some degree of astonishment at finding them-
selves left undisputed masters of the town. General
Johnson, who commanded, is reported to have said, that the
success of that day was to be referred to Providence, and was
not the work of man. .
.During this bloody conflict, in which it is stated from good
authority that upwards of two thousand persons were killed,
the town was set on fire in different quarters, and the flames
spread with such uncontrolled fury as to threaten a frightful
devastation. Yet amidst so many imminent and combined
dangers, Priends were generally preserved in a quiet and
resigned state of dependence upon that Almighty Power which
could alone afford protection in such an awful crisis. Protec-
tion was, indeed, wonderfully experienced, as was foretold by
several ministers of the Society, during their religious labours
in the country some years ‘before this calamity took place.
One Friend, in particular, was heard to declare in Gospel
authority, “ that in a time of trial, which was approaching,
if Friends kept their places, many would be glad to_ take
shelter under the skirts of their garments.” This prediction
was now literally fulfilled: for, many respectable neighbours,
on the evening of the battle, apprehending themselves not so
secure in their own houses as in those of Friends, flocked,
with their families, to the latter, thinking the Insurgents
would probably return and make another attack on the town


in the night. Some of these, belonging to an armed associa-
tion, and clad in a military garb, readily acquiesced with the
proprietor’s remonstrances, and assumed a dress of more
peaceable appearance. And there was reason to believe, that
after experiencing such an unexpected deliverance, their
minds were made sensible that the power or strength of man
was at such a time of little avail, and that providence
alone was able to protect and to rescue from such imminent
danger.
Many facts might be stated to show the impressions
which the people, or at least those who were apprehensive
for their personal safety, generally entertained, that the
peaceable dress of the Society would afford protection in
these perilous times: the following instance may be men-
tioned.
In the house of a Friend near Ennisoorthy, there lodged a
Protestant clergyman, a man of sober moral character, with
his wife. When he saw the danger approaching, he requested
that the clothes of a Friend might be given him, expecting
that in such a dress he might be preserved, or at least might
be able to effect his escape. Put it was remarked to him,
that such a disguise could be of no advantage; and he hid
himself in the garden by the river side, where ho was
found and murdered.
BATTLE OF ANTRIM.
The town of Antrim was the only considerable place in the
North, during the year of the Rebellion, in which any
members of the Society were placed in serious difficulties,
immediately between the contending parties. One family,
however, consisting of a very young man and his sisters,
whose father was then engaged in a religious visit in America,
was preserved in a remarkable manner during the conflict
which took place in this town.
On the day of the battle, when it was announced that the
rebels were approaching, few of the regular army being then
in the place, expresses were sent ofi in different quarters for
assistance. A regiment of cavalry arrived before the com-
mencement of the engagement, but was not able to make any
effectual stand against the force opposed to it. Orders were
issued to the inhabitants to close their doors and windows,
and to remain in their houses. About one o’clock in the


day, the rebels marched into the town; and their appearance
caused a general dismay, so that horror seemed to be pictured
in every countenance.
It was the design of this family to remain in their house,
until they discovered that the action had commenced, and
that the Insurgents’ cannon was placed in the street directly
opposite to.their door. As the house seemed to be in immi-
nent danger, they thought of taking refuge in the fields.
This step would, however, have been attended with great
personal risk, and was happily prevented; for the yard was
so full of rebels that the family could not well pass by them;
and after making an effort to escape, the females returned
into the house; but their brother was shut out amongst the
crowd. And, notwithstanding they were in the heat of
action at the time, they neither asked him to take up arms
and join them, nor did they offer him the least degree of
violence. He afterwards got into the stable, and endeavoured
to secure himself by holding down the latch with his hand,
till one of his sister? ventured out, and brought him into the
house; to their great joy, as they never expected to see him
again alive.
Immediately after they had given up the intention of
going into the fields, and were entering the house, a wounded
rebel came in along with them, and stayed with them the
remaining time of the engagement. Though they endea-
voured to perform the duties of humanity to a suffering
fellow-creature, they felt their situation to be full of
difficulty as well as of danger on his account, not knowing
how soon his enemies might prevail and find him under
their protection. The rebel, who was a respectable person,
strove to encourage them by saying, they need not be at all
alarmed, for that he was sure, as they were an inoffensive
people, and did not meddle on either side, they would not
meet with any harm.
At this time the rebels had gained possession of the town,
having obliged the regiment of cavalry to retreat, after a very
deadly encounter, in which about one-third of the regiment,
in the short space of a few minutes, was either killed or
severely wounded; but it was not long before a reinforce-
ment of the Monaghan and Tipperary militia entered the
town; and, seeing the rebels beginning to yield, they acted
with great cruelty, neither distinguishing friends nor enemies,
bat destroying every one who appeared in coloured clothes.


In a very short time they dispersed the insurgents, and re-
took the town.
Numbers, who were not in any way concerned, lost their
lives; for the soldiers showed pity to none: they fired
into the houses of the inhabitants and killed many: those
who took refuge in the fields suffered severely-.
When the firing had almost ceased, the family above
noticed, concluded it would be much safer for the rebel who
had taken shelter with them to try to make his escape:
for the probability was, that if he should be found in the
house, at such a time, he would not only suffer himself \ but
be the occasion of the family suffering also. He made his
escape accordingly, and was saved.
Not many minutes after, a number of soldiers came to the
door, knocked furiously at it, and demanded entrance imme-
diately, insisting that the family should all come forward
and' show themselves, in order that it might be known
whether there were any strangers in the house. The door
was opened accordingly, and they were immediately sur-
rounded by a great number of soldiers. Their appearance
was very frightful: they were just come from the heat of
the battle; their faces besmeared with gunpowder, and the
expression of their countenances corresponding with the
work of death in which their hands had just been engaged.
One of them said ho wanted to see if he appeared “ Devil-
enough like: ” he looked at his face in the glass, and observed
—“ he thought he did appear quite enough so.” They
inquired, if all the individuals of the family were present,
and if any strangers were in the house. Some of them were
going up stairs to search: but an officer, who lived near,
told them, they should not make any search: “ that the
Quakers were people that would not tell a lie—that their
words might be taken—and, therefore, if any strangers were
in the house, that they would not be denied.” Indeed,
their manner was so kind and civil as to excite the astonish-
ment of the family; especially as many others had experi-
enced very different treatment.
They now brought into the house a poor wounded soldier,
and gave him into the care of the family. Part of his
bowels had forced their way out through a wound made by
a musket ball. Every possible attention was paid to him,
and he was very thankful for it, but died the nexj; morning,
after suffering great pain.


The town presented an awful appearance after the battle:
the bodies of men and horses were lying in the blood-stained
streets; and the people were to be seen here and there
saluting their neighbours —like those who survived a pesti-
lence or an earthquake—as if they were glad to see each
other alive, after the recent calamity.
The same night nearly a troop of soldiers came to the door,
to let the family know “ they need not be at all alarmed; for
that they should be protected, that the soldiers would be
riding through the streets all night, and would take care they
should not be molested.”
After this the inhabitants were kept in a state of constant
alarm for many days, not knowing when another attack
might be made upon the town; fresh orders were repeatedly
given to close up their doors and windows, and to prepare for
another engagement. In the meanwhile the army were
racking many houses, and taking away the property. They
carried off the shop goods of a Friend living in a suspected
quarter of the town, but did not hurt any of his family.
The young man, who, with his sisters, was so critically
circumstanced, as is above related, interceded for his friend
with the commanding officer; but the latter would not
prevent the soldiers from plundering, saying, “He was a
Quaker, and would not fight; therefore the men were
allowed to take his goods.”
A brother of the same Friend, living in a part of the town
which was not considered so rebellious, received no harm, and
suffered no loss of property.
Owing to the bad character which that part of the town
where the young man and his sisters lived, had obtained,
orders were issued that it should be burned. Some of the
houses had already been destroyed on the morning of the
battle; but it was now a fearful thing to have the houses of a
whole street condemned to pillage and the flames, as many
innocent persons would undoubtedly suffer, and numbers
would be left without a place of shelter. For, in this
calamitous period, the poor destitute wanderer, whether
innocent or guilty, who was deprived of a home, either by
accident or design, was always an object of suspicion, and, if
not in military attire, was liable to be shot.
The commanding officer was riding up the street to give
the and one of the young women of the family
thought she would venture through, the crowd and speak to


him; some of the town’s people had indeed kindly urged her
to make the application. She walked up to him accordingly,
and with great simplicity asked him, if their house was to
be burned. He replied, “I have received very bad treat-
ment from the inhabitants of this quarter of the town; but
you shall not be disturbed. I will make them rack the houses
about your house, and save yours.” After this, without their
knowledge, a yeoman was sent to stand at their door, while
the destruction was going forward near them.
Notwithstanding the officer’s commands, the army seemed
disposed, many times afterwards, to plunder their house; but
the neighbours always interfered, saying, “they were inoffen-
sive people, not connected with any party, and that their
father was in America.” ' '
On one occasion the soldiers came for the express purpose
of racking the house, and had their weapons ready to break
the windows. But the neighbours, some of whom were
yeomen, stepped forward in their behalf, so that not even a
shilling’s worth was taken from them, nor did any of the
family receive the slightest personal injury.
The following remarkable circumstance deserves to be
recorded in relation to this family. It is given upon unques-
tionable authority:—
At the time their father, then in a weak state of health,
was preparing to leave Ireland, for the purpose of paying a
religious visit to America, a minister of the Society expressed
himself in prayer, at a Quarterly Meeting, to this effect.
He said, “Ho was led to appear in supplication, in behalf of
a dear brother, who was going to a distant country, he might
say, as with his life in his hands ; that the Lord, he trusted,
would be with him, and would lay out his work day after
day; that he would be enabled to perform acceptably what
was designed for him to do, and would return to his family
and friends with the reward of peace in his own bosom,
experiencing Him, who was his morning light, to be his
evening song; but that in his absence the sword would be
near his house, and the dead bodies would be lying in the
streets, and, at the time, neither hurt nor harm would befal
his family; for the Lord would encamp about them, and
preserve them, as in the hollow of his hand, from the rage
and fury of the enemy.” These things were literally
accomplished.


OF THE GENERAL PRESERVATION OF THE SOCIETY
DURING THE REBELLION.
The Society of Friends is scattered over three Provinces in
Ireland. In these, viz. Ulster, Leinster, and Munster, many
of its members were brought into immediate contact with one
or both of the hostile parties, in towns, villages, and retired
country places. Many of its members, it must also be
acknowledged, were living with little more than an outward
or formal profession of the principle against War, held as
one of its leading Christian tenets by the Society: in fact,
they submitted to the opinion of their friends, and followed
traditionally the maxims of their education, without feeling
such strong conviction of the indispensable duty which this
principle enjoined, as would have made them willing to
part with their liberty, or property, much less with their
lives, rather than violate this important testimony.
In this great variety of circumstances and of perils to
which they were exposed, it is natural enough to inquire
whether the Society lost any of its members. We are enabled
to answer this question by an authentic document issued by
the Yearly Meeting in Dublin, which contains the following
passage; “It is worthy of commemoration, and cause of
humble thankfulness to the Preserver of men, that, amidst
the carnage and destruction which frequently prevailed in
some parts, and notwithstanding the jeopardy in which some
Friends stood every hour, and that they had frequently to
pass through violent and enraged men, in going to and
returning from our religious meetings (which, with very
few exceptions, were constantly kept up) that the lives of
the members of our Society were so signally preserved.”
And in the same document, an extract is given from the
Epistle from the Yearly Meeting held in Dublin in 1801,
addressed to the Yearly Meeting in Philadelphia, which states
that “ it was cause of grateful acknowledgment to the God and
Father of all our mercies, that in retrospection to that gloomy
season, when, in some places, Friends did not know but that
every day would be their last, seeing and hearing of so many
of their neighbours being put to death, that no member of
our Society fell a sacrifice in that way but one young man."
That an exception should thus be made of one young man,
in the accidents or allotments of a Society composed of some
thousands, is in itself a remarkable occurrence: and every one


must be curious to know under what circumstances the death
of this individual took place.
There are some cases in which an apparent exception
confirms the law : and we are much mistaken, if, in this
particular instance, the very exception will not be found
to establish the principle, so far from weakening its practical
force.
This young man, apprehending that his life was in danger,
and that he could find no protection but by outward means
of defence, took up the resolution accordingly to put on a
military uniform and to associate with armed men. He told
his connexions that they would all be murdered if they
remained in such a defenceless state in the country; and taking
with him some papers of consequence, he fled to a neighbour-
ing garrison town. But it so happened that the very town*
he chose as a place of refuge was attacked and taken by the
Insurgents; and, from the most credible information that
can be collected, it appears that, after the contest was over,
he, with some other young men, was wantonly firing out of
a window upon them. The door of the house was soon forced
open by the enraged enemy, and in terror of his life, he
sought to conceal himself in the chimney of an upper cham-
ber, but he was discovered there and put to death. It has
been added, that he was marked for his inconsistency by
those, whom, by his decided opposition he had thus made
his enemies, and that he was formally threatened, that if he
persisted in his rash conduct, he should lose his life.
Pitiable young man!—How little did he know what was
for his real good ! He left his home and the wise instruc-
tions of his parents. He thought they would afford no pro-
tection in this time of peril. He calculated upon a short-
sighted policy, as it proved; though he followed the usual
maxims of the world; and what was the result ? The means
that he took for his preservation proved his ruin. The dress
and arms in which he was accoutred were his greatest
enemies: they spoke the language of hostility and invited
it. The power in which he trusted failed him as in a moment.
On the other hand, the relations he abandoned were saved :
their peaceful principles were to them as a tower and shield ;
and their solitary home, though unfurnished with outward
defences, proved in the end a place of safety.
* Situated in the county of Kildare.


ON THE BROTHERLY CARE OF THE SOCIETY TOWARDS
ITS SUFFERING MEMBERS.
It has already been stated that, on the first appearance of
the civil feuds which ushered in the Rebellion of 1798,
.even so early as the year 1795, the Society of Friends exer-
cised a consistent care in advising its members to destroy
their arms, that they might on all hands keep themselves
free from the stain of blood. Wo have now to record the
fact of their brotherly sympathy having extended itself, in
deeds of active benevolence, towards those families and
individuals, who, by reason of their severe losses, were so
reduced as to stand in need of their friends’ assistance.
The proofs of a wise Christian economy are no less manifest
in the latter case than in the former.
A committee of the Yearly Meeting held in Dublin, was very
early appointed to take the circumstances of their suffering
brethren into consideration; for many, who had been blessed
with comfortable homes and means of supporting their
families, were left almost destitute; and this committee
recommended a voluntary subscription to be raised by the
different Monthly Meetings for their relief.
They scrupled conscientiously to seek redress for their
losses by the usual legal means.
“The Yearly Meeting in London in 1799, being dipped
into sympathy with Friends in Ireland, cordially offered their
assistance, if further exigencies should require.
“Neither did distance of place prevent our brethren in a
distant land from desiring to contribute to the necessities of
their friends in distress: for, by the following extract from
the Epistle from the Yearly Meeting held in Philadelphia, it
appears that the same spirit of brotherly affection and sym-
pathy prevailed in the hearts of friends there.
“*We retain in affectionate remembrance the sympathy of
Friends in your nation, and the generous relief you afforded
to our brethren who were much stripped of their property
by the war in this country some years since: and we are
thankful in feeling a degree of the same brotherly love, by
which we are made one in the LORD, wherever dispersed, or
situated; desiring if, at this time, or in consequence of
future trials, brethren among you should be reduced to
similar circumstances, we may receive information, and be
permitted to follow your benevolent example.’ ”


This affectionate proposal was gratefully acknowledged by
the Yearly Meeting in Dublin in 1801, in its Epistle to the
Yearly Meeting in Philadelphia, in these terms, “Your
Epistle given forth in 1799, addressed to Eriends in Ireland
we received; which feelingly carried with it genuine marks
of strong affection, and near sympathy with us, under
the trials which Eriends in this land, previous thereto, and
about that time, laboured under.
“It .is a cause of humble thankfulness that the dispensa-
tion was not of a very long continuance, though many Eriends
suffered deeply in their property while the conflict con-
tinued : and it was much more severe in some parts of the
nation than others.
“ A considerable sum was raised, which, under the direc-
tion and management of a National Committee, was admin-
istered to the relief of the sufferers in such proportion, as,
from the accounts transmitted of their loss and circumstances,
they appeared to require. When these wants were sup-
plied* there was a redundancy, which was directed to be
returned to the subscribers; so that we need not at present
stand in need of making any further use of your brotherly
intimation of affording assistance than that of expressing a
grateful sense thereof.”
It must afford, we think, a pleasing reflection to every
benevolent mind, that a Eeligious Society, agreeably to the
analogy of the outward body, should, in this way, suffer
and sympathize in the sufferings of all its members; and
though dispersed over a nation, should constitute, as it
were, but a single family, bound together by common
interests.
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
Some observations naturally present themselves to the mind
on reading the foregoing narrative.
“We have seen that in a time of civil commotion, in which
it would be difficult to conceive a state of things attended
with more aggravated circumstances, a number of individuals
following the benevolent precepts of the gospel were enabled
to keep themselves free from party feelings, to open their
houses, and to lend their assistance, to the distressed of what-
ever denomination, and, finally, were permitted to experience


preservation in the midst of a most basbarous and destructive
warfare.
"We have seen that this exemplary humanity and this
remarkable preservation were not confined to one or a few
individuals in a particular spot, but were common to a con-
siderable number of persons, in different parts of an extensive
country, professing and following the same principles.
"We have seen that when they were threatened with the
burning of their habitations, the destruction of their families,
and the loss of their own lives, if they persisted in acts
denounced by their enemies, they were favoured with forti-
tude, notwithstanding, to pursue that line of conduct which
they believed to be consistent with their duty, fearlessly and
faithfully, in the presence of firmed multitudes; who seemed
even to be kept in awe by their Christian magnanimity.
We have seen that the signal preservation which the
members of the Society were favoured to experience, was
marked by one exception, case of a young man, who
fell a victim -to his own temerity; and that the peculiar
circumstances under which this* apparent exception took
place serve rather to illustrate aiild establish, than to invali-
date, the principles by which the Society was governed.
In addition to these things, we have to notice, in the
economy of the Society itself, the sympathy and brotherly
kindness manifested, not only by their countrymen, but by
Friends at a distance; the first in coming forward to relieve,
and the last in offers of assistance, should they be required,
to their suffering brethren.
Upon a consideration of all these things, a number of
reflections offer themselves to our ifoticc.
We naturally feel a desire that principles, like those by
which this body of Christians were actuated, should prevail
more generally in the world; and we are led to inquire, if it
be not possible that moral effects which took place on a small
scale should take place also on a larger; that a beginning
might thus be made for that glorious consummation, when
men shall learn war no more.
The Ipswich Series of Friends’ Tracis are sold in separate or
assorted one shileing Packets, and sent .free op carriage, by a
remittance being forwarded to Richard Dykes Alexander.
■I. H. SUBTOX-AND CO,, SIEBEOrYfKKS END PRINTERS, XPSI7IC1L .
