

f 7 tT%f
| NARRATIVE |
m B
|| OF THE |H
l| THIRTEENTH ||
I Mission VISIT I
fig
If ' T 0 p
H The Islands
, -%L
ell TTSJ ■ ir?
|f|
I BASS & BANKS STRAITS, I
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS , H
G-fc§? 7 *2i)
« «•
fc)
H BY THE 11,
| EEV. CAUOII BEOWEEIGG, |
4Ih 1 a@ <a. ll*
j 6 ' ®
fe-9
4h£i “ Launceston Examiner ” and “ Tasmanian ” Office. S>
<p¥ Sra




NARRATIVE
OF THE
THIRTEENTH
MISSION VISIT
The Islands
BASS & BANKS STRAITS,
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS,
BY THE
REV. CANON BROWNRIGG.
“Examiner” and “Tasmanian” Office.




r\*b3 *s*2 l re K 7
■z-z -4^^
NARRATIVE OF MISSION VISIT
TO THE ISLANDS.
(By the Rev. Canon Brownrigg.)
It was in the s.s. Corio that on the 12th
February, 1885, at about 10 - 45 a.m., we
started for the thirteenth time of visiting
the islands in Banks and Bass straits. Our
crew consisted of one engineer, Mr. O.
Brown, and two deck hands, Messrs. Geo.
and Charles Bennett; the latter officiating
principally as cook and cabin steward.
Upon the present occasion the mission
was strengthened by the presence and aid
of the Bishop of Tasmania, who with the
Rev. Bryant C. Stephenson (lately from
England) had arrived by train from Hobart
on the previous day. My eldest son, Mr.
M. F. Brownrigg, was also a passenger ;
hence inclusive of myself we numbered
aboard seven persons. But as far as George
Town we were accompanied by Miss Sand-
ford and Miss Tait, the former being the
Bishop’s eldest daughter.
Off Rosevear’s we found the s.s. Fateena
at anchor, and by the kind invitation of
Captain Young, her commander, we were
entertained at dinner aboard that vessel.
It was while we were aboard the Pateena
that a smart thunderstorm passed over us,
threatening a wet afternoon, but to our
great satisfaction when we resumed our
way down the river the storm had passed
off, and we were favoured with a fine after-
noon and an enjoyable run to George Town
Cove, where we anchored at 4 - 30 p.m.
Here we remained all night, and during
the evening the Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Moiling
were our guests.


At 10 - 30 a.m., Feb. 13, we steamed out
of the cove, with the wind S.E. fresh, our
desire being to reach Port Furneaux for
the approaching Sunday. We proceeded
along the coast about ten miles, when it
became so apparent by the freshening of
the breeze that we should not effect the
direct inn to the islands that we deemed it
advisable to return to the Heads to anchor
for a few hours in Lagoon Bay, and if
practicable to make an earlier start next
morning. In the wisdom of this course
we were fully established by what we sub-
sequently learned on our arrival at Port
Furneaux, and later on atYansittart Island,
as to the boisterous state of the weather
and of the sea on that particular Friday.
On anchoring at Lagoon Bay we observed
the boarding boat coming off to us. Cap-
tain Croucher, the senior pilot, having
thoughtfully sent off to enquire whether
we wished to land any report. We had,
however, no report in especial to send up
to town, but availing ourselves of the
boarding boat we landed at the Pilot Sta-
tion, and visited some of the residents at
Low Head.
By 5 - 30 a.m. (Feb. 14) we commenced to
get up steam, and by about 8 a.m. were
clear of the Heads, bound for Port Fur-
neaux. The wind was fair and the sea
smooth for some miles of our course, but
off Twenty-Day Island we met a north-
easter and a head sea which much impeded
our progress. Against an increasing sea
we pushed on until on opening out Banks
Strait we passed through much broken
water, evidently the stirring up of the pre-
vious day. An easting of the wind enabled
us to make sail again, but the passage was
very rough, the discomfort of which was
increased by a few seas finding their un-
welcomed way aboard of us. All this time,
moreover, the weather was thick, heavy
banks of clouds resting upon Barren and
Flinders Islands, and the inconvenience of


this condition of things became more serious
as the shadows of night closed upon us. A
dangerous reef about seven feet high above
high water, and about a mile off the land,
directly in the fair way of Long Island
Passage, was the chief object of anxiety,
and the difficulty of discerning this obstruc-
tion in the dark required a sharp look out
to be kept.
As we approached the reef it was re-
ported to be a short distance fiom us on
our lee bow. While it is of course usually
the case to “ round up” under such circum-
stances, yet as the steam power of the
Corio is out of proportion to the size of the
vessel —the engine being only ten-horse —
and her length and head sails making it
advisable to give her lee way (and we had
ample room for that purpose), we “kept her
away,” and passed to leeward of the reef.
This sight of the reef gave us our true
position, and as no further dangers lay
ahead, we steamed confidently up the Pas-
sage, and at 9'30 p.m. anchored midway
between Long Beach and Port Furneaux
to await the return of daylight, when we
might move up to a position more conven-
ient for landing.
At an early hour next morning we pro-
ceeded further up the Passage and sounded
the whistle. This call speedily brought
our friend Mr. Phil. Thomas aboard, who
acted as pilot to put our vessel where she
might lie afloat at low tide.
As our arrival at Port Furneaux was
earlier by a few days than expected, no
preparations had been made ashore for the
services, and some unavoidable delay oc-
curred in holding the forenoon service.
But though unexpected our arrival was
very cordially welcomed, and particularly
glad were our island friends to see their
Bishop amongst them.
At the morning’s service the sermon
was preached by the Eev. B. C. Stephen-
son, and in the evening by the Bishop,


the afternoon service (at which there was
one baptism) being conducted by myself.
The evening congregation, having been
increased by arrivals from various islands,
numbered about fifty souls.
In deciding to remain at anchor all
Monday it was with the intention of afford-
ing the Bishop an opportunity of inspect-
ing the township of Port Purneaux, and of
visiting the residents, but rain detained
us aboard all day until the time of the
evening gathering for prayer at Mr.
Mansell’s cottage, where the Sunday
services had been held. A goodly number
assembled for this service, and again had
the pleasure of hearing further words of
counsel from the Bishop.
At about IP3O a.m. (Peb. 17) we got
under way for Yansittart Island, and were
piloted over the bar by our friend Mr.
Phil. Thomas. The weather was fine, but
hazy, and the sea beautifully smooth, so
that the run down the Sound was pleasant.
At about 2 p.m. we anchored at Yansittart,
and were soon boarded by Mr. Boss, the
proprietor of the island, who had come off
to invite us to dine ashore. Now, seeing
we had just concluded our midday repast,
we were scarcely competent to undertake a
second effort quite so immediately, hence
were obliged to decline the kind invitation,
but promised within a short time to follow
our friend ashore.
At about 3 p.m. we landed, and remained
for the rest of the afternoon and the even-
ing until nearly 10 o’clock.
The arrangements in prospect for the
next day included a visit to Lawson’s and
toPuncheonlsland. Accordingly at 11 a.m.
(Peb. 18) we made a start in an open sail-
ing boat, kindly supplied to us by Mr.
Boss, but owing to a calm and thick rainy
weather we were unable to make any
progress; in fact, the islands we were
making for were completely shut out of
view by the rain, and not knowing how we


S. S. Cor 1 o
Interior of




should succeed in s”ch weather in getting
over the shoals without grounding, we
returned to the ship. A second attempt
to carry out the visit by means of our
dingy was made, but the strong ebb tide
and thick weather compelled us once more
to return.
It was here, while lying off this island,
that for the first time we experienced
afloat the effect of an earth tremor. At
I'4o p.m. our attention was attracted by a
very loud rumbling noise, which at first we
supposed to be a roll of thunder, but of the
real cause of the sound we were presently
satisfied when we felt the ship tremble be-
neath us. It was a severe shock, and was
strongly felt ashore. The sound, we con-
sidered,travelled fromS.W.towardsN.E.and
the whole phenomenon lasted fully twenty-
five seconds. Later on in the same after-
noon, at about 4'50, another vibration was
felt, but this time without being accom-
panied by any audible sound.
An improvement in the state of the
weather now gladdened us all, and ere
leaving for Big Dog Island we landed
once more at Yansittart. Having arranged
with Mr. Boss to pilot us next day among
the Puncheon Island shoals, that we might
yet visit the islands we had set out for in
the forenoon, we returned to the Corio
very much obliged indeed to Mr. and Mrs.
Boss for the kind attention and hospitality
we had received at their hands.
At 5 p.m. we steamed out of the bay to
cross over to Big Dog Island. We got on
very satisfactorily until within about three
quarters of a mile of Mr. Taylor's cottage
at Big Dog Island, when on rounding a
point of the island, and keeping, as we con-
sidered, a reasonable distance off the land,
we suddenly found ourselves in shoal
water. As there were yet two hours of
tide to run out, and the chart showed a
depth of at least II fathoms at low water,
and our draught did not exceed six feet six


inches, we had no suspicion that a deten-
tion was to he realised. We nevertheless
immediately slowed the engine to half
speed, hut ere we could get the line over
the side for a sounding we took the ground
aft, and then all attempts to get off with
the falling tide were utterly hopeless.
In thus referring to the soundings on
the chart, I have no intention of reflecting
upon the accuracy of the survey by my
esteemed friend Captain Stanley, E.N. No
one who has inspected his admirable charts
will question the magnitude of his labours,
for the number of his soundings through-
out Banks Strait and among the Furneaux
Islands is verily legion; but I allude to
the chart in this connection as it was my
only guide in that locality, and of course
it is not impossible that that bank may
have been affected by the very frequent
earth tremors so particularly and strongly
experienced at Big Dog Island and Blin-
ders since the time of Captain Stanley’s
survey. From Mr. Taylor’s statement I
learn that the bank on which we grounded
dries at low water spring tides ; and from
information subsequently gathered at Port
Furneaux, it appears that the straits men
themselves occasionally are pulled up on
that same spot.
Immediately upon our grounding we
despatched a boat to obtain the help of
Mr. Taylor as a pilot when we might
again be afloat. It was, however, late and
dark before Mr. Taylor could come
aboard, and in the meanwhile we had made
sundry attempts to move the ship with
the rising tide, but it was at least one
hour longer after Mr. Taylor’s arrival
before we had a sufficiency of tide to set us
free. It was at least satisfactory to hear
from Mr. Taylor that we were in the fair
way for the half tide, but unfortunately
the tide happened to be more than half
out when we were caught and held fast.


But while thus aground and rolling a
little an accident had happened, of which
we were not immediately aware. The
rudder had become unshipped, and it was
only when we backed off the shoal that we
discovered that the rudder-post had broken
adrift, and our ship was thus disabled.
Our position was now somewhat critical,
for we were upon a lee shore in a
dark night without the proper means
for steering. With the utmost caution we
moved the engine slowly ahead, and
managed to steer by holding (by manual
force and a piece of quartering) the rudder
to “port/’ or “starboard,” or “steady,”
as required, until we were able to find a
suitable anchorage in about three fathoms.
It will here be expected that the loss of
the rudder-post should be accounted for.
From so serious a loss it might be imagined
by some that we had bumped heavily upon
the shoal, but such was not the fact; we
had rolled, but the bumping was nothing
to speak of. The fact is the head of the
rudder-post was rotten, as the sample in
my possession indisputably proves. The
unsound condition of the head of the
rudder-post was, it appears, well known as
a fact before we left Launceston, and my
engineer has since told me that he had
(before we started) been able to shake the
post with his hands. This weak state of
the post had, moreover, been noted by Mr.
Lowes (inspector of machinery under the
Marine Board of Launceston) as needing
a repair to be effected before the vessel
should leave for sea. Iron knees for each
side of the post were to have been pro-
vided, but somehow no such strengthening
pieces had been added; and I do not
hesitate to say that had these been
supplied the rudder-post would have with-
stood all the strain to which it had been
subjected while we were aground upon the
shoal. For my own part, though I had
two or three times spoken about these


knees being fitted, I did not observe
(amongst the many things requiring my
personal attention in the fitting out for the
visit) until just as we were about to cast
off the warps at the wharf that these
repairs had not been made. We could
now only hope that no casualty might
occur on the cruise.
Upon discovering our disabled condition
we held a consultation as to the best
course to be followed. At first we pro-
posed to beach the vessel at Big Dog
Island for the purpose of repair, but
on further consideration decided to
attempt the passage up the Sound to Port
Furneaux, rigging up some temporary
steering gear.
Shortly after daybreak (February 19),
before starting, we instituted a search for
the rudder-post, our desire being to re-
cover if possible the iron work and
gudgeons. For this search Mr. Taylor
and (George Bennett were in one boat and
Charles Bennett and myself in another,
but though we passed over and around the
spot where we had grounded, our search
was unsuccessful. We could therefore only
conclude that we must have dragged it
with us into the deeper water.
As the sea was calm and the wind fair
and very light, we were unwilling to lose
more time in searching for the post, so we
weighed for Port Furneaux, but just as we
started a thick fog obscured all the islands
in the Sound except the one immedi-
ately under our lee, and which was
just visible in parts. Had our position
been less exposed than it was we would have
anchored again till the fog might clear
away, but it was advisable t® leave as soon
as possible, if only to get to some safer bay
at “ Big Dog.” Biappily the fog soon lifted,
and a bright and cheerful day followed.
We would here record our grateful sense
of the kind and valuable help so cheerfully
afforded to us by Mr. Taylor. All night he




a
z
w
X
V”
z>
o
X
3
<
Ul
z
DC
3
u.
H
oc
0
01
u.
o
o.
X
<n
Z
S
o
f-
Uu
O
Ui
K
(7>


remained aboard, and while with us we
felt we had at hand a pilot who knew well
where we might find the safest anchorage
had we required to get under weigh during
the night.
Having landed Mr. Taylor by the help
of my son, who took him ashore in the
dingy, we " steam-whistled’'our kind friend
an adieu and made our way at half speed
up the Sound, our steering apparatus
working wonderfully well.
On arriving off the bar at Long Island
Passage, we anchored to await a suffi-
ciency of water for the crossing, and
in answer to our signal were boarded
by our pilot, Phil. Thomas, and his
interesting son “ little Phil.” Off
the bar we were detained about
an hour and a half, and on arriving at Port
Furneaux we made known our disabled
condition and placed the required repairs
in the hands of Mr. John Maynard, and
Mr. Phillip Thomas.
As soon as the state of the tide permitted,
we beached the vessel, and held a survey.
From the survey thus held, I would here
remark that had I been aware that the
head of the rudder post was so far gone in
decay as it really was I would have in-
sisted upon a few hours delay at Launces-
ton in order to the securing of the post
rather than have gone out of the Heads in
so unsafe a state. Judging from the con-
dition of the post, I feel convinced that a
thump abaft from a following sea would
have been sufficient to have swept the
whole thing adrift, and an opinion to this
same effect was quite independently of my-
self expressed to the Bishop by Mr. John
Maynard, hence it is to be regarded as a
fortunate matter that the casualty oc-
curred just where it did, and not under
more serious conditions.
It was now manifest that a detention of
a few days at Port Furneaux was inevit-
able. A new rudder post was required, and


we hoped yet to recover the old one hy
dragging for it when we might he able to
send a search party to Big Dog. This
could not be immediately undertaken in
consequence of a dead calm in the Sound,
nor indeed was it possible for a few days
owing to the heavy weather which pre-
vailed. We could only arrange to have the
new post fitted up as well and as securely
as possible, leaving the old one to be
searched for at some future date and, if
found, to be forwarded to Launceston.
As it was unavoidable that the vessel
should lie aground for some hours each
day, and her resting upon her bilges
during such hours being equally unavoid-
able, we placed a tent ashore, which was
occupied by the Bishop and Mr. Stephen-
son.
A very picturesque and sheltered spot
having been selected, the setting up of 1 the
tent was zealously and satisfactorily
effected by the conjoint efforts of Mr and
Mrs. John Maynard, and Messrs. Mansell
and Summers, and the temporary residence
was duly styled “ Bishop’s-court, Port
Furneaux.”
Our detention at Port Furneaux being
widely known, the residents gladly availed
themselves of the opportunity to meet ns
each evening for a service, and a very
pleasant and profitable time was thus
spent.
During the afternoon of Saturday
(February 21st) Miss Beeton and her party
arrived from Badger Island, and with the
addition of Mrs. George Everett and cer-
tain members of her family from Garland
Grove, Barren Island, we had the prospect
of a large attendance at the services of the
next day. Nor were we disappointed in
this prospect.
The morning service was commenced at
about 11'30, and consisted of the Litany
and Communion service, followed by an
address from myself, and at the Lord’s






Supper there were in all fifteen communi-
cants.
At the afternoon service three children
were baptized by the Bishop, who also ad-
dressed the parents and children, and this
address was followed by the customary dis-
tribution of copies of the “ British Work man ’ ’
and “ Workwoman/ 5 and the “ Band of
Hope Review/ 5 etc.
In the evening the Bishop preached, and
brought to a conclusion the course of three
admirable addresses which he had com-
menced at the service of the previous
Friday evening. The services of the whole
day were heartily appreciated, the congre-
gations listening with the most marked
attention to the practical and earnest
gospel addresses delivered in such simple
language by the Bishop.
Monday (February 23) will doubtless
long be remembered as a sort of red letter
day by the residents at Port Furneaux. It
was the day on which by some definite act
they were to welcome the Bishop. For
this purpose an arch tastefully dressed up
with evergreens, geraniums, sun flowers,
and tree ferns and flags had been erected.
This structure had been designed by Mr.
Summers of Badger Island, and had been
erected by him with the assistance of
Messrs. Mansell, Smith, and others, and
was placed across the roadway which leads
up from the beach to the township. It bore
the single word, “Welcome. 55
At this arch, the islanders assembled in
full force, and upon the arrival of the
Bishop, Mr. Stephenson, and myself, three
cheers were given for the Queen, and three
for the Governor as her Majesty 5 s repre-
sentative.
To the Bishop, who had taken up a
position beside the arch, the following
address, prepared and read by Mr. Sum-
mers, and signed by the islanders, was
presented:—


Furneaux, Furneaux Group,
Feb. 23, 1885.
Mt Lord, —We, the inhabitants of Fur-
neaux, beg respectfully to welcome you to this
part of your diocese, and to assure you that
we do so with heartfelt sincerity, and with
gratitude for your kindness in coming to visit
us, and we trust that when circumstances and
your onerous duties will permit, we shall
have the pleasure, afc som ■ future period, of
seeing you again. We take this opportunity
to mention that we rec ive most kind and
acceptable visits from the Rev. Canon
Brownrigg, whose kindness and advice we
greatly appreciate. T.usting your Lordship
may enjoy many yetrs of health and happiness,
we remain, my Lord, with respect, your faith-
ful and humble servants.
(Here follow numerous signatures.)
The receipt of the address was then
suitably acknowledged by the Bishop, and
at the close of his reply three cheers were
given for his Lordship.
This address was then kindly followed
by one to myself, which, out of deference
to the wish of my island friends, I here
transcribe :
Furneaux, Furneaux Group,
Feb. 23, 1885
To the Rev. Canon Brownrigg.
Sir, —We, the undersigned inhabitants of
the township of Furneaux, tender our most
sincere thanks for the interest and good you
are trying to do towards us. We sincere l y
hope you will continue your visits to us,
knowing you are trying your best to do us
good. We only wish you could be a little more
with us ; in fact, we want somebody with us
that will lead us the right road, and to help to
put down that demon—drink. Hoping and
trusting in God that you and your family will
live to see many years of health and happiness
for the interest you have taken in us, we
remain, your faithful and humble servants.
(Gere follow numerous signatures of the
islanders.)
I need hardly say that the receipt of this
address afforded me much real pleasure,
for it was unexpected, and, I am sure.


if Xf. K
in M. N m . 4. *«£,■%*
dq ivlK.iMife ?Tx, .4 ipi^f
* I V i] 1 E 1 ■ WELCOME Ml®
iMSiiaiHg
! W&mm mwA Wlmmilmm
li ■.'-■-*>■ % " T ‘
- ■ ,- v Q:~ ~ — ,^t4 i . ' ’ -^v™'-
ZzSSCL ■"_ ~S&. - - 1-T— :
—• -IS^WJW y'-— ~ ->^' J >.' SJ ‘ <L - Jg&Cr. \
RECEPTION ARCH




represented the sincere and kindly feelings
of the islanders towards me. A similar
compliment to that offered to the Bishop,
in the matter of cheers, was paid to myself,
and subsequently a like courtesy was ex-
tended to the Rev. Mr. Stephenson.
At the close of this kindhearted re-
ception, some of the young women, and
some of the matrons also, stepped forward
and presented the Bishop and myself with
specimens of the island’s productions, such
as coralines and strings of shells.
Prom the archway we proceeded to the
township, accompanied by members of the
township’s Board of Management, that the
Bishop might for himself inspect the site
and the work done.
The afternoon had been set apart as a
holiday, as it was intended to have a
general tea meeting at about 5 p.m. 'The
weather was all that could be desired for
the cricket match which was played
among the islanders, but towards tea time
an ominous change was at hand. The
western sky was densely black with clouds,
which approached with a cyclonic move-
ment. A noiseless earth tremor was
distinctly felt by many at about 4T5
p.m. Plashes of lightning were seen,
followed by thunder, and a strong wind
with heavy rain. Long Island Passage soon
became feather white with the crests formed
by the driving wind, and connected with
all this a sort of tidal wave, or, as it is
here called, a “drawback,” was experienced.
A wave about three fleet in height ran
up some thirty yards upon the beach, and
then quickly retreated. Twice again at
later periods in the evening, though less
in height and force,did such a wave return,
and its effects were distinctly felt aboard.
An event of this nature, only on a con-
siderably larger scale, was described to me
by Mr. Maynard as having taken place
about two years ago. At that time, how-
ever, the wave (though the day was calm.


and the sea like glass) approached with
great violence and a roaring sound, and
completed the circuit of the bay three
times in quick succession.
Notwithstanding the inclemency of the
weather, the tea meeting was held, but
not in the more desirable manner in which
it would have been held had the weather
been fine. The rain compelled many to
seek the shelter ©f their own retreats,which
brought the meeting to rather an abrupt
conclusion.
Towards nightfall the weather improved,
and admitted of a temperance meeting
being held. About seventy persons, in-
cluding children, assembled for this pur-
pose. The meeting was addressed in turn
by the Bishop,Mr. Stephenson, and myself,
and at its close thirty-two persons signed
the pledge and mounted the blue ribbon
badge, after which notice was given that
another opportunity for pledge taking
would be afforded the next evening.
During Monday night (February 23) the
weather was the wildest we had yet ex-
perienced. A westerly gale blew strongly,
andjits effects were felt at “Bishop’s-court,
Port Furncaux,” as well as aboard the
Corio. The tent was, however, in a
secure position, and stood well. Aboard,
we were necessarily exposed to the force of
the wind, and finding the ship dragging,
had to lay out additional moorings. In
this rough state the weather continued
throughout the greater part of Tuesday
(Feb. 24), but it moderated and improved
towards sundown.
The evening of that day was devoted to
another meeting in Mr. Mansell’s cottage,
when township affairs formed the subject
of consideration. A very pleasant evening
was passed, and a vote of thanks was ac-
corded to the Bishop for his interest in the
welfare of the islanders.At the close of this
meeting two persons were added to the list


of total abstainers, making in all, with
another subsequently obtained, thirty-five
pledges.
The repairs to the ship being still incom-
plete, another day’s detention followed. A
short service was, therefore, again held in
the evening.
In the forenoon of Thursday (Feb. 27)
we encouraged ourselves in the expectation
that the rudder post would be fixed in its
place in time to enable us to leave by the
evening, but the rising of the tide prema-
turely cut short our labours.There was now
no prospect of getting away until the next
evening, so we again met for a service,
when the Bishop once more preached.
Friday morning (Feb. 27) opened with a
fine light wind from the N.E., but during
the day there was a manifest change for
the worse at hand ; and the “ drawbacks ”
observable in the rising waters betokened
bad weather at hand. In the completion
of the repairs we had verily not one moment
to spare. The tide was actually surround-
ing the vessel ere the caulking abaft was
quite finished. A few moments, however,
sufficed for this work, and it was with no
small measure of satisfaction we contem-
plated the hauling of the vessel out into
deep water when again afloat.
On shore, in prospect of our removal the
Bishop’s tent had been taken down, and
everything prepared for the re-embark-
ation; but while the goods and chattels
were being conveyed aboard, the Bishop
proceeded to the township to baptize pri-
vately the infant son of Mr. Phil. Thomas ;
the little one having been born only a few
hours before. It was during this evening
that (at about 9’55 p.m.) the strongest earth
tremor occurred that we had experienced
this cruise. This was proceeded by
a loud rumbling sound, travelling from
east towards west, and at first a


gentle vibration ; but the noise and vibra-
tion speedily increased, then gradually
passed away. The noise continued for
some seconds after the vibration had
ceased,and the duration of the phenomenon
was about one minute.
We should here be wanting in our duty
did we fail to express our hearty thanks to
Mr. and Mrs. John Maynard for their kind
and constant attentions to us, and to Mr.
and Mrs. Mansell for so readily placing at
our use their new cottage for the several
services held. And we would also thank
others of the islanders who kindly assisted
us in a variety of ways.
It was close upon one a.m. before the
Bishop and Mr. Stephenson were brought
aboard, but all possibility of putting to sea
that night was removed by the strong
south-west head wind then blowing. The
delay was very trying, inasmuch as it was
imperative the Bishop should be in Hobart
as soon as possible; but over winds and
waves we could have no manner of control.
Nor did circumstances improve by the
Saturday morning. A south-east gale set
in, with much sea, so that we were obliged
to remain at anchor all day. Frequent
showers added to the discomfort of the oc-
casion, but towards evening an improve-
ment was discernible. Having the even-
ing at disposal the township was once more
visited, so that a few additional words of
advice might be given, and a blessing
sought upon the labours of the past.
At about 3'55 a.m. (March Ist) we got
underway for the Heads. The morning
was very cold, due principally to the keen
fresh S.S.E. wind. During the previous
few hours the sea had gone down very
much, and as we approached the Tasmanian
shore we entered calm water. Throughout
the day the wind was light and unsteady.
When about 22 miles from the Heads we
met the cutter Clarence, bound for Flin-
ders. Her master, Mr. J. Willett, sailed close


alongside of us, and threw a parcel of let-
ters and papers aboard. Later on we passed
the Syren cutter, under the care of Mr.
W. Davey, bound for Barren Island. While
glad to report the sighting of these vessels,
we felt that by their means the progress we
had made would be conveyed to the friends
we had left among the islands.
At 4 - 25 p.m. Tamar Heads were entered,
and against a strong ebb tide we moved up
to George Town, and anchored at 525 p.m.
We were now in time to attend the even-
ing service at George Town, at which ser-
vice the Bishop preached.
By 8 - 25 a.m. next morning we left George
Town, and accomplished the run to Laun-
ceston in four hours and ten minutes.
Upon reviewing our work we feel that all
has been accomplished for which we had
had opportunity. The unfortunate casualty
in the loss of the rudder post prevented our
carrying out in its entirety the plan we
had formed for ourselves. Apple Orchard,
Badger Corner, Puncheon Island, Clarke
and Waterhouse Islands, as well as the
lighthouse establishments were regretfully
unvisited; but it is now to be hoped that
arrangements may soon be practicable by
which the advantages of settled religious
ministrations may be enjoyed by the
islanders.
It is with a deep sense of the importance
of the work to be accomplished among the
islands that we commend the mission to
the practical sympathy of our Churchmen,
and to the blessing of Almighty God,whom
we thank for the protection we have re-
ceived at His hands.
“ Launceston Examiner’ and “ Tasmanian” Office,


