

f
4


PAa^A^K.
fl *>
O'UL-i
$ (j2^YV\
»
Cufi*-/ . 4-
-Up- i-/Uu/ p
Y e/u*ww j I*S -5 *7 . /


NARRATIVE
OF THIS
LIFE AND ADVENTURES
PAUL CUFFE,
A PEQ, UO T INDIAN:
DURING THIRTY YEARS SPENT AT SEA,
AND IN
TRAVELLING IN FOREIGN LANDS.
VERNONS
PRINTED BY HORACE N. BILL,
1889.




NARRATIVE
OF THE LIFE OF
PAUL CUFFE,
A descendant of an Indian family, which formerly
resided in the eastern part of Connecticut and
constituted a part of that fierce and warlike
tribe of Indians called Pequots, of whose ex-
ploits in the early Wars of New-England, the
reader may become acquainted by perusing
“Trumbull's History of the Indian Wars.”
ml
The subject of this narrative was born in the town of West-
port, in the State of Massachusetts. His father, Paul Cufie,
was a sea-faring man, and had the command of a number of
merchant vessels. It was with him that L made my first voy-
age, when a boy twelve years old. This w'as in the year 1 808.
On the morning of a pleasant day in the month of May, of that
year, we hoisted sail and stood out for sea. There were 16
hands on board. This was new business to me, and with the
novelty attending a sea voyage 1 was highly pleased. Noth-
ing uncommon attended this voyage, which was made to Pas-
samaquaddy, for Plaster of Paris. We made this voyage down
in about 10 days. After loading our vessel, which took two
weeks, we again set sail for Wilmington, in Delaware, at which
port we safely arrived in 16 days, discharged our freight* took
in ballast and 300 bushels of apples, and sailed for Savannah,
in Georgia, where we arrived without any accident to mar the
pleasure of the voyage, in about twenty days, where we again
discharged onr freight and reloaded our vessel with Cotton,


Rice and Logwood. Here we lay thiee months in making
preparation for sea again. From this place we made out into the
broad Atlantic with all sails fluttering in the balmy breeze, and
all hands full of hope and buoyant with expectation. This was
a long, tedious voyage, as the reader will readily imagine when
1 inform him that we sailed a great number of days in a north-
ward direction, until we made the Grand Banks; then we
steered away for the northern coast of Scotland, which we
readied in about fifty days. Thence vve continued our course
. around the Orknies into I he Northern Sea, and made the entrance
to the Baltic through what is called the Sleeve; thence along
the coast of Copenhagen northward to Gotlenhurgh, a flourish-
ing town in West Gothland in Sweden. Here vve lay six
weeks, sold our lading, and took in a load of iron, steel and
hemp, h rom thence we sailed for Elsinore, a seaport of Den-
mark, where vve took in a number of passengers for Philadel-
phia, at which place we arrived after a long passage, somtime
in the month 01 September, 1809. During this voyage we had
much rough weather ; so much so, that we were compelled to
throw overboard fifty tons of iron while on the Grand Banks.
During this gale we lost our fore-top-mast, jib-boom and long
boat.
At this port we sold our load ; after which my father put me
to a high school in Williams’ Alley, where 1 remained two
years. This was an excellent school, taught by a Friend Qua-
ker, a very worthy man, whom i shall ever have cause to re-
spect for his many acts of kindness towards me.
- After (he close of my term at school, I returned home to
Westport, after an absence of three years and five months. If
the reader has ever been a long while absent from home, he
can easily imagine my feelings on my arrival at the dear pater-
nal mansion. Here I again saw my father and mother, bro-
thers and sisters, where i remained but three weeks before 1
again left the fire side of my dear parents to launch out upon
the broad Atlantic’s briny bosom. At the expiration of the
above terra, ] shipped aboard of the brig Traveller, Capt. Tho-
mas Warner, for K.ennebec, state of Maine. On our passage
to this place, our vessel capsized about 10 o’clock at night,
which caused us ranch trouble to get her righted again; but
after four hours’ struggle, and by the aid of our Great Father,
we got the ship to rights, and went on our passage, which w,e


finished in about seven days from this event- Here we sold
our loading and took in a load of pine lumber. At this place,
we were detained but about ten days, when we again hoisted
sail for Westport, where we arrived in ten days thereafter.
Here 1 tarried with my family but four weeks before I again
shipped aboard ol the last named vessel for Lisbon, in Portu-
gal, where we arrived after a rough passage of forty-five days.
Our lading was 525 barrels of whale oil, which we sold at Lis-
bon. While, at this place we heard the roar of tlie cannon in
an engagement between a division of the army of the Great
Napoleon and the English and Portuguese troops, and the night
after this battle the writer saw five hundred wounded soldiers
brought into Lisbon to have their wounds dressed. In this
engagement the English and Portuguese repelled the army of
Napoleon, and caused them to fa 11 bacß a number of miles.
Here we tarried about (our months, and took in one hundred
and eighty merino sheep, being the second load ever taken to
the United btates. Besides these we rook in Salt and Wine.
Our passage back to Westport was made in thirty-five days.
Here we tarried but one week, and again after taking in bal-
last, proceeds d to sea, and steered away for Edenton, North
Carolina; at v\ hich port we arrived in 16 days. Here w'e
were detained about six weeks. After loading our brig with
shingles and herring, we again stood out for sea, and made for
St. Domingo, an Island of the West Indies, peopled by free
blacks, having a republican form of government.
During this passage we encountered heavy gales of wind, and
came very near being shipwrecked, but we were all preserved,
and in 16 days from the time we set sail, we made Port Au
Prince. This is a large sea port town, situated between two
high mountains. This place is the residence of the chief ma-
gistrate of the nation. Robert Boyer was then clothed with
the presidential power. This personage was of commanding
aspect, and appeared to be a mulatto. He used every day to
call out his body guard, who were a fine looking set of fellows
as I had ever seen. They appeared to understand military
tactics to perfection. They were elegantly dressed in red
frocks and trowsers, faced with blue and green. On the whole,
they might be called first rate soldiers. Boyer was most su-
perbly dressed and equipped, and on horseback made an ele-
gant appearance. f


This is an unhealthy place for strangers, our crew being
mostly sick while there. We stopped at this place about three
weeks, during which time we took in a cargo of Coffee and
Sugar. From this port we sailed sometime in October 1812.
At this time the government of my native country and Great
Britain vvere at war. During this voyage, which was made to
New-York, we were chased by a British man-of-war for more
than four hours, while off Bermuda; but we out-sailed her and
made our escape. When off Cape Hatteras, we lost our fore
lop-sail during a heavy squall of wind. We reached the quar-
antine at New- Vork, after a passage of 13 days. Here we
had to lay to for 3 days, for the purpose of being examined by
the health officer; after which we went up to the city, where
we discharged our freight which took about one week, when
we again sailed for Westport, the place of my nativity. Here
I saw my father and mother, with whom I stayed but 5 weeks
before J again left my peaceful home and all the many little
endearments which always surround the paternal mansion, for
New Bedford, a sea port town in the south-eastern part of
Massachusetts, where 1 shipped aboard the Atlas, a whaleman,
bound to the Brazil banks. We hoisted sail just/it night, and
steered away in an east northeast direction until we crossed the
Grand banks, and then stood away for the Azores, where, after
20 days’ sail, we made the Island of Carvo, one of that group
of Islands. Here we stopped a few days and took in 500
bushels of potatoes and 100 bushels of onions. There was no
harbor in this place ; so we were obliged to go ashore in our
boats. The people brought down the above articles on their
backs. Men, women and children were all engaged in sup-
plying us with the above articles. We paid them in oil, of
which they were very fond. What they do with it I know
not. They vvere a very kind people to strangers, but poor.
From this place we sailed for the Cape De Verds, on the coast
of Africa. We were forty-two days in sailing from the former
to the latter island. We touched at the island of Buenavista,
one of this group, where we took in thirty-two hogs, for which
we paid corn, meal and bread. These people are of a very
dark hue, and speak the Potugnese language. Here we stop-
ped but four days, when we set all sails and steered away a
southwest course, for the Brazil Banks, where we arrived, af-
ter a sail of forty-two days.


Here we commenced fishing for whale, but for a time had*
bad luck, owing to the drunken habits of our Captain. We
sunk twelve whales before we caught ©ne. Then we caught
six in the course cf two weeks. I harpooned all these, and
assisted in taking and towing them along side the ship. After
we get a whale along side, we hitch our blubber hooks into the
head, after severing it from the body, then, with our windlass,
draw it aboard, and dip the oil out, which sometimes amounts
to more than fifty barrels. After this we, commence cutting
the whale in a circular manner with our spades; then we hitch
the blubber hooks into the commencement next to where the
head was taken off, and by pulling at the windlass, take off a
large piece which will usually when tried and strained, produce
ten barrels of oil. Before heaving on board this piece, another
hook is fastened below the one to be taken off; when this is
done with a cross blow from the spade, the first piece is sepa-
rated from the rest of the whale. Then the cutting is contin-
ued in the same manner as before mentioned, and another piece
torn off and swung aboard. This operation keeps the whale
constantly rolling over until the mass of flesh is stripped from
the carcass, which is then permitted to float off, or sink, and it
becomes the sport of sharks, who feed upon the little flesh
which remains after it has gone through the hands of the
whalemen.
Here we stayed but six weeks before we took in 1600 bar-
rels of oil. This was about 300 miles off the Brazil coast. —
From this place we set sail with onr cargo about the middle of
June 1813, for New Bedford, where we arrived in fifty-seven
days. When off Block Island we saw the keel of a brig, up-
on which were marked the names of a number of persons who
undoubtedly belonged to her and had died upon the wreck.
We were about five days unloading ship, after which the
hands were paid off and discharged. After this 1 went again
to visit my parents at Westport, where 1 stayed but two weeks
before I went to Philadelphia across land, and shipped aboard
the Dorothea, a Letter of Marque brig, Captain Aaron Pitney,
bound to St. Jago, loaded with flour and hoop-poles. This
brig mounted ten guns. When out two days we fell in with
an English brig of ten guns, to which we gave chase, and fought
her for about two hours, when she got away from us, we being
unable to gain upo» her in consequence of having our rigging


badly cut to pieces. In this action we lost two men killed and
the Captain badly wounded.
About three days after the above action, 4 o’clock A.
M., we discovered an English frigate, which gave chase to us,
and fired several guns, none of which reached ns. This ves-
sel we outsailed and left far behind by 2 o’clock P. JVI. Eight
days after this chase, we reached St. Jago, and discharged our
freight. Here we tarried three weeks and sold the brig to a
Spanish gentleman. We then took passage in the American
schooner Mary, bound to Alexandria, in the District of Co-
lumbia, upon the river Thames. 'Phis vessel had been trading
under an English license, and had been taken by the schooner
Hollo of Baltimore. Her captors were sending her home as a
prize. Of this we were not made acquainted until we had got
out to sea. When wo set sail, we had nine men sick with the
yellow fever, six of whom died and were consigned to the
vasty deep, after the usual ceremony of the reading of prayers,
Sec. We were off the east end of Cuba, when we discovered
early in the morning, a large sail to the eastward, which we
took to he an American man-of-war, but soon found we had
been fatally deceived, for she was a large English sloop-of-war
called the Sapho, Capt. O’Brady. She fired a broad side
which sent all hands below except the captain and mate.—
She then stopped firing and run down upon us, and asked ns if
we did not know it was war time, to which vve answered in
the affirmative. She then run under our lee, and sent her
launch and jolly boat with 30 men, who boarded us. The
Capt. having the old license from the British Admiralty with
him, presented it to the boarding master, who immediately
went on deck and informed the Capt. of the sloop that (he
schooner had a good license, and was told by the Capt. to
overhaul her well, and let her go, if all was right. The board-
ing master then went below* and told the Capt. that he would
overhaul his trunk, which he refused, but after some threats
from the former, the latter gave up the keys. Search was then
made and a commission from the schooner Hollo was found,
and the uniform coat of the Captain. This look from us all
chance of escape, for immediately after, a prize master and
twelve men from the sloop were sent aboard of us to take
charge. The Capt. of the English sloop then told the prize
master to leave all the American sick hoard the prize, and


seird the others aboard of his vessel. They then ordered all
our crew aboard the sloop except the second mate and myself,
who feigned ourselves sink.
Sometime during the afternoon, the sloop gave chase to an
American privateer, and the piize ship steered away for Jamai-
ca. Soon after this, Mr. Hutchins, the second mate of the
Mary, gave the British a large supply of rum, in which he had
previously put a quantity of laudanum. This, after a little
time, threw them into a lethargic state, as a matter of course.
After they had become quite sleepy, the mate told me that we
must retake the ship that night, and that 1 must stand by him,
for he had picked me out of the whole crew of the Mary for
that very purpose. 1 told him that there was so many well
armed men on board, that 1 thought the proposed adventure
too hazardous, but he said we could easily accomplish it if
we would be bold, as wo should have to have to go to Jamai-’
ca and probably die there, unless we could free ourselves that
night. I then told him 1 would stand by him. The sleepy crew
were now all in the steerage, except the the prize master, who
was in the cabin asleep. Eight o’clock in the evening, was
the time agreed upon to commence operations. When that
hour arrived, the mate directed me to go below and seize the
officer in the cabin, while he would secure the hatchway and
prevent the crew from making their way to the deck. All now
depended on doing business with despatch. While hurrying
below, 1 slipped and fell upon the deck; this waked my an-
tagonist, whom I intended to catch napping, but imagine my
disappointment when he jumped from his berth like a tiger who
had been suddenly awakened by a band of hunters; but. I was
ready, and as he struck the deck and was in the act of draw-
ing his sword 1 closed around him, fastening his arras from be-
hind by grasping him firmly ; but he was a powerful man and
] but a boy, still I was determined and resolute. After squab-
ling for some time, he shook me from him, and while in the act
of turning to face me, I gave him a blow under the chin that
felled him to the deck. 1 then cut his belt as soon as thought,
and threw his pistols and sword under the cabin steps; just
at this time, Mr. Hutchins, who had succeeded in his part of
the enterprize, threw a hatchet to me and told me to split the
officer’s head open if he attempted to get up. This I took and
holding it over his head, told him I would finish him in an in*
9


stout if lie moved. At this juncture Mr. H. came to my assist-,
ance, and vve soon finished the business by putting the prize
master in irons.
After all this was done we armed ourselves and steered away
for St. Jago, a Spanish port on the Island of Cuba.
My comrade and myself now had full command, and felt
ourselves free. We took turns in watching the crew, and every
thing went on well until the next morning, when our hopes of
freedom were suddenly blighted, even when vve were in plain
sight of, and but three miles from, the port to which, we were
steering, by being retaken by the same sloop which had taken
us the day before. They immediately put us in irons, which
they kept on us for fifteen days thereafter. Thus, we were
doomed to the most cruel disappointment. We were now put
on board the sloop, which sailed for Kingston, on the Island of
•Jamaica ; but she had sailed but a few days before she gave
chase to an American privateer. A running fight was kept up
between these two war vessels until towards night, when the
British sloop had her main-top-mast shot away. This took
some little time to repair, after which we steered for our place
of destination, where we arrived in about three days. While
making the port we run aground and were not able to get off
until about four o’clock next morning, and then by the aid of a
British man-of-war, which was lying at Port Royal.
The captain of the sloop kindly kept us on board his vessel
for two weeks ; after which we were sent on board of a prison
ship, where we remained eight months. W bile here we fared
very poorly, having only half a pound of meat, a pound of bread
and a gill of peas per day. There were nine hundred Ameri-
can prisoners confined in this vessel, shut out from home and
all its many endearments. Many of them were sick with yel-
low fever, and met here their final exit far from friends and
home.
After the expiration of the above time, six of us got away,
by swimming about a fourth of a mile to a vessel which lay at
anchor in the harbor, the jolly boat of which we made bold
to take into our possession, and steered out of the port through
a great number of men-of-war in safety.
Early the next morning, we captured a smallfishing canoe
manned by five slaves, from which we took a tirtle, four fish,
% sail and three paddles. Immediately after wads we heard


the alarm guns fired aboard ol the ship from which we had but
just made our escape. We then made for shore, drew our
boat into a swamp, and lay concealed all of that day. When
night came, we drew our boat to the water and pulled away
for St. Domingo. The next day we discovered an English
Drogger, manned with slaves, seventeen in number, and load-
ed with porter and cheese. This craft we boarded and took
possession of, after putting the slaves aboard ol our craft and
giving them a small part of the loading of the vessel. We
then steered away for New Orleans, but ill luck again attend-
ed us, for we had not had possession of her but a few hours
before an English man-of-war gave chase to, and compelled us
to run ashore to save being retaken. But we had not been on
shore long before we were again taken by some soldiers and
marched about thirty miles back into the country, and ledger,
in a stone jail, where we remained 25 days. 1 we were
marched down to the sea shore and put aboard the Sea-Hoise
frigate, and carried back to Port Royal, where we were put in
irons and again placed on board the prison ship, i nus were
all our hopes of freedom again destroyed, when we thought our
liberty was almost within our grasp. After this we were kept
on half the usual quantity of provisions for about a month, to
pay us for our love of liberty and fresh air, and hard pay we
thought it was too.
We were again put in irons and otherwise harshly treatec, and
had given up all hope of ever seeing our native snores, vviten
one day soon after this. Captain Joseph Merryhew, from W il-
mington, in Delaware, was brought on board the prison ship
with nine other prisoners, i his man knew, and inquhed of
me how long I had been a prisoner. I told him, awd lie pro-
mised to help me to obtain my freedom; which promise he
faithfully kept. He was a freemason, and a kind hearted man,
and to his influence 1 own my early release ftom the miseries
of imprisonment, which 1 had borne for nearly a year. 1 his
humane man procured not only my release but a large number
more of my poor countrymen. This was a happy change to
men who were sighing for freedom.
We hoisted sail sometime in the month of August, 1814, and
steered away for Baltimore. Our ship was called the W illiam
Penn. Captain Turner. In about eighteen days after leaving
Port Royal, we made Cape Henry,-on the Virginia coast, whore


we found a Britisif blockading fleet at anchor, the commander
of which ordered ns to Philadelphia, to which port we steered
away, but we had the had luck to strike upon the shoals of
Bamegat, during a thick fog that came on that afternoon, but
after three hours hard labor we got off and went on our voyage
and soon made the Delaware bay, which was also blockaded.
Here we were again refused the privilege of going into port,
but were ordered to Boston, and were told by the British offi-
cers to get out to sea within three hours or they would Are into
ns. At this time vvj were almost out of provisions and water.
Of this we made the tyrant officers acquainted, but they utter-
ly refused either to furnish us with these necessaries or permit
us to enter Philadelphia. So we were again compelled to go
to sea with one day’s provisions and water, and steered away
for Boston. The next day about 10 o’clock, A. M., we made
Great Egg Harbor. The crew then told the Captain that he
must go ashore, for they would not stay aboard and starve. —
He said he dared not do it. They then told him that they
would give him half an hour, to think of it, and if he did not
then comply that they should take the ship aslore. He how-
ever complied, and we steered away accordingly. We were
soon aground and were compelled to throw o\erboard all the
ballast, casks, and every thing on board ; howe'er, after much
hard struggling with the sand and waves we got over the bar,
and got as near shore as possible, where we drove stubs down
to keep the vessel. Alter which, we stripped her of all her rig-
ging and sails. The next morning we saw the diore lined with
the militia of New Jersey, who took us to he "an enemy, but
they soon found their mistake. Instead of an enemy, they
found us a pcor set of weather-beaten, starved fellows- Scan
after this, the Custom-House officer sent down joats and took
us off, and carried us to the village that was nea by, and gave
us all a good dinner; after which, we dispersed some went to
New-York, and some to Philadelphia. Thiswas about the
middle of September, 1814. Two hundred ani seven of the
crew started the next day after we got ashore, fa' Philadelphia
by land, which was about one hundred and fiftymiles. With
this number I journied. We suffered much on our journey,
being destitute of money, and being compelled t» beg what lit-
tle we cat on the road. At night vve slept in tht woods. We
were seven days in gelling to the place of our clstination, two


of which we eat nothing but whortleberries, -which we picked
by the way Bide. On the third day a Friend Quaker kindly
provided us with a good breakfast and gave ns money to pay
our bridge fare. This man’s name was John Rogers ; and of
him it may be truly said, “ he did unto others as he would have
them do unto him.” How few of the pious of this covetous
age can be found to exhibit as much real disinterested benevo-
lence as this man did. After this we did not suffer for want of
food.
We arrived at Philadelphia., and from thence we went either
to sea or to onr several homes. After getting my pay, I went
again to see my parents at Westport. Here I stayed until
spring, when 1 again shipped aboard the ship Traveller. Jon-
athan Kendricks, master. The crew numbered seventeen
souls, principally Cape Cod men. We sailed for the Straits of
Belisle, where we went after codfish. We sailed as far north
as Esquimaux bay, where we took in one hundred and sixty
thousand fish in the short space of forty-five days. We then
sailed for Boston. When off Nantucket we experienced a se-
vere gale, which continued all one night, during which time the
ship struck on the shoals; but after two hours we got off and
put into Chatham, on Cape Cod. We lost our main-mast du-
ring this gale, and all the boats but one; besides this, we lost
one man by the name of Hagars, who fell from the fore-top and
was drowned. We dried our fish at Chatham and refitted be-
fore sailing for Boston, nt which place we arrived some time in
December. He we disposed of our fish and returned to New
Bedford and stayed until spring.
The next trip which I made to sea, was in the brig America,
of 200 tons, William Dagget, master. We sailed from Boston
with a crew of ten men, and twenty-five passengers, on a cruise
to New Oi leans, which we made in twenty days.
VVhile opposite; Cape Florida, we fell in with a pirate schoo-
ner, which gave chase to us by coming down upon our larboard
quarter, and giving us a gun which passed through our bulwark.
Our Captain at this juncture advised a surrender of our vessel,
but the mate declared be would not give up if the men would
stand by him. The passengers told him they would fight as
long as there was a man left. They then stripped off their
coats, and we cleared for action. We then fired a broad side,
which cut away the pirate’s main-mast and killed several of


her crew. \Ve fired several broad-sides, and the passengers
bred the small arms lo good effect, for the enemy soon wore
away to windward and got off as soon as possible by means of
their oars. We saw several dead bodies floating on the water
belonging to the pirate crew. We had but one man wounded
and none killed.
We stayed at. New Orleans three weeks, took in a load of
Colton, and again sailed for Providence, where we arrived af-
ter a passage of thirty days. Here we discharged our cargo
and took ic a set of ballast, and after staying about twenty
days we again set sail for Richmond, in Virginia, after flour.
We took in 1700 barrels of flour at the latter place and after
staying about three weeks again set sail for Boston, where we
arrived after a sail of fifteen days. Here we were paid off and
discharged; after which I went home to New Bedford, my
parents at this time being dead. Here 1 stayed.until the next
Jmie, 1817, when I shipped aboard of the Alexander Barclay,
Captain Joseph Dunbar, bound to Baltimore, for Cotton, Fus-
tick, and lobacco-stalks. After loading our vessel with the
above articles, we set sail for Bremen, a town in Germany, on
the river Weser. We had three passengers, Dr. Jamison, wife
and daughter. We were four weeks in loading our vessel
and thirty days on our passage to Bremen. We had an excel-
lent Captain. At Bremen we stayed but three weeks, dis-
charged our freight, took in ballast, and two passengers, a Swe-
dish lady and her daughter. From here we sailed to Gotten-
burgh, which took us fifteen days. Here we took in a load of
Iron, stayed four weeks, and again set sail for New Bedford,
which place we reached in fbrty-sevgn days thereafter. We
went north about between Scotland and the Ferroe Islands.—
A lien on the banks, we saw large islands of ice which con-
tained a number of hundred acres, and some of them one hun-
and fifty feet high. We arrived at New Bedford about
the first of January, 1818. The next year 1 spent principally
around home. But in May 1819, 1 shipped aboard of the brig
Traveller again, on a cruise to Cape Harrison, in latitude 65
degrees north, where we took in twelve hundred quintals of
codfish. While here we killed four white bears. Wild geese
were very plenty. We saw the Esquimaux Indians a number
of times sailing in their skin canoes. We made this voyage in
About six months. We sold our fish at Boston, and went home
14


to, Bedford, where all hands were paid off and discharged.
The next voyage that I made was with Captain Joseph
Gardner, to Matanzas, in the ship William, for Molasses, Cof-
fee, and Sugar. This was in the year 1820. The seas were
thickly infested with pirates at this time, whicli detained us
eighteen days after we were loaded. Captain Porter at thus
time lay off Matanzas, in the sloop Peacock. He.had a num-
ber of schooners also under his command, two of which con-
voyed us with sixty other merchantmen across the Bahama,
banks.
The next fall I went another voyage in the Mary, of Boston,
Captain Joseph White, to St. Thomas for Molasses, which we'
carried to Boston.
During the next eight years I made sixteen, voyages to the
West India Islands, under different Captains and in different
vessels. In none of these voyages did any thing unusual occur,
though we had to throw some of our cargoes overboard to save,
the vessels. After the above voyages 1 stayed at home a few
months, but not being contented on shore, about the 25th op
June, 1829:, 1 again went to sea in the ship Trident, of GOO tons.
There were sixty of the crew, principally experienced whale-
men. We were bound to the Pacific Ocean, for whale. Our
course was as usual by way of the Western Islands, where we,
arrived in about 20 days. We caught three Sperm on the pas-
sage. We slopped Flores, one of these islands, where we took
in potatoes, onions, pumpkins, hogs, and chickens. Here we
stopped but two days. Then we steered away south for the
Cape De Verds, which we passed. The next land which we
saw was the Isle of May. Thence we steered away for
Cape Horn, where we arrived in 90 days thereafter. We
then doubled Cape Horn, and sailed northward off the coast,
until we came to the island of Juan Fernandez, famous for its
being for several years the abode of the celebrated Robinson
Crusoe. One could not help thinking of the dreadful life this
celebrated navigator lived while here. His lonely hours and
lantaliziag dreams. His constant fear of beasts and cannibal
savages. While here we visited the untenanted cave where
that noted adventurer is said to have resided. On this island
are a great, many g®ais ; also peaches, which grow wild in the
woods. There were but few people here. The colony plant-
ed by Crusoe not having multiplied very fast. The land here


k Rood, but the shore is generally bold. From this place we
sailed for Payta, in latitude 5 degrees south, where we arrived
after more than six months sail from the time we left New
Bedford, Here we took in potatoes and onions, re-fitted ship,
mid made ready for fishing. Here we stayed eighteen days.
1 hen we sailed for the “ off shore ground,” a famous place for
sperm whale. VVe were fifty days sailing from Pavta to the
shore. Heie we stayed five months, and took but two hun-
dred barrels sperm. We then sailed again for Payta, where
we recruited ship, staid a couple of weeks, and then sailed
for Tombus, where we took in wood and water. When this
was done, we sailed the for Gallipago Islands, where we went
for i errapin. Ihe J erfapin very much resembles our large
1 urtlo, only they live wholly on the land, and weigh from four
to five hundred pounds. The manner of taking them is as fol-
lows : In the morning we used to go up into the island, among
the bushes, where we usually found them feeding upon cab-
bage trees, that they had gnawed down the night before. Af-
ter finding them two of us used to go up to them andturn them
over upon their backs, then tie their legs, and swing them be-
tween us, by lashing them to our backs. W e then carry them
to the boat?, and from thence to the ship. We sometimes keep
them alive six months without any food or drink. They make
excellent soup, and are esteemed very healthy. They are
worth, when brought to a sea-port city, from two hundred to
three hundred dollars. W r e took six hundred of these animals
in five days, and got them on board ship.
After this, we went again to the “ off shore” coast, for sperm
whale. We had the luck to take six whale after we had been
out two days. After this we continued our sail to the place of
destination, where we took in eighteen hundred barrels of oil.
Here we stayed three months, and sailed for Callao, on the
coast of Peru. After arriving at the latter place, 1 left the ship
and went aboard of the Charles, of London. The Trident,
after recruiting ship sailed for New Bedford.
Ihe Charles, on board of which I had shipped, sailed in
about tw'o weeks after I went aboard, for sperm, along the
coast, but we had such a drunken Captain that we could not
do any business. He was not sober any of the time while we
were out. After going into the port from whence we last sail-
ed, 1 left the Charles and went on board (heGolconda, of New


Bedford. In Ibis vessel I stayed about nine monlbs, during
which we fished in Panama bay with tolerable success. The
Captain was a bad man and abused the crew very much. —
From this bay we went to Payta, where I was paid off and
left the ship.
The people of this place procure their water from springs that
are nine miles off, which is brought in every morning on asses
in what are called callabashes, that hold from fifteen to twenty
gallons each. After staying at this place five months, myself
and two others started with one ass loaded with water and pro-
visions for Peuro, situated one hundred miles south east from
Payta. The country through which we passed was a sandy
desert, without a shrub or spire of grass to cheer us on our
way. At night we slept on the sand and had no other shelter
than the canopy of the heavens afforded. We were five days
on our journey. There was no water to be seen during our
whole journey, nor a single house or cultivated spot. The
sands drift as the snow does in the northern parts of America.
When I arrived at the place of our destination, 1 engaged to
work for Spanish gentleman called Don Francisco. This man
owned a distillery in which 1 labored two months. Then 1.
went about 70 miles further into the country, to a place called
Apputaria, which was situated on the Columbian mountains.
Here 1 labored five months on a farm, for a man named Tar-
bury. The people in this vicinity are Spaniards, and are very
hospitable to strangers. Here the people live by raising sweet
potatoes, corn, cotton and sugar cane. Here I. stayed six
months and enjoyed myself very well. The religion of this
people is the Catholic.
The only man with whom [ had formed an acquaintance
who was from the United States, was a Cape-Cod man. This
man and myself had lived together from the time 1 landed at
Payta. From Apputaria we started about the first of March,
1834, and went again to Peuro, vyhere my companion died,
far from home and friends, in a fore'ign land. He had no kind
friend to close his eyes for the last time, except the writer of
this narrative, who rendered him such assistance as was in his
power to render, and when he slept, in death, procured him such
a burial as was in accordance with the custom of the country.
After the death of my friend L stayed about a week, and then
left that place and went to Payta, which is a sea-port town. —
c V


Here 1 stayed but about one month before I again shipped o»
board a whaler called the Mechanic, of Newport, Rhode Isl-
and. After leaving this port we went down to Tombus, w here
we took in potatoes, squashes, onions and water melons. We
then steered away tor the off shore ground, which is about three
thousand miles west of the coast of Peru. Here we took two
whale, after which we steered away west until we came to the
J J
Reupore Islands, but we did not land here on account of the
ferocity ot the natives, who were anm d with heavy, carved
war-clubs. The land appeared to be good, but was mountain-
ous, back from the shore. The people were almost v\ hite, but
very savage in their appearance, and went almost naked.—
What little clothing they had was made of grass wove into a
species of cloth. This they tied around their waists. Jt reach-
ed down before nearly to the knees. These people have never
permitted the missiouaiies to live among them, but they wor-
ship idols made of stone. They raise potatoes and oranges of
the vegetable kind, and of the animal, hogs. Of these latter,
we purchased a hog that would weigh two handled pounds,
for one whale tooth. What they do with the teeth Ido not
know’. This the natives brought to us by swimming to the
ship. From the last mentioned Islands v\e steered away west
by north, about two thousand miles further, when we reached
an island called Riotier, one of a group called the Society Isl-
ands. Here my time being up, I left the ship and went among
the natives, who were a very friendly, hospitable pet pie. Here
1 stayed five months, and learned much of the customs and
manners of the country. The people generally go naked, and
men, women and children live promiscuously together-
Their houses are very simple, being constructed by driving
posts into the ground and then by fastening beams made of
round sticks to the top of these posts, and smaller sticks, cov-
ered with grass wove very compactly together to the beams.
This forms the dwelling of these poor, but happy people. When
the wind blows hard, or when it rains they heave up grass
mats on the side of the house towards the wind. Under this
frail covering whole families, sometimes consisting of twenty or
thirty, are huddled together both by night and by day. The
people are very indolent, having every thing necessary for their
subsistence growing spontaneously around them. Their food
bread fruit, which grows upon trees somewhat resembling


apple trees, it grows like an apple, but as large as a man’s
head. This is prepared for eating by roasting it in the fire and
by taking off the skin. Then it is sliced up the same as we
slice up bread for the table. This is better than the best
wheat bread. Of this fruit they have two crops in a year which
lasts about two months and a half each crop. Then they have
during the other parts of year two crops of Payees, a kind of
fruit that grows upon bushes about ten feet high and resembles
large cucumbers. These are cooked by digging holes in the
ground and then making hot fires in them and healing the same
as we heat ovens. When the hole is sufficiently hot they clear
out the fire, put in the fruit, and cover them over with large
leaves. In about two hours they are sufficiently cooked.—-
When cooked, they become soft like a polatoe, hut much
more delicious. There is also a root, called lea-root, which is
about four inches in diameter and two or three feet long.—
These, when roasted, afford a juice similar to molasses. Be-
sides these, they have plenty of good fish, hogs and cattle. Hor-
ses are very scarce, though 1 saw a few while there.
The people of this place, when they make a feast, which is
often, roast a hog whole. This they do by digging a hole in
the ground sufficiently large to put (he animal in, then they
build a large fire in it and heat it, as English people heat their
ovens. While they are making the dirt oven ready, they have
another large fire close by, where they heat small round stones.
When these are sufficiently heated and the hole is also heated,
they clear out the coals, and put a layer of the heated round
stones upon the bottom, then they lay in the hug and cover it
with large leaves, then over these a layer of the hot stones,
■then another of the leaves, and over all, they throw a layer of
dirt. When the hog has become properly roasted, they take
it out and lay it upon sticks prepared for that purpose, and the
guests set round and eat.
There is an Englishman by the name of Hunter, who has a
sugar plantation on this island, and employs seventy five hands,
all natives of the country. He has about one hundred and
seventy five acres under improvement. The sugar manufactu-
red here is of good quality. There is n kind of root grows here
called tarrow, which resembles a potatoe. This is the only
vegetable that I saw cultivated on the island. To raise these,
the people burn over a spot during the dry season, and sow the


seed, and get it in with sticks, where the land is not very mel-
low. It generally will sprout, and grow without any labor being
bestowed upon it after sowing. The roots are fit for use in three
months. These are cooked by roasting as we roast potatoes.
There is a missionary on this island, and the people are more
intelligent than most of the other islanders in that vicinity.—
They are one of the most peaceable and happy people with
whom the writer was ever acquainted. They seem to be pe-
culiarly the favorites of our Great Father. Possessing one of
the*most salubrious of climates, with every thing formed in na-
ture, and growing spontaneously for their support, they are
well filled to enjoy life and all iis attendant blessings. They
are happy in their poverty, and contented in their simplicity ;
and I assure my readers, that it was not. without many painful
sensations, that I left this ocean isle, and its peaceful inhabit-
ants. May God ever be with, and preserve them for their ma-
ny acts of benevolence, shown to the writer of tins narrative,
when a stranger thrown among them, and more than fourteen
thousand miles from the land oi his nativity.
One dav, after I had been on the island about five months,
J accidentally found a ship at the harbor which belonged to
Marlines Vineyard, in the United States. This was the first
vessel which 1 had seen since 1 had been here. 'I he Captain’s
name was Toby. After getting acquainted with this man, he
proposed my going home with him. He said I had not better
stay among the natives any longer—that my folks at home
would be glad to see me, 1 finally concluded lo go with him.
We sailed from this place sometime during the latter part of
1835, and arrived at the vineyatd in the sprung of 1836.
While on our homeward bound passage, we lost three men,
by being struck by a whale.
After discharging our freight at Oldtown, on the Vineyard, I
went home to New Bedford, where i stayed three months,
when 1 again shipped aboard of a whaler called the Delight,
Captain Philip Sanford. Our voyage was made to St. Domin-
go in twenty eight days. Here we commenced fishing, but
catched nothing but black fish, which we sold for polatoes,
oranges, squashes Sfc. We then went down upon the Jamaica
coast, where we caught seven sperm whale; after this we
went into Mexico Bay where we took four more whale.—
Then we went to the Western Hands, where we caught three


more large whale. We then stopped at Flores, and took iq
potatoes, onions, chickens, pumpkins and squashes. We stop-
ped at several other of this group of Islands on our way home.
We were gone eight months on this voyage. After unloading
our ship, I stayed at New Bedford but a few weeks before 1
again left home on a visit to the State of New York, to see a
cousin that 1 had not seen for more than eighteen years. This
man lives in the town of Stockbridge, and county of Madison.
His name is Michael Wainei, a man of good property and ef
respectable standing. I stayed at this place until the spring of
1838, when I went to Buffalo, and shipped aboard of the
Steamer Wisconsin, bound to Detroit, in the State of Michi-
gan. We had two hundred and fifty passengers, with their
goods, on board. The next trip that we made was to Chica-
go, in the State of Illinois ; our lading was the same as we had
in our last trip. On our return passage, 1 hurt my foot while
taking in wood, at Cleaveland in Ohio. After this 1 board-
ed a few days in Buffalo, but my foot continuing lame, 1 again
returned to Stockbridge, where I arrived sometime in the month
of June, 1838. Here 1 labored for several persons in the course
of the season. 1 think the people of this place are as industri-
ous and respectable as in any place with which J have been
acquainted. They are, in general, good livers, have fewer poor
people among them, than most of the places which 1 have vis-
ited, and are very civil and courteous to strangers. They are
principally emigrants from the New England States. Ihe
town is beautifully situated, having the Oneida Creek, running
from south to north through its centre. Upon this stream are a
number of grist and saw mills. Here would be an excellent
place for erecting manufactories ol cotton or wool. From the
centre of this town to the Utica and Syracuse Kail Road is but
seven miles. This town produces excellent winter wheat,
■corn, rve, barley and oats, it is called one of the richest towns
in the State of New-\ork.
I now take leave of those who may hereafter peruse this re-
lation of events through which the writer has passed, during his
stay among earth’s travellers. May heaven’s choicest blessings
ever he theirs, together with the innumerable comforts which
are the attendants of an earthly pilgrimage. Good bye.
PAUL CUFFE.
Stockbridge, N. Y. March 18, 1839,
21


* 4 .
. . _•■■■■ ,
■ > •• . • ; _ : .
-
1 ,
' »
,
.
V
J > Sfi» • • ' - - V,.
.
■
'
■>
■ * ' i
•
■
9Wti •- f 1
'
-
i
*
•
'
.
* ' .
i *i -s•, ' >
% '
* ,'
■
,
'
'
.




. . , - /- f l , • v f ' / ' ,*
->•/ ' “ 1 ' ** ’ V ■>' , ’ I . ■ z~ - J* j, < ‘;.v
a? i < slii " v - ■- wi P j r,* . IS < H '
■ - - ' *’ Vx- 1 ' ■- - vf - ■ . ■■ *
, . ■ .■•■• , ■ .. ■ - ’
- • .. ■ • '
, Jv v - * r : 1 ‘ '; •& ' * f§ v (
. , : ■. - •• ,•• ’■■■■■.. • ,■ 1 *. su'i?. v. &*>.,- , ■•>■ ■ *.v j ' ■; ■ : v- ’ ■•-■■■. -: .■ . ■ . . v. ’ .
at' v -»
■
■ ■’V,’* 1< - ,*f;
$v' a,, - rr
r^^rrr?Wi
, •'• . .t | t.' * , 1 ‘ > -*<V'
-y- ' v . * ■> I
‘ - ' ’ 1 ». , ,
S- S -* 1 * <* ' » * sV ' V V . < . \ ' 1 :A': ‘
V.» 4 i; <■
v,. v •'£
rrrrrrr-
fe'-? ‘ r**
m®\ v/. ■>- 9it K Mr ;
■ ,■' ; V ■■ ■ •. • • ■■
■ ■ i v ■ afef
- ", , , ' , . ■ !'■ . - - ’ - , ' v ' 'V ,■•'•' v , > ' ' , / i * v , , . •> 4
: ■ \ l . . . K-.-
-
1 - ' , ’■ ‘ ' s ' * * -V ,
si'
-. ' •, '-v r ;• , , - 1 o .. ■, -, -t' •; - ' . , . 1 , \ \ ' v <' ‘ ?" <1^-. 1 . j
,
, • . ■• v '■■<■ *•-■■■ vc,. ■ • ■ • • -> .V • i; 1 >, VV' r ■ -V
> - ' /, , . v , n ’ __ ' ’ s
V ■ "S'■■■'■. ■' . •.■■•,' ;'»5vCS'i; £ ’: t ■ sfe'n . ’ ''i' 1 '- ' ' V'-.'/.C V. .' ,
“ J -V v ; ' ’’
- - * ■-
■
-^1
- v'-fy. . : • ; > ,y '."'fey *
f ‘ *> \ » ■ h >■ i f ' * s 's» t , •
■
'
,,
.
i •' ’ • > " r . ’/''‘'V,', . * ‘ T > r-:- ' c„ v ,?>**•;
■
'* : ■ V t • r ' k vi t ' ; ; .■ \ ■- v * ■■
,
I
.
■
"• C' '■ ’ • -
.
■ ■ ■ ' . ■ ■ • ' ' •' .-■■.i-.V
*,. ■ r . '■ . ■ ; ; ■; I,-'
\ ;jv ;v. .■■■', ■•■ .,v ;• r rrrr^r^i^r^
t V' ■ r-" r&S ■ ■* v V." m
■
-;^ar u.4- & .r*>
iV " J '* A - - : ; !■ ■■• .>/ :' «, -.ti, * J \ ' ' • v, '?i J*r s’ '
, . '. v.'v '• ;• , -; r V ' '
. r
s > , , i ’v 1 y ,
■
24


'■J A Ax • -*
. f
V ‘ i
Pi wv s-€i>o
i
HwUy eU- -te^,^
C*- 3 * )
LU « tj
Zu %>
_ t* s
<£?>■■ g
;* z i
g> mcs «
-Z §>
Q 'i - > 1
fg uj j
o' „ M I s
u. j 3 - Z |
__i o .g
—j n w
< HI *
«H 9
