

i P<Vw^
' c/




fay,
U-Cftr £&C™s» u^yyiC^Jf
( 219 )
SIR GEORGE SIMPSON’S NARRATIVE OF A JOURNEY
ROUND THE WORLD*
I. UPPER CANADA.
Sir George Simpson might have traversed other countries, such as
Central Africa or Australia, with more benefit to geographical know-
ledge ; but it would be impossible to have travelled in peopled, yet little
known countries so replete with interest as those, the descriptions of which
are comprised in this “ Narrative of a Journey Round the World.”
Commencing his travels among the English citizens of a young re-
public, which is at the present moment doubling its original territory,
without any visible or conceivable obstacle in the way of its almost inde-
finite extension; Sir George proceeds to a conquered province, where
the descendants of the first possessors, however inferior in wealth and
influence, have every reason, he asserts, to rejoice in the defeat of their
fathers ; and thence following one continuous series of English posts that
stud the wilderness from the Canadian lakes to the Pacific Ocean, he plies
his way from the isolated yet progressive colony of the Red River across
prairies and Rocky mountains to the disputed territory of Columbia, to
which, by the very force of circumstances, an eventful future must neces-
sarily be attached.
Then again in California we have before us the fragment of the grand-
est of colonial empires, where English adventurers (with that innate
power which makes every individual, whether Briton or American, a real
representative of his country and his race), already monopolise the trade
and influence the destinies of the country.
In the Sandwich Islands we can contemplate the noblest of all
triumphs, the slow but sure victory of the highest civilisation over the
lowest barbarism. English merchants and English missionaries now sway
the destinies of an Archipelago, which promises, under their care and
guidance, to become the centre of the traffic of the East and West, of the
New World and the Old,
And lastly we cannot but look to the immense acquisitions of Russia
in Asia, without that profound interest and those peculiar feelings as
Englishmen, which must be excited in perusing the actual condition, in
its distant settlements, and in territories untrodden by observing travellers,
of the only possible rival of our own country in the extent and variety of
moral and political influence.
Sir George Simpson sailed from Liverpool on the 4th of March, 1841,
accompanied by four or five gentlemen connected with the Hudson’s Bay
Company’s service. The party was destined to experience on its traverse
the very storm in which in all probability the President was lost. Ar-
riving at Boston on the forenoon of the 20th, they proceeded the same
evening by Lowell —the Manchester of New England —to Nashua, and
thence night and day they travelled onwards by sleigh, till the ice
of the St. Lawrence presented them with a ready means of reaching
Montreal.
Hurry is throughout the order of the day. The plains, mountains,
rivers, and forests of North America are traversed for a distance of
* Narrative of a Journey Round the World, during the years 1841 and 1842.
By Sir George Simpson, Governor-in-Chief of the Hudson’s Bay Company s
Territories in North America. 2 vols. Henry Colburn.


nearly two thousand miles in six weeks and five days, and from Ochotsk
to St. Petersburg, the whole length of the Asiatic continent, or about
seven thousand miles, is crossed in ninety-one days, and nearly one-half
as many nights. Sir George appears to have been thoroughly infected
with the American passion for getting on. Many great objects, as we
shall afterwards see, were accomplished during this remarkable journey,
and there apparently remained plenty of time for interesting remarks and
useful observation, but the most prominent impression, after all, on
arriving at the conclusion of the narrative, is that the greatest of all
objects was to get over the ground.
With such a field before us, the reader would scarcely thank us for de-
taining him in the United States or the Canadian territories ; but we
have a more important reason for neglecting these countries at the present
moment, inasmuch as the consideration of this part of the subject will be
taken up at a future opportunity in this Magazine by more competent
hands.
The season being more backward than usual, the state of the river did
not allow of their departure from Montreal until the 4th of May, when
they started up the Ottawa for nearly four hundred miles, turning into
the Matawa, and thence across the water-shed to Lake Nipissing, where
they parted with Colonel Oldfield, who had accompanied our travellers
so far for the purposes of surveying the country with respect to the means
of navigation. The resting-place of the previous station is characte-
ristically described by Sir George as bad “ the ground damp, the water
muddy, the frogs obstreperous, and the snakes familiar. In spite, how-
ever, of all these trifles, fatigue was as good as an opiate, and in sound
sleep we soon forgot the troubles of the day.”
At the outlet of the Nipissing they saw the first savages, who, though
poorly clad, appeared to be faring well. The current of French River,
although obstructed by rapids which necessitated several “portages,”
carried them swiftly downwards to Lake Huron, whence they had the
prospect before them, with the single exception of Sault Salute Marie,
of seven or eight hundred miles of still water to the head of Lake
Superior.
The celebrated strait above-mentioned, which empties Lake Superior
into Lake Huron, has a British settlement, with a post of the Hudson’s
Bay Company on the one side, and an American village with an incon-
siderable garrison on the other. The mortification of the party may be
easily imagined, when, on arriving at this point in their journey, they
learnt that the ice of Lake Superior was still as firm and as solid as in
the depth of winter. This was on the 16th of May, and their fourteenth
day from Montreal. Yet the sun was already powerful, and budding
flowers and numerous birds attested the approach of spring—the warm
weather, indeed, made the ice a pleasant addition to the wine-and-
water, and their least disagreeable prospect appears to have been that of
eating their way through the luxury. At length, on the night of the
19th, a slight breeze broke the field which had so pertinaciously resisted
the sun’s rays, though the masses continued to be closely packed, and
after a hard day’s work they accomplished about thirty miles. Their
progress was much embarrassed by the mirage , which at one time de-
ceived them with the appearance of an island, at another with that of
open water, and then again with impenetrable icebergs. Arrived at


Michiplcoton, after overcoming numerous difficulties, the governor held
a temporary council for the southern department, after which progress
was more easy and the lake more open, enabling them to sail past
Thunder mountain, a bleak rock rising with a perpendicular face to
the west 1200 feet out of the lake. “ One of the most appalling objects
of the kind,” says Sir George, “ that I have ever seen. The Indians
have a superstition, which can hardly be repeated without becoming giddy,
that any person who may scale the eminence and turn thrice round on
the brink of its fearful wall will live for ever.” Luckily the barren and
forbidding rocks of Lake Superior have lately become an object of in-
tense interest, and promise one day to rival in point of mineral wealth
the Altai and Uralian mountains.
Stepping ashore, at length, at Fort William, at the upper extremity of
the lake, the canoes were exchanged for smaller vessels to overcome the
difficulties which are announced by the very name of the river—
Kaministaquoia. At this point Governor Simpson had an interview with
a band of Saulteaux or Chippeway Indians, whose orator, a tall, hand-
some man, somewhat advanced in years, addressed the Europeans fluently,
and with the air of a prince, arrayed in a scarlet coat with bright buttons,
perfectly new, but from want of nether garments, or from a Highland
taste, the tail of his shirt was made to answer the purpose of a kilt.
The little squadron started merrily, and in full song, up the beautiful
river beyond whose verdant banks formed a striking and a greater con-
trast with the sterile and rugged coast of Lake Superior. The first ob-
stacle was the falls of the Kakabeka, which are inferior in volume alone
to those of Niagara, and have the advantage of their far-famed rival in
height of fall and wildness of scenery.
“ The river,” says Sir George, “ during the day’s march, passed through
forests of elm, oak, pine, birch, &c., being studded with isles not less fertile and
lovely than its banks ; and many a spot reminded us of the rich and quiet
scenery of England. The paths of the numerous portages were spangled with
violets, roses, and many other wild flowers, while the currant, the gooseberry,
the raspberry, the plum, the cherry, and even the vine, were abundant. All
this bounty of nature was imbued, as it were, with life by the cheerful notes
of a variety of birds, and by the restless flutter of butterflies of the brightest
hues. Compared with the adamantine deserts of Lake Superior, the Kaminis-
taquoia presented a perfect paradise.
“ One cannot pass through this fair valley without feeling that it is destined,
sooner or later, to become the happy home of civilised men, with their bleating
flocks and their lowing herds, with their schools and their churches, with their
full garners and their social hearths. At the time of our visit the great ob-
stacle in the way of so blessed a consummation was the hopeless wilderness to
the eastward, which seemed to bar for ever the march of settlement and culti-
vation. But that very wilderness, now that it is to yield up its long hidden
stores, bids fair to remove the very impediments which hitherto it has itself
presented. The mines of Lake Superior, besides establishing a continuity of
route between the east and the west, will find their nearest and cheapest supply
of agricultural produce in the valley of the Kaministaquoia.”
This is a bright and cheering glimpse into futurity, which offers a com-
fortable relief to the state of things nearer home. Beyond the Dog’s
Portage, a country of hill and dale, chequered with the varied tints of
the pine, the aspen, the ash, and the oak, with the silvery stream of the
Kaministaquoia, meandering through the heart of this lovely district, led
the way to the heights which separate the waters of the great Canadian
June, —vol. lxxx. no. cccxviii. q


lakes from those of the Hudson’s Bay territories, and at the same time
divide the two territories from one another.
ii.—the Hudson’s bay territories.
The entrance into the Hudson’s Bay territories was effected by de-
scending the River Embarras, so named from the great number of fallen
trees that obstruct its channel, after which they crossed the beautiful
lake of a Thousand lakes to the French Portage, considered to be the
worst in that part of the country, and thence, by Sturgeon Lake, they
proceeded into the Maligne, and by Lac la Croix to the Macan.
“ At nearly all the rapids and falls,” says Sir George, “on these two rivers,
the Indians have erected platforms which stretch about twenty feet from the
shore ; and on these they fix themselves, spear in hand, for hours, as silent and
motionless as possible, till some doomed fish comes within the range of their
unerring weapon. If they take more sturgeon than what they immediately
require, o they tether the supernumeraries by a string, through the mouth and
gill, to the bank.”
This latter practice prevails also on the Danube, only that the fish are
generally tethered on the latter river to the stern of a boat. After tra-
versing Lac la Pluie and five or six miles of the river of the same name,
the party reached Fort Frances, where they were saluted by about a
hundred Saulteaux, the warriors of a band of about five hundred souls,
who had come to address the governor upon such matters as concerned
them, and who being referred to the next morning, erected a conjuring
tent, and muttered charms, shook rattles, and committed offerings to the
flames during the whole night, singing, whooping, and dancing at inter-
vals, to propitiate Sir George in their favour. These Saulteaux have
dwindled down from being one of the most powerful tribes _in the
country to some three or four thousand souls, and even this inconsiderable
number, though scattered over a vast extent of territory can scarcely keep
body and soul together. The hunting grounds of the tribe have been
nearly exhausted, and though the soil is fertile, producing wild rice in
abundance, the savages are too proud to become, as they loftily express
themselves, “ troublers of the earth.” Upon this present their
chief complaint was that the exchange of rum for furs had been discon-
tinued.
“ The river which empties Lac la Pluie into the Lake of the Woods is, says
Sir George Simpson, “ in more than one respect, decidedly the finest stream in
the whole route. From Fort Frances downwards, a stretch of nearly a
hundred miles, it is not interrupted by a single impediment, while yet the cur-
rent is not strong enough materially to retard an ascending traveller. Nor
are the banks less favourable to agriculture than the waters themselves to
navigation, resembling in some measure those of the lhames near Richmond.
From the very brink of the river, there rises a gentle slope of green sward,
crowned in many places with a plentiful growth of birch, poplar, beech, elm,
and oak. Is it too much for the eye of philanthropy to discern, through the
vista of futurity, this noble stream, connecting, as it does, the fertile shores of
two spacious lakes, with crowded steam-boats on its bosom, and populous towns
on its borders ?”
The river which empties the Lake of the Woods into Lake Winipeg,
forms so many rapids and falls along its rocky channel, that its length of
more than two hundred miles is broken by no less than thirty-seven por-
tages. Passing the two establishments of Rat Portage and Fort Alex-


under, the party at length reached the traverse leading across Lake Wini-
peg to the Red River settlement, upon their arrival at which they feli-
citated themselves upon having accomplished a safe journey of two thou-
sand miles.
The origin and progress of the Red River settlement is replete with
Interest. The territories thereunto annexed were ceded, in the year 1811,
to the late Earl of Selkirk by the Hudson’s Bay Company. The territory
was called Assiniboine, the particular settlement the Red River. The first
body of emigrants was composed chiefly of hardy mountaineers from Scot-
land. In the beginning of the year 1813, the settlers amounted to about
one hundred persons, and since Lord Selkirk’s death in 1820, no new colo-
nists have joined the establishment, yet, notwithstanding this drawback,
and in spite of the occasional emigrations from the Red River towards the
Mississippi and the Columbia, the colony numbers at present above five
thousand souls, and the population is found to double every twenty years.
It is impossible not to see then here, the nucleus of a powerful territory,
fixed in one of the most curious and out-of-the way spots on the face of
the globe. The soil is fertile, the rivers abound with fish, the prairies with
buffaloes, and the woods with elk, deer, &c., and the natives are friendly;
but on the other hand the winters are longer and more severe than in
Canada, and the territory is liable to devastating floods, and to the plagues
of frogs and locusts.
Fort Garry, the principal establishment at the junction of the Assini-
boine and the Red River is a regularly built fortification with walls and
bastions of stone. There is also a lower fort, a Roman Catholic cathedral,
four Protestant churches, a large and flourishing school, and numerous re-
spectable country houses, most of them consisting of two stories.
At <£ Rupert’s Land,” as the united settlements of the Assiniboine and
Red River are called in the royal charter, Governor Simpson parted com-
pany with Lords Caledon and Mulgrave, who had accompanied him so
far in order to hunt the buffalo. Being desirous of encountering as many
of the adventurers of the wilderness as possible, these young noblemen had
determined on passing through the country of the Sioux to St. Peters on
the Mississippi; and they had provided themselves with guides for this
purpose. Lord Caledon succeeded in carrying his intentions into effect,
gaining golden opinions among the hunters, by his courage, skill, and
affability ; but Lord Mulgrave, from indisposition, retraced his steps, first
to Fort Garry and thence to Sault Sainte Marie—that connecting link
between the canoe and the steam-boat.
Quitting Fort Garry under a salute of great guns, Sir George Simpson,
escorted by Mr, Rowand, in charge of the establishments upon the Sas-
katchewan, and a well-appointed party of eighteen or twenty men defiled
into the open plains with an horizon before them as well defined as that of
the blue ocean. The uniformity of the prairie, was, however, broken
in parts by river courses, small lakes, and swamps, and after a journey of
thirteen days, during which they travelled six hundred miles, and suffering
a good deal from the mosquitoes, which literally mottled the poor horses
with black patches of great size, they arrived at Carlton, the lowest of
the company’s establishments on the Saskatchewan, where they rested
for two nights, and changed horses. Passing Fort Pitt the party
reached Edmonton, the highest of the company’s stations upon the
Saskatchewan after a week’s travelling. On the way they passed a
Q 2


large body of emigrants travelling towards the Columbia. The com-
pany’s forts are defended by wooden stockades, or high pickets, with bas-
tions, battlemented gateways, &c., and some, as Edmonton, for example,
have the additional advantage of a good position, crowning almost per-
pendicular parts of the river’s bank. They have also large gardens iu
the vicinity, which produce abundance of potatoes and other vegetables,
but wheat seldom succeeds.
In the same districts, although the red deer and moose are becoming
scarce, the buffalo appears to multiply in spite of persecution. These
animals appear to be incredibly numerous. Sir George relates, that in
the year 1829 he saw as many as ten thousand of their putrid carcasses lying
mired in a single ford of the Saskatchewan, and contaminating the air
for many miles round. Besides maintaining the company’s people, and
ail the natives, during the whole year, “ in an apparently wasteful and ex-
travagant manner,” the animal in question is made up in these districts
into pemmican and dried meat for the general supply of the company’s
service. So wasteful of life are the hunters, that in one day’s journey on
the Saskatchewan, we find an account of fifty-five buffaloes killed merely
for the sake of their tongues , the carcasses being abandoned to the
wolves.
The fur-bearing animals are equally numerous, and about three
hundred Indians, Saulteaux, Crees, and Assinibolnes are attached to
the company’s establishments as hunters. But while at times both
whites and natives are living in wasteful abundance on venison, buffalo,
fish, and game of all kinds, at others they are reduced to the last degree of
hunger. “ Throughout this country,” says Sir George, “ every thing is
in extremes —unparalleled cold and excessive heat; long droughts
balanced by drenching rain and destructive hail.” The country, however,
appears, from scattered statements, to be very fertile ; in one place we
read of whole plains covered with luxuriant crops of vetches, and wild
peas; and wild strawberries, raspberries of large size and fine flavour,
service berries and other fruits abound in the season. The ravages of the
Blackfeet Indians are the most serious inconvenience in these remote
settlements.
111. —THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.
Beyond Edmonton the country is impracticable for vehicles, so that the
luggage had to be conveyed on horseback, and wardrobes, &c., were iu
consequence all reduced to the smallest possible compass. The first ob-
ject of interest met with was,Gull Lake, a fine sheet of transparent water of
about twenty miles in length, by five or six in width, and surrounded by
high hills. While quietly forcing their way through the bushes beyond
Red Deer’s River, the party being very much scattered, they suddenly
encountered a small band of Sarcees, the boldest of all the tribes that in-
habit the plains. Luckily, however, with the help of a little tobacco and
ammunition, the interview went off peaceably. The next day’s journey
was distinguished by the capture of a whole flock of geese. Every hour
of their march began now to mark an ascent to a higher level. The first
pines had made their appearance at Fort Pitt; they now began to increase
rapidly in number, while other kinds of trees disappeared in proportion.
The willow and the poplar w r ere the last to dispute the sway with this ever-
green child of the mountains. But even they soon gave up the contest - ,,


and left the field to the black, straight naked stems of the pines, which, in
these regions, shoot up in an unbroken height of eighty or a hundred
feet.
These pathless forests amid which the horses were continually going
astray, alternated with swamps in which the animals sank up to their
girths, and which were almost impracticable in this the driest month of
the year. Before them, mountain rose above mountain into white peaks
that seemed like clouds on the horizon, while at their feet lay valleys of
stony and repelling aspect, hemmed in by rugged and almost perpendi-
cular crags, and surrounded by amphitheatres of cold and bare peaks.
The path which they were following was a track of the Assiniboines,
carried for the sake of concealment through the thickest forests. They
were the first whites who had attempted this pass of the mountains.
Thick forests, broken rocks, defiles, and valleys formed the successive
features of travel, but the valleys frequently contained lakes, and open
glades, and meadow lands in their bosoms, and the beauty of the scenery
often compensated for the difficulties of the way. At one point from the
top of a peak that rose perpendicularly at least two thousand feet, there fell
a stream of water which, though of very considerable volume, looked like
a, thread of silver on the gray rock. They tried in vain to get within
shot of the numerous goats and sheep that were seen clambering and
leaping on the rocks.
A level isthmus scarcely fourteen paces in width, and situated amid
crags and peaks, on whose summit lay perpetual snow, formed the hinge,
as it were, between the western and eastern waters. Here they
filled their kettles for their lonely meal at once from the crystal sources
of the Columbia and the Saskatchewan, while those feeders of two oppo-
site oceans murmured over their beds of mossy stones as if bidding each
other a long farewell. Sir George Simpson did not, like Dr. Tschudi,
when on the crest or water-shed of the Andes, cheat the Pacific of a cup
full, to send it travelling to the Atlantic. The sources, although so
proximate, and springing as it were from the same snow wreaths, pre-
sented a remarkable difference of temperature, those of the Columbia
showing only 40 deg., while those of the Saskatchewan raised the mercury
to deg. It is to be regretted that the travellers were not provided
with mountain barometers, or did not even register the temperature of
the boiling point; but Sir George estimated the elevation at from seven
thousand to eight thousand feet above the level of the sea. At the
northerly pass of the Rocky Mountains, known as the Athabasca portage,
the road is little better than a succession of glaciers, while the relative
position of the opposite waters is such as to have few parallels on the
earth’s surface ; for a small lake, appropriately enough known as the
Committee’s Punch-bowl, sends it tribute, from one end to the Columbia,
and from the other to the M‘Kenzie rivers.
From this point, the road naturally began to descend, and from the
much greater proximity of the eastern slope of the mountains to the
Pacific than of the western to the Atlantic, the increase of temperature
is much more rapid on the eastern than on the western side, in fact, so
much so as to make itself felt at once. “We had not,” says Sir George,
“ descended half a mile before we felt a difference in the climate, and
the trees were also of fine growth.” In half a day’s march the rivulet
had become a river of fifty feet in width, and by the end of the ensuing


day’s march had swollen out into a hundred yards ; and the channel was
so deep, that the packs got soaked on the backs of the horses. The road
was often exceedingly difficult. At times it lay through thick and
tangled forests, where prostrate trees of large dimensions, piled and inter-
laced together, barricaded the track. At others it ran along the precipi-
tous banks of the river, or along the side of steep and stony glens, or
over the bed of a boiling torrent, through lonely, dark, desolate glens, or
over high hills of parched clay. Several accidents happened to the
horses, and sometimes not more than two miles were accomplished in
four hours.
At length they reached a large prairie, through which the river
winded a serpentine course, and at a point where the same river received a
tributary stream before expanding into two lakes; they found (as had been
anticipated from a rude hieroglyph discovered upon a tree and portray-
ing the fact) Berland, a guide, who had been deputed from the west side
of the mountains to meet the party with a fresh relay of horses. We
feel upon such an occurrence that the difficulties of the journey are really
over, but there were still many steep hills and bad roads to overcome
before they reached the navigable Pend’ d’Oreille.
The first natives they met with on the west side of the mountains
were the so-called Flat-bow Indians, and they are described as being
darker, with features less pleasing, and figures less erect than the Crees.
These were succeeded by the Kootonais Indians living upon the lake and
river of same name—“a miserable set of beings, small, decrepit, and
dirty.” At Grand Quete Lake they were still among the pine forests,
but following the river of same name they found themselves advancing
into a region of varied vegetation, and they soon came in for a large
choice of fruits, including raspberry, gooseberry, currants, and a variety
of fruits not familiar to our own country, but which surely ought to be
introduced. Crossing the Kootonais in canoes of a peculiar construction,
and ascending a steep mountain beyond, they reached the Kullespelm
Lake, where they found a flat-bottomed bateau waiting for them, and
capable of conveying all the travellers and their baggage, besides a crew
of five men ; the horses being sent on by land.
The next day they crossed the lake, and running down the Pend’
d’Oreille river, they reached their rendezvous by eight in the evening.
At this station they found an encampment of the Pend’ d’Oreille In-
dians preparing to hunt the buffalo. These Indians were handsomer in
appearance, and more stately in manner than any savages they had
as yet met with on the east side of the mountains. “ Their behaviour,”
Sir George says, “ was elegant and refined,” The Pend’ d’Oreilles, like
their neighbours, the Kootonais, are noted for the bravery with which they
defend themselves, and also for their attachment to the whites. One of
their great dietetic resources is the kammas, a kind of wild onion.
The journey from this last station to Fort Colvlle, presented few diffi-
culties, and was wound up with a gallop of fifty miles, at the end of
which a prairie of three or four miles in length, with the Columbia river
at one end, and a small lake in the centre, led the way to the now novel
scene of a large farm, with barns and stables, fields of wheat, maize and
potatoes, and herds of cattle grazing at will beyond the fences.


iv, THE OREGON TERRITORY.
Fort Colvile, by the road which our travellers had taken, was the first
station in the much talked-of Oregon territory. It is a wooden fort of
large size, enclosed with pickets and bastions, and standing about a mile
from the nearest point of the Columbia, and about two miles from the
Chaudiere Falls, where salmon are so abundant, that as many as a thou-
sand, some of them weighing upwards of forty pounds, have been caught
in one day with a single basket. The soil around Colvile is sandy ; and
the climate is so hot and dry, that a fine season there means a wet one.
Notwithstanding these disadvantages, the farm is remarkably productive.
Cattle thrive well, and the crops of wheat, potatoes, maize, &c., are
abundant. The Chaudiere Indians of the neighbourhood have also com-
menced agricultural operations.
The stream of the great Columbia river now lay before our travellers,
and a canoe worked by sixteen oars was placed at their disposal below
the Chaudiere Falls. At first the banks of the river were dull and
monotonous, consisting of a succession of sandy flats, with very scanty
herbage, and still less wood, and which were varied in a few places by
rocky hills. The average breadth of the river was about three-fourths
of a mile, though here and there was a narrow channel, between pre-
cipitous rocks, down which the canoe flew in perfect safety. There were
encampments of natives along the banks, and large bands of horses,
which, notwithstanding the dryness of the pasture, were in excellent con-
dition. The company’s post at Okanagan was garrisoned by half-a-dozen
women and children; the person in charge being absent at the farm, so
they only remained long enough to rifle some pans of milk.
As they continued to descend the river, the sun became so powerful
that three baths a day were scarcely sufficient to make the heat endurable.
At the Isle des Pierres Rapids, the river rushed between lofty rocks of
basalt, while the channel was obstructed by rocky islets. Beyond this
the Snake River, as Sir George terms the stream known to Americans
as the Lewis and Clarke’s River, joins its waters to the Columbia,
which it equals in magnitude, and below this, at the junction of the
Wallawalla, is another company’s station. This fort is in a most dismal
situation, being surrounded by a sandy desert, which produces nothing
but wormwood. The buildings have thus to be constructed of drift-wood,
about which many a skirmish has taken place with the Indians, as
anxious to secure the treasure as the whites. There was an American
missionary at this station, who had been two years on the Columbia with
his family, and who was grievously disappointed with the country —“ a
feeling,” says Sir George, “ common, in his opinion, to most of his fellow-
citizens.”
Below Wallawalla, as the whites become more numerous, so the Indians
become more troublesome ; and the party had to change their craft, and
attach to themselves an interpreter. The banks of the river were at first
tenanted by the Snake Indians, described as “ a poor, miserable, degraded
race.” For the most part the sandy plains had also given way to bold
cliff's and noble bays, and amphitheatres of basaltic rocks. T-he Snake
Indians were soon succeeded by the Cayuses, who possess horses, cattle,
slaves, and other sources of wealth. A chief of these Cayuses, who re-
joiced in the name of Five Crows, and in the possession of considerable


wealth, added the recommendation of being young, tall, and handsome.
He had lately raised his eyes to a beautiful and amiable girl, daughter of
one of the company’s officers.
After enduring the flames of love for some time in silence, he determined
to make his proposals in proper form ; and accordingly, having first dismissed
his five wives, he presented himself and a band of retainers, master and men,
all as gay as butterflies, at the gates of the fort, where the father of his “ ladye
love” resided. To his dismay, and perhaps also to his astonishment, his suit
was rejected; and, in the first transports of his anguish, he so far forgot him-
self as to marry one of his female slaves, to the great scandal of his family and
his tribe.
The pleasantness of river navigation was somewhat disturbed in the
onward progress, by treacherous Indians on the banks, and rapids and
whirling torrents, as Les Chutes, Les Petites Dalles, Les Dalles, or the
Long Narrows, generally formed of volcanic rocks. In the Long Nar-
rows one of the company’s boats was once sucked stern foremost into a
whirlpool; and in a single instant a tide, that told no tales, was foaming
over the spot, where eleven men, a woman, and a child, had found a
watery grave. Seals ascend the Columbia as far as these rapids in great
numbers in pursuit of salmon.
Below these rapids was the American mission of Whasplcum, which
contained two comfortable houses, in which five families resided. The
missionaries said that they were as happy in their new home as they could
expect to be in such a wilderness, admitting, at the same time, that they
had not found the land of promise which they came to seek. They were
not, however, without occupation, for twenty-one rattle-snakes, reptiles
delighting in rocks and sands, had been killed at the mission within the
last three months.
The banks of the river were now covered with forests not only extend-
ing to the water’s edge, but also into the stream ; a phenomenon con-
cerning the cause of which Sir George says doctors differ. There are,
however, still some small cascades and bold and lofty rocks at the highest
point reached by the tide, after which the navigation is open to Van-
couver, whither the party arrived after having crossed the continent of
North America at its widest part, by a route of about five thousand miles,
in the space of twelve w'eeks of actual travelling.
At Vancouver, which is the company’s grand depot, and is situated
ninety miles from the sea, Sir George Simpson found two vessels of the
United States exploring squadron, under the command of Commodore
Wilkes. Sir George, however, did not rest himself at Vancouver, but
started almost at once in a large and heavy bateau, with a crew of ten
men, first for the company’s grazing-lands and farms, which, strange to say,
are on the Willamette, or American side of the Columbia. Thence they
again passed into the Columbia and up the Cowlitz, a northerly feeder,
upon whose banks, Sir George says, there was a large population of
whites in 1828, but since which time the intermittent fever, which com-
menced its ravages in the following year, has left but few to mourn for
those who fell. Upon this river the party was increased by the addition
of a native canoe and its complement of Chinook Indians,
Between the Cowlitz River and Puget Sound, a distance of about sixty
miles, the country, which is watered by many streams and lakes, consists of an
alternation of plains and belts of wood. It is well adapted both for tillage and


for pasturage, possessing a genial climate, a good soil, excellent timber, water
power, natural clearings, and a seaport, and that, too, within reach of more
than one advantageous market. When this tract was explored a few years
ago, the Company established two farms upon it, which were subsequently
transferred to the Puget Sound Agricultural Association, formed under the
Company’s auspices, with the view of producing wheat, wool, hides, and tallow,
for exportation.
On the Cowlitz Farm there were already about a thousand acres of land
under the plough, besides a large dairy, an extensive park for horses, &c.; and
the crops of this season had amounted to eight or nine thousand bushels of
wheat, four thousand of oats, with due proportions of barley, potatoes, &c.
The other farm was on the shores of Puget Sound ; and, as the soil was found
to be better fitted for pasturage than tillage, it had been appropriated almost
exclusively to the flocks and herds; so that now, with only two hundred acres
of cultivated land, it possessed six thousand sheep, twelve hundred cattle, be-
sides horses, pigs, &c.
In addition to these two farms, there was a Catholic mission, with about a
hundred and sixty acres under the plough. There were also a few Canadian
settlers, retired servants of the Hudson’s Bay Company; and it was to this
same neighbourhood that the emigrants from Red River were wending their
way.
Are we to understand that these lands, brought under cultivation by
the sweat of our countrymen, and these extensive grazing districts covered
with our flocks and herds, have, by the late treaty, been ceded to America?
For certainly they are southward of the line drawn by diplomacy, although
up to the present moment held by British subjects/.
Sir George Simpson sailed from Fort Nisqually in the Beaver steamer.
Captain M‘Neill, a steam vessel kept by the company for the purposes of
the coast-trade, which it naturally facilitates to a wonderful degree. Off
Frazer’s river, which falls into the Gulf of Georgia, in lat. 49°. Sir
George says, that from personal exploration, that river, proposed by some
as a boundary-line, is hardly practicable for any craft, and would be of
little or no use to England as a channel of communication with the in-
terior. If this parallel, he further adds, should, as proposed by the
Americans, become the international boundary on the west side, Britain
would not only be surrendering all the territory of any agricultural value,
but would also virtually cut off the interior and the coast of her own
shore from each other.
In another part of his work, Sir George Simpson discusses at length that
vexed question to which we have before given a mature consideration in the
Neio Monthly. It is gratifying to find the views of so high an authority,
correspond with those at which we ourselves had arrived. There is no
doubt that the river Columbia was discovered by Heceta, a Spaniard, in
1775. The claim advanced by the Americans founded upon Gray’s first na-
vigation of this river after Meare’s and Vancouver’s exploration of the coast,
is exactly as if, after the coasts and shores of Great Britain had been dis-
covered and explored by the Romans, a sea-king of the north should,
from having afterwards first sailed up the Thames, lay a claim to the
whole country. Astoria and the other ports planted on the Colombia,
not by the United States government, but by individuals, were volun-
tarily abandoned during the war, and even the new settlement on the
Willamette, in which Americans have now begun to plant themselves,
under the high-sounding title of “ Oregon city,” Sir George says is a
colony originally formed by British subjects, acting under British au-


thority; its nationality being- as little affected as that of Canada, in the
eye of public law, by American immigration.
“ The United States,” says Sir George, in conclusion, “ will never possess
more than a nominal jurisdiction, nor long possess even that, on the west side
of the Rocky Mountains ; and supposing the country to be divided to-morrow,
to the entire satisfaction of the most unscrupulous patriot in the Union, I
challenge Congress to bring my prediction and its own power to the test, by
imposing the Atlantic tariff on the ports of the Pacific.”
After visiting the Company’s forts or stations M‘Loughlin, Simpson,
and Stikine, the latter only leased from the Russians, and the Russian
station of Sitka, to which he after-wards returned, Sir George took his
way back by what he justly designates as the most extraordinary course
of inland navigation in the world ; viz., Fuca’s and Vancouver’s straits,
to the Columbia, where he found the company’s barques, Columbia and
Cowlitz , beating their way up the stream.
Upon this occasion Sir George visited “ Oregon city.” It is situated
at a point where the presence of falls impedes the further navigation of the
Willamette, and extends from the falls for a considerable distance up
both banks of the stream, containing about a hundred and twenty farms,
varying in size from a hundred to five hundred acres each. This settle-
ment was formed about ten years ago, under the auspices of the Hudson’s
Bay Company, as a retreat for its retiring servants. Of these original
settlers, there are now sixty with their half-breed families, while, on the
other hand, there are sixty-five new settlers from the United States, most
of them with wives and children. The colony, although as yet de-
pendent upon the Hudson’s Bay Company, will, Sir George thinks, rise
rapidly in importance, and soon be enabled to supply a large quantity of
wheat, hides, and tallow, for exportation to a foreign market.
V. —CALIFORNIA.
Towards the close of November, Sir George Simpson embarked in
the Cowlitz, for California, the Sandwich Islands, and Sitka. As the
ship glided down the river, the waters were observed to be absolutely
covered with swans, pelicans, geese, cranes, cooris, ducks, cormorants,
eagles, gulls, &c. The barque reached Fort George, formerly Astoria,
on the 3rd of December, but, owing to contrary winds, it was not able to
cross the bar till the 21st, after which, spanking progress was made
along the coast. Cape Mendocino—a spur of the Rocky Mountains—
which separates two regions as different as Scotland and Spain, was
doubled in a gale, and passing Bodega and Ross, a harbour and fort of
the Russo-American Company in California, they at length arrived, on
the 28th off the port of San Francisco, one of the finest harbours in
the world.
The entrance, just narrow enough for purposes of military defence, is
commanded by a fort now dismantled and dilapidated, and beyond this is
a square of huts, distinguished by the lofty title of the Presidio of San
Francisco, which Is tenanted by a commandant and as many soldiers as
might, if all told, muster the rank and file of a corporal’s party. In
addition to this presidio there are three others in the upper province,
situated respectively at Monterey, Santa Barbara, and San Diego. But
their principal occupation is gone. Founded by the Jesuits and Fran-
ciscans as the head-quarters of the carnal weapons with which to encounter


the heathen; when the missions were spoiled and dissolved, the presidios
fell into decay.
The inland sea of San Francisco comprises a number of bays, inlets,
and basins, which it is needless to enumerate, but which present one
of the most attractive, and yet most neglected, scenes imaginable. The
sea is sheltered from every wind by an amphitheatre of green hills, and
the open plains are dotted by the habitations of men ; but the Californians
have nothing except a kind of raft or basket to navigate these matchless
waters, which are also as little used by the world at large as by the
present occupiers of the country.
At the time of Governor Simpson’s visit, there were in the deep bay,
called Whaler’s Harbour, the government schooner, California, and the
Russian brig, Constantine , bound to Sitka with the last of the tenants of
Bodega and Ross. On the right, just opposite the ground occupied
by the above-mentioned ships, stretched the pretty little bay of Yerba
Buena, whose shores, says Sir George, are doubtless destined, under
better auspices, to be the site of a flourishing town, though at present
they contain only eight or nine houses in addition to the Hudson Bay
Company’s establishment. Here the Cowlitz dropped anchor in the
neighbourhood of the American barque Alert, and brig Bolivar, the
British barque, Index, and the Mexican brig, Catalina, and after firing a
salute, they went ashore.
“ The Californians of San Francisco,” says Sir George Simpson, “ number
between two thousand and two thousand five hundred, about seven hundred
belonging to the village or pueblo of San Jose de Guadaloupe, and the remainder
occupying about thirty farms of various sizes generally subdivided among the
families of the respective holders.
“ On the score of industry, the good folks, as also their brethren of the other
ports, are perhaps the least promising colonists of a new country in the world,
being, in this respect, decidedly inferior to what the savages themselves had be-
come under the training of the priests : so that the spoliation of the missions,
excepting that it has opened the province to general enterprise, has directly
tended to nip civilisation in the bud.”
The result of this state of things is, that the trade of the bay, and, in
fact, of the whole province, is entirely in the hands of foreigners, who are
almost exclusively of the English race.
Of that race, however, the Americans are considerably more numerous than
the British —the former naturally flocking in greater force to neutral ground,
such as this country and the Sandwich Islands, while the latter find a variety
of advantageous outlets in their own national colonies. At present, the fo-
reigners are to the Californians in number as one to ten, being about six hun-
dred out of about seven thousand ; while, by their monopoly of trade, and their
command of resources, to say nothing of their superior energy and intelligence,
they already possess vastly more than their numerical proportion of political
influence ; and their position in this respect excites the less jealousy, inasmuch
as most of them have been induced, either by a desire of shaking oft legal inca-
pacities, or by less interested motives, to profess the Catholic religion, and to
marry into provincial families.
It is needless now to enter upon the circumstances which have con-
spired to render the Spanish Americans so very peculiarly indolent and
corrupt. The population itself was in great part draw r n from the most
indolent variety of an indolent race, and the objects of colonization were
not of the kind to awaken energy, or to uphold independence of character.


With regard to San Francisco, the superabundance of cattle and horses
has further assisted in corrupting a naturally indolent population, by the
readiness with which idleness can find both subsistence and recreation.
The income of the missions derived from these sources were enormous.
San Jose alone possessed 30,000 head of cattle, and San Gabriel is said
to have owned twice that number. So magnificent a country, whether
we regard its internal resources or its commercial capabilities, cannot be
long thrown away upon its present possessors—on men who do not avail
themselves of their natural advantages to a much higher degree than the
savages whom they have displaced, and who are likely to become less and
less energetic from generation to generation, and from year to year. The
rapid progress of events in Mexico lends at the present moment the very
highest importance to Sir George Simpson’s views upon the future of
California ; and although it may be now too late to adopt the measures so
patriotically recommended by the governor of so large a territory in North
America, and Britain may have to fall back upon the Sandwich Islands
as a more isolated and defensible check upon an aggressive republic, still
it is but due to give to these views all possible publicity, so that if there
has been any neglect of the interests of a great commercial and colonising
nation, that neglect may at least be made known.
“ The only doubt,” says Sir George, “ is, whether California is to fall to
the British or to the Americans. The latter, whether one looks at their
seizure of Texas, oral their pretensions to the Oregon, have clearly the advan-
tage in an unscrupulous choice of weapons, being altogether too ready to
forget that the fulfilment of even the most palpable decrees of Providence will
not justify in man the employment of unrighteous means. But, though Eng-
land cannot afford to acquire additional territory by such measures as would
shake that reputation for integrity on which her empire is founded, yet she has
one road open to her by which she may bring California under her sway, with-
out either force or fraud, without either the violence of marauders, or the effron-
tery of diplomatists.
“ Mexico owes to British subjects a public debt of more than fifty millions of
dollars, which, though never formally repudiated by her, is a burden far too
heavy for her to bear. By assuming a share of this debt, on consideration of
being put in possession of California, England would at once relieve the republic
and benefit the creditors, while the Californians themselves would eagerly
prefer this course to the only other possible alternative of seeing their country
follow in the wake of the Texas.
“ In fact, under the treaty of 1790, which has been already cited, England is
even now entitled to colonise a considerable portion of the upper province. As
America has renounced every thing that lies below the parallel of forty-two
degrees, England and Mexico, as the successor of Spain, are regulated in their
reciprocal relations to the southward by the stipulations of the international
compact aforesaid; so that England, without being questioned by any one, may
immediately occupy the coast from the forty-second parallel of latitude down
to the due range of the settlement of San Francisco.
“ Now, the due range of a settlement varies in direction according to its posi-
tion. If unconnected, like Monterey, with the interior, a settlement must be
presumed to be likely to spread along the coast; while if situated, like San
Francisco, at the outlet of many navigable waters, it will, in all probability,
creep along the shores of its lakes and rivers. Neither on principle, therefore,
nor in fact, does San Francisco extend many miles to the northward of the
mouth of its harbour ; so that, to take an instance, England may to-morrow
justifiably occupy the valley of Santa Rosa, which opens into Bodega Bay.”


VI. —THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
Our travellers, after a brief visit to Monterey, took their way across
the Pacific, from the bosom of which they descried the snowy summit of
Mouna Kea, which falls very little short in point of elevation to the stu-
pendous Mount Elias on the north-west coast of America, at a distance
of a hundred and ten miles ; and soon after the Cowlitz was piloted into
the coral harbour of Honolulu by “ Old Adams,” an English tar who has
made the Sandwich Islands his home for some thirty or forty years.
Sir George Simpson remained long enough at this most interesting
and remarkable group of coral and volcanic islands, to give a com-
prehensive account of the actual condition both of the Hawaiian nation
and of the foreign settlers, and of the produce and commerce of the
country ; but we can only afford to select a few of the most striking
generalities from the facts collected by his industry. Sir George traces
all the Polynesian nations to a common source —a point or points
between the southern extremity of Malacca and the northern limits of
Japan—but as he truly remarks, the origin of this nation has in it less to
interest us, than that sentence of death which seems to be hanging over
it. The first census of the population of the Sandwich Islands was taken
in 1832, and gave a total native population for the whole group of
130,313, a second taken in 1836 gave no more than 108,579, and that
was reduced at a third, taken in 1840, to 80,000 ! As this is found to
be everywhere the inevitable result of the contact of so-called civili-
sation, with its forced labour, its alcoholic drinks, its diseases and vices,
with savage life ; it is needless to enter into the details of the phenomenon
as more particularly connected with the Sandwich Islands, where internal
wars and an enormous demand for sandal wood, assisted the ordinary
causes of depopulation.
1 “ Viewed, therefore,” says Sir George, “by itself, civilisation has been, and
still continues to be, a cankerworm, to prey on the population of the group.
When a superior race, without fraud or violence, plants its thousands where
an inferior race could hardly maintain its hundreds, nothing but the mere
mawkishness of sentimentality could attempt to avert or retard the change;
but there is something truly deplorable in the reflection that, in this archipe-
lago, civilisation is sweeping the aborigines from the land of their fathers,
without placing in their stead others better than themselves.”
The Hawaiian language is no longer the exclusive language of the
natives. English is daily becoming more familiar to them, and is, in fact,
destined ere long, to be the vernacular tongue of the group. The prin-
cipal food of the islanders is the root of the kalo (arum esculentum ) and
pork, but the islands grow in perfection a great number of vegetables
and fruits, and the group in general is supplied in an eminent degree
with nearly all the luxuries of every clime.
At the feasts of the foreign residents, champagne and claret flow with lavish
hospitality, while the lighter and rarer viands of every name are brought direct
from the richest countries on the globe—from England and France, from the
United States and Mexico, from Peru and Chili, from India and China. In
fact, such sumptuousness of living as we experienced, day after day, from our
numerous friends, is perhaps not to be found anywhere out of London, and
even there is seldom found in all its unadulterated genuineness.
While England, France, and America, have, by recognising the entire


and absolute sovereignty of the Hawaiian government, secured the Sand-
wich Islands as effectually as any other community against foreign inter-
ference, they still are, from their position, and the inexperience of their
rulers, peculiarly liable to come into collision with the very powers that
have guaranteed their independence.
Their position alone with respect to the trading interests of England and
America will render neutrality extremely difficult, if not altogether impossible,
in the melancholy event of a war between those kindred states ; while any in-
fringement of the law of nations in this respect will be sure to lead to the oc-
cupation of the group on the part of England, either as the avenger of her own
wrongs, or as a protector against the vengeance of America. But, unlike this
occasional danger, the inexperience of their rulers is a rock on which they may
be dashed at any time with fatal effect; and, within these few short years, the
cause in question has placed the native government at the mercy both of
France and of England.
In giving up all claims over the Sandwich Islands, France surrendered
nothing but her thirst for all kinds and degrees of glory: America had
acquired something like an equitable title by her instrumentality in bring-
ing the Archipelago within the pale of civilisation and Christianity ; and
England, to say nothing of an unvarying course of kindness and genero-
sity, enjoyed all the legal rights, that could be based on a complete disco-
very and on repeated cessions.
The American missionary system appears very often to represent under
a different aspect, that of the Spanish Jesuits of old. It is, indeed, in
many points, precisely the same thing over again. “ The protestantism
of the Sandwich Islands,” says Sir George, “ assimilates, at least in kind,
if not in degree, to that very Catholicism of California, which the mis-
sionaries of the group are so ready to decry—the proselytes, in either
case, being subject to a tutelage, which does not even profess to train
them to think for themselves.”
But it is not only here that the resemblance holds good. The American
missionary is like a Jesuit, very often a political propagandist. Hear what
Sir George tells us as to the facts.
Soon after their arrival from Boston, the missionaries notoriously became, so
far at least as new legislation was concerned, the real rulers of the group. For
many years, they attempted, hopelessly enough, to shroud their political supre-
macy under a very transparent veil of special pleading, partly because most of
their innovations were offensive to nearly all the foreign residents, and partly
because their whole proceedings not only set at defiance their special instruc-
tions against meddling with affairs of state, but also evaded the fundamental
rule of their craft, that Christianity ought, in order of time, to take precedence
of civilisation. At length, however, the Rev. Mr. Richards happily modified
this system of indirect domination, by resigning his position as a missionary,
and standing forth as the avowed counsellor of the Hawaiian government.
The example of Mr. Richards was imitated, immediately after my depar-
ture, by Dr. Judd, who undertook the offices of treasurer and recorder, the
latter department having been subsequently resigned in favour of an American
lawyer, of the name of Ricord. Of the upright intentions and disinterested
motives of Dr. Judd and Mr. Richards, I am able, from my own personal
knowledge, to speak in high terms. Still, the fact that all the three are Ame-
ricans must excite the jealousy and suspicion of British subjects in general, and
must exercise all the prudence and caution of the British consul in particular.
VII. —ASIATIC RUSSIA.
As Sir George Simpson proceeded from the Sandwich Islands north-


wards to Sitka, the change of temperature became perceptible, not only
from day to day, but from hour to hour, and in twenty-two days they ex-
changed an inter-tropical climate for a heavy squall of snow, which
ushered the Cowlitz into Norfolk Sound, As they arrived at Sitka on
Saturday, April the 30th, according to the reckoning of the Cowlitz,
but on Sunday, the 18th of April, according to the Russians, the Russian
calendar was adopted, during Sir George’s five months’ uninterrupted
travel across that colossal empire, which, like Great Britain, literally girds
the globe, where either continent has the greatest breadth. Sir George
speaks highly of Governor Etholine’s endeavours to improve this chief
station of Russian America, but he still conveys a sufficient notion of the
difficulties to be overcome, when he says, that “ of all the dirty and
wretched places that he had ever seen, Sitka is pre-eminently the most
wretched and the most dirty.” Yet in this miserable spot a bishop of
the Greek church, and a whole body of ecclesiastics, are located in accord-
ance with that policy —too much neglected by Great Britain—which has
amalgamated so many uncongenial tribes into a compact people, by
means of one law, one language, and one faith.
Sir George sailed for New Archangel in the Russian ship, the Alex-
ander, on the 9th of May, after a farewell dinner contributed with the
sumptuousness and luxury which everywhere in Russia contrasts with the
poverty and misery of the lower classes. On the way they fell in with
an American whaler which had been out nineteen months, and had got
2,200 barrels of oil. The captain gloried in being a real “ teetotaller,”
notwithstanding which he went away from the A lexander with a tumbler
or two of port on board.
On the 23rd of June, after a voyage of forty-four days, and after avail-
ing themselves of every lane of open water in the floating ice, the Alex-
ander reached the port of Ochotsk —a collection of wretched buildings
standing on a shingly beach so low and flat as not to be distinguishable
from the adjacent waters, and embedded in the almost perpetual fogs of
an hyperborean climate.
Ochotsk having been supplanted as a penal colony by the mines, now
numbers only eight hundred souls.
A more dreary scene can scarcely be conceived. Not a tree, and hardly
even a green blade, is to be seen within miles of the town ; and in the midst
of the disorderly collection of huts is a stagnant marsh, which, unless when
frozen, must be a nursery of all sorts of malaria and pestilence. The climate
is at least on a par with the soil. Summer consists of three months of damp
and chilly weather, during great part of which the snow still covers the hills,
and the ice chokes the harbour; and this is succeeded by nine months of
dreary winter, in which the cold, unlike that of more inland spots, is as raw as
it is intense.
In such a climate, spontaneous vegetation is hardly to be expected, and
hence the principal food of the inhabitants is fish, which is extremely
abundant. All other supplies for the table are brought across Asiatic
Russia, and are ruinously extravagant. Scurvy rages frightfully, and the
only remedy is a kind of wild onion or garlick. The buildings are of
wood, and most of them are in a state of decay. The town is, indeed, a
mere place of transit between Yakutsk on the one hand, and Kamtschatka
and Russian America on the other. Yet being the only town within the
compass of a territorial space of two or three European kingdoms, the


inhabitants have a high sense of their own dignity, and out of eight hun-
dred souls there are, including judges and clerks of the court, no fewer
than forty limbs of the law. One of the judges, Fish by name, was born
in St. Petersburg of English parents, but like the rest, he has learnt the
inevitable Russian practice of tempering justice with self-interest. Of the
venality of the employes at Ochotsk, an idea can only be formed by
considering what is known to exist under the immediate shadow of the
Tsar, multiplied by the distance of the whole of the Asiatic continent.
Upon this subject Sir George Simpson makes the very sensible remark,
that the head of an extensive despotism is always peculiarly liable to be
deceived by his subordinate functionaries. Official knaves always rely
on the proverbial consolation, that the emperor is far off, and they calcu-
late on the interested sympathy of nearly all those who may be occupying
the long ladder of communication between his majesty and themselves.
Horses and guides were procured at Ochotsk, from the Yakuti, who
were so inclined to drive hard bargains that, to bring matters to a final
understanding they had to be marched by a party of Cossacks before
Governor Golovin. The journey was then commenced by a ride along
the sea-shore, whence they struck into forests of pine, larch, willows,
and alder, with abundance of swamp tea, such as grows in Labrador
and many parts of the Hudson’s Bay territories. The Yakuti, although
corrupted by constant punishment, were really good guides and cheerful
creatures, turning every incident into a rude melody to beguile their own
toil and that of their cattle. In the conveyance of large caravans of
goods, the property is left entirely under their charge, and they are
known to be careful, faithful, and honest, in the discharge of their duty.
They are, however, extremely superstitious, and have a greater dread of
the elves and spirits who dwell in their interminable forests than even
of the Cossacks, and as every locality has its own elf, the Yakuti, when on
a journey, have no respite, soothing by various offerings of horse-hair,
and other matters, one object of terror after another, and only multiply-
ing their tormentors as they increase their speed.
The road lay up the course of the Ochota, a river of which the enter-
prising and eccentric Cochrane said, “ Byron swam the Hellespont, and
John Cochrane the Ochota,” and they had to ford it sometimes as many
as fourteen times a day. Many villages of Yakuti were passed ; the
people are described as very industrious, young and old, male and female,
always being occupied with some employment. They were, moreover,
cleanly and hospitable. The hills, although it was now midsummer,
were still covered with snow, and the atmosphere was very cold. On the
third day they saw a huge she-bear and her cub making off at a round
trot. Bears are both numerous and fierce in the Yakuti country, and
often kill the horses of travellers.
As they proceeded, the country became more fertile, there was no want,
of flowering plants, and the forests were enlivened by the warbling of
birds, which was particularly grateful to Governor Simpson, who for
twenty years of his life had been accustomed to the death-like silence of
the American woods. A plant grew in this neighbourhood which intoxi-
cates horses, and often proves fatal to them. Numerous caravans of
goods and herds of cattle were met with on their way to Ochotsk. The
encampments along the roadside were also numerous and good, and to


one who had just passed the Rocky Mountains the road itself appeared
very passable when not absolutely running in the bed of a river.
Un the fifth day they passed Clss Rule or Spine Lake, which, like the
Committee’s Punch Bowl, pours its waters on one side to the sea of
Ochotsk, and on the other to the Polar Ocean. The country around was
studded with large fields of perpetual snow and ice. Beyond this, at the
ferry of the Udoma, was a small station, where the party were hospitably
received. The next day they passed more glaciers, amid a scenery
otherwise picturesque enough, and the road was absolutely alive with
caravans and travellers, all taking advantage of the fine season to pro-
ceed to Ochotsk with goods, provisions, and cattle. Their course lay
next along the bed of the Nalivnoi, in the valley of which were
numerous glaciers, the largest, known as the Capitanskala Sascha, being
eight or ten miles in circumference. The glare of the sun s rays in tra-
versing these fields of ice was most painful. This was succeeded by a'
country of pine, poplar, and willow, and the latter appeared to vegetate
where the roots were buried in perpetual frost. On the Yagetlog, or long-
river, which they reached the next day, the glaciers were as frequent and
as troublesome as ever. The Yakutis estimate distances by the time
necessary to boil a kettle, which, as this varies according to the altitude,
must be a very uncertain method of computation. They say such a
place is so many kettles off, or only part of a kettle. That most horrible
of all annoyances, musquitoes, were beyond any thing tormenting.
On the eleventh day, they passed the crest of the Nanukau with its
field of ice, which contrasted strangely with the sultriness of the weather.
After this the road began to improve. The scenery at the same time
lost its alpine character, the mountains flattening down to hills, the tor-
rents sobering into rivers, and the roads becoming level, while the land-
scape was rendered more cheerful by shrubs and flowers, among w’hich the
wild rhubarb was particularly plentiful. Hares, rabbits, and partridges
were also abundant.
The difficulties of the road were, however, merely altered in form, rude
rocks and forests being exchanged for morasses, bridged with corduroy, so
full of gaps as to be'quite as dangerous, and nearly as impracticable, as the
morass itself. At the Aldan river, which is three-quarters of a mile in
width, is a small settlement with, as usual, a guard of Cossacks in uniform.
After partaking of a repast of five different kinds of fish, Sir George gal-
loped to the Anga (seventy-eight versts) by supper time, and the next
day achieved eighty- one versts more through a country described as ex-
hibiting on all sides signs of civilisation and comfort. The landscape
varied by copses of wood, lakes teeming -with wild-fowl and meadows
covered with countless herds, the whole subdivided into separate farms.
The country, indeed, between the Aldan and the Lena, appeared to have
once consisted almost entirely of a chain of lakes.
At length, on the seventeenth day, after a toilsome progress of eight
hundred and eighty miles over rock and ice, through forest and morass,
and across rivers and torrents, the spires and cupolas of Yakutsk announced
the presence of a large town with all the signs of civilised life, and that
upon the banks of one of the grandest rivers in the world, for the Lena is
even here, at a distance of twelve or thirteen thousand versts from the sea,
five or six miles wide.
June. — vol. lxxz. no. cccxviii.


Yakutsk, "the capital of the district of the same name, contains
about four hundred dwelling's, laid out into wide streets and spacious
squares. Of public buildings, there are seven churches, a monastery,
a hospital, a barrack, and the ruins of an old Ostrog or fort. The town
is situated on an extensive plain, once, probably, the bed of the Lena, and
hence the surrounding country is flat and uninteresting. The climate is
hyperborean, the heat of summer not sufficing to dissipate the effects of
winter to a depth of more than two or three feet. In consequence of
which the cellars remain in a frozen state during the whole year, and
the wells send up newly-formed ice in midsummer. With such a climate
and such a soil agriculture is out of the question. Rye alone ripens
occasionally. Yakutsk is, however, not merely a town of transport, ad-
mirably situated for the purpose, and receiving its supplies from the Upper
Lena, but it is also the emporium of the ivory and the fur trade of eastern
Siberia. These are, as usual in Russia, sold at an annual fair.
Sir George Simpson was received with the utmost kindness and hospi-
tality by the authorities of Yakutsk. Russian profusion and prodigality
were taxed to do him honour. The Yakut! beat the Muscovites and all
the world in gluttony. Sir George saw two men eat thirty-six pounds of
boiled beef, and eighteen pounds of melted butter at a meal. After such
repasts, the Yakut! remain for three or four days prostrate and in a state
of stupor, neither eating nor drinking, being rolled about occasionally
to promote digestion.
Ai Bestach, a sort of post on the river which saves a tedious winding,
Sir George took to the Lena in a tolerably comfortable boat, with another
in tow for the indispensable Cossack and the servants. The boats being
towed against the current by horses, sometimes supplanted by boys or
even women. A journey of two thousand five hundred versts on the
broad, shallow, sluggish Lena, cramped up in a boat, tormented by mus-
quitoes and fevered with heat, does not present a pleasing subject to dwell
upon. The fish of the river are most deserving of mention. The
yelma or white salmon is highest in repute; next comes the stirlitz, a kind
of sturgeon; and then the titemay, a kind of salmon trout.
On the sixth day the boats arrived at Olekminsk, a small town of
about fifty houses with a mixed population of 3630 Yakuti, 520 Tungusi,
and 630 Muscovites. The climate was now sufficiently good for potatoes,
rye, oats, and Himalayan wheat. The sables of the Olekma, at the
mouth of which Olekminsk is situated, are universally admitted to be
the finest in the world ; the best skins are obtained towards the head of
the river in the Yablonnoi mountains. There was the same excessive eating
and drinking at this station as elsewhere.
In their onward progress, the Cossack had often to belabour the poor
creatures who towed the boats with a stick to get them to do their duty.
This sounds very disagreeably to Englishmen, who repudiate a system
necessarily had recourse to in Russia and in great part of the East. Sir
George says himself that he found, as Captain Cochrane had found before
him, that under the system of corporal chastisement the people had be-
come so degraded as hardly to appreciate the force of any other motive.
The tenth day brought the travellers to Yerblnsky, the first station in
the Irkutsk government. The river was now contracted to about half
a mile in width, and was studded with islands of pine, birch, and willow.


On the next day they passed the town of Vittlmsk, on the River Vittim,
renowned for its sables, and which flows from the Vittim steppe in the
Yablonnoi not far from the Chinese frontier. On the banks of the river
currants of various kinds were met with, as also cranberries, rasp-
berries, service-berries, strawberries, and choke-cherries. The travellers
had also regular supplies of mutton, fish, potatoes, eggs, honey, cream,
butter, &c.
At Fliimskaya they entered the country of the Tungusi, who are de-
scribed as being both physically and morally superior to the Yakuti;
active, well-made, and independent in their manners and sentiments.
Upon the banks of the river were large heaps of the cones of the stone
pine, which are crushed for food and for the oil, the latter being univer-
sally used by the Tungusi for salads and cookery. Nettles are also
artificially grown as greens. Beyond Kirensk, the second town on the
Lena in point of size and importance, agricultural settlements became
much more numerous.
On the Bth of August the tedious journey on the Lena was brought
to a close. Carriages, sent to meet the party by the Governor of Irkutsk,
were waiting near the mouth of the Uga, and they were whirled, jolted, and
thumped through the ancient town of Vercholensk, and thence by Kats-
chooga—the roads, the cattle, and the weather being as fine as the heart
could wish—to the Bratsky steppe, a magnificent prairie studded with
Burat settlements, while thousands of cattle, horses, goats, and sheep,
were grazing on the rich pasture all round as far as the eye could
reach.
Beyond this steppe was a village of political exiles of distinction, and
ascending a slight eminence they obtained their first view of the metro-
polis of Eastern Siberia, with its fifteen churches and their spires, its
convents, hospitals, and other public buildings congregated at the
junction of three rivers, the Angara, the Irkut, and the Oushakoffka.
The first favourable impression vanished, however, as they got nearer,
and they were disappointed at seeing so little bustle in the wide streets,
and so many edifices going to decay.
At Irkutsk, a handsome carriage with four magnificent grays, as also
a smaller vehicle and pair, were placed at Sir George’s disposal by the
governor, with postilion, footman, and bearded coachman all complete,
and several days were spent in calls and festivities. Most assuredly the
Russians are, from all concurrent testimonies, the most hospitable people
in the world. But when Sir George was about to make a lateral excur-
sion to Kiachta, he received a hurried note from the same governor
stating that, according to information just obtained by his excellency, the
Chinese, without assigning any reason, had suddenly interdicted all com-
munication with foreigners of every nation ! In fact, drink champagne
ad libitum , but do not spy into the secrets of the land. Instead of a
trip to the frontier of the “flowery land,” Sir George made an excursion
to Lake Baikal, the largest body of fresh water on the old continent.
Surrounded by lofty mountains, whose precipitous sides sink at once into
the bottomless waters, Sir George describes Lake Baikal as possessing
but few harbours or anchorages, and as being little better in regard to
traffic than a barren waste. What traffic does exist is connected partly
with the great mines of Nertshinsk and with the international emporium
b 2


of Kiachta. As both these must cross this upland sea, it is obvious
that both time and money would be economised by the introduction of
steam, an improvement which, according to the public prints, has been
effected since the visit of Sir George and his recommendations to that
effect.
Our travellers quitted Irkutsk on the 15th of August, by the regular
post road to Tobolsk. In consequence of severe rains the roads were
very bad, and it was not till the 20th that they reached Kansk in
the district of Yenissei, which has the reputation of being the worst
governed district in all Siberia. The villages, however, are described
as very numerous not only on tbe road, but as far back on either side'
as they could see, and the people all looked healthy, comfortable, and
happy.
Sir George speaks highly of the Russian criminal system.
“In fact,” he says, “ for reforming the criminal, in addition to the
punishment of the crime, Siberia is undoubtedly the best penitentiary in the
world. When not bad enough for the mines, each exile is provided with a lot
of ground, a house, a horse, two cows, and agricultural implements, and also,
for the first year, with provisions. For three years he pays no taxes whatever,
and for the next ten only half the full amount. To bring fear, as well as hope,
to operate in his favour, he clearly understands that his very first slip will send
him from his home and his family, to toil, as an outcast, in the mines. Thus
does the government bestow an almost parental care on all the less atrocious
criminals.”
No stay, beyond that of changing horses, was made at Krasnoyarsk,
the capital of Yenissei, where the usual number of public buildings, all of
wood, such as churches, hospitals, and barracks were perceived. Krasno-
yarsk is, however, the centre of those gold washings which find employ-
ment for many thousand of souls, and which threaten some day or other
to affect by their produce the currency of the civilised world. The pro-
vince of Yenessei had that year alone yielded five hundred poods of
gold.
From the Yenessei the travellers proceeded onwards to Atchinsk, where
a town of 2000 souls, and surrounding villages with five times the
number, have sprung up within the last twenty years owing to the at-
tractive occupation of hunting up the precious metals. In each town and
village along the great road, there was a wooden fort for locking up con-
victs on their journey. Three hours were spent in crossing the river
Kid, while cold, wet, sleepy, and unwell, Sir George thought this the
most miserable portion of his long journey. Even the next few days were
as uncomfortable as possible—weather and roads being bad, and there
being nothing to eat but black bread and sour milk, with most vexatious
delays at every station.
At length they reached Tomsk on the Tom, a handsome and flourish-
ing town with wide streets and brick buildings. Tomsk has a population
of 18,000 in summer, and 24,000 in winter, the extra 6000 being
occupied in gold hunting during the season. Either Sir George was
tired and out of spirits, or every thing went wrong at Tomsk. The
feeding was bad, and the Cossacks and Tatars were troublesome.
Passing the Barabinsky steppe and Kolyran, one of the most valuable
of the mining districts, they got on more briskly. The Cossack had


given out that Sir George was an ambassador from the Emperor of
China to the Tsar, and as the roads were excellent, the joke was enjoyed,
and they were whirled along at the rate of twelve or fifteen versts an
hour.
Thus they soon reached Omsk, the new metropolis of western Siberia,
described as situated at the confluence of the Om and the Irtish, in the
midst of a sandy plain, presenting no tree of larger size than a dwarf
willow. The town is strongly fortified, and it has been selected with a
view to the gradual subjugation of the Kirghiz, who occupy all the
country from this place to the Caspian on the one side and Khiva and
Bokhara on the other.
The distance from Omsk to Tobolsk, the former seat of government,
only occupied the travellers three nights and two days. The country
was flat and uninteresting, yet closely settled. The fine old city of
Tobolsk is celebrated in history as the seat of the great triumph of
Yamac Timofeeff over Kutchum Khan, the descendant of the terrible
Zinghis, and Sir George relished alike the beauty of the city and its
historical associations. Tobolsk has, however, been set aside com-
mercially as well as politically, and the caravans from China to Russia
now pass between Tara and Tiumen.
The mayor of the latter city gave the travellers the best repast which
they had enjoyed since leaving Irkutsk, and this put the governor in such
good humour, that he declares it to be the only place in Siberia, that at
all comes up to our English idea of a snug, pleasant, and prosperous
town. It is curious to observe to what an extent a traveller’s feelings
influence his opinions ; for example, Captain Cochrane who received
every attention at Kamishloff, the first station in Russia Proper, describes
it as a pretty place, while Sir George Simpson, who was tormented in his
feverish haste by every delay of the post, set it down in the first draft
of his journal as a miserable village.
Passing Ekaterineburg, the centre of the mining districts of the Uralian
Mountains, but which Sir George was unable to visit owing to indisposition,
and Kangar another thriving town depending on the mines, the travellers
soon reached the fine old city of Perm, where, however, they only re-
mained an hour to change horses. At this rate, Kazan, Nishney Novo-
gorod, Vladimir, and Moscow were swiftly left behind, and Sir George
Simpson reached St. Petersburg on the Bth of the English October,
having travelled the whole distance from Ochotsk (7000 miles) in ninety-
one days, and from Irkutsk in forty-one days, of which time thirty-six
nights had been spent in the carriage, two on the floor, two on a sofa,
and one in a bed—a truly remarkable example of fortitude and endurance
in travel. Having returned to England, via Hamburgh, Sir George’s
whole journey round the world was completed within the space of nine-
teen months and twenty-six days !


THE OPERA.—JENNY LIND.
In our last number we endeavoured to give a faint notion of the ex-
citement that was occasioned by the mere arrival of Jenny Lind at
Blackwall. We have now to describe the furore which was produced on
her debut.
“ Describe,” did we say ?—Oh, yes that’s an easy word—that same
describe. We really cannot doit.—We would as soon undertake to Imi-
tate in a whisper the sound created by the explosion of a powder-mill.
We would fain avail ourselves of the simile of the painter, who con-
cealed Agamemnon’s face, but we have an uneasy suspicion that we used
it last month. Let us, therefore, turn our humble means to the best ac-
count. We shall fail, but it will not be without doing our utmost.
In the first place our readers must picture to their minds the interior of
the Opera-house utterly crammed. They must fancy the pit-folks so
packed together, as to render it problematical whether the attraction of
adhesion will ever let them come apart again. They must fancy the
elevated habitants of the gallery rising up in a dense compact mass to
the vanishing point near the ceiling. They must fancy boxes occupied
by royalty, nobility, and the rest of fashion. This they can fancy, for
perchance they may recollect the visit of the Emperor Nicholas. It is
even just possible they may conceive the awful sense of expectation which,
like a weighty atmosphere, pressed upon that dense throng. The feeling
that the unutterable was approaching bound every tongue. This state
of things, we will benignantly grant, those of our readers whose organ
of ideality is greatly developed, may possibly imagine.
But the shout that burst forth when Jenny Lind, in pilgrim’s dress,
was dragged upon the stage—that shout, we say, none can represent to
themselves who were not actually present. The poor organ of ideality
might swell and burst and leap through the skull that encloses it, without
even approaching in a remote degree to a result so desirable. Every
man, woman, and child became a Stentor on the occasion—every one
seemed to have provided himself with a patent pair of lungs, warranted to
bear the strongest enthusiasm, and off they all went into full action. It
was such a hurricane of applause, that we marvelled it did not sweep off
the stage the little fair, delicate form which had raised it.
Just as on some broiling summer’s day, a clap of thunder which threatens
to demolish all your doors and windows, is followed by a pelting torrent
of rain, which seems as though it would melt away your chimney-pots,
so was the roar of approbation followed by an overwhelming shower of
“ hushes.” People had seen—people wished to hear.
The very first roulade executed by Mademoiselle Lind caused a revival
of the uproar. Never mind interrupting the song, the folks must applaud,
be the consequences what they might. But for the details of success, for
the number of times Jenny Lind was called after the fall of the curtain,
for the particular arias in which she gained most approbation both in
Roberto and la Sonnambule, we refer to the daily papers. For us it is
left to give a notion —faint as we have said—of the general impression.
The voice of Jenny Lind is not only a thing admirable, but a thing
loveable. It does not only hit the ears of the auditors, but it reposes in




