





MR. H. M. CHESTER’S EXPEDITION TO
NEW GUINEA.
No. 1.
During a visit paid by Mr, Douglas to Thursday Island, Mr.
Chester, the Police Magistrate, at Somerset, was instructed to
visit that portion of the New Guinea coast lying to the north of
Thursday Island. He was subsequently instructed to visit
Murray Island, Darnley Island, and Port Moresby. The fol-
lowing reports were furnished by Mr. Chester to the Govern-
ment of Queensland, in obedience to these instructions. They
are now published for general information.
Instructions to Mr. Chester to visit New Guinea.
Mr. Chester, —As the final removal of the Government
establishment at Somerset to Thursday Island will shortly be
carried into effect, and as your time will then be more fully
occupied than it is at present, I think it would be as well that
you should, before the north-west monsoons set in, pay a visit
to the coast of New Guinea for the purpose of obtaining some
additional information in connection with the entrance to the
“ Mai-Cussar ” or Baxter river.
You are authorised, therefore, for this purpose, to take the
cutter and such of the men on the station as you may think
suitable. You may invite also, as volunteers, any of the pearl -
shellers whose services are likely to be useful.
Mr. Pennefather has expressed to me his willingness to co-
operate with you, and to supply a lugger and her crew for the
purposes of the expedition. You will thus have a pretty strong
party, and be able to provide for the safety of all concerned.
I need scarcely, I am sure, impress upon you how desirable
it is to encourage friendly relations with the natives of the
country in the vicinity of the Mai-Cussar, of which at present
so little is known. Endeavour to obtain samples of sago, nut-
megs, ebony, and any articles of commerce which might prove of
value if the trading instincts of the people can be stimulated.
Eor the general purposes of the expedition, and for the purchase
of trade, you are authorised to expend an amount not exceeding
£SO. Any famples of the commercial commodities I have
referred to, or any specimens of natural history, arms, imple-
ments, or fabrics which you may obtain, should be forwarded to
the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane, together with a report on the


expedition, which should be as full as possible, giving details on
all matters which are likely to be interesting to the general
public. If you are able to induce one or two yOung men or
women to return with you, I think it would be desirable to do
so, as you would have an opportunity of teaching them our
language, and of thus more effectually securing friendly relations
on some future occasion.
I fear that it is somewhat late in the season for you to
attempt a visit to the Outauata River, which appears to be an
interesting field for discovery ; but if you should find it possible,
after visiting the Mai-Cussar, to proceed to the Outauata, you
are authorised to do so. You should not, however, be absent
from Thursday Island for more than six weeks, as it is necessary
that you should be at head quarters early in January.
(Signed)
Thursday Island, 21st November, 1877.
J. DOUGLAS.
Mr. Chester’s Report.
Thursday Island, January 15th, 1878.
Sir, —I have the honour to report that, in accordance with
your instructions, I left Thursday Island in the cutter on Ist
ultimo, and proceeded to Jervis Island (Marbiak) to pick up the
rest of the party who had volunteered to join me on an expedi-
tion to the Mai-Cussar River, in New Guinea.
At Marbiak I found two of the crew of the “ Neva,” who
had just returned from the Fly River, where they had been with
Signor D’Albertis. One of them was in a pitiable condition
with fever and ague. They stated that they had been told to
find their own way to Somerset from the mouth of the Fly, and
that, after a narrow escape from death at the hands of the
Bampton Islanders, the Katon natives brought them as far as
their village, and sent them on to Cornwallis. They found the
New Guinea natives very numerous and hostile where the year
before they saw no signs of inhabitants. The “ Neva” was fre-
quently attacked, and one of the Chinese crew was wounded by an
arrow. The original party on board the “ Neva” included Signor
D’Albertis, a European engineer, three South Sea Islanders,
and five Chinese sailors. One of the latter died during the
cruise, and the fate of the other four is uncertain. They are
said to have run away with the “ Neva’s” boat, and were probably
killed by the natives.
We left Marbiak on the morning of the 3rd December, the
party consisting of Messrs. Jardine, Summers, Pennefather,
Pilot Wilkie, myself and son, together with five Europeans and
sixteen South Sea Islanders, with two large boats belonging to


Messrs. Jardine and Pennefather. Mr. Pearson, manager of
Bell’s station, kindly gave us the services of one of his men, to
pilot us across the Orman reef, and also induced Mamoose, the
chief of the Marbiak tribe, to go with us as interpreter for Talbot
Island. We passed to the eastward of “ Turnagain,” which is
merely a mangrove swamp, and anchored for the night about 5
miles from Talbot Island, in 10 feet water. Next morning
anchored off the north end of Talbot (Boigu) in 4 fathoms,
opposite a village of four miserable gunyahs, inferior even to
those of the mainland. A canoe with seven natives came off to
us. Each man had a small book in his hand, or stuck in his
waist-cloth. These proved to be “ primers,” printed in English
characters, but in the native language, and the owners appeared
to regard them with a kind of superstitious reverence as talisman
for their protection. One intelligent young fellow afforded us
much amusement by his anxiety to display his recently acquired
knowledge; but it extended no further than the first page,
which he had evidently got by rote. One thing, however, was
noticeable, that whereas their notation never previously exceeded
two, they now can count as far as ten in English, though I doubt
whether their own language is capable of expressing that number
otherwise than by repeating two five times. The native evan-
gelists, as they are termed, who are reducing these barbarous
tongues to writing, are not as well educated as an average
English child of twelve years of age. Under their tuition, the
natives are adopting new pronunciations of old words, and intro-
ducing new ones ; the result is a mongrel language, that will
some day puzzle philologists. The very names of the islands are
altered to suit their notions. “Marbiak ” becomes phonetically
“ Mah-bu-whack; ” and Torke Island, known to Jukes and
McGillivray as “ Masseed,” is tortured to “ Macheeg.” I must
also protest against the practice of re-naming rivers and places
which have once been placed on the chart. The position of the
river which has been re-named the “ Baxter ” was fixed and
called by its native name “ Mai-Cussar,” on Lieutenant Connor’s
chart, two years before it was visited by Mr, McEarlane in the
“ Ellangowan.”
We landed on Boigu during the day, and sent Mamoose to
secure the services of an interpreter for the New Guinea coast.
The whole island, with the exception of a small mound opposite
our anchorage, appears to be a swamp in the wet season. The
timber consists principally of mangrove and silk-cotton trees,
with a few cocoanuts at the western end of the island. The
inhabitants are fine muscular men, and from the quantity of
dugong bones, crab, and turtle shells, in the vicinity of their
huts, they evidently live well. Scrub hens are also very numerous.
Their huts are more miserable than those of any island in th©
Straits, which is the more remarkable as they are in frequent


communication with the well-housed natives of iMew Guinea.
Towards sundown Mamoose returned with a number of men,
including the chief, who also answers to the name of Mamoose;
in fact, this name is now applied to the chief of any island, and
has been adopted by the natives, although previously unknown.
It may not be uninteresting to trace the origin of this novel
application of a word foreign to their language. In 1870 I
visited Darnley Island, and having studied with much interest
“ Jukes’ Voyage of the ‘ My,’ ” I surprised the natives by recalling
names of people who were then living but who have long since
“gone over to the majority,” and by repeating a number of
words in their language. The simple natives would have it that
I was Jukes himself, and told me that during the “ My’s” visit I
had changed names with a man called “ Mamoose ” (signifying
red hai»), and from that time they never spoke of me by any
other name. In the following year I visited Marbiak, where the
chief, whose name was “ Genai,” insisted on my changing names
with him ; since which time, even among his own people, he has
always borne the name of Mamoose. When the pearlshellers
arrived in the Straits, Marbiak offered a fine field for recruiting
labour, and, finding the chief was called Mamoose, they con-
cluded it was the native word for chief, and from hearing it so
often the natives have gradually adopted the word.
On December 5 we took an interpreter on board, and, after
a run of two hours and a half, anchored in the mouth of the
Mai-Cussar, close to left bank, in fathoms, the river about
one mile wide. Two canoes of Boigu men accompanied us, A
short time before our visit they had lost a man in a skirmish
with the ISew Guinea natives, but had since made friends.
They told us there was a village a short distance inland, and, in
hopes of being able to communicate with the people, we landed
a strong party, numbering eleven Europeans, and six or eight
Polynesians, We crossed a belt of mangroves, then an exten-
sive flat covered with tea-tree scrub, and came out upon com-
paratively open country dotted with magnificent tree ferns and
clumps of bamboo. Crossed a salt-water creek on a slippery
fallen tree, and halted, for a spell. We reckoned we had come
about 5 miles, and, as the guides, when asked where the village
was, still spoke of it as a long -way off, we questioned them more
closely, and found we were not even half way. As it would have
been impossible to reach the village and return before sundown,
and as there was no water to be found, and no native tracks
visible, we reluctantly retraced our steps, and after a bathe in
the creek, regardless of alligators, we returned to the cutter,
somewhat fatigued with our exertions in such a climate Our
progress through the bush was much easier than we had antici-
pated, as the grass had been recently burnt, and in places the
fallen timber was still smouldering. We saw one or two wild
4


pigs, a kangaroo, and a quantity of pigeons of a kind that are
not found in the Straits. We went on about ten miles in the
cutter, and anchored for the night in ten fathoms. The Boigu
men declined to go any further. Continued the ascent on the 6th
without impediment, anchoring at night, ami on the 7th passed a
plantation of cocoanuts and bananas, but still no signs of natives.
The river now narrowed" rapidly, and a fringe of broad-leaved
palms took the place of the inevitable mangrove on either bank.
Anchored at 4 p.m., at a spot about twelve miles beyond the
furthest point reached by the “ Ellangowan ” in 187-"), the river
being sixty yards wide. We landed a watering party, some of
whom wandered away in the bush, shooting pigeons and scrub
hens, leaving two of the cutter’s crew, a Darnley islander, named
Spear, and my Chinese servant, to fill the beakers from a small
creek. A little before sundown the two boys came running
back, saying that the natives were mustering with bows and
arrows. Reinforcements were sent, but were not required, as
no attempt was made to molest the men in the creek. The
cowardice of Spear, and the shameless way in which he justified
himself when upbraided with running away, although armed with
a double-barrelled gun, fairly convulsed us with laughter.
“ You think me fool ? ” said he, “ No no, me no want to
dead ; when me been see him bow-an-arrow full cock, my word,
me run like h .” On the Bth we filled our tanks, but the
water procured was so charged with decayed vegetable matter
as to be scarcely drinkable. While breakfasting on deck we
suddenly heard loud shouting, and thinking the watering party
were being attacked we snatched up our guns to go to their
assistance, but presently saw a number of natives on the oppo-
site bank shouting and waving green boughs. The words
“ Boigu,” “Missionary,” “ Smoke,” “ Whitefellow,” were plainly
distinguished. Several of us jumped into the boat and went to
meet them, taking a quantity of Turkey red, calico, knives, and
tobacco. Only eight or ten men showed themselves, but there
were many more concealed in the bush. They bartered a few
arrows, dilly bags, bone daggers, and necklaces of dog’s teeth,
and we had no difficulty in persuading two of them to go off to
the cutter with us. These men had aquiline features and straight
hair, and were superior in physique to the Australian aboriginals.
It was unfortunate having no interpreter, as they are evidently
in constant communication with the Boigu men, who have doubt-
less told them of the missionaries and that they have little to fear
from white people. They understood the use of tobacco and
were eager to get it. In a short time they disappeared, and we
did not see them again. That afternoon, Messrs. Jardine, Penne-
father, myself and son, with two South Sea Islanders, started to
go farther up the river, in the skiff. A short distance above
where the cutter was anchored, we came upon a raft made of


bamboos lashed together, which is evidently their only means
of crossing the river, and about 5 miles further on we landed
at a small plantation of cocoanuts, yams, and bananas, partially
surrounded by a fence in an unfinished state. The ground was
cleared of undergrowth, but the large trees were left standing,
and killed by burning round the roots.. There were also trenches
to drain the garden. On a slight rise behind the clearing were
four or five neat log huts, with arched roofs made of tea-tree
bark, high enough to admit of a man standing upright. The
sides were formed of saplings about 4 inches in diameter, laid
horizontally between uprights, and the whole firmly lashed with
vines, forming a perfect defence against arrows. Each house
had a porch in front, formed by extending the arched roof
beyond the gable. In one we found an old dismantled native
drum, which I took the liberty of appropriating, leaving in its place
a large piece of Turkey red and some tobacco. These camps are
evidently only occupied at certain seasons, probably by hunting
parties, as the plantations are too small to support many people.
We continued the ascent for another 5 miles, and found the
channel becoming blocked with trees as if by land-slips. The
river was here 25 yards broad, the water quite salt, and the in-
fluence of the tides plainly discernible. We commenced our
return at midnight on December Bth, entered another branch
on the 9th, and anchored outside the mouth on the evening of
the 11th, having had to tow the cutter the whole distance.
From the anchorage Boigu bore east-by-south, distance about
9 miles.
The Mai-Cussar is certainly a magnificent river. There is
not a shoal or a sandbank in it to obstruct the navigation, nor is
there a dangerous bar at the mouth. We found 9 fathoms at
the entrance, and carried deep water to the very head. Vessels
drawing 18 feet can lie alongside the banks. There is probably
a deep passage between Talbot Island and New Guinea which,
if properly surveyed and marked, would be available for the
largest vessels. If so, a man-of-war, by sending her steam launch
ahead to sound, could in moderate weather avoid Torres Straits
altogether, passing to the eastward of Cornwallis, and thence to
the Brothers. In war time, an enemy’s ship might thus elude
observation, and before her presence was known intercept every
vessel passing through the north-east channel. We saw several
reefs and shoals that are not marked on the chart, notably a
reef dry at low water about half-way between Talbot and Corn-
wallis, the latter island bearing south-east from it. There are
also shoal patches about seven miles south-east of Cornwallis.
I reached Thursday Island on December 15. It was my
intention to have gone further along the coast to the westward,
but having to be at Somerset by the 20th idem to relieve Mr,
Beddome, there was no time for further exploration. I regret


this very much, as I believe the coast in that direction offers a
fine field for discovery. It is highly probable that there are
other large rivers affording access to the interior between the
Mai-Cussar and Frederick Hendry Island, but it would be use-
less to attempt their exploration in our cutter.
By the mail steamer I forward a few curiously-barbed bone-
pointed arrows, an ornamented gourd containing lime used in
betel chewing, and a sample of flax from the South Cape, New
Guinea.
I have, &c.,
HENRY M. CHESTER, P.M.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.
No. 2.
“ Port Moresby, July 20, 1878.
“ Sie,
“ I have the honour to report that, in accordance with
your instructions, I left Thursday Island in the ‘ Ellangowan/
on July 1, for the purpose of visiting Port Moresby and other
settlements on the coast of New Guinea.
“We were detained two days at Somerset by stress of
weather, and proceeded to Murray Island, where we remained
until the weather moderated. During our stay we called a
meeting of the people They complained bitterly of the oppres-
sion they had suffered at the hands of a West Indian Black, who
has been living there since 1871, carrying on the beche-de-mer
fishery. It appears he induced a number of their young men to
work for him, and took women by force as wives for them, as a
means of keeping them in his employ. I enquired how it
happened that they did not defend themselves. They replied,
that they dreaded reprisals, and retailed the following story :
About 1866, a fishing vessel was anchored off their island, and
one of their crew, a New Zealander, having seized one of their
women, a fight ensued, in which, after shooting a native, the
Maori was killed. The next day, two armed boats’ crews landed
and laid waste their villages, shooting men, women, and children
indiscriminately. Fifteen were killed outright, and many wounded.
A few days after, a canoe coming from another island was
attacked, and twelve men killed, the women being taken
to work on the reef. They further stated that this West


Indian had severely beaten a chief, whom he accused of bewitch-
ing a man in his employ, and burnt his house. They would
have killed him long since, but feared a man-of-war would be
sent to punish them. I explained that I had been appointed by
the British Government as their protector from miscreants of
this sort, and advised them to elect a chief and submit to his
authority, which, if properly exercised, would be supported.
Nine men were pointed out as chiefs, and these unanimously
agreed to recognise one named Buziri as their head. The West
Indian referred to left the island a few weeks before, owing
upwards of two years’ wages to a number of people who had
been working for him, eight of whom were signed on his boats’
articles. I recommended, if he returned, they should refuse
him permission to land until he had paid all arrears of wages,
and if he committed any further outrage to secure him until
they could communicate with the authorities at Thursday
Island. After presenting Buziri with suitable gifts, the people
dispersed to talk the matter over.
“A native teacher, employed by the London Missionary
Society, has been stationed on Murray Island since 1872, and
appears to have acquired considerable influence over the people.
They have built a neat church, which was tilled on the Sunday
we spent there. The people, however, are too prone to sit round
and sing hymns, instead of working and improving their sur-
roundings, which are in much the same state as when I visited
them in 1870. The teacher, Josiah, has a school for the boys,
while his wife attends to the girls. They have a primer printed
in their language, and some of the young folks read fluently.
The women especially seem to take kindly to the new faith, as it
improves their social position, and ensures them better treat-
ment. The island, though small, is extremely fertile, and food
is so plentiful that it is allowed to rot on the ground, the people
being too indolent to bring it in for sale. The natives are com-
paratively wealthy, from having worked for the pearlshellers, and
all wear some kind of garment, if only a waist-cloth.
“ Murray Island is probably destined to play an important
part in the evangelization of New Guinea, it being proposed
to establish an institution for training natives from all parts,
who will subsequently return to their homes, and impart to their
countrymen the knowledge they have acquired. It is to be
hoped that an industrial school, conducted by a good English
mechanic, will form a prominent feature in such an institution,
as hitherto the introduction of the Gospel seems to have been
attended with an increased disposition to indolence in a people
not at any time given to exert themselves.
“ Before leaving, we learnt that the chiefs had talked over
the advice given to them, and had resolved to build a house
to serve the double purpose of a court-house and council-chamber.


The most serious evil the missionaries have had to contend with
is the practice of the women to procure abortion, which in a
population of less than 400 souls threatens the speedy extinction
of the race. There are three kinds of plants growing on the
island which are used for this purpose, the end being obtained
by chewing and swallowing the leaves. A young married woman
was detected in the act, and, after trial by the chiefs, was
sentenced to three weeks’ labour on the roads.
“Left Murray Island on 13th July, the little steamer being
crammed in every available space with supplies for the teachers
in New Guinea. The weather being squally, with rain, consider-
able care was necessary in threading our way through the open-
ing in the Barrier Reef. Passed to leeward of the Portlock
Reefs, under steam and sail, and made the coast of New Gumea
about 11 p.m. of July 14, half-way between Yule Island and
Cape Suckling, from whence w’e beat up to Boera, a village of
about 370 people, some twelve miles from Port Moresby.
“ Mr. Chalmers and I went on shore and took up our
quarters in the house of Peri, a Earatongan teacher stationed
here. In the evening we had an interesting interview' with the
chiefs. We asked, what was their idea of the foreigners who
had come to live amongst them ? They replied, ‘At first we were
afraid they would take our lands and drive us into the interior,
but we are now satisfied they are peaceable. All our experience
of the white man has been good. Our fathers knew nothing of
them, and of the wonderful things they bring us.’ We gave
them some advice as to their dealings with white men, and after
the usual presents they took their leave. We gleaned the
following information from them. Their annual trading voyage
commences in August, and extends about 100 miles to the west-
ward. They call at all the villages to exchange their pottery ware
for sago, and return to Boera with the first north-west wind in
December. There are twelve villages to pass before arriving in the
cannibal districts. Yaimuro is the last place of call, nine villages
further on, and to them come people from three villages
still further to the westward, Kerepo being the last village with
which they have intercourse. The best means of communicating
with the tribes to the west would be to accompany the trading
canoes. They seem eager to obtain European wares, and en-
quired of the Boera people whence they procured them. ‘ Peri
gave them to us.’ £ Then bring Peri with you,’ was the reply.
We asked, ‘ Would they receive us kindly if we went with you?’
The answer, given with emphasis, was, ‘ They would nurse you ’
—literally, ‘seat you on their thighs.’ When we visit them
each house claims a portion of us as guests, and they do not let
us want for anything while staying with them.
“ They relate a curious circumstance in connection with the
people of Kerepo, The male children have a hole pierced through


the left hand in infancy, which is kept distended like those in the
lobes of the ear, until they arrive at manhood, and is then put
to this extraordinary use. In fighting, their arrows are balanced
through the hole in the left hand, from whence they are pro-
pelled with great force by a smart blow from the right hand.
The bow is not used by them. We classed this story with the
account of the men with tails, but the chiefs were quite amused
at our incredulity, and assured us they themselves had seen
these things.
“The Boera people are friendly with the Boro tribe on the
mainland opposite Yule Island, who murdered Dr. James and
Thorngren in 1876. They gave us a minute, circumstantial
account of the affair, which agrees in every .particular with the
evidence given me by the survivors on that occasion. We asked
what led to the attack ? and they told us the chief wished to test
whether all white men were invulnerable, as a short time before
a white man had allowed them to hurl spears at him, which re-
bounded without doing him any injury. ‘Was he a spirit?
Had he come from the clouds ? ’ they asked. But no, he came
from the sea, and their weapons were powerless against him.
We set this down as some ancient tradition, but Captain Dud-
field afterwards told us he had seen a coat of mail in Signor
D’Alberti’s possession, and as that gentleman visited the Boro
tribe, there may, after all, be some foundation for their story.
“ The village of Boera consists of a number of thatched nuts,
each accommodating a single family. They are built on slender
piles, a short distance from high-water mark,without anyregard to
regularity. They bury their dead in shallow graves in the very
street, close to their houses, which must seriously affect their
water supply. The women of the tribe were busily engaged in
the manufacture of pottery for their approaching voyage. The
process is as follows: —Each woman has a shallow trough along-
side her filled with black clay in small lumps. After softening
this to the proper consistency, she takes a flat piece of wood and
beats it out on a round flat stone, adding fresh clay on the out-
side, and gradually fashioning the pot to the required shape.
They are then dried in the sun, afterwards piled in rows between
brushwood and small sticks, baked of a dull red colour, and
allowed to cool gradually. They make two kinds, —one circular,
with a short narrow neck and turned lip, resembling the Indian
‘ lota,’ the other about half the size and bowl-shaped. They hold
from one to five gallons of water, and serve also as cooking-pots.
“ The people are of a light-copper colour, below the middle
stature, with straight hair, friezed out like a mop, in which a
bamboo comb is stuck ; they are well-made, with rounded limbs
and respectable calves, and both in appearance and softness
reminded me of the Pelew Islanders. Many of the women are
pleasing looking, and some of the younger girls are even pretty.


The raen are naked, with the exception o£ a cord round their
waists, which is put to much the same use as that worn by the
Tannese ; yet even this small concession to decency has a certain
dignity in their eyes, for they speak of their friends to the west-
ward as naked savages. For ornaments, they wear a piece of
shell about four inches long, stuck through the septum of the
nose, and the village dandies may be known by the length and
whiteness of this ornament. Crescents of pearlshell, necklaces
of dog’s teeth, and earrings of tortoiseshell are also worn. The
women all wear the grass petticoat, and are tattooed in regular
patterns on the face, breasts, backs, and arms. Each has a capa-
cious bag, netted with the finest jute, in which food and other
heavy loads are carried. Some are very neatly made, and stained
in coloured patterns. They appear to set considerable store by
these, and refuse to sell them for tobacco, asking an American
tomahawk for a very ordinary specimen. They are all incorrigible
beggars for tobacco (kuku), and, after answering any question
put to them, are sure to add, ‘You don’t happen to have a bit of
tobacco about you ? ’ in a coaxing interrogative way.
“ The cutter ‘ Saucy Jack,’ Simpson, master, has formed a
beche-de-mer station just across the Bay, but it was blowing
too hard for us to visit them in the boat. The captain was very
ill with fever, and sent off to the * Ellaugowan’ for medicine.
They were advised to go to Port Moresby to recruit. The
natives work willingly in collecting beche-de-mer, receiving
tobacco in payment.
“ July 16.—Weighed and steamed around to Port Moresby,
where we anchored about 4 p.m. Pound the ketch ‘ Hibernia ’
had arrived a few days previously from Cooktown, with three
horses and Captain Redlich, who intends starting a store. With
this exception there has been no addition to the digging popula-
tion since Mr. Ingham’s last report. There has been much sick-
ness, and scarcely a man has escaped a touch of the fever. It is
with pleasure I am able to report that the friendly relations with
the natives inaugurated by Mr. Ingham, remain unimpaired.
Men go and come between the camp at the Laloki and the port,
a distance of twelve miles, entirely unarmed, and have no diffi-
culty in getting carriers for their goods. The example set by
those who arrived in the ‘ Colonist’ is worthy of all praise, and
has given a tone to the rest. There have been two deaths since the
‘ Sappho’s’ visit. There are only five men out prospecting ; the
rest are divided between the Laloki camp and the port. Captain
Webb, of the ‘ Pride of the Logan,’ has kindly taken five of the
sick men round to his fishing station at Kerrepunu to recruit.
Dissatisfaction is expressed at the apathy of many of the diggers,
who, though well equipped with horses and provisions, have not
rendered the least assistance to the prospecting party; in fact,
some of them have never gone a mile beyond the Laloki. It is


said that those who came in the * Pride of the Logan,’ who were
spoken of by the Queensland Press as the best equipped party
that has left for New Guinea, have done literally nothing in the
way of cutting scrub or assisting in the arduous work of pros-
pecting this truly formidable country. I have held an enquiry
touching the death of a Mr. Neville, a gentleman of independent
means, who only arrived from England in the ‘ Chimborazo.’ The
general opinion is that he over-exerted himself, as it was no un-
common thing for him to walk to the Laloki and return the
same day. Poor fellow, he was found on June 20, lying dead on
the track among the long grass, about, three and a-half miles
from the port. After proper identification, he was buried near
the spot where he died, it having been found impossible to
convey his remains to Port Moresby. It may be some consola-
tion to his friends to know that the last sad offices were per-
formed by sympathising bauds, for he was a general favourite,
and that a religious service was read over his remains by Euatoka,
the missionary teacher, of whom I shall have more to say anon.
Mr. Neville’s property remains in Euatoka’s hands until Mr.
Ingham’s return, as that gentleman has deceased’s will.
“ On July 18, Captain Eedlich having kindly lent us horses,
Mr Chalmers and I rode out to the Laloki camp. The view
from the top of the range immediately behind Port Moresby is
magnificent, but calculated to depress the spirits of even the
most sanguine digger, and convey an idea of the Herculean task
before him. Broken ranges, rising one above the other in ap-
parently interminable succession, bar the approach to Mount
Owen Stanley, the dark blue outline of whose base forms a
fitting background to the landscape, whilst the summit is lost in
the clouds. To the right is the lesser range crowned by Mount
Astrolabe, and on the table-land between five determined men
are struggling with the forces of nature in the search for gold.
It is a scene to bring reflection to the most thoughtless,—the
grandeur of nature contrasted with the puny efforts of men, but
men of whom the colonies may justly be proud. Leading our
horses down the range, we descended into a wide basin surrounded
by hills, and followed the track through grass level with our
faces on horseback out on to the plains, which, but for the high
ranges in the distance, and dwarf cycads dotting the face of the
country, resembles some parts of the Warrego district. It may
be described as well-grassed open forest, lightly timbered with
Moreton Bay ash. About three and a-half miles brought us to
poor Neville’s grave, which is marked by a neat pile of logs.
Two of the Port Moresby tribe accompanied us as carriers,and kept
up with our horses at a fast walk with a load slung on a stick
between them. Halted at a creek a little less than half-way
to give the natives a spell, and rode on to the Laloki,
passing through a narrow belt of scrub differing in no


respect from those at the back of the settlement at Somerset.
About two miles from the river the country changes to barren
stony ridges, from whence the river timber is plainly dis-
tinguished. The camp is situated on a slight rise below a bend
in the river, which is not more than ten or twelve yards wide,
with high banks ; it consists of a log hut roofed with bark, and
a few tents. We received a hearty welcome from the diggers,
and were glad to find there were only two men who could be
called seriously ill, although all had suffered more or less from
fever. The worst cases are those in which there is a dropsical
tendency. Mr. Chalmers gave a short, impressive service, which
was reverently listened to, and it was arranged that a party
should be sent out to convey the sick men to Port Moresby.
Mr. Broadbent, the well-known naturalist, is camped on a hill
overlooking the diggers, and we spent a pleasant half-hour in
looking over his collection of birds. Out shooting from dawn
till noon, and occupied till late in the evening in skinning the
spoils of the day, Mr. Broadbent has no time to think of fever,
and it would be well if some of the diggers followed his example
in the matter of exercise.
“We were astonished to find men living for weeks in one
spot in such a climate, with no other shelter than a calico tent,
without even a fly. The labour necessary to house themselves
comfortably would be the best preventive of fever. The diggers
are here at least two months too early. The river beds are still
unworkable from the constant showers on the mountains, although
no rain has fallen at the camp for more than a month. Those
who have been out prospecting speak of the scrubs as being
worse than they have ever before met with, and the labour of
cutting through them has told severely on those so employed;
yet they sav this could be cheerfully borne but for the ivant of
rest, caused by swarms of mosquitoes, ticks, and a sort of scrub
itch that drives, men frantic,
“ I am indebted to Mr. Hanran for the following account of
what has been done: —‘ A party of about thirty men left Port
Moresby on Ist May, consisting of those who came in the
‘ Colonist’ and ‘iSwan.’ After crossing the Laloki they struck
the left bank of the Goldie Biver, which was heading north-east.
About seventeen miles from Point Moresby they commenced to
cut a track through the scrub, and penetrated seven miles
further, where, feed being scarce, the party camped, and sent
seven men out to look for more open country. These followed
up the left bank ot the river through dense scrub for tvelve
miles, but rain falling brought on sickness, and compelled them
to return. The main camp was then shifted back seven miles to
the right bank. Pour men then travelled on toot up that bank
for fifty miles, when they found the river heading to the south-
east in a half-circle. This occupied five days, but on returning


they made the camp in thirty-five miles, in a day and a-half, by
steering a direct course. They found the colour everywhere in
the bed of the river, but never in the gullies. The country
traversed consisted of broken ranges and thick scrub, impassable
for horses. They found the natives friendly wherever they met
them, and obtained their assistance in carrying swags and point-
ing out the track. No sign of auriferous country thus far.
Meantime sickness had thinned their numbers, those who were bad
with fever returning to the Laloki. Seeing that the Goldie was
heading to the south-east, with comparatively open country, all
returned to the Laloki camp, when the following party was
organised under the leadership of Frank Jones —namely, J. W.
Murphy, Alex. McCall, Dan. Connell, and R. Ferguson (all
‘ Colonist’ men), and a portion of the original party of ten who
had kept together throughout. This party started from the
the farthest camp on June 28, with two horses and about four
months’ provisions, as no game is to be found in the ranges ; and
after travelling in a south-east direction four days, came to the
table-land, since which no news has been received from them.
They were then making for the head of the Goldie, which
appears to have its source in the Astrolabe, or one of the coast
ranges. It certainly does not take its rise in the Mount Owen
Stanley range. A party of six are waiting till Jones returns to
follow up what has been done. Before going to the Laloki we
had a meeting of the chiefs, who expressed the satisfaction of
the people with the treatment they had received from the diggers.
We advised them to avoid everything that tended to impair
the present friendly relations, more especially to impress on
their young men to refrain from purloining, which, if not put a
stop to, would lead to trouble. Also, if they did sell any portion
of their land, to adhere to their part of the compact, and not to
try to sell the same land over again. We told them that the
principal difficulty in their dealings with foreigners was caused
by their lack of authority over their own people, and that if they
did not punish offences against the whites, the latter, in the
absence of any authority, would be likely to take the law into
their own hands. In the event of a resident Judicial Commis-
sioner being appointed here, he will inevitably have to assume a
sort of benevolent protectorate over these people, in consequence
of this want of authority in their chiefs.
“ I was an eye witness of the purchase of a piece of land
by Captain Redlich, on which he wished to erect a store. The
portion bargained for was about an acre and a-half of stony, un-
productive ridge at the rear of the mission promises. Eleven
persons, including women and boys, claimed the land, and the
price agreed upon, about £4 per acre, was divided between them.
Several onlookers immediately offered to sell their land, but
there were no buyers. These people have made a sudden leap


of a thousand years, from the ‘ stone’ to the ‘ steel’ age, and
American steel at that! The trade fantail tomahawk, costing
about sixpence, passed current in the South Seas for years after
Europeans visited the islands, but these people will not look at
anything short of an American tomahawk, costing about 4s. 6d.
retail. We had to pay our carriers one each, which is expensive
labour. While on the subject of land, I may correct a report
that has gained publicity, to the effect that the mission has
bought up all the available land here. The mission property
does not exceed three acres, and the price above quoted seems
to have been the average amount paid for it. The native planta-
tions are situated on the slopes of the hills, overlooking the port,
and in no instance has a plantation been sold.
“ On the evening of the day we interviewed the chiefs, I
addressed a meeting of the diggers, who spoke in high praise of
the kindness shown by the natives to the sick and to those who
had been temporarily lost in the bush. The general desire on
their part is to live in harmony with the people. They expressed
themselves as most anxious that someone with sufficient power
to repress lawlessness should reside among them, and promised
to support his authority. The objection to Chinamen arriving in
crowds is as strong as ever, but the summary measures proposed
in the excitement of a first landing find but little favour with
the more sensible members of the community. They trust that
means will be found to prevent mere shanty-keepers, whose only
stock-in-trade consists of enough iron to build a shed and suffi-
cient liquor to fill it, from starting their nefarious business in
their midst, and urge that, inasmuch as an Englishman in a
savage land cannot divest himself of the allegiance he owes to his
country’s laws, so the State ought not to shirk the responsibility
of providing for the due administration of those laws. Although,
from a digger’s point of view, some who have come to New
Guinea would have been better employed in wheeling a per-
ambulator at home, they are as a whole a most respectable class
of men, and their conduct in the difficult circumstances in which
they are placed reflects credit on the colonies from whence they
came.
“ I cannot close this report without referring to the services
rendered to the diggers by Euatoka, the Earatongan teacher
stationed here, and his excellent wife. Although by no means
passing rich on fifteen pounds a year, this truly good Christian
has fed and nursed the sick at his own expense. Night and
day his services have been put in requisition in a thousand little
ways, in which without his assistance the diggers would have
been unable to deal with the natives, until his own health has
suffered. On one occasion, a sick man having fallen exhausted
on the track, he went out and carried him for five miles on hie
back, and over the range to the Port. All this has been done in


singleness of heart, without expectation or hope of reward, and,
I feel sure, only requires to be made known to ensure some
recognition from the people of New South Wales and Queens-
land.
“In conclusion, I may add that, but for the assistance
received from Messrs. McFarlane and Chalmers, of the New
Guinea Mission, in interpreting between the natives and myself,
my report would have lacked whatever interest it may be thought
to possess.
“We leave to-morrow, July 22, for Kerepunu, a village
sixty miles to the eastward, from which place I may have an
opportunity of forwarding a supplementary report.
“ I have, &c.,
“HENRY M. CHESTER,
“ Judicial Commissioner.
“ To the Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
Brisbane.”
No. 3.
Stacey Island, South Cape,
August 27, 1878.
Sib, —In continuation of my previous report, I have the
honour to inform you that we left Port Moresby on July 23, and
steamed along the coast inside the Barrier Reef to Round Head.
The reef is here not more than two or three miles from the
coast, with numerous openings. The day being fine and clear,
the slopes of the Astrolabe Range were very distinct. Patches
of grass land bare of timber were probably taken for planta-
tions by the early surveyors, who, judging by their soundings,
can scarcely have been inside the Barrier. The average depth is
from five to seven fathoms as far as Hound Head, with occasional
patches of reef. At Kaile, a village about eighteen miles from
Port Moresby, several canoes came off with stone axes, yams,
&c., to barter, 'these people seemed more energetic than those
of Port Moresby, not yet having been demoralised by the sudden
accession of wealth. Between Kaile and Port Moresby, five
Niene (Savage Island) teachers are located at the different
villages. They are like fish nut of water since Mr. Lawes’de-
parture, as that gentleman was the only person able to converse
with them in their own language. In their intercourse with the
missionaries and the Earatongau teachers, they use the Port
Moresby dialect.


Three or four miles west of Round Head are two Tillages
built on piles in the sea about half-a-mile apart, called Kapakapa.
Canoes put off from them, but were told to follow us oil to
Round Head. This headland is shown on the chart as a bluff
immediately on the sea, but there is a long low spit stretching
out from it for a distance of two miles. Anchored in six fathoms
about 200 yards from a fine beach, and procured a good supply
of wood. We went about a couple of miles inland across a
plain that is a swamp in the rainy season, in which was a fine
lagoon of fresh water, and were startled at finding tracks of
nailed boots until we remembered that Webb’s boat had prob-
ably anchored here on the way to Kerepunu. The range of hills
at the back is not more than 300 ft. high, and the villages are
perched on their summits.
July 24.—Weighed at sunrise. A good look-out from the
mast-head is necessary here, as there are many patches of reef
off Round Head not shown on the chart. A vessel making this
part of the coast may easily recognise the Astrolabe Range by
three remarkable notches or steps in the hills. Anchored about
T3O p.m. about four miles to leeward of the western extremity
of Hood Bay, off which, on piles in the sea, is the village of Hula.
Mr. Chalmers and I beat up to Hula in a boat against a strong
south-easter, and put up on shore in the house of the native
teacher, a Raratongan and his wife, named Taria. Shortly after
dusk everyone went on board the village to sleep, not daring to
remain on shore for fear of an attack by the hill tribes. I saw
here for the first time native drums in process of manufacture.
This had hitherto been as great a puzzle to me as the apple in
the dumpling was to George 111., and the explanation is equally
simple. They select a good-sized tree with a pipe in it, which is
cut into lengths and hewn to the required shape —resembling
an hour glass ; the hole at either end is then enlarged by burning.
July 25. —Started at 7 a.m. to walk to the Kemp Welch, a
fresh water stream running into Hood Bay. Taria and his wife
accompanied us and a few young men from the village, one of
whom carried a native shield given me by Taria. With this and
a light spear he illustrated their mode of fighting, which consists
in a series of panther-like leaps and bounds, now crouching to
the ground with the whole body covered by the shield, anon
springing erect and hurling the spear with unerring accuracy of
aim. The road for about four miles ran through extensive
plains, partially cultivated, in which were cocoanut groves
amidst thick patches of scrub. We met a troop of women
carrying heavy loads of food to Hula, and shortly after came to
the cultivated land outside the village of Kamari, which is five
miles from Hula, Here we saw two gangs of men, about twelve
in each, ploughing the ground. Each man had two long sticks,
pointed at the ends. Standing in line, they drove these into the


earth to the depth of a foot or 18in., and then, suddenly falling
hack together, raised a broad sod the length of the line and
turned it oyer. Another mile brought us to the village. The
paths leading to it are well kept, and bordered with rows of
cocoanuts placed side by side as close as possible. These are
allowed to grow where they lie, and when about a year old are
planted out. Before entering the village we noticed a large
platform of logs with the ground about it beaten hard and clean
swept. This is the market place, where all trade is conducted
by the women. From thence a narrow lane, fenced with cocoa-
nut branches, led into the village of Kamari. We went straight
to the chief’s house, which has nothing to distinguish it from
the rest. The houses are all built on stout piles, about 10ft.
from the ground, with a broad platform of logs in front, and are
two storied. The ridge-pole, which is about 20ft. or 25ft. from
the ground, is supported by forked trees, some of which are
elaborately carved. The roofs and sides are covered with thatch
made of pandanus leaf. Breadfruit, crotons, and diaceuae are cul-
tivated in small enclosures within the village, and the practice of
burying the dead in the streets prevails. Crowds of women and
children flocked to see us as we smoked our pipes on the chief’s
platform, and we estimated the population at from 1,200 to 1,500
people. The land all belongs to the chiefs, who are possessed
of more authority than those of Port Moresby, and the common
people cultivate it, and are paid with the produce. Their cleanli-
ness goes no further than sweeping the streets and houses, for
on leaving the village we found all the refuse heaped in a long
mound by the roadside. The young men and children are good-
looking and remarkably intelligent. The unmarried girls are
easily recognised from their custom of letting the hair grow;
the matrons have theirs cropped close. A chief from one of the
mountain villages was the guest of our host. He had come
down on business in connection with the murder of one of his
people, and we afterwards heard that the Kerepunu people were
responsible for the outrage, which in the fullness of time means
compensation or war. This man recognised Mr. Chalmers, who
some time before had visited his mountain home. Continued
our walk three miles further, to the village of Kalo, the road
running along the top of a narrow grassy ridge commanding a
view of the sea and the McGillivray ranges in the distance.
Kalo is a larger village than Kamari, with a population of per-
haps a couple of thousand. Similar well-kept paths, bordered
with cocoanuts, led up to the village, and we passed through the
narrow streets, crowded with people, with infinitely less annoy-
ance than a strangely-attired foreigner would experience in many
parts of England. There is a kind of natural politeness about
these people, and they are very far removed from savages. The
chief to whose house we directed our steps set food before us,


and received, with much gravity, the presents made to him. A
great feast was in course of preparation when we arrived. A
row of stout poles, about 30ft. high and a yard apart, were
bound together with vines, and secured in position by long guys
of cane. These extended fifty yards, and were covered with
cocoanuts to a height of 10ft. The houses are not as lofty as
those of Kamari, but are similar in other respects. The floors
are made of softwood planks about 2ft. wide, which appeared to
have been the sides of canoes, being rounded on top and hollow
below. The chiefs’ houses are distinguished by a kind of spire,
12ft. high, built of poles and thatched. We saw two young
girls undergoing the painful process of tatooing at the hands of
two ancient dames. The pattern was neatly sketched out in
some black pigment on the face and breast, and they seemed
quite unconcerned, although the blood followed every tap of the
instrument. Kalo is situate on the right bank of a river that
has been named the Kemp Welch, in honour of the treasurer of
the London Missionary Society, but at a short distance from it,
as the river is continually changing its bed. There is a bar at
the mouth, upon which a heavy sea was breaking. We crossed
in a canoe, and sat down on a log to await the arrival of our
boat, which was to sail from Hula, but after an hour—seeing no
sign of her—set out to walk to Kerepunu, at the other extremity
of Hood Bay, a distance of seven or eight miles along a hard
sandy beach. It was a trading day for the Kerepunu people,
and we were accompanied by some fifty women returning with
loads of food, weighing from 801 b. to 1001 b. Passed the
schooners “Annie ” and “ Pride of the Logan ” at the head of the
bay, and found the “ Ellengowan ” anchored opposite Kerepunu,
in the mouth of Hood Lagoon.
July 26.—Spent this day in walking through the seven de-
tached villages that go to form Kerepunu. One of these, built
partly on shore and partly in the sea, is occupied by a colony of
fishermen from Hula. Large well-made fishing nets, with neat
wooden floats and shells for sinkers, hung on the platforms of
their houses, but the all-pervading odour of fish caused us to beat
a hasty retreat. Almost every house had a tame parrot or
cockatoo ; these will be duly plucked when a feast is at hand, to
furnish finery for the dance. We found also strong rope nets
used in kangaroo-hunting and pig-catching. Breadfruit and
the Areca palm flourish in the streets, and many houses had
orchids in flower growing on the sides and roofs. Children ac-
companied us in our walk, and contended for the honour of hold-
ing our hands. There is only one village built directly on the
beach, and, being inhabited by shipwrights, it presents at all
times a scene of bustle and activity that is sought in vain else-
where. Quite a raft of logs were moored near, and from dawn
till dusk the blows of the stone axe never ceased. We saw them


Commence a canoe. Four men worked at it in pairs, facing each
other on the same side of the log, and chopped alternately, the
second blow invariably detaching a good-sized chip. Three or
four canoes in various stages of completion were lying near, with
men at work on them. One man was specially employed in
carving and ornamenting the ends, his tools being a spike nail and
a piece of wood for a mallet. Others were charring the canoes
inside and out, preparatory to launching, and all but the children
were busily employed. They appear still to prefer their own
primitive tools to the axe and tomahawk of European manu-
facture, at least for canoe-making ; but use the latter for clear-
ing the land and cutting timber for their houses. An attempt
has been made to induce them to cut wood in readiness for
the “ Ellengowan,” but so far without much success. The secret
of this people’s industry is their geographical position. Their
villages being on a narrow peninsula, there is very little land
available for cultivation, consequently they must import all the
food they consume. Every third day is a trading day. The
women set off about 2 a.m., some on foot to Kalo, others in
canoes, which they pole round the lagoon to the Dundee River,
all with heavy loads of fish and salt water for the hill tribes.
They ascend the Dundee for about two miles, leave their canoes
made fast to the bank, and trudge through swamp, scrub, and
forest to the regular market-place, to which come the hill women
with an escort. Having exchanged commodities, they resume
their weary tramp, and it is quite 4 p.m. before they reach home.
July 27. —This day was devoted to exploring the saltwater
creek that has been dignified with the name Dundee River. We
left about 6 a.m., and crossed the lagoon, which is about three
miles long and the same in width. On getting to the landing-
place we discovered that we had no fresh water in the boat,
which involved a walk of several miles for a drink. Our native
guide, thinking we were on a shooting excursion, led us by a
roundabout way through swamp and pandanus scrub, impassable
except by keeping to the paths, until we began to think he had
lost himself. Four miles of walking, sometimes through forest
teeming with pigeons, hornbills, and parrots, brought us to a
clear pool of fresh water at the foot of a small waterfall, where
we lunched and washed the mud from our clothes. While rest-
ing here, the Kerepunu women returned with their loads, escorted
by two young fellows who scorned to carry anything heavier than
a spear. Their purchases consisted of taro roots too small for
food, and probably intended for planting. By following the
women, we reached the boat in two miles, instead of the four
we had travelled.
July 29, —Left in a boat for Kalo to install a native teacher,
and were nearly swamped on the bar of the “Kemp Welch.”
The chief received us at the landing-place, and led us to a house,


which he placed at our disposal, detailing at the same time one
of his wives to attend to our wants and supply us with food.
The scaffold seen on our former visit was now literally covered
with food to the very top of the poles, and the people were all
in holiday attire—the women in parti-coloured grass petticoats
and elaborate head-dresses of shells, the men with long streamers
of pandanus leaf on their arms and legs. Good humour and
fun prevailed, and we mingled freely with the people, who showed
us much kindness. In the afternoon we pulled up the river
against a strong current for about three miles', passing several
islands covered with cocoanut groves and plantations. The various
channels were blocked with trunks of large trees and debris
washed down by the floods. The bed of the river is gravelly and
full of quartz pebbles. It affords an easy means of reaching
the ranges in the interior, as the natives told us if they left at
daylight in their canoes and poled all day they were at the back
of the range at sundown. The harbour alone excepted, this part
of the coast is far better adapted for settlement than Port
Moresby. It offers a splendid field for missionary labour, and
it is to he hoped that Mr. Lawes will soon return to take charge
of this the most important district in New Guinea, where he is
so well known and esteemed by the natives. On returning to
the mouth of the river we saw the Sappho in the offing, steering
towards Kerepunu. Just before sundown we were sent for to
see a procession of young men and maidens perambulate the
village. About sixty took part in the ceremony, the men dressed
in all the bravery of paradise feathers and necklets of pearl-
shell, the women wearing heavy necklaces of dogs’ teeth, with
pendants of the same reaching to their waists. The women
walked backwards, beating small dimms with a slow monotonous
chant, while the young men kept time with their feet and long
white wands covered with streamers and hollow seeds. The
party halted before certain houses and sang, and after reaching
the end of the village broke up and dispersed. The greatest
gravity characterised the proceedings, and those who in the
morning had been romping with us now took not the slightest
notice of our presence. Returning to our quarters, we found
supper prepared by the chief’s wife, consisting of yams and taro,
cooked in various ways, and small delicious puddings made of
sago and scraped cocoanut, baked in banana leaves. We slept
in a room in the upper story, about 40ft, long, into which we
climbed by a short ladder.
At daylight on July 30 I walked to Kerepunu, and went on
board the “ Sappho,” and Captain Digby and his officers being
anxious to witness the festivities at Kalo I returned with them
in the steam cutter. It being low water, the sea was breaking
heavily on the bar, so that it required considerable nerve to cross,
especially as we did not know the depth of water, and a monster


shark was cruising at the back of the first roller, as if on the
look out for “ a fresh mess.” Our landing created little excite-
ment, as the people seemed to have given themselves up to
enjoyment, which not even this unheard-of influx of foreigners
could disturb. While I was away, ten pigs, each weighing about
3 cwt., were sacrificed with all due ceremony at the foot of the
food scaffold, and a number of young women in a state of
absolute nudity threw food to the people from a platform. It
appears that at each annual feast the girls who have been
tattooed since the last festival are required to perform this duty
as evidence of the fact, and I am told that several seemed over-
come with shame at the exposure. Mr. Chalmers tells me these
people have a distinct idea and beautiful conception of a Supreme
Being. To them the Great Spirit is a most beneficent being
from whom nought but good is" received, while the spirits of their
ancestors are blamed for all evil that befalls them. A good
yam season is the work of the Great Unknown—a drought is
caused by malevolent ancestors. The whole proceedings at this
festival seemed to have a religious significance, and it may be
regarded as a thanksgiving for a bountiful harvest. The dis-
tribution of food went on all day to the people of three villages,
besides Kalo, viz., Papaka (inland from Hula), Kamari, and
Kerepunu. We estimated that there could not have been less
than 30,000 cocoanuts and 500 bunches of bananas, besides yams
and sugar-cane, on the scaffold poles. Dancing commenced
about dusk, but as there were no fires and lights, and women
principally took part in it, ’twas a very tame affair ; accordingly
we started a dance on our own account, and very soon had by
far the largest share of spectators, one of whom, a very pretty
lassie, deftly abstracted a red silk pocket-handkerchief from my
belt. After supper we sat on the platform of our house singing,
and were in the middle of “Haney Lee” when a peremptory
message arrived from the chief to “ shut up” or his people would
fall sick. We resented this want of appreciation of our vocal
talents, and mildly suggested that it was all the same as their
singing in the morning. “ But,” said the chief, who had come
in person, “ our God is accustomed to our singing, while he won’t
know what to make of your noise; so please stop.” We all slept
at Kalo that night, and left before daylight for Kerepunu.
About a week before the arrival of the “ Ellengowan,” the
schooners “ Pride of the Logan” and “Annie” had been fishing in
the bay near Keppel Point, and the latter vessel had a station on
shore. A dispute had occurred between her crew and the
natives about the purchase of some btsche-de-mer. Several shots
were fired, and a native was wounded in the arm. This rankled
in the minds of the people, and three weeks afterwards the
young men from several villages combined to attack the
foreigners. The attack was made on a shore party at midday,


but after thrusting a couple of spears into the cook and stand-
ing a few shots they took to their heels. The whites say several
natives were shot and carried off. A night or two afterwards
their curing-house was burnt, with a quantity of provisions and
trade, but whether by accident or design is not known. Both
vessels cleared out, not thinking it safe to remain.
The district in which these villages are situated is known as
Aroma. It is densely populated, and therefore important from
a missionary point of view. It was at a village near Keppel
Point that Mr. Chalmers nearly lost his life in May last. He
had walked through several villages with only the teacher Taria
and a Mare native named Jack, in Mr. Goldie’s employ, who
carried a double shot-gun. Mr. Chalmers saw that the people
were getting excited, and that mischief was brewing, so they
made for the boat. There were several natives from the cannibal
districts among the crowd, and the teachers heard them consult-
ing as to when they should kill the Dim-dims (foreigners).
Finally, someone suggested that they should wait till they
reached the boat, and so capture and kill the whole party. The
clothes and trade were to go to the Aroma people, but the bodies
were to be given to the Orangerie Bay folks to be eaten ! They
were only kept back by fear of the gun, and tried hard to induce
Jack to fire it off. On reaching the beach, Mr. Chalmers
suddenly threw a quantity of beads amongst the crowd and all
made a rush for the boat. A howl of disappointed rage arose,
and for a few minutes their position was critical, as the Chinese
boat’s crew lost their heads and allowed the boat to get broad-
side on to the beach. But they were fortunate enough to get
off safely. It was during this trip that Mr. Chalmers made the
acquaintance of Koapena, the chief at Keppel Point, whose
people afterwards attacked the “Annie.” This man has great
influence throughout the Aroma district, and is dreaded by the
people of Kerepunu. After considerable difficulty Mr. Chalmers
succeeded in getting a message conveyed to him, asking him to
come to Kerepunu, and we found him there on our return from
Kalo. We took him on board the “ Sappho” and confronted him
with Captain Webb, of the “ Pride of the Logan.” The chief gave
much the same account of the affray as we had previously heard.
He is a splendid specimen of the “noble savage,” about fifty
years of age, 6ft. 2in. in height, and has a determined look that
bodes ill for those who cross his path. He was terribly scared
at the man-of-war, but did not betray it further than by a nervous
grip of my arm, which I had linked in his lest he should make a
sudden leap over the side. After Captain Digby had made him
several presents, he took him on deck to see the crew exercised
at general quarters. The rushing to and fro of the men, the
bugle calls, and rapid words of command fairly deprived him of
speech, and when a shell was fired from one of the great guns


his legs gave way under him. He left the vessel with assurances
that thenceforth there should be peace between his people and
the foreigners. We spent the rest of the day in exploring the
Dundee, and, as anticipated, found that after about five miles it
became a mere ditch, with scarcely water enough to float a canoe.
The “Sappho” left onAugust l,andMr.Chalmers andl went
in a boat with Koapena to visit his village, Maopa, at Keppel
Point. We pulled into the middle of the bay, and up a salt-
water creek that offered an easier means of reaching the village
than the long pull round the point. This involved passing near
the villages that took part in the recent attack, so we asked
Koapena if the people would be likely to cause trouble ? He
was chewing betel at the time, but stopped, and looking fixedly
at us for some moments, said, “ What land will give you trouble ?
Am not I with you ?” and brought his chunam spoon down with
tremendous energy on the gourd, as who should say, “ I should
like to see anyone attempt it!” “But will not these people
bear malice against the foreigners, and attack them if they
return here to fish?” He replied, with a smile of peculiar
meaning, “If they do, where will they go to live ? Will they go
up to the skies ?” After ascending the creek about three miles,
we landed in a mangrove swamp and walked to Maopa. We saw
here some crabs that reminded us of a story told by a certain
gallant admiral, more remarkable for ingenuity than for his
veracity, when teased by some ladies for a good sea story.
“ Well, ladies,” he began, “ I was sailing one day in the Medi-
terranean in a fine frigate, and bowling along about nine knots,
when suddenly, while writing in my cabin, I felt the ship’s way
stopped dead! ‘On deck there!’ I called out; ‘What is the
matter?’ The lieutenant of the watch put his head down the
hatch, and said, ‘ A most extraordinary occurrence, sir; please
come on deck.’ I -went on deck, and*—would you believe it,
ladies F —the sea was literally alive with lobsters! So thick
Avere they that they actually stopped the ship’s way ! I walked
forward and looked over the bows, and, sure enough, there they
were swimming about in their little red jackets” “ Why,
admiral!” exclaimed a lady, “lobsters are not red till they are
boiled !” “Oh ! damn it (beg pardon, ladies),” said the admiral,
“ I forgot that!” How the crabs that we saw had certainly not
been boiled, but for all that their shells were a bright scarlet.
After crossing a thin belt of scrub we came out on a plantation
belonging to Koapena, who made us sit down while his people
got cocoauuts and sugar-cane for us. The road lay through a
fertile plain for about five miles to the village, a little outside of
which was Koapena’s country house; here we rested for a short
time on a bed of leaves spread for us, and orders were given to
have food cooked against our return. Nothing could exceed the
kindness and attention of the old chief. He and another—a


sort o£ henchman—carried us over every little pool o£ water or
swamp on the road, and he was constantly assuring us that there
was no cause for fear, I flatter myself we felt less than he did
on board the “ Sappho.” The village of Maopa is built between
two sandhills, a short distance from the beach, and is larger than
any we have yet seen. The houses are altogether different from
those in the Kerepuuu district, having the gables extending
several feet above the ridge-pole, giving a canoe-like appearance
to the roof. They are built on piles and are two-storied, but the
upper room extends the whole length of each house, with a short
ladder giving access to it through a kind of trap-door. The
ceiling of the lower room in the chief’s house was carved in
geometrical patterns, and from it hung a number of wooden
hooks—like double harpoons —to suspend things by. Over the
doorway, in an inclined position, as if ready to fall on the head
of intruders, was the chief’s war club, a stone disc, the size of a
cheese-plate, with a long handle, and at the opposite end was a
pile of firewood neatly stacked. The winter’s supply of yams
was stowed away in the upper story, into which we followed the
chief, away from the prying eyes of his followers, who crowded
the platform below, and there produced our presents. He took
down a bundle from the roof, and undid one wrapper after
another until he come to his stock of feather ornaments, which
are only worn on great occasions, and, after long and solemn
deliberation, selected some, which ho handed to us as the most
precious gifts he had to bestow. “ Put them on,” said he, “ that
all the people may know you are my friends.” Thus decorated,
we marched through the village, and found it, like Kalo, kept
very clean around the houses. After resting some time, we re-
turned to Koapena’s country house, where a dinner of taro and
yams was served. These people, although so near Kerepunu,
have not yet learned to use tobacco ; but the old chief took an
occasional whiff from our pipes, by way of impressing his
followers. Koapena and a number of his people accompanied
us back to the boat, and we regretted being unable to spend
more time with him. I believe we have secured a valuable and
powerful friend in this chief, and trust no new unpleasantness
between Ihe fishers and the natives will occur to
mar the present relations. With Koapena’s assistance, it ought
not to be a very difficult matter to cross New Guinea to Huon
Gulf, and, with Mr. Chalmers for a companion. I am ready at
any time to make the attempt. It was sundown when we reached
the boat, and 11 p.m. before we arrived at Kerepunu.
During our absence a Karotongan teacher, who had long
been ill of consumption, died. A new cance was bought from
the natives to serve as a coffin, and the ends being sawn off and
a lid fitted, it formed a tolerable substitute. The poor fellow
was buried the following morning at the foot of a shady tree, on


a hill overlooking the sea, and this being the first funeral of a
foreigner the whole population turned out to see the ceremony.
The children swarmed up the tree, and perched upon every over-
hanging branch, until we feared some accident would happen.
The natives kept remarkably quiet throughout the service, and
sharply rebuked the youngsters for chattering.
It is melancholy to think of the number of good men who
have been sacrificed since the commencement of the New Guinea
mission. These poor fellows were brought from their pleasant
island homes in a delightful climate, dropped here and there
along an unhealthy coast, and left to their fate until it was con-
venient for the “ Ellengowan” to 1 visit them. If the place proved
healthy, well and good ; if otherwise, their places were supplied
by fresh arrivals. Their pay is £ls a-year, out of which they
have to clothe and feed themselves, build houses, and buy land
to cultivate. In an unhealthy climate like this men require
something more than cocoanuts and yams to support life, and
these teachers ought to be supplied with meat, flour, tea, and
sugar. They are the true heroes of the mission, but at the May
meetings at Exeter Hall who hears their names ?—-I have the
honour to be, Sir, your most obedient servant,
HENEY M. CHESTEE.
To the Honourable the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.
Stacey Island, South Cape,
August 30, 1878.
Sir, —Continuing my report of 27th instant, I have the
honour to inform you that I left Kerepunu on the 3rd idem.
The cruise along the coast offered little worthy of remark. We
anchored at Grange Island, Amazon Bay, Dufaure Island, Port
Dudfield, and Meikle Bay, and had intercourse with the natives.
Those at Amazon Bay were the most miserable specimens we
had seen. They build their villages on the tops of almost in-
accessible crags for fear of their enemies from Toulon Island,
who come across to the mainland to plant, leaving their women
in charge of two or three men only. This gave rise to the report
that there was a district in New Guinea inhabited solely by
women, hence the name Amazon Bay. We procured specimens
of Masooi bark there, and the natives say there is plenty of it.
Mr. Chalmers and I went on shore everywhere and made pre-
sents to the chiefs. The canoes crowded round the vessel, and
hoop iron was in great demand, but the specimens of arms and
ornaments offered for sale were scarcely worth picking up.
Between Orangerie Bay and South Cape are several snug coves,
almost landlocked, which offer good shelter for small crafts
trading on the coast. These appear to have escaped notice when


the “ Basilisk” surveyed the coast. There are no mission stations
between Kerepunu and South Cape, but the hiatus will be sup-
plied on the arrival of the “ John Williams” in October. Arrived
at South Cape on August 10, and put up in Mr. Chalmers’
house, which is situated on the north side of the island facing
the main land. It is built close to the beach and in the centre
of the village, which is but a small one, at the foot of a hill 900 ft.
high. Although the station has only been formed eight months,
there is more land under cultivation than in any station I have
visited, and everything seems flourishing. The pumpkin and
pawpaw are well known in the South-east Peninsula, and Mr.
Chalmers has introduced a number of vegetables and fruit, the
seeds of which are eagerly sought after by the natives. Peri,
the teacher from Boera, will live in the memory of the Hew
Guinea natives when most of the European missionaries are for-
gotten. He is known from Boera to South Cape and along the
shores of the Papuan Gulf as the introducer of the sweet
potato, which bears his name. Peri-mota Sliow (Stacey Island)
was selected as a mission station with a view to health, other-
wise the people of the mainland are far preferable to live
amongst. The natives are very jealous of others holding inter-
course with the mission, and, although an insignificant tribe,
appear to have considerable influence, through alliances with
their more powerful neighbours. The women are particularly
ill-favoured, and might well have suggested the idea of “ ghouls
in a graveyard” to the Arabian novelist. A night or two after
our arrival we heard an unusual talking in the village, and on
going down to learn the cause found the son of the chief
addressing an audience of two small boys and a woman with
great volubility on the fearful enormity of cannibalism ; but, as
Jack Bunsby puts it, “ The bearing of the case lies in the appli-
cation of it.” He had no sentimental horror of cannibalism in
the abstract—he merely objected to becoming the subject. It
appears that a day or two previous a respectable father of a family
departed this life, and the widow being inconsolable for his loss,
and determined that even in death they should not be divided,
dug up the remains on the day of the funeral and ate them!
His speech was something to this effect: —“ Oh ye people of
Show, what kind of women are these who eat even their own
relations ? If we permit this kind of thing we shall have them
eating us after death. Let us kill them first —or stay, let us
banish them to the country of the Dim-dims. Begone!” His
wife was also very energetic in protesting, but as she had not
been invited to the feast I mistrust the sincerity of her convic-
tions. The Show women were particularly venomous after the
attack on the “ Mayri.” They tried their very utmost to goad
the men into attacking the station on shore, and when they found
it impossible to screw their men’s courage to the sticking point,


they brought their shields out from their houses and smashed
them with every mark of opprobrium and contempt. Long after
the men made friends the women avoided the station, and some
are only now beginning to frequent the house. The eagerness
of these people for hoop-iron causes them to work willingly in
planting, house building, and cutting wood for the steamer. A
piece of iron 6in. or Sin. long is considered a fair equivalent for
a good day’s work, while red cloth and beads will purchase food
in any quantity. lam at a loss to discover whether a pig, a
canoe, or a human life is the most valuable. The same article
will purchase the two first, and atone for the other, namely, a
pair of shell armlets! The balance of evidence, however, is in
favour of the latter, as the deceased will probably have relatives
who must all receive compensation. Stacey Island is favourably
situated for holding intercourse with strangers from other islands.
The fame of “ Tamate” (Mr. Chalmers’ native name) has been
noised abroad, so that people from China Strait, and even from
the Louisiade Archipelago, visit him.
On the evening of August 13, having completed our
arrangements for a walk across the peninsula to Milne Bay,
which Mr. Chalmers had long contemplated, we went over in a
boat to Yarauru, a village in Catamaran Bay, from whence we
were to obtain carriers. We were met on the beach by the
whole population, and escorted to the chief’s house, who was
sitting in state to receive us, with his son-in-law. “ Keep
silence, everybody,” he cried out; “ the great chiefs are with us,
let their voices alone be heard.” He then busied himself in
looking after our gear, and seeing it carefully stowed away in
his house. After the usual inspection by the women and chil-
dren, we withdrew and arranged our camp for the night. The
houses in this village, and indeed those of all this part of the
country, resemble those described at Maopa, but are much
smaller and have only one story. The portion devoted to the
women was at the end farthest from the door, or entrance, and
partitioned off by a sort of screen about 2ft. high. Close to this
was a fireplace, round which was a neat framework resembling a
miniature lift. From it depended a couple of loops of cord, in
which our host was wont to sling his heels in order to toast his
nether extremities. Before retiring to rest everything was
arranged for an early start, and the old man Quiani seemed
anxious to set oft; but about midnight he awoke us, and in a
most lugubrious voice told us he had dreamt a dream! He
droned away for about half-an-hour, the burthen of his song
being the terrors of the road we were to travel. He dreamt
that rain fell in torrents ; thunder and lightning worse than had
ever been experienced was incessant; and to crown all, Mamoose
(myself) and the China boy knocked up on the mountains, and
could neither proceed nor return, I thought this portion of the


dream not unlikely of fulfilment, for I had been leading a seden-
tary life for three years past and was in no condition for climb-
ing mountains, but kept my thoughts to myself. “Now that I have
told you my dream, will you still venture ?” “ Certainly, old
boy; goto sleep, and let us do likewise.” With a long-drawn
sigh he fell back on his wooden pillow, and we fondly hoped we
had done with him, but at 2 a.m. he was as brisk as ever, calling
out to us to get up as a new day had begun. It was impossible
to be angry with the old fellow, so we made the best of it, and
sat talking by the fire till daylight. This affords an opportunity
for a sketch of the old chief. He is about 60 years of age and
about sft. 7in. in height, but as wiry and active as a young man.
His bald bullet head, seamed with scars, and little twinkling
eyes, give a most comical expression to his face, in which, even
when excited, there is nothing of that ferocity one has been
accustomed to associate with cannibals. He is not only a
great chief, but a renowned sorcerer, with a reputation extending
far beyond the limits of his tribe. After the attack on Mayri,
when the sorcerers of Suow were compassing the destruction of
the mission by all the spells known to them, Quiani upset their
machinations, and turned the tide of popular favour in the other
direction, since which he has proved a firm and useful friend.
As soon as it was light enough to see, the loads were appor-
tioned to the carriers, not without the shirking and shifting
usual on such occasions. Finally, everything was shouldered by
6 s’clock, except our stock of boop-iron, weighing about 361 b.
No one would undertake this, and in an evil hour, thinking to
shame them into picking it up, Mr. Chalmers and I slung it on a
pole aud carried it between us. A shout of laughter greeted this
performance, aud the procession started. I began to think we had
let ourselves in for a good thing, when the chief called a halt, and
two able young fellows coming forward relieved us of this awful
nightmare. Our party now consisted of Mr. Chalmers, three
teachers, my Chinese servant, myself, and twenty carriers, five of
whom were women. We started at a brisk pace through a fig-
tree scrub, up one ridge and down another, past waterfalls with
deep pools at the bottom of gorges into which the sun seldom
penetrates, until about 11 a.m., when we came out on a river
rushing over a bed of shingle which falls into Catamaran Bay.
We spelled here ten minutes, but Quiani would not let us boil
the kettle, saying we had still a long way to travel. Now began
the hardest travelling I ever experienced. We crossed and re-
crossed the river some twenty times, the depth and current in-
creasing with each occasion. At times the bed of the river
afforded the only practicable road. With cramps in the legs
from walking all day in water, I trudged painfully along, sitting
down occasionally to empty the gravel from my shoes, and
devoutly wishing for the sight of a cocoanut tree to indicate a


village at hand. At length I was fairly exhausted, and sat down
by the side of a brook at the foot of a steep range. One good
fellow, named Berigi, son-in-law to Quiani, stuck by me, and
encouraged me to proceed. An artist of the tribe has per-
petuated this man’s features in ebony in the form of a chunam
spoon, which I shall ever retain as a memorial of a genial old
cannibal, who, though bearing a striking resemblance to the
popular idea of “ Auld Clootie,” I found a good-natured fellow
and capital company. By 3 p.m, I gained the top of the range,
and found the whole party camped there. It was a spur of the
Cloudy Mountain range, 2,700 ft. above sea level, and not more
than seven or eight miles from the sea in a direct line, although
it h(id taken us nine hours to reach it. Quiani insisted on our
going on, but I considered I had done enough for a first day, and
determined to camp where I was. At length it was arranged
that Mr. Chalmers and the main body should press on to the
village, leaving Berigi and two more to camp with the teachers
and myself. The top of the ridge was only a few yards wide,
and afforded barely sufficient ground for a camp. While waiting
for the moon to rise, Berigi suddenly declared he saw an old
woman of the tribe who had died some time before, and com-
menced throwing fire-sticks on each side of the range to drive
her away; but this not having the desired effect he asked us to
fire off our guns, after which we had peace, A light rain fell at
intervals all night, but we were too tired to mind that. At day-
light we found that, although we had the cooking utensils, the
food had gone on. We made tea with the milk of a cocoanut in
the absence of water, and then began the descent of the range,
passing through plantations of taro, surrounded by stout log
fences, until we came to a river which the natives say falls into
a large lagoon at the head of Orangerie Bay. Crossed an
affluent of this, and rested a short time at a village of three or
four houses on the bank. The proper camp was at a larger
village three miles further on, and all the people had gone there,
taking two pigs with them. After about three hours’ travelling
we reached the village of Diodio, where we spent the remainder
of the day, and dried our things. Quiani came out strong here.
He put on all his war paint and ornaments, and regularly took
charge of the village. Flourishing a big knife, he marched up
and down before the chief’s house where we were camped, and
gave the people to understand that the Dimdims were his friends,
and he would like to see anyone disturb them. His excitement
and energy were something wonderful for an old man, and now
and then he would whisper to us with a comical wink, “ These
people will look upon me as a great chief.” Everything was
paid for through Quiani with hoop-iron, beads, and red cloth ;
in fact, he got everything he asked for, and lavished presents on
his friends. All day the women were busy cooking, and in the


evening twelve large pots filled with taro were placed before us,
any one of which was a meal for ten people; but eventually it
all disappeared, in addition to the two pigs. These people
showed better taste than those of Kalo, for they were continually
pressing us to sing. Uana, uana (sing, sing) was perpetually in
their mouths. Altogether we spent a very pleasant time, and
gave them cause to remember our visit for years to come.
August 16.—Started about 6 a.m., and travelled through a
large plain covered with dense fig-tree scrub for about eight
miles, crossed two rivers, both falling into the lagoon, and passed
through three villages, breakfasting at the last. The road then
lay through the bed of the second river for several miles. We
had to clamber over boulders slippery with moss, and pick our
way carefully through a rapid stream, where a false step meant a
dislocated ankle, or perhaps a broken bone, until we began to
think we had done a fair day’s work; but here, as on the first
day, a lofty range faced us which must be surmounted before we
could enjoy rest. The aneroid showed a height of about 360 ft.
at the foot of the mountain, and after a toilsome steep ascent
we gained the summit, 3,360 ft. above sea level. Pandanus trees,
with roots 20ft. long, and large fig-trees with the fruit growing
in clusters on the trunk as well as on the branches, clothed the
slopes and crest of the range, which, like the first, was only a
few yards wide. It was now 4 p.m., and we had been travelling
ten hours, so we arranged to camp here. But the day’s work
was not yet over for Mr. Chalmers ; word was brought that one
of the teachers had been taken ill half-way up the mountain, and
he hurried down with brandy and medicine to his assistance.
Finally, the teacher was carried up to the camp by the natives,
with frequent halts and relays of bearers. Quiani was very
much concerned, and said, “ Bid not I tell you the mountains
were very dificult to cross, and that you would never do it; and
now I shall get into trouble for bringing sickness to the people.”
Saying this, he seated himself beside the sick man, and com-
menced a series of incantations, occasionally whispering and
blowing into his chunam gourd, and corking it up, until at length
he arose and expressed himself satisfied that no danger was to
be feared.
August 17. —It was most unfortunate that a thick mist
obscured the view from the top of the range at sunrise, as we
hoped to have been able to see the level country and the lagoon
at the head of Orangerie Bay. Two hours of easy descent
brought us to a village on the brow of a hill 2,300 ft. above, and
overlooking Milne Bay, where we halted tor breakfast. A pig
Avas purchased for four pieces of hoop-iron and a fantail toma-
hawk, and the chief, seizing a spear, began walking up and down
in an excited manner as if about to attack us, but turning sud-
denly as the pig was borne past on a pole, he plunged the spear


into its heart and went on talking as if nothing had happened.
The women at this village were better looking than those we had
hitherto seen, and are not disfigured by tatooing. Instead of
blacking themselves from head to foot as a sign of mourning,
they cover the breasts with a fringe of long grass hanging from
the neck. We noticed a pretty monument over a recent grave,
consisting of a miniature house constructed to scale and neatly
finished, with carved wood sides ornamented with colours.
Heavy clouds rested on the Stirling Range, and it was becoming
evident that if our journey had been delayed a couple of days it
would never have been made. A Scotch mist made the hill-sides
slippery, and settled into a steady downpour as we started. The
talking and feasting at this village, added to the fatigue he had
previously undergone, began to tell upon the old sorcerer, and I
was rather pleased to see it, as the pace was not quite so hot as
it had been. He assured us there were ,no more hills to climb,
and, after a difficult descent, we rested on a small island in a
river, expecting to reach Discovery Bay that evening. A long
consultation took place, when, with a grave face, Quiaui informed
us that there was a village a little off the road with which he was
at feud, and what better time could there be for making peace
than when the Dim-dims were with him P In vain we stormed
and refused to hear of such a thing ; he had an answer for every
objection. At last Mr. Chalmers thought he had clenched the
matter by saying, “ If we go to this village we shall have to part
with the hoop-iron, &e., reserved for Yako-Yako (our last halting
place).” “ Oh,” said Quiani, “is that all that troubles you P
Bear not. I will bear all the expenses! ” Then began a
number of incantations to ensure a favourable reception. H e
scraped a quantity of cocoanut into a shell, and the whole party
anointed their heads and faces with it, and plunged into the
stream to wash it off. They next mixed some black pigment in
a shell and painted their faces in various devices, while the old
sorcerer mounted his favourite necklace of shell, with a large
boar’s tusk attached, and put on his shell armlets and feathers.
We preserved a sulky silence all this time, and when the word
to march was given sternly bade him take the road to Vako-Vako.
After about an hour’s travelling we were disgusted to find
another small range to climb, and forced the old rascal to confess
1 hat he was off the right track. There was nothing for it but to
s-übmit, as evening was approaching, and right glad we Avere to
make a village at last. We marched in with due solemnity,
having previously been assigned our places in the procession.
The people of the village had notice of our approach, and were
seated round a circle of stones under a cocoanut tree. A shout
of welcome greeted our party, but no one rose. We made the
circuit of the stones, and then by Quiaui’s direction seated our-
selves within the circle. He threw down his tomahawk with
32


great force at the feet of the chief, and Berigi did the same with
two pieces of hoop-iron. These were evidently a peace-offering,
or compensation for some old cause of complaint. A grey-
headed woman of the tribe then came forward and embraced
Quiani, and the chief of the village started up and began a
promenade, brandishing a large club. Peace having been thus
happily concluded, our wants were attended to ; a pig was killed,
taro baked, and very soon silence reigned in the camp. The
house given up for our use was probably that occupied by the
young unmarried men. There was no women’s compartment in
it, and at each end, in a kind of rack, about fifty spears were
arranged ready for instant use. In all these houses the ends
extend an inch or two below the floor to prevent the inmates
being speared in their sleep, and it is necessary to crawl in on
the hands and knees. It was situated at the edge of a steep
cliff overlooking Discovery Bay and the village of Yako-Yako.
The chief’s wife wept bitterly for the death of her pig, which
w r as sacrificed to entertain us, but did not object to partake of it.
It is a common thing in this part of New Guinea to see women
nursing the young pigs. Our carriers were in clover here, and
wished ns to remain ; but we started on the morning of August
18, and after an hour’s travelling arrived at Yako-Vako, a large
village in Discovery Bay. It had been arranged that the “ Ellen-
gowan” was to call here on the 19th, in case we were unable to
continue our original programme, which was to walk to Orangerie
Bay, and thence to Farm Bay. The Yako-Yako people were at
war with the villages on the road, and this of itself was sufficient
to upset our plans; but two days’ consecutive rain had so
flooded the country as to make travelling impossible. The chief,
Buniara, gave us a house to live in, and did his best to make us
comfortable; but the rain and swarms of blowflies destroyed
the pleasure we should otherwise have had. Crowds of natives
flocked to see us, and were never tired of examining our skins
and feeling our limbs, speculating the while how we should eat,
until I began to feel like one of the plates in Mrs. Acton’s
cookery-book —marked out in joints. They baked a dog for us
as a great treat, and were quite disappointed that we did not
partake of it. They began to weary of us when the steamer
did not come in as expected, on the 19th, and hinted that she
was not coming at all, upon which Quiani said, “Never mind,
there are twenty-three war canoes in my district, and if the
steamer does not come I will send fur them to fetch you away.”
Thus we had crossed the peninsula (in about sixty miles), from
South Cape to Milne Bay, through a population of cannibals,
and have seen more of their domestic life than falls to the lot of
most people. Our progress throughout was a royal march, and
we felt as safe as if in our ow r n houses. We were virtually
unarmed, for the natives carried my fire-arms, and throughout
33


the journey not a single article was stolen. Our trip may not
have been rich in scientific results, but at least we have demon-
strated that it is possible to travel among savages and cannibals
in New Guinea without resorting to coats of mail, explosive
bullets, or dynamite. As for the road, Ido not think there is a
square yard of ground in the country, even in the plains, upon
which to set the foot without treading on the buttress of a fig-
tree, a root, or a boulder. 1 have crossed a range in Oman, on
the coast of Arabia, 10,000 ft. high, the Lebanon, and the sources
of the Euphrates and Tigris, but never did I encounter such
difficult country. lam indebted to Mr. Chalmers for the oppor-
tunity, for without his assistance, and the confidence with which
He has inspired the natives, the journey could never have been
accomplished.
The “ Ellengowan” arrived on August 20, and remained till
the following morning. A pig weighing 2cwt. was purchased for
ten pieces of hoop-iron, a tomahawk, and knife, and more pre-
sents were distributed. Some of our carriers, in attempting to
recross the mountains, were nearly swept away by the swollen
torrents, so they concluded to return in the steamer. On
August 2L we crossed Milne Bay to East Cape. There are two
Loyalty Island teachers here, but I question whether the place
is sufficiently healthy for them to remain. Next day we steamed
through China Strait to Dinner Island, on which there are a few
cocoanut trees, but no inhabitants. Mr. McFarlane has pur-
chased it from the natives of Heath Island, and employed a
number of them to clear it, with a view to forming a healthy
central mission station. There are two teachers on Heath, and
two on Tesle Island, all from the Loyalty Group. It is to be
hoped, for the sake of the inhabitants of Moresby Island (Basi-
laki), that a teacher will soon be sent there. I have christened
this island the Victualling Yard, as it serves as a sort of depdt
for fresh provisions for the people of China Strait and the main-
land. If a human victim is required for a feast, they make a
raid on Basilaki, and generally succeed in capturing one or more.
Should any of them be caught at sea in their canoes, they are
invariably killed and eaten; but, being a weak tribe, they are
powerless to reciprocate these little amenities. AVe left Mr.
McFarlane at Dinner Island, and reached Suow the same day.
It has rained almost without intei’mission since August 20, and
in consequence we have been unable to visit the villages in Farm
and Catamaran Bays. These people have always borne an evil
reputation, and the specimens we have seen at Suow have not
impressed us with any great liking for them ; but these are only
stronger reasons for going amongst them, and we regretted being
deprived of the opportunity.
Our recent cruise will have dispelled the prevailing idea that
New Guinea is a country solely inhabited by savage races with


whom it is impossible to hold intercourse, and that annexation
is an easy matter. These people cannot he dispossessed of their
•country as easily as the aborigines of Australia. They have
vested interests and rights that cannot be disregarded; but lam
sanguine that the day is not far distant when this land^will be
opened up to the markets of Manchester and Sheffield. Copra
in large quantities may he procured in the districts of Hula and
Aroma, and masooi bark, cedar, and ebony in the south-east
peninsula.
It is remarkable that an agricultural people who do not eat
human flesh should be “ sandwiched in,” as it were, between the
cannibal inhabitants of the western shores of the Papuan Gulf
■and Oraugerie Bay, in the south-east peninsula. Thanks to Mr.
Lawes, we are better acquainted with the legends of the Port
Moresby district than those of any other portion of New
Guinea east of the 141st meridian. According to these they
are the conquering race, who are gradually displacing the canni-
bals on the coast. The Kerepunites, again, are a different race,
and are said to resemble the people of Eastern Polynesia. Mr.
Chalmers kindly translated for me the following legend as told
in Earotongau, by Peri’s wife, who had heard it from the people
of Boera. Ages ago Port Moresby produced food in abundance,
hut a quarrel arose, which resulted in a secession of one-half of
the tribe, and from that time the sago, palm, and cocoanut tree
gradually died out. About this time lire, which was previously
unknown, was brought to them by a dog. The people had
noticed a brilliant light at night and thick smoke by day, in a
large canoe becalmed off their coast, and knew not what it was.
In those days they lived on intimate terms with the birds and
animals, and could converse with them. The turtle first volun-
teered to fetch news concerning this strange light, but failed in
the attempt. The pigeon next tried, but fell exhausted into the
sea while returning with a flaming brand. The dog then offered
his services. He boarded the canoe, and saw water boiled and
food cooked by this mysterious light. Watching his opportunity,
he jumped overboard with a brand in his mouth, and swam ashore
in safety with his prize. He taught the people how to use the
fire, and to cook their food, but they forgot in time the benefits
conferred by the dog, and treated him with ingratitude, so he
revenged himself by biting the people, and fomented the quarrel
which led to the dispersion of the tribe. Those who remained
at Port Moresby were reduced to the verge of starvation, biit
eventually their brethren, taking compassion upon them, taught
them the art of making pottery, and sold sago to them in
exchange for earthenware pots.
Should small trading vessels visit the coast, the following
■simple direction for their guidance may be found useful:—
Keep the bulk of your trade out of sight, and if in a small
vessel do not allow the natives on board. Pay scrupulously for


everything you receive, and if the owner is not satisfied return
the article offered for sale. In all our traffic with them we never
met with a single instance of dishonesty in trading. Should
anything be stolen, do not resort to firearms, but stop the trad-
ing, and in most cases the missing article will be restored. As
Mr. Lawes remarks, “ Confidence begets confidence,” and our
experience has abundantly proved this truth. Respect their
women and avoid all excitement. Having ascertained who are
chiefs, give them small presents; but chiefs will multiply in an
extraordinary manner if discretion is not used. It is a good
plan to give presents of beads to women with children in arms.
Do not be over-confident, even though the natives appear un-
armed ; it is astonishing how soon they are supplied with
weapons in the event of a row. If a disturbance takes place on
board while any of your party are on shore, on no account fire a
gun, but hoist a flag previously agreed upon.
American tomahawks, tobacco, and knives are required to
trade with the people from Yule Island to Keppel Point. Stout
hoop-iron about Sin. long, red cloth, beads, and looking-glasses
will pass current on the rest of the coast, although fantail toma-
hawks and knives are in great request. In an appendix I give a
list, kindly furnished by Mr. Chalmers, of most articles of food
or commerce in the dialects of Port Moresby and Dauni, a
knowledge of which will facilitate operations. Traders who deal
honestly and kindly by the natives may be sure of meeting with
every assistance from the missionaries and teachers, notwith-
standing the prevailing impression that they are interested in
keeping strangers out of the country.
Since leaving Murray Island we have visited twenty-six
villages, and slept at ten. We have invested twenty chiefs with
the “ Order of the Red Nightcap but Quiani is Knight Grand
Cross, and Berigi Tv C. of the order. Perhaps the person best
known by repute on the New Guinea coast, from Port Moresby
to South Cape, after Peri, is the lafe proprietor and edilor of the
Cooldown Merala, through a clever mechanical toy rejoicing in
the euphonious name of the “ Double Jubilee Gymnasts !” which
he gave to Captain Rcdlich, and which we secnred. Wherever
we went crowds flocked to see the extraordinary contortions of
“ Missi Bayli,” as it was called. We also constructed a telephone
with two jam tins and a couple of iguana skins, which afforded
great amusement to the people of Suow.
Finally, I have to express my thanks to the committee of the
New Guinea Mission for the readiness with which they granted
me a passage in the “Ellengowan,” and for the many kindnesses I
have received from them during the cruise.—l have the honour
to be, Sir, your most obedient servant,
HENRY M. CHESTER.
The Honourable the Colonial Secretary, Brisbane.


APPENDIX.
In the following list of words, as in all proper names in mj
report, the Italian vowel sounds are used, being the plan adopted
by the New Guinea Mission :
English. Port Moresby. Daunt.
Water Lanu Goird
Cocoanuts Niu Niu
Banana Piku Asae
Sago Rapia Rapia
Taro Taro Udo
Yams Mao Apoi
Pigs Poroma Poro
Tomahawk Ila Revareva
Knife Kaid Nigo
Hoop-iron Tlalia Gourigouri
Pish-hook ivunai Aure
Needle Turituri Din
Looking-glass Yarivari Hu
Beads Akeva Bordimdim
Red cloth Tapua-kaka Upu
Spear lo Arabia
Shield K esi Opea
Club Kahi Putuputu
Sword Kareva Erepa
Paddle Ote Nose
Canoe Yauaki Yaka
Bowl Tihu Gaeba
Armlets Toea Kavivile
Basket ... Ilaiala
Net Bag Kiapa Marra
Pottery IJro Gureva
House Luma Numa
Massoi bark ... Goobu
Ebony ... Gahi
Native mahogany ... Pauri
Cedar Nara Ivini
N.B.—The district of Dauni extends from Orangerie Bay
to South Cape. The Port Moresby dialect will be understood in
the Kerepunu district.
By Authority ? James 0. Beal, Government Printer, Brisbane.


