

[?]
NARRATIVE
OF
JAMES MURRELLS’
(“JEMMY MORRILL”)
SEVENTEEN YEARS’ EXILE
AMONG
THE WILD BLACKS OF NORTH QUEENSLAND,
AND
HIS LIFE AND SHIPWRECK AND TERRIBLE ADVENTURES
AMONG SAVAGE TRIBES; THEIR MANNERS, CUSTOMS,
LANGUAGES, AND SUPERSTITIONS;
ALSO
MURRELLS’ RESCUE AND RETURN TO CIVILIZATION.
BY
EDMUND GREGORY.
PRINTED BY EDMUND GREGORY, BRISBANE.
1896.




NARRATIVE
OF
JAMES MURRELLS’
(“JEMMY MORRILL”)
SEVENTEEN YEARS’ EXILE
AMONG
THE WILD BLACKS OF NORTH QUEENSLAND,
AND
HIS LIFE AND SHIPWRECK AND TERRIBLE ADVENTURES
AMONG SAVAGE TRIBES; THEIR MANNERS, CUSTOMS,
LANGUAGES, AND SUPERSTITIONS ;
ALSO
MURRELLS' RESCUE AND RETURN TO CIVILIZATION.
BY
EDMUND GREGORY.
PRINTED BY EDMUND GREGORY, BRISBANE.
IS9G.




PREFACE.
This pamphlet was originally published in 1863, and success
fully and rapidly passed through several editions, all of which
have long since passed out of print and public notice. The
majority of those who read the first edition have gone to the
hereafter, and a new generation been born and grown to man-
hood and womanhood since Queensland was excited by the first
story of the shipwrecked mariner rescued from the wild blacks
of the Burdekin Eiver in 1863.
This edition is published with the author’s belief that the
remarkable narrative will be quite as interesting to the new
generation as to the old.
Apart from its recognised value to the ethnologist it must
ever remain the sole available record of one of the most thrilling
and astounding incidents in early Australian history.
There is now no possibility of such an experience being
repeated. The Burdekin blacks have been civilized out of
existence, and on no other part of the Queensland coast could
a wrecked person remain among any native tribe without being
killed, or speedily restored to his own people.
The first edition of this work was written partly to satisfy
an urgent public demand, and partly to provide funds for
Murrells’ immediate necessities. It not only succeeded so well
financially that I was able to hand him a considerable sum, but
it also directed the attention of the Government to his helpless
position, and he received an appointment in the Custom House
at Bowen, where he gave valuable services in maintaining
harmony between the frontier settlers and the surrounding
tribes with whose dialects he was well acquainted.
From time to time, during the intermediate period, since


1863, T have received letters referring to this work from Ameri-
can, European, and British scientific societies interested in
Murrells' account of the customs, laws, and languages of the
aboriginals, and of their food producing plants.
When recalling the original hasty compilation of fragmen-
tary facts, and thinking of the additional historical and ethno-
logical value that might have been given to this narrative at the
time it was written, I earnestly regret not making a special
effort to exhaust Murrells’ store of rare and instructive know-
ledge, of which lam painfully conscious I have only touched the
mere fringe, and so take all available advantage of an oppor-
tunity that, once departed, can never again return.
I must acknowledge my indebtedness to Archibald Meston,
Esq., in finally revising this little brochure for press, and
without the association of whose name any work on the abo-
riginals of this Colony would, I feel, be wanting.
DEMUND GREG-ORY.
NOTE TO THE FIFTH EDITION.
The substance of this pamphlet was published iu 1863, but it
has Jong since been out of print, and believing that the narrative
of the sufferings and strange incidents here recorded will be
read with interest as long as Queensland is in existence, I have
determined to reissue it. It has, however, been necessary to
rewrite it. Under the circumstances it was to be expected that
time would have made it necessary to correct some parts,
hastily called to memory after lying dormant so long; but in
this very little had to he done: substantially no corrections were
necessary, thus proving the strength of our hero’s memorj The
most notable correction is in his own name, as will be noticed
in the first page.-
E. G.


CHAPTER I.
Birth and Parentage of James Murrells —Education—Choice of
Profession—Apprenticeship—Voyage to Sydney, New South
Wales, in the Ramilles—Voyage from Sydney to New Zea-
land and back —Shipped on board the barque “Peruvian,”
for China.
The subject of this singularly interestingnarrative, who gave
as his name James Morrill, but which ultimately proved to
be Murrells, was bom on the 20th May, 1824, in the parish
of Heybridge, a considerable village on the north side of
the River Blackwater, and a northern suburb of Maldon.
On referring to “ The History, Gazetteer, and Directory
of the County of Essex,” edited by William White,
published in 1848, among the names in ihe directory is
that of Edward Murrells, a hawker, a b:other of James
Murrells. It will not be considered anyth.ng very extra-
ordinary, after reading this narrative of suffering and
hardship resulting from seventeen years’ isolation in the
bush among the aboriginals, with a blotting out of civiliza-
tion, that there had been taken from him the power
accurately to recall his own name to memory, although he
said —that he might not forget—he sometimes sat for hours
together in the solitudes of his temporary home, as well as
to amuse his dusky companions, and traced the outline of
his name in writing on his knee, also with a pointed stick
on the sands, and then reading to them what he had written,
of which they never seemed to tire and wonder.


His father, it appears, was by profession a millwright
and engineer, and carried on business in Swan Yard, in
connection with James Hayes, James Murrells’ uncle.
From information, however, received through Henry May,
Esq., of Maldon, Government Emigration Agent, in 1865,
it was ascertained that Murrells’ father lived just long
enough to hear of his long-lost son’s restoration to civilized
life, and that immediately before bis death he greatly
desired to see him once more, a wish which unfortunately
could not be gratified. At tbe date of the publication of
the before-mentioned directory, Murrells’ uncle was still
carrying on the business in bis own name.
James Murrells at the time he finally left home had
a brother older than himself, and three sisters, his juniors.
When old enough he was sent to the village national
school. The schoolmaster was the same as in 1848,
according to the directory, Mr, George H.Eridgeby name;
he had been a soldier, consequently was a strict discipli-
narian, and he added to the usual course of study at that
time the manual exercise, and frequently put_ the boys
through their facings, to their no small amusement. His
schoolboy days, however, do not appear to. have been
marked by anything worth remembering or calling par-
ticular attention to.
When be was about 13 or 14 years of age, and bad
acquired an ordinary education, such as was generally
given in those days, and old enough to be of use, he went
with his brother to work in his father’s shop. But the
confinement of a workshop was evidently not congenial to
his somewhat restless disposition, as he was always glad of
an opportunity to get away from it, if only for a day, par-
ticularly if he could get amongst the shipping. Among
the friends who used to visit at his father’s house was a
pilot named James Firman (whose name also appears in
the Gazetteer before referred to), who pilotted craft down
the river Blackwater, and who would sometimes take the
lad with, and bring him back, in the pilot boat Tins was,


■of course, only in fine weather ; the novelty of these trips,
the songs of the sailors, the beautiful smooth sea, ami no
doubt the yarns of the sailors, made a powerful impression
on his youthful mind, and he was constantly expressing his
desire to become a sailor. His parents frequently told him
of the troubles of a sea life, and that he would soon wish
himself at home again, but he was nothing daunted.
On one occasion when he was going on one of these
excursions, the captain asked the pilot if the lad would like
a sea life; if so, and all were agreeable, he would take him
there and then, and when he arrived at Shields, the place
of his destination, he could supply him with the few
things he would need. James was consulted, and readily
agreed to go on those terms ; the pilot on his part offered
no resistance, and thus, without further consulting his
parents, he went away on his first voyage in the brig
“ Royal Sailor,” belonging to the Maldon Shipping Com-
pany. The captain was a very good man —a Wesleyan—
and a local preacher of that body. Every night at eight
o’clock, weather permitting, he used to call all hands
together, to read the Bible to them, and conduct religious
service.
Everything went on right that voyage, and his ardour
was not in the least abated to be a sailor. He went several
voyages in her, and when he was 16 years old he was bound
apprentice to the Company for four years. He served part
of his time in the “ Royal Sailor,” and part in another of
the Company’s vessels called the “ Duchess of Kent,” a
schooner. Nothing happened while serving his time except
the usual incidents attending a sea life—hairbreadth
escapes from the violence of storms, the worst he re-
membered being, when once they were driven in bad
weather to leeward of their port and went into the Eirth
of Forth for shelter.
After he finished his apprenticeship he re-joined his
old skipper, Mr. Harlin, and went four voyages with him.
But at this period of his history his ideas began to enlarge,


and he became dissatisfied with small colliers and short
voyages; he thought he would like to go long voyages in
larger ships. He made known his wish and determination
to Mr. Henry May, who was at that time agent to the
Company, and afterwards a Government Emigration
Agent in the same place; and sought his advice and
assistance, Mr. May took great interest in Murrells at
that time, and has continued to do so since his return to
civilized life. He gave him his discharge, a present for good
conduct, and three letters of recommendation—one to the
Sailors’ Home, London, and two to large shipowners. With
these he started by rail to the metropolis to seek his
fortune, where he arrived late in the afternoon. The next
morning, without much thought and without using the
letters of recommendation, he shipped on hoard a troop-
ship, the “ Eamilles,” as carpenter’s mate. He had only
time to hurry home and prepare for his voyage, which
being accomplished he left for the last time and joined his
ship at Deptford, on a Eriday. The following day they
dropped down the stream and anchored at Gravesend-
The next day (Sunday) they shipped the XI. Eegiment of
Eoot for Hobart Town, whither she was bound; also
a detachment of Eoyal Artillery, for Sydney, which was
intended for New Zealand, a war having broken out in the
Bay of Islands with the Maories. They finally started on
their voyage some time during that week, and were six
months on the voyage.
AH troop-ships were obliged to carry a double comple-
ment of hands, so that when they arrived in Sydney one
half the hands were not wanted; he thus obtained per-
mission to leave the ship. As he had not then been long
enough from home he soon shipped again, this time on
hoard a little schooner called the “Terror,” bound for
Auckland, New Zealand. He made a successful trip in
her to Auckland and back, but it not being easy to obtain
a cargo in those days some of them were discharged, him-
self among the number.


There were several vessels in the harbour laid on for
the mother-country, but still having no desire to turn home-
wards he shipped on board the ill-fated ship “ Peruvian,”
bound to China with a cargo of hardwood. The following
pages will disclose the result.
CHAPTER II.
Voyage from Sydney—Shipwreck—Forty-two days on a raft—
Reaching Land -Reception by the Natives—Death of the
Apprentice Boy, the Captain, and his Wife—Restoration to
Civilized Life —Appointment under Government—Death
and Burial.
On Tuesday, the 24th February, 1846, he shipped on board
the barque “ Peruvian,” Captain George Pitkethly, with a
full complement of hands, and passengers as follow:
Mrs. Pitkethly, Mr. and Mrs Wilmott, Miss Wilmott (an
infant), and a young nursegirl, Mr. J. E. Quarry, and
daughter, about six years old. Ship’s company —The Cap-
tain, the captain’s brother (first mate), John (second
mate), the carpenter, John Millar (sailmaker), the cook,
James Dicks, James Gooley, Jack , and James
Murrells (able seamen); James Wilson, William ,
James , and another (apprentices) ; and two black
men ; the captain, officers, and apprentices were all from
Dundee.
The following letter is confirmatory to some extent of
the above:—
Custom House, Sydney, 4th April, 1863.
Sih, —I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
30th ultimo, and in accordance with your request I forward the
list of passengers who sailed in the ill-fated barque “ Peruvian.”
Passengers—Mrs. Pitkethly (Captain’s wife), Mr. and Mrs.
Wilmott, Mr J. B. Quarry, and Miss Quarry. No list of the
crew can be found in this office.
I have the honor to be, Sir, your obedient servant,
W. A. Duncan, Collector of Customs.
To E. Gregory, Esq., Courier Office, Brisbane.


The rest of the narrative will he read with greater
interest when it is known to be as nearly as possible in his
own words —in narrative form. On Wednesday we finished
loading, and swung out from the wharf. On Thursday
she cleared at the Customs, and on the sailors’ unlucky
day (Friday) the mail came on board, with the pilot, and
we started on our voyage, with a fresh leading wind which
lasted all that day and the next. On Sunday studsails,
mainsails, ekysails —every stitch of canvas —were set, till
sundown, when threatening weather came on. All the
small sails were stowed; the wind increased very much
during the night. At eight bells on Monday morning all
hands were ordered on deck to shorten sail. We soon got
her all snug. On the following day her fine-weather sails
all blew away, but we immediately got new ones bent on.
The bad weather increased till Friday, when every stitch
of canvas had to be taken off, and she drove under bare
poles. The next day, Saturday, the weather showed signs
of breaking, and the captain got sights, hut it was very
thick and dirty weather. When it moderated we got a
little sail on her to keep her steady, and that night, during
the first watch, the mate made more sail. The captain said
they were in the neighbourhood of Horseshoe Beef or the
Minerva Shoal, and told us to keep a good lookout for
broken water. The first watch was relieved at 12 o’clock ;
I was in the second watch, under the charge of the second
mate. 1 took the wheel from 12 to 2, when I was relieved
by the eldest apprentice. Between the hours of 3 and 1
o’clock we observed what appeared to he land, or a dark
cloud dead ahead of us The second mate went down and
told the captain, and immediately returned on deck, which
he had hardly done, however, when she bumped heavily on
a sunken reef; the first sea which afterwards struck her
lifted her bodily on it: the second mate was at the same-
time swept overboard with one of the boats, and bo was
never afterwards seen. The next sea that struck her lifted
her further on the rocks, where she stuck fast; the first


shock knocked her bilge off, and otherwise damaged her,
so that if she had been in deep water she must have sunk
quickly. The captain and all hands ran on deck in great
confusion, most of them in their night clothes, and finding
she was hard and fast on the rock, the sea still running
very high, and not knowing where and how she was
situated, we took shelter in the cuddy till such time as we
could see what was best to be done.
At daylight a terrible scene presented itself, for as far
as the eye could reach there were the points of the rocks
awash, but no friendly land in view. The captain ordered
the jolly boat to be got over the side, as in that seemed to
be our only chance of escape. We hung her in the tackle,
but no sooner did we lower her within reach of the water
than she broke up, and so became useless. We had now
only the long boat left, and that w'as old and shaky. The
captain ordered us to launch it over the side, which we did,
intending to keep her there till w r e got the passengers and
provisions into her, and then cut ourselves adrift; but she,
too, soon filled with the spray and boisterous water as she
hung in the tackle. Some hands were ordered to bail her
out, but it was evidently so unsafe that none would risk
their lives thus, excepting the first mate, the captain’s
brother. He had no sooner done so than the stern post
was jerked out of her which was loft hanging in the tackle;
at the same time the fore tackle got adrift, and the remains
of the boat dropped in the raging sea with the mate in her,
and she was carried away with the current. Lines were
thrown out but none reached him; ho had only a live sheep
in the boat with him. He then calmly sat in the bows,
bade his brother and sister good bye, and awaited the will
of God; presently he disappeared and was seen no more :
he could hardly have lived long in such a frail craft. Our
position being now apparently hopeless, the captain called
us all into the cabin, where we engaged in religious exer-
cises, commending ourselves to God in prayer. We then
Went on deck again, and discussed the advisability or other


wise of making a raft, although our chances of being
picked up seemed to be very small. However, this we
decided to do, as our condition was very hazardous, every
sea threatening to wash us off our resting place. We there-
fore set to work and cut away the spars of the ship, and
secured them —first the mizenmast, then the mainmast—
but it was a very difficult job, for they came down with the
sails all loose. With these and some spare spars we had
on board we had enough for our purpose. The large out-
side spars we rested partly on the rocks and partly on
the wreck; we lashed and nailed them together, and in
the centre we fixed a mast, and built a platform of light
spars to enable us to sit and lie down out of the water.
When finished the next difficulty was to cast it adrift.
With great labour we managed to get it off the ship’s-
quarter on to the rocks, and from thence into the water—
this much we accomplished by midday, Sunday. Wo next
selected what provisions we could, but to our dismay we
found the bread was all utterly destroyed with salt water,
and the preserved meat which we had previously got on
deck to carry away with us was nearly all washed over-
board, unobserved in our confusion. To add to our other
misfortunes, there was nothing left whole that would hold
water excepting a small keg. All the provisions we could
therefore muster were a few tins of preserved meat, the
small keg of water, and a little brandy. These were all
deposited on the safest part of the raft; the ladies and
children were next put on, with the captain’s instruments
and charts, some blankets and clothing. We were all at
last so far safely on the raft: it was our intention to have
stayed by the wreck a,few days, and if possible build a
boat, as there were some boat planks aboard During the
night, however, the strength of the current, added to the
dead weight of the raft, caused her to part her moorings,
and we drifted to sea. There were on the raft three
ladies, two children, two gentlemen passengers, the captain,
carpenter, sailmaker, cook, and four able seamen, including


myself, four apprentices, and two black men, stowaways,
working their passage—in all twenty-one souls.
It was agreed that the stores should be given out
equally amongst us, and that there should be no lots
drawn to take away each other’s lives. One tablespoonful
of preserved meat a-day was served out, about 12
o’clock midday; and the water was measured in the
neck of a glass bottle, four to each person, one in the
morning, two in the middle of the day, and the other in
the evening. All went on as well as could be expected
under the circumstances for twenty-two days. The current
and our small sail carried us about forty miles a-day. At
first we caught a few birds, which were a great treat; their
blood was greedily drunk, and their raw flesh eaten with
gusto ; as we neared the land, however, we caught no more.
The weather, was fine throughout: in the day-
time there would be a light wind, which died away at sun-
down. The captain took sights occasionally. On the twenty-
second day out we saw a sail in the distance, which kept in
sight about four hours, but finally disappeared, we having no
means of attracting attention. This greatly disappointed us.
A few days after this the first death occurred, James
Quarry, leaving his child to survive him but a very short
time. He said the day before that he was dying, and that
he should not live long. As soon as he died he was stripped
and thrown over, the sharks devouring him instantly before
our eyes. The next day or so we caught a fine rock cod
fish with a line and hook, baited with a bit of white rag,
which was cut up in equal parts and served out. We
caught another fish, but smaller, the next day; and yet
another the day following. The preserved pneat had all
run out. It then rained, but the sail was so soaked with
salt water that we could not drink what we caught till the
salt was well nigh washed out of the sail. We fortunately
managed, however, to save enough to eke out our small
store before it cleared up again. The sucking baby of
Mrs. Wilmott was the next to succumb; shortly afterwards


the other little girl, and next to her Mrs. Wilmott herself.
Her husband stripped her of what clothing she had on,
all but a nightdress, and appealed to us to turn our heads
when he threw her overboard, and he trusted we would not
look at her. She however remained floating in company
with us longer than the others ; she was in sight about
twenty minutes. The burial service of the Church of
England was read over each one as we committed them to
the silent deep. And now r they dropped off; one after
another rapidly, hut I myself became so exhausted that I
forget the order of their names.
We next began to think how we should obtain food.
Our only fishing line had been broken and carried away by
a big fish. We had more hooks hut no more line. There
were plenty of sharks about, some of which we tried to
catch. The captain devised a plan to snare them with a
running bowline knot, which we managed as follows ; we
cut off a leg of one of the men who died, lashed it at the
end of an oar for a bait, and on the end of another oar
we set the snare, so that the fish must go through the
snare to get at the bait. Presently one came, which we
fortunately captured and killed with the carpenter’s axe.
We cut his head off and flayed him. The sailmaker’s
hunger was greater than his caution, for while he held its
head in his hands eating it, he incautiously put his hand in
its mouth, the jaws closed, which gave him a severe bite—■
so much so that it stayed his hunger for a time—sucking
his own blood quite satisfied him. The rest of us made a
good meal off it. Three days afterwards we caught another
in the same way, with the same bait, which we cut up in
strips and dried, which eat much better. We then caught
another and did the same with it. Our number by this
time was very much reduced. Ultimately we reached the
Barrier Reef; we came down upon it driven by a strong
cun'ent. The trouble was to clear it, but we managed, after
a deal of trouble, to get her over into deep water again
before dark. Two days after this we came in sight of the


land, which appears to have been Cape Upstart. We were
not a long way out at sea, and at night we passed it. Two
or three days afterwards we made the land once more, and
were driven towards Cleveland Bay, but just as we were
preparing to get ashore, in hopes of getting much needed
fresh water, a breeze off the land sprung up and drove
us out to sea again. During the night, however, the sea
breeze drove us in shore again, and eventually about
midnight we landed on the southern point of Cape Cleve-
land. The first and most urgent thing to do was to find
fresh water, which one or two of the strongest essayed to
do, but were not successful; so we laid down on the sand
and went to sleep. Presently it came on to rain, which
filled the holes in the rocks, from which we filled our tins.
So that we might not lose our knowledge of time, while on
the raft the captain cut a notch in a piece of wood every
day, and on counting them there were forty-two. Of the
twenty-dne who left the wreck only seven remained —the
captain, his wife, Mr. George Wilmott, myself, James
Gooley, the sailmaker, and one of the boys.
In the morning when the sun arose we washed and
dried a piece of white rag took a magnifying glass out of
a telescope, set light to the rag and made a fire. We then
cut some pieces of the dried shark off, boiled it in a pre-
served meat tin and ate it, with a drink of clear fresh water
for breakfast which we greatly enjoyed.
At low water the captain, being the strongest, sallied
forth in quest of food and to reconnoitre. He shortly after
returned for the axe, bringing a few rock oysters, which
were very plentiful, sticking in large clusters to the rocks.
Some of us managed to crawl to get a few and return to
our camping place, but being so long on the raft without
exercise it was difficult to move about at first. We con-
tinued to do this for a few days, but Mr. Wilmott and
James Gooley were so exhausted they were utterly unable
to move about to provide for themselves ; so they laid down
by a waterhole and died, nobody being equal to provide


for more than their own absolute necessities. The captain
found in his rambles a native canoe, and in it the lines and
spears of a fishing party of natives, who had evidently been
there lately, and I thereafter learned they resorted in and
about this spot in the rainy season. The sailmaker, Jack
Millar, thereupon determined that he would try and get
away in it, and so make another effort to reach a more
inviting spot. He could not prevail upon any of us to
accompany him in such a frail thing, so he started alone
the next morning. We eventually knew he was starved to
death on the shores of the next bay, for the natives who
saw his dead body told us.
The same day that he left, or the next, as the captain
and I were going over a hill leading to the adjoining bay
we saw a full-rigged ship running down the inside channel,
but having no means of signalling her we could only sit
down and cast a longing eye at her white wings, wishing
we were on board. She soon disappeared out 5f sight.
We then came on the track of the natives, but could not
trace them far as the late rains had obliterated it.
After we had been on shore about fourteen days a
small party of natives made their appearance. It turned
out that for several nights previously they had observed
some falling stars in the direction of the neighbourhood
where they found us. They have a superstitious belief
that such-like phenomena point out the direction of a
hostile tribe, and so quicken their observing faculties.
Some stronger feeling than usual seems to have possessed
them on this occasion, for they purposely bent their steps
in the direction the stars seemed to fall, and came on to
the coast, where they picked up our tracks apdran us down;
they first came on a fire at the place where the boy had
camped the preceding night, and it afterwards appeared he
must only a short time before have left. In consequence of
the low state of his health (he had two large boils on his
legs) he was not able to reach the general camp the previous
night, but as soon as possible he came on; it must have


been but a few minutes after he had left the blacks came on
his track. They sighted and followed him at a distance,
but as the tracks indicated the presence of numbers they
did not come near nor show themselves : they tracked the
boy down to where the captain’s wife was —the captain and
1 were away at the time. They then arranged that one of
them should remain in sight while the other two should go
to the camp and report their discovery; they shortly
returned accompanied by about twenty or thirty others.
"When I returned in the evening the captain’s wife said
she was sure she had heard some natives jabbering and
whistling near; I did not think it possible. When the
captain came home she repeated her story, and while
we were discussing the possibility and its probable conse-
quences—about ten minutes after his return —-she heard the
same noises again. She immediately sprang to her feet,
went outside to see what it might be, where, sure enough,
she beheld a number of naked blackfellows on the rocks.
Whereupon ghe exclaimed—“ Oh ! George, we have surely
come to our last now, here are such a lot of wild blacks.”
We quickly joined her, and there they were and no mis-
take. At first they seemed to be as afraid of us as we
were of them. Presently, however, we held up our hands
in supplication for help, some of them did likewise; and
after awhile we neared each other, they came among us,
and felt us all over from head to foot to make sure we
were human beings like themselves ; of this they seemed to
be satisfied, and hearing us talk they asked by signs where
we had come from. We replied by pointing across the
sea: seeing how emaciated we were they evidently took
pity on us. They asked us, as well as w T e could understand,
where we were going to sleep, for it was getting dark.
We pointed to the overhanging rocks. They came in with
us ; we were going to make them a present to propitiate
their help, when to our dismay we discovered that while
we had been yabberiug outside, some of the others had
been inside and had helped themselves, and eased us of


everything left to us. Eventually about ten of the old
men came in the cave-like hollow rock which we had used
as a camping place, and slept with us, hut they kept us
separated by lying between us. They kept up a constant
yabber among themselves, which led to a more minute
examination of our person, this time evidently to ascertain
our sex, which seemed necessary on account of our being
clothed. The captain’s wife naturally shrank from such
scrutiny, but they persisted, and when they found we were
like themselves—male and female—they seemed satisfied,
and did not further molest us. They seemed to understand
that the captain and his wife bore that relationship by
their being always so close together. We got some light
sleep as the night wore on. At daylight the next morning
there seemed to be a great commotion among our dusky
friends as to what should be done with and for us. There
were present, it appeared, representatives of two different
tribes, so the boy and myself were claimed as relatives of
one tribe who had jumped up whitefellows, whose then
general camping place was in the neighbourhood of Mount
Elliott; and the captain and his wife were similarly
claimed by a tribe whose location was about Cape Cleve-
land. Not content with taking all that we brought with
us off the raft, they now commenced to strip us of the
few clothes we had on. They took the boy’s trousers off
first, but he begged to be allowed to retain his shirt and
sou’-wester, pointing to the sun to make them understand
the danger it would expose him to. They semed to under-
stand, and so allowed him to retain them. They next took
the captain’s clothes all off, but when they came to me
and the captain’s wife we made signs of our fear of the
sun, and they did not insist. Presently, too, they gave the
captain his clothes back again. They then gave us some
small roots to eat, about the size of small marbles, which we
enjoyed very much—they tasted like nuts. They pointed
to our stomachs, to indicate they knew we were hungry ;
and to their ow r n that they had plenty. They also pointed


mland to indicate that there we should have plenty to
eat and drink. On signifying our intention to go with
them to their camp they were very glad, and wanted us to
join with them in a corroboree, but we were too weak;
thinking, however, it might please them to sing something,
I gave out the words of a hymn I knew —
God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform, &c.—
to the end, which we sang, and which amazed them much.
While we were by ourselves in the cave every night we
read the hible, sung hymns, and prayed, as we had done
on the raft; we had among the few books we took with
us from the wreck, a prayer-book, hible, and hymn-book.
The natives now began to make preparations to move
off towards their camp, and seemed pleased at our going
with them. Seeing the boy was unable to walk, one of these
stalwart fellows picked him up, put him on his shoulder
with his legs hanging down, the same way as they carry
their children when on a journey. And noticing how weak
we were two of them helped us along, one walking each
side of us to lean on. After we got a little way three
new arrivals came from the camp ; they were told to stay
somewdiat in advance of us and wait till we came up—it
was on the margin of a plain—where they had made a fire.
When we came up to them they were sitting round the
fire: we recognized them as strangers —they were powerful-
looking men and seemed to be sitting in state; they did
not move when we came up. Great fear seized hold of me,
for I thought they were chiefs; and when they came to
lead me up to them to satisfy their curiosity, I thought it
could be for no other purpose than to be killed, cooked,
and eaten: 1 accordingly resisted; but reflecting how use-
less resistance could be, how small the fire was, and that
they had no weapons, I suffered myself to be led up to
them, and sat down They looked at me, and observing
me shake with fear they warmed their hands at the fire,
rubbed them over my face and body to reassure me, seeing


which I took heart again. The captain, his wife, and the
boy underwent the same scrutiny. Here w 7 e halted for
awdiile, and they wanted us to join them in a corroboree
again, but not being able they had it among themselves.
Some of them dressed themselves very fantastically, with
shirts, trousers, coats, &c., which we had saved from the
wreck, and a more ludicrous scene could not be imagined;
one with only the sleeve of a shirt on, another with a pair
of trousers —his legs put through the bottoms, and another
hind part before. They tore the leaves out of the books
and fastened them in their hair and on their bodies : alto-
gether they were a strange medley. In the meanwhile
some were sent on ahead to the camp to tell them to hurry
up and prepare for a feast and a grand corroboree in honour
of the occasion. Prom where we landed to their camp
was about eight miles, but it was sundown before we
reached it. The first thing they did was to lay us down
and cover us with dry grass, to prevent our being seen till
an appointed time. They then collected from all quarters,
to the number of about fifty or sixty—men, women, and
children —and sat down in a circle; those who discovered
us stepped into the centre, dressed up in our clothes, with
a little extra paint, danced one of their dances, at the same
time haranguing all present, recounting how they discoverd
us, in a rude sing-song tone, from whence they had brought us,
and all they knew about us, all of which greatly surprised
them : and then as a finale we were uncovered, and led forth
into the centre in triumph. The first sight of us —having
white skins and being fully dressed —produced a panic,
and they scattered in all directions. After a little while,
however, being reassured, they returned in twos and threes,
and a few of the more courageous ones came near to look
at us; by and bye they came nearer, felt us all over,
examined us more minutely, and satisfied themselves there
was no need to fear. After their curiosity had somewhat
subsided they led us to a gunyah which was placed at our
disposal, and one and other of them brought us plenty to


cat and drink, and kept frequently coming to look at us,
and see how we were getting on. They went on preparing
their own evening meal: one after the other they sub-
sided in sleep. In the morning they replenished our stock
of roots and gave us water, and then turned out in quest
of their own day’s necessities. As they returned they
brought numbers of their relations and friends from the
near tribes, and in the evening they had another corroboree,
explaining all about us. When they had finished they
came and fetched us into their midst, as on the previous
evening, for exhibition. This was repeated on six or eight
successive evenings, as members of the more distant tribes
heard of the finding of white people and were anxious to
see them. This was continued so long that we became
weary of it, and we expressed our disinclination to appear;
but it was no use, they would not be denied, and threatened
to kill us ; so we thought it prudent not to put them to the
test, although we did not think they would do so but only
intended to frighten us. Eventually matters assumed
their usual course at the camp. They would not let us go
out to obtain food, seeing we were so weak, but gathered
us themselves sufficient for all our necessities. As the
novelty of the situation wore away, and as our strength
became established, we began to join them in their search
for roots and other kinds of food, and so learned our first
lesson in bush life.
After we had been with them for five or six months,
and we began to pick up a knowledge of their language,
they informed us that a large tribe and a number of other
tribes were coming to see us, and that they would be there
in the dry season —about four moons’ time. We spent
our time wandering about with them on their fishing excur-
sions, and in learning how to snare ducks, wild turkeys,
and other bush birds, in which I became very expert after
awhile, even more so than the natives themselves, because
1 took more care in making strong string for the nooses,
and in choosing the best places to set them; also my sailor


knowledge stood me in good stead in making running knotSj
which altogether tended to raise me in their estimation.
Time ran on, and stranger natives began to collect in
considerable numbers, as it had previously been intimated
to us they would. When they all arrived they numbered
over a thousand souls ; there were a larger number present
than I have ever seen in one place since. They belonged
to about ten different tribes, but what interested us most
was, that some of them belonged to the country far south
of where we were, which caused us to determine, if possible,
to go away with them when they returned, hoping by that
means the sooner to reach some white settlement. Of
course they had grand corroborees, which lasted three days;
they also went through the rites of the boree—making
young lads men, and instructing them in their duties
towards the women —hereafter to be described. The tribe
I was with went through their ceremonies by themselves,
when about fifty lads were made men; another tribe by
themselves made about twenty. After it was all over
the various tribes began to move off to their various dis-
tricts. We stole aw r ay, and went with the tribe going south.
We were then well known in all the tribes, and we were
distributed one in one tribe and one in another. The boy
went further south than myself. The tribe I was in were
located on the present site of Port Denison. About two
years after we had been living with them intelligence was
conveyed to us of the death of the lad, and that his remains
had been burnt, as they did with their own dead. About
six -weeks after the boy died the captain sickened and died
also ; I believe the death of the boy, the degraded state
of his wife, and the utter helplessness and hopelessness of
saving her from her miseries preyed on his mind, so that
be gave way to despair. Up to this time she managed with
great difficulty to keep herself partially covered, but he
knew it could not be for much longer; and the thoughts of
her being dragged down so low was too much for him —
he sank under it. The sight of these things severely tried


me, awl at times it almost broke my heart. On the occa-
sion of the captain’s death I was obliged to leave on a
hunting and fishing expedition to divert my mind from the
painful feeling of isolation and despair that I should never
be rescued and be restored to civilization, the hope of
which was never absent from my mind. I saw the captain
could not last long when I left, and I asked them not
to burn him but to bury him in the ground, which they
did. As soon as I heard he was really dead I hurried
back, but before I reached the camp his wife had followed
him —four days afterwards. Being with a strange tribe I
felt lonely, and I determined to go back to the tribe which
claimed me at first, thinking they would feel more interest
in me. After several months I reached there, and they
were all very glad to see me again, and enquired all about
the others : when I told them they were dead they were
very angry with me, laid all the blame on me, and said
I deserved a crack on my head. The tribe which had
adopted the captain and his wife would have killed me if
they dared, but my tribe protected me. It was the cause
of a good deal of trouble between the two 'tribes. I was
the first to go away with the captain, and when we had
got about fifty miles away the captain returned alone,
to fetch his wife and the boy, and as I did not appear they
said it was I who had taken or decoyed them away.
After the misunderstanding had been cleared up 1
lived on year after year in the tribe as one of themselves.
On one occasion when I was on the coast fishing I saw a
barque going northwards in the inner channel, but, of
course, she was too far out for me to attract attention.
Oh, how my heart sank within me as I beheld her retreat-
ing from my gaze! Shortly after this again, when I was
on Mount. Elliott looking for honey and breadfruit, which
was not quite ripe at the time, a report was brought to me
that a vessel had been seen on the coast at Cape Cleveland
near to where our raft had stranded, and the people on
board had given the natives some spotted shirts, which


they showed me. This appears to have been Captain Till,
who was about that time on a surveying expedition.
Some time after this, again, another vessel was seen,
which was duly reported to me, and the men from the
vessel were said to have looked through a glass and brought
down the sun to the water. I had previously told them if
ever they saw a white man again to try and make him
understand there was a white man living there with them.
On this occasion they remembered my injunction and
tried their hardest, but seem to have failed: the white men
became alarmed and thought they meant mischief, whereas
it was only their earnestness in trying to make them under-
stand. Alas, how much mischief may have been occasioned
by similar attempts of our dusky friends trying to make
themselves understood for the good of those to whom they
wished to communicate! The following quotation from the
report of the proceedings of the Government schooner
“ Spitfire,” in 1860, will explain this matter :
Saturday, 15th September, IB6o.—Having been hove to
during part of the night, we bore up at daylight with Cape
Cleveland bearing W. | S. about nine miles distant, and at 9.30
a.m. came-to in its roadstead. Fixing on a convenient rooky
promontory for making observations for latitude and longitude,
we landed; and perceiving a small party of natives, I was in
hopes that such a friendly intercourse would take place as
would enable us to gather information respecting the mouth of
the Burdekin. Such hopes, however, were soon blighted, for
upon an increase of their party they suddenly made an attack,
which was instantly repulsed, when they retreated with great
rapidity.
Observing a canoe passing round one of the points into a
lagoon we gave chase, and after it was deserted we took
possession and broke it to pieces, so as to cut off the communi-
cation and prevent any immediate increase to the force of the
aborigines, already numerous and violently hostile.
Sunday, 16th September.—During this day we observed
considerable numbers of natives about the beaches and hills,
shrieking and yelling most diabolically. Finally (as we did not
land on this day), they retired towards the south.


Hothing, it will be observed, is mentioned in this report
about shooting the natives ; one stout able bodied black-
fellow, however, was shot dead by someone in a boat, and
another was wounded; and the hideous yelling was the
noise they usually make over their dead.
On one occasion a report was brought to me by some
members of a distant tribe that a white man had been seen
with two horses, and that whilst some of a tribe were
lamenting the death of an old man the white man fired
in among them and shot the son, who fell dead across
his father’s dead body. Tbo rest ran away; but eventually
they all fraternised and apparently made friends with each
other, but when they got him off the horse, of which they
were more frightened than of the rider, by a preconcerted
signal they struck him down and killed him; they tried
also to kill the horses, thinking they could speak and do
mischief as their owner had done ; but they got clear away.
Mr. P. Somers, of Port Denison, told me he thought it
must have been a Mr. Humphrey, who had left the party
he was out with in search of runs, intending to return by
another by-way. Some time after this four stray cattle
were seen in my district, but I was on the coast at the time
with one of the blacks —a brother-in-law of mine—making
possum-skin rugs. When I returned they showed me the
tracks of the cattle, and I recognized thorn by their hoof
marks. I questioned them, and they informed me three of
them had teats, and one had none; thus I understood thei le
were three cows and one bullock. I explained they were
what white men ate: they chaffed me about their great
size, long tails, big ears and horns. These reports of the
evident near approach of civilization greatly excited me
and made me feel uneasy ; I began to think of the possi-
bility of rescue. Soon afterwards a report came into camp
of a lot of white and black men on horseback, near Cape
Upstart, shooting down members of the tribe I bad been
living w r ith, where the captain, his wife, and the hoy died.
They explained to me about the saddles the men sat on,


the stirrups, the bridles, guns, smoke, and the noise they
made when fired off; all about which they asked me many
questions. I explained all to them to their great surprise.
On hearing this, I determined to make my way south to the
Burdekin Elver (native name Mall-Mall), thinking my
chances of meeting with some pioneers on the river would
be greater than at Mount Elliott—fifty miles inland. My
tribe kept travelling backwards and forwards, and they
were always asking me why I did not return with them, as
I had lived with them so long; they evidently began to
suspect someting unusual would happen. I told them I
would hy-and-by. Erom the first I made them believe
I had a wife and two children, believing they would not
think it so strange at my wanting to get away; also because
I could better excuse myself from being too closely linked
in with them by taking a wife, which I knew would be
dangerous in many ways. At last they became so pressing
I had to tell them that I was anxious to see the white men
myself —to see if they knew my people at home—and to
get from them clothes, guns, and old iron, but that I would
come back again. They then gave me up as it were, and
left me to my own sweet will, as they saw I was bent on
going at the first opportunity. Erom this time I was
receiving almost daily reports of the near proximity of white
settlers. There were two white men and a blackboy being
constantly seen in the neighbourhood where I then was—
the blackboy being a great favourite -with the gins. I was
about a moon and a-half from the place where they were, at
one of the fishing grounds (Bokodally), and I went to try
and find and see them, but could not. So I returned to
our head camping ground again. Shortly afterwards I
heard of cattle running on the banks of the river in great
numbers, and of a man being with them on horseback,
having in his hand a stockwhip which he cracked over and
over again, -which they thought was a gun, and on hearing
which they climbed up the trees quite frightened. They
saw him get off the horse and drink some water, Japping it


with his hands, hut the water being warm he scraped a hole
in the sands till he got some which was cooler; he had a little
black dog with him. They described to me there were so
many cattle that they had drunk all the water that was in
the holes; but when asked why they had not secured the
fish, said they were too much afraid. Hearing this I was
very anxious to find out where the settlement could be,
for I felt sure there must be one nor far off. Having,
however, been with the blacks solong, they had a very strong
attachment to me, and were unwilling to let me go, fearing
1 should be taken for a blackfellow and treated accord-
ingly, that is shot. Hearing that the blacks had guns I
could not make it out, and I must confess I was not without
fear lest if I fell in with them they would fail to under-
stand me, and even if I met any of my own countrymen
my long absence would prevent me making myself in-
telligible to them: for, certainly, I had long lost all likeness
to a civilized being. The next news I got was that about
fifteen blackfellow's, a fishing party belonging to the tribe
I was then living with, were shot dead, a sad reward for all
their kindness to us. I then pressed them to let me go
away and show me where the wdiite men were that 1
might be the means of saving their lives. They reasoned
among themselves that what I said was true, and accord-
ingly they agreed to go on a hunting expedition wdth me
on a hill called by the natives (Tamarama), which was
about half-a-mile only from the out-station, which I was at
last so soon to reach. But thinking that the white men
were like the natives without any settled place of abode,
constantly roaming from place to place, they were not sure
whether they would find the white men in the same neigh-
bourhood as where they last met with them. When w r e
arrived at the hill we spread our nets and commenced to
w ork; and while we were hunting, the old women went to
spy out the white men’s resting place. They speedily
brought me word that they had seen their hut, and fences
with red and white blankets hanging on them, and that they


heard a dog barking, and the bleating of a sheep or a goat
tied up to a tree; they also heard the report of a gun twice
but could not make out from whence it came. I there
and' then wanted to go and see for myself, but my com-
panions were not willing that I should go alone, so the
man under whose particular care I was supposed to be, sent
his gin with me. When we got over the hill, going down
in the direction of a hut, we saw sheep feeding in the grass,
the sight of which so frightened the gin, never having seen
anything of the kind before, she scampered back to what
was to her a place of safety. On looking at the sheep I
could not see anybody with them, so went on and came
to a waterhole where I washed, to make myself look as
much like a white man as possible. I went further on
till I came to sheep pens, and saw the blankets on them as
the gin had told me. 1 also saw the smoke of a fire in the
hut, and heard some persons speaking inside. I stood
behind the fences some minutes not knowing how best to
attract the attention of those in the hut, and trying to
think what I should say. Presently I got up on the fence
to be free of the dogs, that they could not bite me, and
called out as loud as possible, “ What cheer, mates ?” There
were, it appeared, three persons living in the hut, but there
were only two at home then. They heard me calling out, and
knowing the voice to be strange, one of them came out and
saw me on the fence: seeming to be neither black nor
white and quite naked, he did not know what to make of
me, he was awfully surprised; he stepped back half in the
hut again and called to his mate. “ Come out Bill, quick,”
I understood him to say ; “ here is a red or a yellow man
standing on the rails of the fence, naked —he is not a black
man —bring the gun.” Being dreadfully afraid they would
use it, I said “Do not shoot me, I am a British object —a
British sailor.” 1 meant, of course, subject, but in inj
excitement, and forgetting the proper word, I hardly knew
what to say. One said to the other, “He says he is a ship-
wrecked sailor.” One of these men’s name was Hatch,


the other Wilson; the latter had been a sailor himself.
They told me 10 come round the stockyard, which 1 did,
they meeting me half way: they cross-questioned me as to
how I came there, so I told them all about the ship-
wreck and our ultimate misfortunes. They asked me if I
knew what day and date it was ? I told them no, all know-
ledge of such matters had long been lost to me. So they
told me it was Sunday, the 25th January, 1863. They
reckoned back to 1816, when I was lost, and told me it was
seventeen years ago, and asked me if I thought it w T as so
long ? I said no, not half so long. After talking some
time thus, asking me many questions about the country,
the blacks, my mode of life while living with them, my
wishes for the future, &c., they took me in the hut and
gave me a bit of damper, and asked mo if I knew what
it w r as ? I told him it was made with flour. I tried to eat
a piece, but I was so overjoyed that it stuck in my throat,
and I could not get it down. Besides I was not particularly
hungry, for we had caught about twenty small grey
walkibys during the day, and so had had plenty to eat.
They also gave me some tea, asking me if I knew' what it
was ? I said yes, but that it was too sweet —I had not
tasted anything with sugar for so long—and so they put
some hot water to it. After I had been in the hut some time
and they had tired of asking me questions, the men told me
to look out and tell them wdiat I saw. It was a large flock
of sheep and their other companion coming home—he
w r as a Scotchman, named Creek. They then wanted to give
me some clothes to put on, but I told them I had better
go back to the natives (who w r ore on the hills in the distance
where we had been hunting all day), precisely as I was for
the night, to tell them the wonderful news of my reception,
and to advise them to go away towards the sea-coast, and
they might rely on it that I would return to them in the
morning, which they agreed to; I was also instructed to
tell the blacks that if they did not interfere with ns they
would not be harmed. They also told me that if I did


not come back in the morning they should coTm'ule I had
told them a lie, and that they would put tue biacii. trackers
on our trail and that we would be shot.
"When I left them I went hack to the hills where I
knew my dusky companions were: they immediately
surrounded me, and in turn asked me all manner of ques-
tions ; had I seen the white people —how many there were,
were they kind to me, and so on : I told them as I thought
for their good : so as to intimidate them I told them there
were a great many people, many more than themselves;
that they had plenty of guns, and that if they went near
they would be killed. I told them they had come to take
possession of their land. They, among themselves, naturally
act on the principle in everything that might gives right;
and they were therefore the more ready to accept it from
others. So, believing me, and bowing at once to the force
of might, they requested me to ask the white men to let
them retain all the land on the north of the Burdekin, also
to allow them to fish in the rivers ; also to let them have
the low and swampy grounds near the sea-coast, where they
obtained most of their root food, and which would not he
so useful to the white people. They asked me what I
intended to do. I told them I was going to stay with them
that night, but in the morning I must go back or they
would come and track me up and shoot us all. They said
“ perhaps they are doing so now.” I assured them that they
were not, hut that we had better move further away; so
we went four or five miles further and camped. The next
morning they all came round me again, and finding I was
determined to go they asked me if I would come back in
a few days. I told them no, I should «probably be away
three or four moons. They then said “ you will forget us
altogetherand when I said good-bye, the man I was
living with burst into tears, so did his gin, and several
other gins and men. It was a wild touching scene. The
remembrance of all their past kindnesses came up power-
fully before, and quite overpowered, me. There was a short


sharp struggle between a feeling of love I had for my old
friends and companions, and the desire once more to live a
civilized life, which may better be imagined than described.
I then left them and went back to the hut. The men
were glad to receive me, and took me down to a waterhole ;
gave me some soap and flannel with which I washed myself
thoroughly ; brought me hack and gave me some clothes to
put on. Further on in the day we tried to cross the river
to go to the head station to report ourselves and to obtain
rations, but it was too sw r ollen. We came back, and at
night they killed a sheep, off which they cooked me a chop.
Oh, for that supreme moment of my life, with knife and
fork in hand once more, and that salt and pepper, can I ever
forget it! I remained with them about a fortnight, in case
any of the natives should put in an appearance, but none
of them ever came in sight. I then gave myself up to
Mr. Meyers, who left me in charge of Mr. Salting, on
Hiffling Cattle Station, until the return of the Commis-
sioner’s orderly from the Fanning River, who accompanied
me safely into the town of Bowen. I desire to acknowledge
the great kindness I received from Mr. W. H. Thomas,
and Mr. P. Somers, who gave me clothes, and who made
a collection to provide for my more immediate necessities.
From Port Denison Murrells was passed on to Rock-
hampton by the captain of one of the steamers, where he
stayed a short time, and while there the inhabitants also
made a subscription for him. From thence he went on to
Brisbane in a similar manner. In each of these places he
was besieged by those curious to see the man w-ho had
lived such a strange and eventful life. He was, however,
very shy, especially at first, and was not very commuuica-
tive; this arose mainly from his inability to express him-
self readily. The knowledge of his own language came
back to him very slowly, and it was very troublesome for
him to understand what was said to him, and harder still
for him to make himself understood. He made several


acquaintances in Brisbane during his stay there: among
others the Bov. B. G-. Wilson, the Baptist minister of
Wharf-street, felt a strong interest in him, and hy whom
he was publicly baptized on a profession of his faith.
He was introduced to Sir G. E. Bowen by George
Edmondstone, Esq., M.L.A.,and Mayor of Brisbane at the
time. He visited at Government House several times, and
ultimately the Executive Council gave him an appointment
in the Custom House at Bowen, as a bonded warehouse-
beeper. After a short stay in the metropolis he entered
on the active duties of his office. Some time afterwards
the Government organized an exploring party to examine
the coast northwards of Bowen, and he was appointed one
of the party, in the capacity of interpreter; ho would of
course have been of greater use had the expedition been an
everlaud one. When he heard of a proposed expedition to
be sent in search of Leichhardt, he, through the columns
of the Fort Denison Tinvs, offered his services, fully
believing it quite possible, if not probable, that some of
the party were then living. He became a freeholder at
Port Denison, and a general favourite with the inhabitants:
living so near to the scene of his wild life he no doubt
gave some sort of prominence to the neighbourhood. His
personal appearance was somewhat striking. Of course
long exposure to the tropical sun and all weathers had left
its marks on him and tanned his skin. He was rather
short and thick set, his eyes were sunken, and he had a
rather wide mouth. His teeth were nearly worn down to
the gums, and no wonder, for they were his only knife for
years. He had suffered much from rheumatism. In the
heaviest of their rains the only shelter he often got was a
little grass to cover over his ears at night. Once a year
at least, for years past, he had large rheumatic swellings
on various parts of his body, which had left terrible marks
on him, and which he said be believed would ultimately
have some connection with his death. He soon entered
the matrimonial state, which, together with the circum


stances of his decease and burial are thus recorded in the
Port Lennon Times: —
It is our mournful duty to record the death of the pioneer
white man in the north, James Morrill, which took place on
Monday, 3<)th October (!8o5). For some time he had been
suffering from the effects of a wound received in the knee during
his sojourn among the aborigines, which had been attacked by
rheumatism, and ultimately brought on inflammation and fever,
which resulted in his death. It will be a satisfaction to his
numerous friends to know that during his last illness he was
unceasingly attended by Dr. W. S. Smith. Jemmy was
devotedly attached to his wife and child, and during his late
illness, when his mind passed as in a dream through the scenes
of misery and care of his exile, he always returned to his wife
and child, and his only care seemed to be how they should in
future be provided for. He was a general favourite throughout
the district, and when his death became known in the town on
Monday the whole of the flags of the ships in harbour, and at
the various stores throughout the town, were lowered at half-
mast. The funeral took place yesterday, and was attended by
a large number of mourners, including many of our influential
citizens. The men belonging to the pilot station had asked and
obtained permission to act as hearers to their old comrade’s
remains ; the police also attended, and moved in the procession
next the hearse ; then came the Mayor and Police Magistrate,
followed by a long string of vehicles, horsemen, and pedestrians.
During the reading of the solemn and beautiful service of the
Church of England, by the Rev. E. Griffiths, many an eye
glistened with the unbidden tear as some act of kindness of the
departed was recalled.
.lames Morrill was by no means an old man, his age being
only 41, but he was rendered prematurely aged by the troubles
and hardships he had encountered during his adventurous life.
Could the Mount Elliott blacks learn that their pale-faced
brother was dead, what howling and woe there would be. But
their grief, though perhaps more demonstrative, could not be
more serious or deeply felt than is that experienced by the
people of Bowen at the loss of one who was always ready to
explain the use of a blackfellow’s mysterious weapon, or the
qualities, poisonous or otherwise, of the various roots and plants
•found in the neighbourhood.


CHAPTER III.
The Aboriginals of Northern Queensland —Nomadic Habits—
Living in Tribes —What they eat as Food—Language—How
they make Fire—The Ceremony of making the Lads Men—
Relationship—How they dispose of the Dead—Flax grown,
and the uses they make of it —Description of the Country—
Gold—Extinction of the Eace.
The aboriginals among whom James Murrells bad been
living are described by him as being physically superior, as
to general appearance, to any others he had seen iu the
southern parts of the colony; nevertheless they are
treacherous, jealous, and exceedingly cunning. They are not
black —they are more of the colour of half-castes. When
born they are nearly white, but when they are three days
eld the gins squeeze out their own milk on them and rub
it and powdered charcoal into their skins to make them
black and shiny. They have sunken eyes, broad flat noses
(which are made so by pressure by their mothers in infancy),
and very broad mouths. The infants are allowed to suck
at the breast a very long while—indeed until they are old
enough to obtain their own food. He (Murrells) had seen
a child sucking at the breast with its next brother or sister.
He had also seen the little things working in the swamps
with their mothers, getting roots, and often going to them
for a drink at the breast. The women have very few
children, seldom exceeding four, and more seldom have
twins; indeed he could not remember more than about
four cases of twins. He also remembered that in one case
when there was a boy and a girl born the father killed the
boy to save the mother trouble in rearing both : they were
very lazy. It caused, however, a great disturbance in the
camps among their friends, who thought the parents ought
not to have shirked their responsibilities. The women go
into the swamps as usual, the very next day after their
confinement, to gather root food, as though nothing unusual
had happened. The men have several wives—in some cases
as many as eight or nine—and it is mostly about their


wives that their wars, fights, and feuds occur; they steal
them from each other, and not unfreqently lend or sell them
for a time, for a slight consideration. It was his early
knowledge of this condition of things that necessitated
great caution on his part.
The natives rarely stay long in one locality: as a place
becomes exhausted of food they migrate to another. In
the wet and cold seasons they put up small gunyahs to live
in, hut in no particular order. They are divided into
tribes, each tribe speaking a different dialect —they can
hardly be called different languages. Murrells could speak
freely in eight of these dialects. They had no regular
chiefs ; the strongest is the best man.
The natives obtained their living by fishing, hunting,
digging in the earth for roots, gathering wild fruits, &c.
They can eat almost anything, sharks, snakes, crocodiles,
shell-fish and fish of all kinds, kangaroos, rats, wallabies,
grubs, snails, all kinds of creeping things, wild ducks,
geese, turkeys, and several kinds of roots, one of which
called (moogoondah), growing on the tops of the highest
hills, is the best eating; it is sweet, firm, dry, and flourishes
best in red clay soil. There is another root called (mal-
boon), the habitat of which is in the scrub at the foot
of the hills, which is soft and nico eating. There are
several varieties—one called (carnool), of a sticky nature
when cooked, grown on the mountains (not in the scrub
but in the grass), white like a turnip, with a small thin
leaf; another like it smaller, and darker in colour, but
similar in all other respects called (cahnan); another,
called (booan), a creeper which grows on the high banks
of the fresh-water creeks, having a small thick green leaf ;
another, called (manoon), resembling much the turnip, but
smaller in size. There is one called (cardoola), or (carlm-
ba) which is a runner in the grass; it has a little blue
flower; and many others. They have several kinds of
fruit: a plum, very large but with little substance on
it, all stone nearly, called (gowan gowau) or (oolooboo).
a small currant, very blue in colour, nearly all


stone, called (moogah muddali) ; a banana, full of black
seed and very little other substance. There is a very little
berry, similar to the white currant, very sweet, called
(walba) ; another which is red, nearly all stone, called
(mooray) There is a fruit like an apple, called (barkabah);
a red fig, called (cowarah) ; and a black one, called (balla-
moo). The bread-fruit grows on the mountains, and is
called (mugurdah). The following remarks by Monsieur
Thozet, on some of the natural productions above and
■elsewhere alluded to, written by that gentleman, which
appeared in ihe Rockhampton Bulletin, of the 11th March,
18(36, will no doubt be read with interest by botanists and
scientific readers :
The importance of Morrill’s experience would have been
practically illustrated had his services been at the disposal of
the late lamented Victorian expedition, by the preservation of
Burke and Wills’ lives, through his knowledge of indeglnous
articles of food, and the consequent certainty of their ultimate
return to relate their own achievements. But fate otherwise
willed it; and Providence appears now to have conferred upon
ns a means of averting the recurrence of similar disasters. With
the above preface, then, we will at once plunge in medias res,
and commence our botanical recapitulation with the native small
plum, aboriginally known as Balemo; botanically as the Mens
aspera, it. Br., a shrub occasionally verging into a tree, and
pointed out by Morrill on the northern range of the Pitzroy.
This plant can be readily identified by its oval dark-green leaves,
which, like its specific name, indicates its singular roughness.
The milky juice of the young shoots is employed by the natives
medicinally, and is represented by M orrill, from personal
experience, to be very efficacious in healing wounds. After the
application of the milky juice of the Balemo, the scraped root
bark of the Ourai (or Wretvia of botanists), a genus belonging
to the Tiliaceae order, is used as a poultice to the wound- - it is to
be presumed from its emollient properties, as a counterbalance
to the acridity of the Balemo. The Ourai or ftrewii grows
abundantly near Eockhampton, and has a large alternate oval
serrated leaf, tomentose beneath, bearing as fruit a very small
brown berry, generally in pairs, on a small axillary peduncle.


The Rockhampton tribe call this plant Karoom. The two-
plants—the Balemo and the Ourai—are the only two Morrill
could identify in the Rockhampton flora as in use by the natives
both medicinally and as edibles. The following are the other
vegetable foods from wTiioh Morrill derived a considerable por-
tion of his sustenance. The Barkabah, or botanioally Burnng-
tonia Oareya, ilox b., occasionally locally denominated the broad-
leaved apple tree, very common in our rich alluvial soil, bearing
a ha dsome pink and white flower ; the fruit is full of seed, and
tasting not unlike a dry banana. According to Morrill the bark
of the stem of the Barkabah is used by the natives for stupefy-
ing fish in fresh water; and, strange to say, the bark of the root
for the same purpose in salt water. The Raourou, or Nymphcea
gigantea, Hook —the well-known blue water lily, common in our
lagoons—is another edible plant, its seed and root forming an
important item of aboriginal diet, in addition to another aquatic
plant termed the Rournabai —may be a Trig lochia (?) —with a
yellow flower, and a root considered as a groat delicacy The
Ralado, p or Phascolus rostratus, is one of our small creeping
lag jminous plants, with three narrow, long, sharp-pointed leaves
upon a common stalk, bearing a flower not unlike our cultivated
tea, and root compared by Morrill to our carrot, growing abun-
dantly in every plain, or .creek bank, and constituting a promi-
nent feature of native gastronomy. The Boganga, or IN argan,
is probably Caladium macrorhizon (?) Vent., colonially known
as the Creek Lily, with a large poisonous root, employed as
native food, after a peculiar preparation, too long for present
explanation. The DTorin of Morrill is a small egg-shaped
slightly acidulated fruit of the Carissa ovataoi It. Br., aud with
the previously mentioned JMargado, palm-nut (or lycas media),
the Taberio, Leichhardt tree (or Nuuclea Leichhardtii Ed.
Mueller); the native plum (Owetiia ceiat sefera P. M.), the
large pomegranate fruit (Capparis MUchehi), the Pink Lily (or
Nelumhium Leichhardtii), two species of yam (Dicorcee and the
gogaba), native banana (or Musa Jucku), very abundant
round Mount Elliott, and, according to Morrill, extending far
inland, constitute the catalogue of plants it has been possiole to
identify. But at the same time, to assist botanical research in
the comparatively unknown north-eastern flora, the aboriginal
names of several other plants are appended, including Kauoul,
Ranane, Boan, Malbon, and Mogondal, whose roots or bulbs
were employed by the natives as food.


Although so far as James Murrells’ experience went
he never saw cocoa-nuts growing, yet he said he had
sometimes seen them on the shore. There is plenty of
honey in the hollows of trees, from the native honey-bees.
The natives eat honey, combs, bees and all, if they are
hungry. There is plenty of food of various kinds obtain-
able : cannibalism is not a usual custom, but under par-
ticular circumstances is certainly indulged in. Tor instance,
they eat the flesh of young men killed in battle, or if killed
by accident; also of young women and children, but never
that of their enemies. They cut their flesh up in strips,
dry it, and distribute the pieces through the tribe,
by doing which they think they obtain some of their
enemies’ strength added to their own, and that they will
be lucky in hunting and fishing.
These aboriginals have no written language whatever,
and very little traditional lore. The language is verygtteal ,
and extremely limited in power of expression. They have
very limited means of communicating a knowledge of their
language, which is done principally by imitation, memory,
and the necessities arising from their daily wants. The
different animals are classified according to the size of their
feet; hence sheep have the same name as wallabys (car-
goon) ; all kinds of sailing vessels have the same name as
their canoes, because they float on the water (woolgoora).
The heavenly bodies are named differently, the sun (ingiu),
which they think is a body of fire, because of its warmth,
and especially so since they saw a rag set on fire with a
burning glass. The moon (werboonburra) they think is a
human being like themselves, and comes down on the earth,
and which they sometimes meet with when on their fishing
excursions. They say one tribe, a long w r ay off, throw's it
up, and it gradually rises and then comes down again, when
another tribe catches it to save it from hurting itself.
They accordingly think there is a new sun and moon each
day and night. There is a large open space on Mount
Elliott with not a vestige of vegetation upon it, whilst up


to its very margin is a thick scrub, which they told
Murrells they attribute to the moon, who threw his circle-
stick around it (meaning his boomerang), and thereby
cutting off from that spot all vegetation. Throwing the
sun and moon up by one tribe and catching them by
another will readily be recognised as their understanding
of the regular rising and setting of those bodies. They
have no knowledge of the earth beyond the locality they
inhabit. The stars and comets are both named alike
(nilgoolerbudda). They think the falling stars indicate
the direction of danger, and that comets are the ghosts or
spirits of some of their tribe who have been killed at a
distance from them, working their way back again, and
that they come down from the clouds on the coast. They
saw one the last dry season previous to Murrells’ restora-
tion, which they thought was one of the tribe who had
been killed in war. They think all the heavenly bodies
are under their control; that when there is an eclipse
of the sun or moon some natives are hiding them
behind a sheet of hark to frighten the rest. There w r as
about six years before Murrells’ restoration, an eclipse
of the sun, nearly total, the only one he remembered
seeing, about four o’clock in the afternoon. He asked an
old man what it meant, and he told him his son had hidden
it (the sun) to frighten another member of his tribe. But
they were very uneasy during the time of an eclipse. They
picked up a piece of grass and hit it, making a mumbling
noise, keeping their eyes steadily fixed on the obscured sun
till theeclipse had passed over, when they became easy again.
They think the natives have power over the rain (durgun),
to make it come and go as they like. The rainbow (terebare)i
they think, is the clouds spewing fish in the lagoons, also
roots on the hills—something for their good —wherever the
ends touch the horizon. They are very frightened of
thunder (teegoora), and lightning (timulba), although
Murrells never knew an instance of any harm being done
by lightning. They have no theory of the origin of species—


they live and die like animals, and that is the sum of their
knowledge, although they have the usnalinnate fear of death;
and they have some idea that after death they will arise
as whitefellows. The previous reference also to theghosts or
spirits of their departed friends being associated with
comets points to an undefined hereafter, hut the know-
ledge of any future is nearly obliterated. They tell of their
forefathers witnessing a general flood when nearly all were
drowmed; only those who got on a very high mountain
(Bibbiringda), which is inland of the north bay of Cape
Cleveland, were saved. Murrells naturally associated their
statement with the scriptural account of the flood, esjiecially
as they said only a few -were allowed to go up.
They have names for the first five numerals only:
woggin (I), boolray (2), goodjoo (3), munw-ul (4), murgai
(5) ; for any number beyond these they put up their ten
fingers; beyond that number again the ten fingers of
another, and so on till they come to the number of days
between new' moons ; when they refer to fish, roots, or
common things in general, they have words equivalent to
few, and plenty. They measure time by moons, and wet
and dry seasons.
The language is very irregular, and seems to be totally
impossible to reduce it to any grammatical order. The
following is a list of the principal words in use: —
Nannie —earth Murgunman—girl Moolin—lips
Ejugabah—lire Mowdruman—boy Moodomooda —neck
Doongalla—water Colaman - babies IJgar—breast
Injin—sun Deenah—feet Nhamoon —teats
Wurboonburra-moon Tabaray—legs Booloo—belly
Durgan—rain Toobun—arms Doolga—back
Terebare —rainbow Coode—head Coondoola —emu
Teegoora—thunder Cabankabun-hands 800100n —albatross
Tinmlba—lightning Teeburra —eyes Noogooral—goose
Moggoor—clouds Deeragun—ears Yamarah—duck
Bundara —sky Weir-hair Waboora —small
Munpah—man Telli—tongue Wadoolbil —large
Yungoorah—woman 'lingool—teeth Queearilla —plenty


bfilgoolerburdda—stars, comets Coobirangil—iguana, all one
WixiigooiM— canoe, ship colour, light brown, rather
Cargoon--sheep, small kangaroos dangerous
Cocicool—cattle, large ditto Carbul —carpet snake, quite
Oombal—horses, dogs harmless, good eating
Oodra —large old man kangaroo Carmoolmulle - black snake,
Gourgoola —female ditto yellow belly, lives both in
Prorogwan—native companion water and on the land
Moongun—opossum, wild eat Othubuda —along thin light-
Munbrebare —flying squirrel brown snake, lives in the
Kooroongun—common rat grass, the bite is certain
Cuudulmule —kangaroo rat, be- death, ‘i he natives have
cause the hoof of the foot no certain antidote 'for
is divided like a kangaroo’s snake bite
Gungur—green iguana; there Bindebudda -a large brown
are three kinds snake with red spots on
Coonbinmulla-iguana,harmless, its belly
light colour, dark speckles, Moorayubnrra-turkcy, named
short thick tail after the red currant,
Enugedy—enough, that will do which they are fond of
Dungaburre —a brown snake
The natives easily obtain fire by friction. The opera-
tion is very simple, and is as follows:—They use wood;
the best for tliqpurpose is the black fig after it has rotted and
almost become powder. They take a branch off a little
thicker than your finger, split it, and put it on the ground
the flat side upwards, holding it down with their feet; they
then take a sound piece, round, and straight, about twelve
inches long, placing one end on the flat side of the piece on
the ground, holding it up on end between their hands,
and then commence rolling it rapidly between them, press-
ing it into the piece beneath, so that it bores a hole in it;
after this is done they make a notch in the side of the
piece at the bottom, so that the fine dust made while the
boring process is going on shall fall down on some dry
grass, they then repeat the rolling process till the friction
generates sparks, which, falling over on the dry material, is
all taken up in their hands together, and blown into a blaze
The ceremony of making the lads into marriageable


young men takes place about once every six years. Murrell*
remembered four different occasions when there were great
meetings for the above-mentioned purpose while he vas
with them. About nine months before the event, the lads
have to leave the camp to provide wholly for themselves ;
during which time they are not allowed even to see a
female —this is intended to test their fitness to take a wile;
if by accident the lads should see a female it is accounted to
be a misfortune, and they think they will fade away. Aft er
nine moons have passed they are brought into the camp;
cane rings are put on their arms and tightened very much,
so much so as to stop the circulation of the blood; in con; e-
quence their arms swell very much, and puts them in great
agony. They are then left in that torture all night—their
cries are terrible to hear. To keep their fingers from
contracting and thus deforming them, they sit with their
hands and fingers spread out on the ground with their
heels tightly pressed on them. In the morning they are
brought out again, in the presence of their mothers, sisters,
and other relatives; and just above and below the mark
the cane ring has left on their arms they make small
incisions to let blood flow freely, which tends to keep
down inflammation. While all this is going on, their
mothers and relatives are crying and cutting themselves
from head to foot with sharp stones, in token of joy at
seeing them. 'When their frenzy has somewhat subsided,
the lads retire to places previously provided for them
to sleep under, with boughs to shade them from the
sun, as otherv, ise they would get very little sleep. While
they are sleeping the gins go into the swamps and collect
roots sufficient to prepare and make into cakes for them
by the time they awake in the evening: the old men get
all the lads’ spears they have been carrying with them
during their nine months’ isolation, and fix them in
the earth on a clear space in a semi-circle, fastening
from head to head of the spears grass festoons. In the
evening, all being ready, they are awakened, and each made


to sit under a festoon in a reclining position. Then their
sisters or cousins lie with their heads on the swollen arms,
and gently press and otherwise soothe the sore places, and
they think nothing harmful can come after such treament.
"While they are thus lying there a lot of cakes are thrown
down and scrambled for by the lookers on, who had gone
through the same ceremony before them: they all then
retire to their several fires or camp. In the morning they
go away from the camp and dress up with shells and the
down and feathers of birds stuck on their heads ; they also
paint their bodies and otherwise make themselves quite
dandies according to their standard of taste; they are then
brought back to choose and take their sweethearts, for
better or worse : winding up with a grand corrohoree.
Brisbane : Printed by Edmund Ghegoby.
