

JJ ll
NARRATIVE
OF THE
TO THE
ISLANDS
BAMS k BASS STRUTS.
By the
REV, CANON BROWNRIGG.
PRINTED AT THE "LAUNCESTON EXAMINER” OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXXII.
ii rr




'lirlfe Rl t
"2 *2. -
NARRATIVE OF THE TENTH MIS-
SION TO THE ISLANDS IN
BANKS AND BASS STRAITS.
By the Rev, Canon Beownrigg.
Our tenth mission visit to the islands
in Banks and Bass Straits was undertaken
in a yawl of about 5J tons, named the
Franklin,after the illustrious navigator of
that name, one time Governor of Tas-
mania, and whose name has also been
given to an inlet or sound between Barren
and Flinders Islands, in the Furneaux
Group, and has likewise been selected for
the new township on Barren Island, for
the establishment of which arrangements
have now been completed.
Aboard the Franklin we numbered in
all four souls—my eldest son, Mr Marcus
Brownrigg, and Mr Frank Corrie being
passengers, and the working hand John-
nie Durant, who has accompanied me on
former visits to the islands, and on behalf
of whose qualifications as an able, active,
and experienced seaman, with a cheerful
and obliging disposition, I cannot speak
too highly.
Our departure from Launceston, which
took place on the 11th day of February,
1882, at about 2 p.m., afforded some little
entertainment to friends and spectators
on the wharf ; for no sooner had we cast
off our lines, than owing to our being
somewhat sheltered from the wind by the
low state of the water, the flood tide took
charge of our little ship, carrying us up
river towards the Tamar bridge. But


our course in that direction was soon ar-
rested by a rope thrown to us from his
ship’s side by my courteous friend Cap-
tain Finlay, of the Araunah.
By the help of a waterman’s boat and
the use of our own oars we subsequently
contrived to stem the tide, and got into a
position in which we were aided by a
pleasant breeze, and considered ourselves
fairly under way for George Town, at
which place we hoped to spend a portion
of the next day, Sunday.
The flood tide as we proceeded proving
too strong for us to work against in such
a light breeze, we made our ship fast to
one of the piles of an old jetty above the
Tea Tree Bend to await the ebb. This
delay while it rendered our prospects of
being in George Town for service less
hopeful, was really no inconvenience when
viewed from the standpoint of comfort.
Our tiny cabin, measuring 6ft. by 3ft.
in the clear (exclusive of the bunk
on either side) and about 4ft. high, was
really so lumbered up with stores and
packages of various sorts, put on board
at the latest and yet earliest moment,
that it might be fairly described in the
terms employed to represent the usual
character of a midshipman’s sea chest,
viz., “everything uppermost, and noth-
ing at hand. ” The opportunity was now
open to us of making a general clearance
of the cabin, by stowing away the said
stores and parcels in the lockers provided
for the same, and in an hour or two we
had things as comfortable as we could
make them.
With the ebb tide (for there was no
wind to help us) we managed to drift
down to about a mile below Freshwater
Point, and there anchored, and with the
next ebb resumed our drifting. Off Nel-


son’s Shoals we were favoured with a
little air, and on passingWindermere were
visited by Mr Sydney Gaunt and his son
Mr Percy Gaunt, who pulled off in a boat
with a very acceptable present of fruit,
and who afterwards kindly lent us the fire
pot of the Siren, to replace the cooking
stove which we had shipped—a substitu-
tion which added much to our subsequent
comfort.
Abandoning the idea of being at George
Town in time for service, we next en-
deavoured to arrive at Sidmouth for that
purpose; but in consequence of the ad-
verse state of wind and tide—the former
light and the latter strong—we would not
make the attempt to pass through Whirl-
pool Reach, and therefore found an an-
chorage for ourselves close in shore on the
east side of the Tamar.
At about 5‘30 p.m. several visitors came
alongside from various homesteads within
sight, and among these visitors were Cap-
tain Lutwyche and members of his family,
I was now able to arrange for a service to
be held in the evening at the cottage of
Captain Lutwyche, and at that service had
the pleasure of meeting about fifteen
souls.
By about 9'30 the next morning we let
go our anchor in George Town Cove after
a tedious passage, accomplished to the
very much greater extent by drifting than
by sailing. At this anchorage we re-
mained until the next morning (Feb. 14),
when we left for Pilot’s Bay, to await a
departure from the river.
As there was no clergyman in charge of
the parish I held a service in the neat
little church at the Heads, and met an
attentive congregation numbering 32
souls.


During our stay at Low Head, which,
in consequence of fresh north-easters, ex-
tended until Monday morning, we received
much kind attention from Captain and
Mrs Croucher, and one evening was spent
with Mr Darby, of the Telegraph Depart-
ment, when I baptized His infant
child.
The dawn of Thursday (Feb. 16) broke
with a very unpromising appearance.
During the night the Franklin had rolled
a great deal, and this was in part due to
the shift of wind into the west to which
position our situation was exposed.
The question to be now settled was
whether we should get under way for
Waterhouse Island, or go for shelter to
Kelso Bay, for it was obvious we should
not long be able to remain in Pilot’s Bay.
After taking some opinions ashore we de-
cided upon attempting the run to the
eastward, so hoisting in our dingy, and
giving it a berth upon our cabin roof, we
lifted our anchor, and with a single reef
in the mainsail beat out through the
Heads, our little ship working well among
the tide rips in the way.
By 10'45 a.m. we cleared the Heads,
and shaped our course to Waterhouse
Island. We had proceeded only a very
few miles along the coast when the in-
dications of bad weather became more un-
mistakeable. The glass was steadily fall-
ing, and wind and sea were increasing,
but we were making good headway. After
some hard running for twenty miles,
during which we experienced some strong
gusts of wind, and were being played with
by a cross sea, we close reefed our main-
sail, and kept a single reef in our lug
mizzen. Under this canvas we continued
our course, with wind and sea gathering
sLength, but we shipped no seas ; far


otherwise, we had good cause to be satis-
fied with the sea-going qualities of the
Franklin, and our minds were at ease
upon that point.
Upon arriving off East Sandy Cape
(distant from Tamar Heads about thirty
miles, and at which position we found
ourselves after a run of three hours and
three-quarters) we determined to give
effect to the intention we had formed on
the passage eastward and make for Brid-
port. We deemed this on every account
the wisest step to take, and especially on
this consideration, viz—that should we
continue our course we should have to
meet the flood tide between Waterhouse
Island and the main, when we might ex-
pect to find a sea, which opposed by the
very strong westerly wind then blowing
would have been perilous to any small
craft.
Before rounding East Sandy Cape we
took the precaution of lowering our main-
sail altogether, rather than risk the
danger of jybing the sail while carrying
such top weight as our dingy on the cabin
roof added. I would here remark that
one great advantage in the rig designed
for the Franklin by my honoured father,
Captain Brownrigg, R. N., is the getting
rid of a main and mizen boom, and re-
peatedly in our cruise we realized the
satisfaction of being free from the incum-
brance of booms. For sea-going pur-
poses in small craft no rig, I venture to
suggest, will be found more handy than
that one which divides the canvas into
small portions, and dispenses with booms
altogether, as in the case of the Franklin,
which is supplied with a mainsail, a gaff
topsail (set flying upon a bamboo), a lug
mizen with tack set down to the fore
side of the mast and sheet made fast to a


bumpkin (which is simply the iron
tiller handle extended through the
rudder stock) and a jib. Under the
easy sail of jib and mizen 'we coasted
along in comparatively smooth water
from East Sandy Cape, and on arriving
off the Great Forester River, found the
cutter Brothers at anchor, and near her
we “let go” to await a sufficiency of water
for our vessels to cross the bar and find
shelter in the river.
Until 7 p.m. we remained at anchor,
rolling heavily all the time, for we were
lying head to wind and beam to sea ;
but at that hour we got in our anchor,
and followed in the wake of the Brothers
to be guided over the bar and up the river.
Upon approaching the bar, however, we
observed a boat with one man in it
coming off to us, and soon discovered that
the occupant was Mr Kraske, of Brid-
port, who had made out our flag, and con-
cluding that we were all strangers to the
port, and might hesitate to enter the
river, had kindly put off to pilot us in.
Hauling our staysail to windward and
catching hold of the dingy’s painter we
soon had the boat alongside and Mr
Kraske on board, who then took charge
of the vessel and piloted us in safety past
a few awkward places in the river up to
the wharf, to which we made fast.
The Franklin as quite a new boat
(having been placed in the water only
then about ten days) had taken in a good
deal of water by leakage, and in conse-
quence of having been so pressed upon
her lee side in our heavy running from
the Heads, the bilge water had found its
way into the zinc trays in the cabin
lockers, which trays had been provided
with the express design of keeping clothes
and other spoilable articles dry, should


water at any time find its way on to the
cabin floor. This design had, however,
been sadly defeated, for the said trays
becoming once full of water had care-
fully retained that fluid, and the clothes,
and flags, and other articles which had
been there stowed away for security were
simply saturated and afloat.
Upon making this unwebome discovery
we, of course, lost no time in freeing the
tins of their contents both of water and
articles, and the question how to dry our
wet tilings with no convenience for such a
purpose aboard was soon decided for us
by Mr Kraske who at once conveyed our
things to his house where Mrs Kraske
kindly turned her kitchen into a “ drying
ground,” and before a blazing fire hungup
our things to dry upon lines, which were
stretched in various directions from wall
to wall.
As we were utterly without any com-
fort on board for the night—bed and bed-
ding being either decidedly wet or peril-
ously damp—we took up our quarters in
the Forester Inn,where we received every
attention from its owner, Mr Jones.
At Bridport we were detained all Fri-
day by heavy weather, but I employed
the afternoon in visiting the various fami ■
lies in the township, and in the evening
held a service in the little church, which
considering the unavoidable shortness of
the notice was very well attended.
A moderation in the weather next morn-
ing decided us upon getting under way
for Waterhouse Island, but previously to
starting I baptised the two youngest chil-
dren of Mr J ones, the proprietor of the
inn in which we had been staying.
To the wharf we were accompanied by
Mr and Mrs Chapman, who came to see
us off and to bid us farewell. With the


first of the ebb we made a start, and
cleared the bar with a light south-west
wind and all sail set; but within a quarter
of an hour we opened out a point, which
brought us under the influence of a
fresh breeze from the west, and were
immediately compelled to reduce our
sail, even to putting in two reefs in the
mainsail. The sea was still running high,
but considerably less than we had had it
when running from Tamar Heads. In two
hours and a half after leaving Bridport,
we arrived at Waterhouse Island, and
there found the cutter Furneaux and
the steamer Avon each at anchor.
Having visited Mr Barrett, who
kindly extended to us in his wonted hos-
pitality, we left Waterhouse the next
morning (Feb. 19) to hold service at Swan
Island. We had a slow passage, which
was due to the exceedingly light wind.
At the Swan we were warmly welcomed
by the residents. Some changes had, I
observed, taken place in the employes in
the lighthouse establishment, Mr Baudi-
net and his family being the only persons
I recognised since my previous visit about
two years ago. 1 was, however, sorry in-
deed to find Mrs. Baudinet so seriously
ill, her physical state awakening the
gravest fears of her family concerning her
recovery. It was some satisfaction, at
least to myself, that my visit had been
opportune, as enabling me to minister in
some measure to her spiritual com-
fort.
In the evening we had prayers in Mr
Baudinet’s house, and at the close of the
service a few illustrated papers and
children’s books were distributed.
The next morning (Feb. 20) at about
5 o’clock, the threatening appearance of
the weather to the westward, from which


direction the freshening wind was blow-
ing, and we were, therefore, upon a lee
shore, induced us to remove the Franklin
to the anchorage at the south-eastern
side of the island ; but within an hour or
two after arriving in the new anchorage a
change for the better in the weather set
in. The day proved calm, and beautiful,
but as the state of the tide, and the direc-
tion of the light wind would not allow of
our departure from the island for some
hours, and we spent the day on shore.
T)uring the afternoon I visited the light
keepers, and after what I fear 1 must call
it, a farewell visit to Mrs Baudinet, we
proceeded to the harbour accompanied by
Mr Baudinet and Mr Dawson (the private
tutor of the family), and then made sail
for Clarke Island.
It is somewhat remarkable that I have
as yet had only one satisfactory passage
from a weather point of view across Banks
Strait, and that was in the Freak about
ten years ago. Each time I have experi-
enced either a calm or else more wind than
I desired. On the present occasion we
left the Swan with a light fair wind, but
were becalmed about four miles off the
land. We then betook ourselves to the
oars for a full hour, but though we had
made some approach towards Clarke
Island, it was undeniable that the flood
tide was sweeping us fast to the westward,
and it was equally beyond a question that
we should not make the land that night.
At about 11 p.m. we had light airs from
the north-east, but in consequence of the
indistinctness of the land from haze and
smoke, we decided not to adventure our-
selves among either rocks or reefs, but
rather to stem the ebb tide, and make a
westing for the Goose Island light, and
await daylight.


Midnight found us about 12 miles from
the Goose light, with light and variable
winds, and fortunately with a smooth sea.
For some time we were able to keep
the light in view, but the force of the
wind (then westerly) was not sufficient
to enable us to make way against the
tide, so we dropped off to leeward,
and daylight discovered us close to the
Night Isles and Preservation Island, to
the former of which (the scene of the
Cambridgeshire’s wreck), we were glad to
give as wide a berth as possible.
Shortly after nine o’clock in the morn-
ing (Feb. 21), we closed in with Clarke
Island, and after a vigorous effort
against the flood tide to round point to
the proper anchorage, we were compelled
to drop our anchor in four fathoms on a
sandy patch to the southward of the spot
we had desired to gain.
Leaving Mr Corrie and my son to pull
the dingy round at a later moment, I
effected a landing at the nearest point,
and after a lisky scramble over huge and
rough boulders set foot upon pleasant
walking ground, and was soon met by
Mrs Maclaine—Mr Maclaine being at that
time absent from home.
As my stay at Clarke Island could be
only a short one, the family assembled
for prayer in the forenoon, and at that
time the youngest child was baptised.
The whole of that day was intensely
hot, but the temperature was improved
towards 4 p.m. by a pleasant but light
north-easter. The wind from this
direction was fair for Long Beach, Barren
Island, and accordingly we sailed at about
5 p.m. for that place, but though we had
started with a good wind its
force was soon expended ; we were just


able to get into the anchorage at Preser-
vation Island, where we remained for the
night.
Since my last visit to that island its
ownership has been changed. At the
present time it is leased to Mr Maclaine
by whom it is used for stock fattening
purposes, but no one resides there.
Sheltered as is the little harbour at
Preservation from most winds, a very
disagreeable roll nevertheless sets in at
about the top of high water, and we had
some experience of this during our brief
stay ; we were glad, therefore, to get
under way at break of day, though with
only with so light an air that for some
time we could do no more than hold our
own against the two knots per hour ebb.
With the turn of the tide we pushed
on, but the wind headed round. We had,
therefore, to beat our way, but this was
preferable to the almost no progress of
the previous few hours.
On arriving at Long Beach we found
many to welcome us, for in the prospect
of our arrival the several families had de-
ferred their removal to Chappell Island
for the great harvest of the Straits—the
mutton birding.
We here learned that much anxiety had
been felt by our non-appearance at an
earlier date, . for intelligence had been
brought to Long Beach by a vessel which
arrived there shortly before us to the effect
that the weather had been so boisterous
after we had cleared Tamar Heads. The
cause of our delayed arrival was, however,
easily explained by the fact that we had
visited various islands before coming to
Long Beach.
An opportunity was now open to us of
placing the Franklin on the beach, to as-
certain and stop the cause of her leakage.


This was soon effected, in part by Mr
Brown, and in part also by Mr J. Willett,
who kindly gave their time and labour
freely to our service. The benefit of their
labour we have since enjoyed, and now
thankfully acknowledge.
As the Franklin had to be completely
emptied of everything but the ballast for
the overhaul in contemplation, we made
a camp on shore, Mr Oorrie and my son
attending to the necessary work of pitch-
ing the tent and arranging other details.
These had to be carried out with
the utmost promptitude, for the
sky was now black with clouds,
and a heavy thunderstorm was breaking
upon us. For about an hour the storm
lasted, the distant peaks of Flinders, and
the rounded summit of Mount Munro
(Barren Island) looking truly grand when
flashed upon by the vivid lightning.
Though heavy rain fell, the meeting for
service in the school room was well atten-
ded, and I am glad to say that at the ser-
vice held in the evening of each day of
my stay at Long Beach the school-room
was thoroughly filled.
At the close of the first evening’s ser-
vice notice was given of a meeting to be
held the next evening to decide the ques-
tion of the site for the proposed town-
ship, and of a meeting for the following
Friday evening in the interests of the
temperance movement.
In determining the site of the proposed
township, a good water supply . was of
the first consideration. I therefore re-
solved upon inspecting a site indicated,
which was said to possess this advantage.
For this purpose I started out with a few
of the islanders, having previously to
setting off baptized an infant of Harry
Armstrong’s. I was favourably impressed


with the new locality, and to mark the
event of laying out a township I gave
notice of a tea meeting to be held on the
evening of the day we commenced the
work.
After the service in the evening,
(Feb. 23) the meeting in re the township
took place, when it was agreed that the
new site should be selected, though all
present were of opinion that if a suffici-
ency of good water could be relied upon
throughout the year, the site first pro-
posed would be the proper one, as having
other advantages lacking in the new one,
viz , a good harbour and plenty of wood.
The meeting being almost unanimous
about the site, it was then resolved that
we should next morning meet upon the
new site, and proceed to mark out the
allotments; but singularly enough, just as
we were about to set off at the appointed
hour, Mr George Everett and Mr May-
nard arrived at Long Bea.h, reporting
that they had at an early hour that
morning “struck water” near to the
originally proposed site, and produced a
large bottle of water in evidence.
We all tasted the water, and were
agreed as to its excellence, the only
question being the extent of the supply.
A consultation was then held which
resulted in a resolution to proceed at
once to examine the new discovery.
On arriving at the spot we not only saw
the hole from whence the bottle full had
been procured, but we opened the ground
in other places and obtained running
water in each. This discovery settled the
whole question immediately, for it was
evident that a dam placed in the water-
course before us would be all that would
be required to secure a liberal supply of
water throughout the year, as it would


retain winter rains which hitherto had
been allowed to run to waste.
On Friday evening (Feb 24), the usual
service was followed by a temperance
meeting. At a similar meeting held last
year I had promised that to each one
(referring chiefly to adults) who would
keep the pledge of total abstinence from in-
toxicants during the ensuing twelve
months, a small book should be given, in
the fly leaf of which that fact should be
recorded. I undertook this contract in
the hope that the proposal would meet the
support of total abstinence friends in
Tasmania, and that when known, some
might be willing to contribute their two
shillings towards the purchase of the
books. I could not, however, appeal for
help before I might ascertain how many
books would be required.
At the meeting under notice the names
of some who had kept the pledge were
received, so that the books might be
prepared for distribution by the following
Monday evening. A few—and O, thank
God, very few had failed in this respect,
and these candidly acknowledged the fact
with much expression of regret. How-
ever, all were determined to start afresh,
and at the close of the meeting twenty-
five pledges were administered, and these
on a subsequent occasion were increased
to 39. It has been admitted that the pa=t
year (in which, in consequence of the
pledge taken, the use of intoxicants has
been limited to the few, instead of being
indulged in by the many) has been the
freest from troubles—those troubles, for
example, which are so clearly traceable to
intemperate habits : no unimportant testi-
mony this, to the value of the Temperance
Reformation.
On Sunday (Feb. 26) three services
were held in the school-room, the one in


the afternoon being specially for the
young. I would here correct an opinion
that has been expressed to the effect that
the half-caste population among the
islands is decreasing. It is quite the
reverse ; and I never before saw so many
young people at a children’s service
here, as I saw on the present occasion.
The congregation at the afternoon service
consisted of 52 young persons and 17
grown up. Some of the latter not being
able to find sitting accommodation within
the school-room stood as listeners at the
windows and at the door.
The great heat of Sunday was followed
by another thunderstorm, and during the
night much rain fell accompanied with a
heavy blow from the south-east. This
somewhat dulled our prospects of work at
the new township appointed for the next
day, but the weather improved towards
the morning.
At 9 a.m. (Feb, 27) we mustered up
our forces and proceeded to the scene of
operations, sixteen persons in all entering
upon the work. With the Franklin’s
compass, and two lines marked off to
quarter chains, double work was carried
on by two parties at the same time in dif-
ferent directions, and by 1 p.m. a suffi-
cient number of allotments having been
pegged out, a large corner post was pro-
vided to mark the starting point, and this
post I was requested to place and drive
in ; and this operation over, with the final
stroke of the axe-head I had the honour of
proclaiming the site of the Township of
Port Franklin, a proceeding which was
followed by three cheers from all present.
On returning from the township to
Long Beach, we found the Franklin gaily
decorated. In honour of the township,
Johnnie had been busily at work aboard,


and from tlie bowsprit end, over the
masthead and to the bumpkin at the rud-
der stock, had displayed the ship’s rain-
bow of flags.
Five o’clock in the afternoon had been
the hour appointed for the tea-meeting,
and by that hour seventy-five persons old
and young (among whom were Miss Lucy
Beeton, and her islanders who had
arrived at Long Beach the previous even-
ing) had assembled. In consequence of
the heavy rain, the tea-meeting was held
in the school-room by relays, the waiting
ones taking shelter under bushes, and any
other available protection. None, how-
ever, complained, for the rain was gener-
ally regarded as a much needed blessing.
After the tea, our usual service was
held, and this was followed by a meeting
attended by the heads of families. The
object of this meeting was to distribute
the allotments on the township, and to
agree upon certain rules and regulations
for the government of the township, and
for the conduct of matters at Chappell
Island. To give the most general satis-
faction, the land was distributed by lot,
my son drawing the numbers from the
box, which decided the lot for each.
At the conclusion of this business
eighteen books were handed over to as
many “total abstainers,” according to
promise, and then a number of illustrated
temperance tracts, kindly supplied to me
by a staunch and warm-hearted friend
to the temperance cause in Launceston,
were distributed. Thus closed a day, the
good effects of which it is earnestly to be
hoped may long be seen and enjoyed
among the Islands ; and I would now ask
the kindly help of friends in Tasmania
and elsewhere towards providing a suit-
able library ; and any journals or maga-


zines, or daily papers, or illustrated pub-
lications for use in the proposed reading
room in the new township, I shall be glad
to take charge of, and to forward such
material as I may receive from time to
time.
Monday night (Feb. 27 ) was the wildest
we experienced on this cruise. Torrents
of rain and constant peals of thunder
accompanied the strong blasts of
wind from the south-east, and made
matters very uncomfortable for us in the
tent. It was but very little sleep or rest
that we had all that night, for our tent
door was directly exposed to the wind, and
the blowing in and bulging out of the
tent, and the bending down of the ridge
pole, did not inspire us with much confi-
dence as to the stability of our fabric. A
general clearance of the tent was ex-
pected every instant, but happily the
additional ropes we had set up to the tent
kept it in its place. Within the tent
everything was damp, and the approach
of dawn was hailed with no small satisfac-
tion.
The heavy weather continuing all that
day detained us at Long Beach, and
induced us to find a refuge in the school-
room for the night. T would here grate-
fully acknowledge the kind and assiduous
attention we received from Mr and Mrs
Oollis.
Wednesday morning opened to us the
desired prospect of a run down the Sound.
The wind was westerly and light, and at
about 10 a. m. we got under way
for Little Badger Corner. Previously,
however, to starting, I visited the
public school, and was satisfied with the
result. The attendance also during the
past year showed a decided improvement.
Notwithstanding the advantages of wind


and tide, our passage through the Sound
was not so satisfactory as it might have
been, but this was owing to a detention
upon a sand-bank over which the depth of
water was less than we had expected.
We arrived, however, just before dark,
and in the evening I had family prayer in
the cottage occupied by Mr J. Robinson.
The next day, leaving the Franklin at
Badger Corner, I took a passage over at
Big Dog Island in the Rosebud, as the
navigation among the numerous sand-
banks was well known to Edward Smith
and Fred. Collis, who offered me the pas-
sage in that boat. After visiting Mr Tay-
lor at Big Dog, we proceeded to Little
Dog Island as Smith and Collis wanted to
procure a few mutton birds for home use.
Though there was no resident on the
island I landed and accompanied Smith
and Collis to their “birding.” The rook-
ery the birds inhabit resembles a rabbit
warren. The soft ground is burrowed out
in all directions among the tussocks of
grass, and the thin covering over these
holes often gives way— as it did frequently
in my own experience —and lets one down
knee deep.
The mode of “ birding ” is very simple,
but by no means free from danger, arising
from snakes, which are occasionally found
in the same hole with the bird. To pro-
cure the bird the arm is first bared, and
then thrust in sometimes quite up to the
armpit into the hole, and the bird is laid
hold of. The young birds offer no resist-
ance, but the old bird does not hesitate
to defend itself, and makes its presence
felt by sharply driving its beak into the
hand or arm of the capturer, and drawing
blood. When dragged from its hole
a jerk of the hand speedily kills the bird
by breaking its neck. As the birds are


collected they are fastened upon a
pointed stick called a “spit,” which is
pushed through their beaks, and thirty
birds make a fair load to carry.
Within a short time Collis and Smith
had collected sixty birds, and with the
spoils we returned to the boat, and sailed
over to Badger Corner, At family prayer
in the evening I baptized the infant child
of Mr W. Robinson, making the ninth
time of administering that rite among the
islands during this visit.
With the ebb tide and a light air from
the north-east, which afterwards veered
round to south-east, we left Badger Cor-
ner on 3rd of March, and worked over to
Vansittart Island, where we were most
kindly received by Mr and Mrs Ross.
After partaking of some refreshment
we were invited by Mr Ross to inspect his
island, and were greatly surprised to no-
tice the extent of the improvements he
had effected during the three years he
has had possession of the island. With
the assistance of one man he had collected
an innumerable number of stones (some
very large), and with these had constructed
a wall nearly a mile in length, and about
four feet high. He has also built up a
rough stone breakwater, under the shelter
of which he is able to keep his cutter
safely in all weathers. His paddocks are
well fenced in, and sown with
English grass. He has raised
some excellent hay,and the fine condition
of his horse speaks well for the care
bestowed upon it by its owner. The
homestead is only equalled by the one
provided by Mr Taylor at Big Dog Island.
Adjacent to the house, we examined a
tank in course of construction. It is being
built of granite blocks collected upon the
island, and securely fixed together with


Portland cement, and firmly puddled in
at the back below the level of the surface.
When complete the tank will be capable
of holding about 2500 gallons. Very
much credit is due to Mr Ross for the
extent of his undertakings upon the
island, and difficulties have been over-
come which imply the presence of a large
amount of pluck and patience and
perseverance on his part.
As we had arranged to be at Long
Beach (D.Y.) for the approaching Sun-
day, we were obliged to shorten our time
at Yansittart to enable us to visit Apple
Orchard and Long Island. Accordingly,
after family worship, we went aboard and
at 6‘3op.m. started for Apple Orchard,
A light fair wind brought us slowly to
our destination, and after spending two
hours ashore in Mrs Lee’s cottage, we
returned to the Franklin for an early
start with the flood tide.
At about 4 ’3O a. m. we were again under
way. The morning was cold and cloudy,
with a fresh south-east breeze. Our run
up the Sound was therefore favourable,
and in about two hours and a quarter we
were in our old anchorage at Long Beach.
After breakfast we ran the Franklin
across to Long Island that we might visit
Mrs Barrett, and after a short stay at that
island we returned to Long Beach about
noon, having had a fine lead both going
and returning.
On Sunday (March 5) service was held
in the morning and evening, and in the
afternoon (as we were only few in number,
some of the families having left for
Chappell Island) we met in the school-
room and sang a few hymns. These I
accompanied upon a small harmonium,
and then the young people present
soon learned a new hymn tune to
22


which they had taken a fancy when
hearing; it played once for them.
It was shortly after this meeting
that tidings were brought to us from
Swan Island that Mrs Baudinet had passed
to her rest the day after we had left Swan
Island. Her loss will be deeply felt by
those who knew her; but to her sorrow-
ing relatives and friends it will be a com-
fort to know that her end was one of per-
fect peace. Her simple trust was in
Christ, the Saviour of mankind, and her
life had been a practical exhibition of that
faith which overcometh the world. I now
look back with satisfaction to that inter-
view I had with her upon the eve of my
departure from the island,when she spoke
to me of her preparedness for her end.
With the evening service at Long Beach
I brought my work to a conclusion, and
decided to commence my return to Laun-
ceston at an early moment after midnight.
At 1 a.m. we lifted our anchor, and set
sail before a light fair wind for the Tamar,
but through being becalmed for some
hours we did not enter the Heads until
just before daybreak on Tuesday morning.
The breeze which helped us along only set
in about 30 miles from the Heads, but in a
short time it had stirred up some lumpy
water. However, the Franklin ran well,
and behaved herself satisfactorily.
Our progress up the river was not so
rapid as we had hoped for, but this was
due to the lightness of the breeze. We
arrived shortly before 10 p.m., thankful
for preservation among the “ perils of the
deep,” and much -encouraged with the
work.
Before closing my narrative I would
take the opportunity to acknowledge the
receipt of £lO, as a “thank offering”
from a friend for a mercy he had


JAF p
B l&Lio
24 . F7SEZ
received. This has been given towards
the reduction of a debt of about £BO, on
behalf of the Furneaux Mission for which
lam personally liable. This debt has
arisen through having been obliged to
part with the former mission vessel at cost
less than her purchase, through inadequate
support, and I need hardly say, that it would
be a great relief from anxiety on this
-behalf if I could be assisted in discharging
this liability. I would thankfully receive
any help that might be extended to me
for this purpose. The Furneaux Mission
has been now carried on with regularity
for some years past, and its continuance
is really desired by all the well disposed
among the islands. One great want now
felt and which I trust may be supplied at
an early date is the appointment of a cate-
chist to reside at the new township, who
might also be the school-master, and
whose wife might take charge of the
school during the absence of her husband,
while he might be occasionally visiting
some of the islands. I would earnestly
hope that the Lord of the Vineyard may
soon provide a suitable labourer who
would, for his part, find among the
Straits Islands an interesting field of use-
fulness, alike promoting the welfare of
man, and the glory of God.
Printed at the “Launcettm Juxaminer” Office-
