



BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF THE WRECK OF THE "ADMELLA," WITH BOATS AND STEAMERS RESCUING SURVIVORS.
From a Sketch by James Fawthrop who led the Crew of the Life-boat in the successful attempt.


NARRATIVE
OF THE
SHIPWRECK OF THE “ADMELLA,”
INTER-COLONIAL STEAMER,
ON THE
SOUTHERN COAST OF AUSTRALIA:
DRAWN UP FROM AUTHENTIC STATEMENTS FURNISHED BY
THE RESCUERS AND SURVIVORS.
BY SAMUEL MOSSMAN:
AUTHOR OF ARTICLE AUSTRALIA. ENCYCLOPAEDIA BEITANNICA, AUSTRALIA
REVISITED. ETC., ETC.
WITH A MAP OF THE COAST,
AND A SKETCH OP THE WRECK AT TIME OF' RESCUE,
BY J. FAWTHROP. HARBOURMASTER, PORTLAND.
gfelirotmiß:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR THE COMMITTEE OP THE “ADMELLA”
FUND, BY J. H. MOULINE3 AND CO.
1859.




DEDICATED
TO THS COLONISTS Ot
VICTORIA ANU SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
WHO SO GENEROUSLY CONTRIBUTED
TO XHB
“ADMELLA” FUND,
top.
BSWMD3K© THE MAW BSgOHEBS,
AN1>
RELIEVING THE DISTRESSED SURVIVORS OF THAT SHIPWRECKED VESSEL.
AT THKXK OBKLISNT SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.
Melbourne, November. 1M0.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
CHAPTER I. —INTRODUCTORY.
Geography of Southern Coast of Australia—Extent of Shipping and
Maritime Traffic along the Coast—Dangers of Navigation—Appalling
Shipwrecks—Motives for Publishing Narrative on Part of the Com-
mittee and Author - - - - - - - 1.
CHAPTER II. —THE WRECK.
Narrative- Reference to Map of Coast where the Wreck happened —
Class of Vessels to which the “ Admella” belonged—Her Character
and Equipment—Starts from Port Adelaide Friday, August 5, 1859,
5.30 a.m.—Steams down Gulf St. Vincent, and through Backstair
Passage—Cape Willoughby Light-house—Heavy Swell from S.W.
-Race-horse Jupiter falls—Ship brought round to steady her—
Course resumed—Night comes on—No apprehension of danger—
Midnight, the Weather changes—Head Wind, gloomy, with Light-
ning—All Passengers retire to Bed—The Mate’s Watch on Deck—
All on the look-out for McDonnell Light—Suddenly the Vessel
strikes on the Reef with a grinding force —Saturday, August C, five
a.m.—Ship labours on the Rocks—Fearful cries of Passengers—
Bewildering anarchy, prevails—Boats stove and adrift—The Hull
breaks up into Three Pieces—After part fixed, mid Portion sinks,
fore Part swerves round—No Lights left—One Rocket fired —Day
breaks—Awful position of Wreck—“Havilah” steamer passes by—
Hopes destroyed—Soren Holm, seaman, swims to Life-boat —Rope
severs and he is lost—Day advances—Sea rough and Breakers high—
Some Food and Clothing is had out of Cabin—Night sets in drearily
of ocean steamer “ Bombay”—She passes close to Wreck
without seeing it—Weather cold but calmer - - - - 5


CHAPTER 111. —THE WRECK.
PAQB
Second Bay breaks clear and sunny—Sunrise on the Wreck—Groups
pictured on the after Part and fore Part—Fifteen Men cross over
to the after Wreck, leaving all the Women and Children on the fore
Wreck—Captain Harris dives for Provisions and succeeds—Brandy
thrown overboard and Edibles served out—No fresh Water—A Raft
constructed on which Leach and Knapman volunteer to go on Shore
They are cast adrift on the turbulent Waters —Perilous Voyage
through the Breakers—They reach the Shore in Three Hours—They
are saved—Stricken down with fatigue they lie on the warm dry
Sand—Signal to those on the Wreck—Night approaches They
journey towards the Light-house—After Fourteen Hours they reach
it—Light-house Keeper rides to Telegraph Station—The sad Tidings
communicated by the Electric Wires through the length and breadth
of the land - - - - - - - 20
CHAPTER IV. —THE TIDINGS.
The Electric Telegraph conveys the sad Tidings to Melbourne and
Adelaide—A Tribute to the Genius that invented it —First Telegram
at Melbourne—Message from Adelaide —Anxiety and sorrow of the
Colonists-Light-house Boat—Peter, the Fisherman, from Guichen
Bay, reaches scene of Wreck —Message from Mount Gambier—lts
exciting effect upon the Community, notwithstanding the political
agitation of a General Election —Departure of s.s. “Lady Bird” for
Wreck —Cross Telegraph Messages causeydelay —Government decline,
.giving a Guarantee for extra Insurance—-Melbourne Merchants sub-
scribe—Proceedings of Inhabitants at Portland —Voluntary efforts of
Settlers on the Coast —Mr. Power’s account of their Attempts with
the “ Admella’s” Boat cast on Shore —Failure—Night sets in—
Watch-fires and Bivouac —Volunteer Seamen from Stations—Thurs-
day, the sixth morn to those on Wreck—“ Lady Bird” goes in search
of Wreck—Cannot find it—Returns to Portland —Time lost, and
hope sickens within the hearts of those desolate People - - 27
CHAPTER V. —THE WRECK.
The two Sailors seen to reach the Shore—A prayer of thanksgiving to
the Almighty—Bitter cold Night—Winter Season in Australia—Suf-
ferings of the Women and Children on the Fore Wreck—They drop
off one by one into the Sea—All Lost on the Third Night—Scenes
on After Part—A Negro dies raving mad —Those who succumb,
delirious Twelve Hours before they Die—Death of Miss Clendinning
—Endurance of Miss Lcdwith—Unmanly conduct of a Sailor—Man’s
inborn Selfishness exemplified—Reflections thereon —Horrors of Thirst .
and Hunger—A Fireman dies mad from drinking Saltwater —The
water-tight Bulkhead driven in by the Sea—The Cabin completely
submerged—Several drowned —Captain Harris at last succumbs—
All now seek for safety on the Deck, Bulwarks, and Rigging-
Despair of Survivors —Bodies seen floating round the Wreck—
Welcome Sight: People seen on Shore—Bivouac Fires—Bitter cold


PAGE
Night—Eighteen Die from Exhaustion—Wednesday, Fifth Day on
Wreck—The Fishermen from Guichen Bay pass the Wreck—Despair
again unnerves them —Some yearn after their Worldly Possessions
Fifth Night on Wreck—Sixth Day dawns—Circumstances of Mr.
Magarey’s Death —Misery at beholding the futile Attempts of a
Rescue - - - - . • - ■ -40
CHAPTER VI. —THE RESCUE.
Account of the Arrival of the “Cady Bird'* steamer at Portland, and
Preparations for a final Attempt at Rescue, drawn up by Portland
Committee—Captain Fatvthropthe Hero of the Rescue — His Account
of the Portland Life-boat, Crew, and Equipment—“ Lady Bird”
starts from Wharf on Thursday Night —Reaches the Wreck on Friday
morning—Fawthrop’s Description of First Attempt--Johnstone’s
Account—Discharging Rockets with Lines—Description from the
Shore by Melville--Lyon and Power bear Testimony to brave At-
tempt—Pilot-boat and Crew—Wildly picturesque Scene around
the Wreck on Sea and Land on the Eve of the Rescue — Lights
on Shore, Fireworks on Steamers, glittering moonlit Sea—Scientific
description of “ Rollers” and Waves generally— SaTUuday, August
6th, opens propitiously—First attempt of Rescuers by the improvised
Crew of the “Admella’s” Life-boat and the Adelaide Pilot-boat—
The Rescue accomplished by the Portland Life-boat under com-
mand of Captain Fawthrop, and “Admella’s” Boat under Mr.
Germain—Joy of the Rescuers—Emaciated appearance of the Sur-
vivors—Johnstone’s Account of the Rescue—Remnant of Survivors
safe on board tho “ Lady Bird ” —Arrival of the Rescuers and the
Rescued at Portland—Hospitable Reception of them by the Inha-
bitants - - - - . - - - -52
CHAPTER VII. —REWARD AND RELIEF FUNDS.
Progress of Events telegraphed to Melbourne and Adelaide- Tele-
grams received on Wednesday at Melbourne from Adelaide, Port-
land, and Cape Northumberland—Thursday’s message from Geelong
and Mount Gambier —Erroneous Despatch from Mount Gambler
that the Survivors had been Saved on Thursday—True Version of
News given Five Hours later—Telegrams on Friday from Adelaide
and Mount Gambier—Saturday, 13th August, Message from Port-
announcing Success of Rescuers, with List of Survivors —En-
thusiasm increases at Portland—Attention of Stationmasters —
Noble advocacy of the Press in the Cause of Humanity—Leading
Article from the Age, Melbourne daily Journal, on the Subject,
forcible and truthful Language—Public Meeting at Melbourne,
Adelaide and . Portland—Resolutions passed, at the Melbourne
Meeting—Formation of Committee—Public Reception of the Cap-
tain and Crew of “Lady Bird”—Letter of Congratulation Meeting
at Portland—Committee appointed—Public Meeting at Adelaide,
vroyemor Chairman—Reward and Relief Fund Committee —Reso-
mtions passed—Speech of J. H. Barrow, M.L.A., at a Meeting—
Reflections on the Conduct of the Victorian Government—Proceed-
ings of Melbourne Committee zealously conducted by the Honorary
treasurer, J. H. Blackwood—Conflicting Statements furnished to.


PAGE
Committee and Printed—Proposal to Adelaide Committee to amal-
gamate Funds, and make one uniform Distribution, not acknow-
ledged—Onerous task of awarding Medals and Pecuniary Rewards
to Rescuers —Plan adopted—Relief Award to the Widow of Captain
Harris, Relatives of Soren Holm and Others—lmpartial Decisions
by the Committee in apportioning the Rewards—A Moiety of the
Donations reserved for the Approval of the Donors to form the
Foundation of a Sailors’ Homo at the Port of Melbourne. - 69
CHAPTER VIII. —CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Reflections on the conduct of Individuals mentioned in the Narrative,
not in Judgment but Instructive—lnquiry into probable cause of
Wreck—Evidence unsatisfactory—Strong current chief influence
Captain of the “Admella” navigated the Passage a hundred times
—Too much confidence often begets disaster—lncorrect Charts of
the Coast from Cape Otway to Guichen Bay—Cowtan’s political
Views on the Subject— Incident of Soren Holm referred to—.
Horne’ to the Argus on the subject; also on Life-
buoys and Swimming—Conclusion—Less interest in Narrative to
Strangers than Colonists—Moral teachings to the Millionaire, the
Gold-Digger and Religious Devotee —Dispassionate Sentiments of
Contemplative Mind —Liberal Donations; if they express equally
generous feelings, then the WRECK OP THE “ADMELLa” has not
happened in vain - - - - - - - 91


SHIPWRECK OF THE “ADMELLA."
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
Oleography of Southern Coast of Australia—Extent of Shipping and
Maritime Traffic along the Coast—Dangers of Navigation—Appalling
Shipwrecks—Motives for Publishing Narrative on Port of the Committee
and Author.
The experienced mariner, consulting the chart of the
southern coast of Australia, will perceive that the eastern
section, which forms the ocean boundary of the colonies of
Victoria aud South Australia, presents a formidable and
dangerous line of navigation, from the numerous islands,
rocks, and reefs which skirt the coast. From Cape
Catastrophe—the ominous name given to the western
cape of Spencer Gulf—in South Australia, to Cape Howe,
the eastern angle of Victoria, which comprises the whole
of the settled territory of the two colonies within its
limits, a ship cannot make the distance in less than a
thousand miles; and if the sinuosities of the gulfs and
bays be taken into consideration, there is fully twelve
hundred miles of the mainland exposed to the tremendous
surge heaved by the mingled tides, waves and currents of
the South Pacific and South Indian oceans, which rolls
unceasingly, and, at times with ruthless fury, against the
inhospitable shore.
B


Along this line of coast there are eight sea-ports, among
which is reckoned that of Port Phillip, the most important
in the Australian group of colonies, —if not in the
Southern Hemisphere; and hence it has become the
great highway for ships from all parts of the world, bound
for that central harbor in the gold regions of Victoria.
Besides the great amount of foreign shipping destined for
these southern ports, almost all the European, Indian,
and American vessels, bound for New South Wales and
New Zealand, having to sail through Bass Strait, pass in
their course these perilous land-marks ; whilst not the
least important branch of the maritime traffic, which
swells the tonnage inwards and outwards, is comprehended
in the very large number of inter-colonial steamers and
sailing vessels and small coasting craft, passing at all
times and seasons from port to port, so that probably
four-fifths of the aggregate amount of shipping employed
in the Australian trade have to encounter its intricate
navigation during some part of the year.
If these vessels had to sail amongst the dangers
enumerated in such weather as prevails nine months out
of the twelve on the English coast, where mist, fog, snow,
and rain more or less obscure the horizon, shipwrecks
would no doubt be as frequent in proportion—if not more
so—than they are on any part of the British Isles.
Fortunately the danger is lessened by the remarkable
clearness of the Australian climate ; and when shipwrecks
do occur, it is generally at those exceptional times when
the weather assimilates with that of the mother-country.
Nevertheless, the maritime annals of these colonies record
more of these disasters than there should be, where
unskilfulness or neglect has sometimes been the cause, or
partly assisted in the wreck of a vessel, which, in several
instances, have been attended with a dreadful sacrifice of
human life, and bodily suffering.
Amongst those of an appalling nature, which have
happened within the last seven years, may be mentioned
the total loss of the “ Cataraqui,” emigrant ship, on King
Island, Bass Strait, when 400 souls met a watery grave ;


the “ Dunbar,” English liner, near Port Jackson Heads,
the particulars of which are still fresh in our recollection ;
and the “ Nene Valley,” on Cape Northumberland, not
far from the spot where the “ Admella” was wrecked.
Each of these catastrophes furnished its melancholy tale ;
but the last-named —which it is the object of this narrative
to relate—is fraught with the most agonising details. In
the former cases, the sea suddenly engulphed the ships
with their living freight, or quickly sent the few survivors
on shore. There was no lingering death before the hapless
passengers and crews —no helpless beings clinging to the
shattered wrecks, suffering, for days and nights, all the
honors of thirst and starvation. In the present instance,
however, these “ dangers of the sea ” have recurred with
appalling severity, accompanied by the still more dreadful
effects of mental suffering, where death has come in
madness and despair.
To furnish a narrative of the harrowing details attendant
upon such, a calamitous wreck, merely to satisfy curiosity,
is, however, not the chief object of publishing this volume.
The writhe of it, and the members of the “ Admella
Seward anil Relief Fund,” who have sanctioned its publi-
cation, have a higher motive in view than to gratify
the morbid appetite for tales of woe and suffering. There
are circumstances attending the rescue of the survivors
that exalt the subject to a higher position in the chronicles
of humanity,—the recital of which, without the aid
of pen or pencil, compose a drama of thrilling interest.
The means employed, and the services rendered by the
colonists to succour their fellow-creatures in such dire
distress, present a panoramic sketch of life in one of its
noblest phases, that must warm the coldest heart, and
interest the most indifferent stranger.
With these brief introductory remarks, we shall now
proceed to give as truthful, impartial, and concise an ac-
count of the shipwreck of the “Admella,” and its atten-
dant circumstances, as possibly can be derived from the
multifarious statements and reports of the survivors and
rescuers; premising, that the story is narrated from a


Melbourne point of view, consequently much of interest
to the inhabitants of Adelaide and Portland may be:
omitted unintentionally, from the events not having come
within the knowledge of the writer.




CHAPTER II.
THE WEECK.
Narrative-Reference to Map of Coast, where the Wreck hap-
pened.—Class of Vessels to which the “Admella” belonged—Her
Character and Equipment—Starts from Port Adelaide Friday, August
5, 1859, 5.30 a.m. —Steams down Gulf St. Vincent, and through Backstair
Passage—Cape Willoughby Light-house—Heavy Swell from S.W. —Race-
horse Jupiter falls—Ship brought round to steady her—Course resumed
—Night comes on—No apprehension of danger—Midnight, the Weather
changes—Head Wind, gloomy, with Lightning —All Passengers retire to
Bod —The Mate’s Watch on Deck—All on the look-out for McDonnell
Light—Suddenly the Vessel strikes on the Beef with a grinding force—
Saturday, August 6, five a.m.—Ship labours on the Rocks—Fearful
cries of Passengers—Bewildering anarchy prevails—Boats stove and
adrift—The Hull breaks up into Three Pieces—After part fixed, mid
Portion sinks, fore Part swerves round—No Lights left—One Rocket
fired—Day breaks —Awful position of Wreck—“Havilah” steamer passes
by —Hopes destroyed—Soren Holm, seaman, swims to Life-boat—Rope
severs and he is lost—Day advances—Sea rough and Breakers high—
Some Food and Clothing is had out of Cabin—Night sets in drearily—
Lights of ocean steamer “ Bombay”—She passes close to Wreck without
seeing it—Weather cold but calmer.
Of that part of the Coast to which the subject of our
narrative refers, the accompanying map gives an approxi-
mate delineation from Portland in Victoria, to Adelaide in
South Australia. It will be seen even on such a small
scale that the intricacies of Gulf St. Vincent and Back-
stair Passage, the great bight from Encounter Bay to
Lacepedeßay,andthe rocks and reefs dotting the Coast from
Cape Bernouilli to Cape Nelson, a considerable series of
dangerous points have to be weathered by vessels trading
between these two ports, especially if it be a lee shore,
when the prevailing wind from the South-west sets in with
a heavy sea.


Of the class of vessels to which the “Admella ” be-
longed, it may be said that although not the largest in
number and tonnage employed in the intercolonial trade,
still it is the most-important in-passenger traffic. Not
only do they equal the most improved boats on the British
Coast in build and speed, but they excel them in their
internal arrangements, for comfort and luxury. To those
in the mother country who have seen the screw-steamers
that ply between England and the Continent, or up the
Mediterranean, with their luxurious accommodations,
they will realize some idea of their appearance, and the
class of passenger traffic. As the wreck of a British
passenger steam vessel is almost certain to involve the loss
of influential individuals well-known in the circles of
the trading ports, thereby augmenting the melancholy
interest of such a catastrophe, so the wreck of an inter-
colonial steamer with loss of passengers and crew, creates
more sensation among the several communities of the
Australian colonies, than that of the largest foreigner.
Thu “Admella” was a favourable example of this class
of steamboats. She was built at Glasgow in 1857, ex-
pressly for the Australian intercolonial traffic, measuring
36‘0 tons register, and fitted with engines of 100 horse-
power. In June, 1858, she commenced plying between
Adelaide and Melbourne, so that up to the period of her
loss she had been fourteen months in the trade. Her
accommodations for passengers and cargo were in every
way complete. She was considered a fast boat, being
well manned, and equipped, with an experienced Captain
and able crew.
On Friday, the Oth August, 1859, she started on her
usual voyage from Port Adelaide, at 5.30 a.m., with eighty-
two passengers on board ; a crew, including the Captain,
consisting of thirty-one individuals; seven horses, and a
general cargo, amongst which was ninety-three tons of
copper in cakes and ingots. There are a few facts re-
quiring special notice regarding the freight: four of the
horses were racers, bound for Melbourne, where they were
to be entered for a great intercolonial champion race on


the Ist of October, at which competitors for the stakes
were expected to arrive from South Australia, Tasmania,
New South Wales, and New Zealand. It will he seen in
the sequel that one of the‘horses had indirectly something
to do with the cause of the shipwreck, and that the copper
became an agent in preserving the last fragment of the
vessel, and thus contributed towards the safety of the
survivors. It is also a matter of melancholy interest to
note, that of the eighty-two passengers thirty-four were
women and children, nineteen of the former and fifteen
of the latter.
Nothing of consequence transpired on board the vessel,
as she steamed slowly down the narrow inlet which forms
the anchorage at Port Adelaide and rounded Schnapper
Point into Gulf St. Vincent, excepting that a fireman
and some passengers were taken on board at the Semaphore,
making her total complement of passengers and crew, as
near as can be ascertained, to have been one hundred
and thirteen. The weather was fine, with very little
wind starring, and she sailed down the Gulf smoothly at
full speed; whilst all on board were in high glee at the
prospects of making a quick and pleasant voyage. The
time was passed agreeably among the passengers, specu-
lating on the forth coming racesatMelbourne, and of course
the race-horses were the observed of all observers. This
was particularly the topic of conversation in the cabin,
where the owners of three out of the four race-horses
were passengers. These gentlemen were Messrs. George
and Hurtle Fisher, sons of the President of the South
Australian Legislative Council; while Mr. Magarey, a
stockholder and flour merchant, possessed of large means,
and owner of the three other horses, was also on board.
After some five hours of this smooth water navigation,
the steamer had passed through that narrow channel
between Kangaroo Island and Cape Jervis on the main
land, called Backstair Passage, when she became exposed
to the south-westerly swell that rolls in continually on
that shore. The calm waters of the Gulf, under the shelter
of the island, were now left behind, and the vessel began


to heave and pitch into the trough of the sea, which dis-
turbed the tranquillity of everything on board. Between
twelve and one o’clock the vessel was abreast of Cape
Willoughby light-house, and from about this point on the
map the Captain shaped his course for Cape Northumber-
land S.E. by S,, distance 170 miles. This brought her, fore
and aft, parallel, or to use an expressive nautical term,
“ broadside on ” to the swell, and caused her to roll very
considerably. As the ship cleared the island, and pro-
ceeded to sea, the swell increased and became not only
uncomfortable to the passengers, but particularly awkward
to the high-mettled racers, cooped up in their boxes on
deck.
About four o’clock, while the cabin passengers were at
dinner, it was reported that in consequence of the motion
of the ship, the race-horse Jupiter was thrown on his
back in his box. The Captain and Mr. Rochfort, a
wealthy squatter, immediately went on deck to secure
him properly. For this purpose it was necessary to
steady the ship by bringing her head round to the swell,
which was done accordingly. The position of the
“ Admella” at this time, as affirmed by Captain McEwan,
was thirty-six miles from Cape Willoughby, that head-
land bearing N.W. by N., and the vessel’s head S.W. In
this position she was kept under steam for an hour,
.making, according to the Captain’s reckoning, an offing
of nearly five miles, while Mr. Rochfort estimates it at
two. Be this as it may, there was then no land visible on
the port bow to ascertain the fact, whether she made
head-way or lee-way, and as her course was across the
great bight of the Coorong, with a low sandy shore not
visible five miles off, before it could be corrected it would
then be dark, so that no reliable land-mark could be made
until the McDonnell light-house was sighted. Thus
circumstance, however, caused no uneasiness, and the
ship’s usual course was resumed.
The afternoon passed away without any noticeable event
on board the vessel, and the weather continued fine
throughout. The sun set behind the western wave, bright


and glowing ; and evening came on without the smallest
apprehension of danger. Some anxiety was, perhaps, felt
hy the owners of the race-horses, who were afraid that
the rolling and pitching of the vessel might damage the
limbs of their favorites. The stars shone out brightly
from the dark-blue vault of the southern heavens, as night
set in, and the numerous lights on board gave a cheerful
aspect to the vessel. Supper-time ■ passed over, and the
hum of life on board that ill-fated ship gradually died
away. Amongst the passengers, the women and children
first sought repose—alas ! the last they were to find on
earth. Then the groups of men on deck, enjoying the
“ fragrant weed,” broke up as they went below to their
respective sleeping berths. In the cabin, the ladies retired
early, leaving the gentlemen to enjoy a quiet game of
whist. Then these turned in to their snug berths to
dream probably of happy homes on shore, some of whom
were never to visit them again. The Captain and his mates
attended to the duties of the ship, setting the watches for
the night, seeing that the look-out men were properly
stationed, that the signal-lamps were lit, and the helms-
man sober and steady; so that, as far as human foresight
could calculate, all was right.
Midnight came, and with it tire sheen of lightning
gleamed across the southern sky. The electric state of
the atmosphere was disturbed, which attracted the
attention of the Captain and his officers. It was now
that the vessel’s course w'as altered to S.E. and continued
so during the first morning watch, under the charge of
the Captain and second mate. At four a.m., it being the
first mate’s watch on deck, the ship’s head was again
altered to S.E. hy E., according to the usual practice, after
sailing the distance computed. Without fear they trusted
to the compasses, and steered the ship at full speed with
the utmost confidence, expecting to see the light-house
on Cape Northumberland before daylight. By this time
also a smart breeze had sprung up, arid the mate rivers
that “ it was very dark, with lightning.”
Presuming that the vessel was thirteen miles off the


land, this easterly course was continued ! Fatal mistake !
She was then steering directly towards a group of the
most dangerous reefs on the coast. A point more to the
southward would have saved her. But no ' the doomed
ship held on her mad career, even in the midst of haze
and gloom which now obscured the horizon. Was it the
under-current or the swell that drove her in shore, or was
it the subtle influence of aerial electricity that disarranged
the compasses, misguiding the steersman? These and such
influences, over which at times the mariner has no control,
may have urged the bark to her doom. If so, the bereaved
relatives and friends of the hapless beings lost on that
fatal night must bow their submissive heads, trusting that
no neglect or unskilfulness on the part of the Captain,
officers, and crew precipitated the catastrophe.
Suddenly ! —while the anxious Captain was waiting to
hear the report from the look-out man on the bridge of a
“ light on the port bow,’’and the mate was peering through
the gloom for a glimpse of the welcome beacon on the
headland—while the engineers were pressing on the vessel
at the highest speed, and the man at the wheel steering
confidently S.E. by E.—suddenly, without a soul on board
hearing the warning sound of the breakers ahead, or the
awful reverberations of the “ rollers” on the lee shore—the
ship struck. Not a dead blow forward against the
treacherous rocks, but with a grating crash along her iron
hull,- causing the ship to quiver from stem to stern, and on
a, sunken reef that sloped towards the sea, having its broken
crest just level with the surface of the water. On to this
point she was impelled with such force, that she lay on the
summit of the ridge, heeling over to port with her starboard
side high out of the water. All around—as far as could
be discernible in the murky nigh t-r- the surge broke heavily
upon the reef, and the vessel was exposed “ broadside on”
to the irresistible force of the waves, which every now and
then made a clean breach over her.
• After the first shock, the dreadful position of the vessel
was not apparent to the most- experienced man at that
time on deck. A second and a third came, however, as


the hull thumped upon the rock, shaking the frame-
work from stem to stem, and in less than three minutes it
was evident she was breaking up. On and on came the
breakers, with increasing strength, causing the vessel to
reel from side to side upon the sharp rocks, which soon pene-
trated through the iron plates. The Captain, mates, engineers,
and crew, with despairing energy, tried to relieve the
vessel, but their efforts were futile. Meanwhile the
frightened passengers rushing on deck, thinly clad out of
then* warm berths, gazed with stupefaction on the scene,
scarcely knowing but what it was the phantasm of a
dream. At last, when the dread reality struck the youngest
and dullest imagination amongst them, their mingled cries
of terror and despair rose above the roar of the breakers
with appalling sound—the strong man and the infant, the
women and the children, alike uttered shrieks of woe ;
while above all the shrill scream of the steam valve, which
Avas opened to prevent the bursting of the boilers, joined
in the Availing cry of death. ■
To, state that all Avas confusion and consternation would
be but feeble expressions to convey any idea of the be-
Avildering anarchy Avhich prevailed. Orders were ignored,
for it Avas utterly impossible to execute them. Each one
rushed to the nearest part of the vessel for safety, or the
boats for succour. There Avas no commanding voice to
organize the people scattered about. These Avere busied
in unreeAdng the tackles of the boats that Avere hung to
the davits, or fastened on deck. The quarter-boat was
loAvered by the unskilled passengers, and in consequence
got adrift, although it Avas fitted Avith that admirable
invention for loAvering boats invented by Clifford. The
starboard boat was stove in by the force of the sea dashing
it against the mast, Avhile the funnel came doAvn Avith a
crash, and crushed the remaining boat to atoms. Thus
were the first means of being saved suddenly frustrated,
and the destruction of the boats added mental agony to
the physical horrors of the Avreck.
Simultaneous Avith these accidents, and all Avithin the
short space of ten or tAvelve minutes, the long hull of the


vessel heeled more and more over to port; and at every
surge the straining iron beams and joints gave way. Over
that portion of the reef, where the midship and fore parts
of the hull lay, there was a greater depth of water than
.where the after. part rested on the rock. Consequently
the leverage at every strain bent the yielding frame-work,
until at last it snapped asunder at the bulkheads of the
compartments into which the hull was divided, and the
vessel literally broke into three pieces in less than a
quarter of an hour from the time she first struck, bringing
down the funnel, and the greater part of the rigging,
chains, and blocks upon the heads of the wretched people;
and these, with the' heavy rolling of the ship, swept
several from the deck half -killed, stunned, and bleeding
into the boiling surge, never to be seen or heard of more.
Of these, the first victims were Mr. George Fisher and
Dr. Yaux, of Adelaide, and Mr. Holbrook, who was on
his way to England; while at the same time the horses
were all pitched overboard by the violence of the
concussion. v ,
The vessel being now Severed into three parts, the mi-
serable satisfaction of equality in misery being the common
lot of all, which buoys up people in such a straight, was not
even theirs. One portion clung to the after part of the
wreck, and another to the fore part, while the section
between, which contained the machinery, sunk below the
level of the waters, excepting the boilers, which stood up
like a portion of the rock There was, however, a gulf
between them. On the bows and rigging were all the
women and children, excepting three ladies in the cabin,
who, with upwards of forty men, held on with desperate
energy to the bulwarks. Fortunately for those on the
after compartment, the lower hold contained sixty-three
tons of copper in ingots and cakes, which served as a firm
foundation for it against the force of the sea, otherwise
there is not a doubt but that the surge would have driven
it over the reef into the deep water, and scattered its
helpless tenants into the merciless breakers. To a certain
extent this happened to the fore part, although twenty


seven tons of copper, besides some general cargo, was
stowed in the hold of that compartment; for as the sea
beat upon the bows it swerved round to another part of
the reef, exposing its occupants to a still greater sweep of
the gigantic rollers, which now broke with devastating
power at intervals upon the wreck.
In this fearful position they lay longing for the approach
of day. Minutes seemed hours to their distempered
imaginations. It was about five o’clock when she first
struck the reef, and for more than an hour they stared
wildly into the dark profound, with only the dull phos-
phorescent light which tipped the curling breakers, serving
merely to render the “ darkness visible." Not a gleam
of all the many lamps which shown so cheerfully on board
but a short hour before was seen amidst the gloom, and
the great roaring furnaces, which glowed in the engine-
room, had sunk, hissing, into the steaming waters, and
were soon extinguished. Some matches and rockets were
found in the Captain’s cabin, but the latter were all so
wet, that only one ignited, and that, feebly ascending,
was soon lost in the foam. The fact then became patent
to their minds that not a lamp, firearm, or firework was
to be had as a signal of distress to any vessel that might
chance to pass in the night.
Daylight came at last about half-past six with its usual
rapidity in these latitudes. With anxious eyes these
shipwrecked people gazed around to view their position.
The morning was dull, and the breakers sent up such a
hazy spray, that with difficulty they could at first discern
the main land about a mile and a-half distant. But it
was evident that they were near an unfrequented part of
the coast, where not a human habitation is seen for miles
inland. They beheld the wreck also perched upon a reef
of rocks, surrounded on every side by the foaming surge,
which of itself would hide them from the view of any
friendly ship. There was no prospect of succour land-
ward or seaward beyond the watery barrier, unless some
venturous mariner could reach the shore.
. In this state of suspense their hopes were suddenly


raised about eight o'clock by the welcome sight of &
steamer looming in the distance, not very far off. She
was soon made out to be the “ Havilah," the sister trading
vessel of the ill-fated “ Admella.” To improvise signals
of distress by exposing their night garments on the
rigging, and to shout with wild energy, was the simultane-
ous impulse of every soul on the wreck. Could they but
attract attention all alive might yet be saved, and these
numbered upwards of a hundred. Their straining eyes
watched the progress of the vessel eagerly for signs of
recognition. Hopes of succour rose up in the faintest
heart. They found in the lockers the signal-flags, and
hoisted the union-jack on the mizenmast. On the fore
part of the wreck the ship’s bell was still there, and they
rang it with desperate energy But all was of no avail.
In the haze and spray that surrounded the wreck it was
not discernible ; while the “ Havilah ” was so plainly seen
that, with the aid of a telescope, they saw the people
moving about on deck.. No signal was made in reply.
She came and passed like a phantom ship in the grey
mist, steering away to the haven they had just left.
As her hull and funnel were lost in the distance they
turned, saddened and distressed, to look around on the
gloomy scene. On came the angry breakers, driving against
the shattered hull and poop now lying on its beam-ends,
with the far more dreaded “ rollers” advancing at intervals
of three or four minutes, threatening to engulph them at
every swell.
The other fragment was even more exposed to the force
of the sea ; and as the foremast still remained standing,
with a crowd of men, women and children clinging to the
rigging, it swerved from the shock of each gigantic Wave,
with a jerking motion, that required all the power of the
strongest to hold on. This continued motion, with the
top weight of people, was too much for the foremast to
stand, and at length it gave way with a fearful crash, the
noise being rendered more appalling by the screams and
frantic cries of its occupants, who were soon struggling
for life amidst the breakers. Many were drowned, but


some of them succeeded in gaining the wreck. The man
in charge of Magarey’s horses was seen floating on part
of a horse-box, and trying to paddle with his hands.
Shortly afterwards a man named Purdon swam oft’ to a
piece of timber, hoping to get ashore on it. These men
were watched with great anxiety, aud it was observed that
after they got about half a mile from the wreck, a current
took them out to sea*
As the day advanced, and objects became more easily
discernible, the ship’s life-boat was observed floating, keel
up, amongst some spars and rigging in the surf, at no
great distance. To secure the boat which had got adrift
presented a fair chance of, escape from the wreck. A
consultation took place among those on the poop as to how
this should be effected, when a brave young seaman, whose
name should be registered on the tablets of all shipwrecked
mariner’s societies, named Soren Holm, a Dane, volun-
teered to swim to the boat with a rope. Quickly one was
found, and he boldly plunged into the surf with it fastened
round his waist. With anxious eyes they watched him
breasting the mountain waves, when they saw that the
rope was not long enough. Hurriedly another piece was
bent on, but with a slovenly knot, from the tremor which
seizes the most expert in moments of danger. The daunt-
less swimmer was seen to reach the boat in safety. But,
ah ! hapless mischance, as the signal was given to haul
on the line, the insecure knot gave way, and the line
separated. With super-human strength the sailor en-
deavoured to work the boat through the breakers to the
wreck by dint of swimming, and paddling with a piece of
wood which he picked up at a short distance from the boat.
In vain his efforts. The merciless waves drove the boat and
him further away, first towards the shore, and then with
the ebb-tide and current out to sea. Nearly the whole of
the day he was discernible from the wreck drifting about,
and was at last washed off the boat to regain it no more.
* Mr. Kochfort’s personal narrative.


Tims perished a noble fellow, through the unseaman-like
fastening of a life-line, which any tyro on shipboard would
be ashamed of not knowing how to make securely.
At this untoward event, disappointment again cast its-
desolating sense over the stoutest heart; and their hopes
were tantalized by the appearance of a sailing vessel in
the offing during the day. About noon the weather cleared
up, and the sun shone out, cheering them with his rays.
Still the sea was high and the breakers unabated. To the
southward the ocean heaved tumultuously, and they
beheld no chance of succour from there, even if a hundred
ships passed along the horizon. They turned their longing-
gaze again to the shore, which was still obscurely visible
beyond the spray and foam. Although it presented a
desolate sandy appearance, nevertheless, in their eyes, it
was a paradise ; for it was there they looked for succour.
If but one of their number could reach it alive, all might
yet be saved. Who would volunteer to cany the sad
tidings to the nearest habitation or the light-house, some-
fifteen miles off, was now the question ? There
were some wealthy passengers amongst the sur-
vivors, and they would give golden rewards to the
venturous man who would succeed. Several thought of
it, independent of these promises ; but on looking again
at the seething surf, their courage failed, until at last the-
second mate, Johnston, proffered his services. Fastening
a cumbrous life-buoy under his arms he dashed into the
breakers, and made for the land. Where the water was-
least broken he succeeded in making some progress with-
out risking his life ; but when he was borne along by
the crested rollers, his feeble efforts were unavailing to*
resist their fury, and they fell upon his devoted head in
cataracts, hurling him from the view of his expectant
fellow-sufferers upon that beach he never reached alive.
Hitherto the excitement and the sense of an ever-present
danger prevented the gnawings of hunger and the cravings
of thirst from preying upon their vitals. But now these
feelings became deadened by the succession of disaji-
pointments they had experienced, and the cravings of


nature summoned them to look for fresh water and pro-
visions. So far as the former pabulum of life is con-
cerned, not a drop rvas to be found in either part of
the wreck. Of provisions none were in the fore wreck,,
and in the after part a scanty supply rvas at first found
submerged in the steward’s pantry, consisting of a piece
of ham, which they were afraid to eat, as it, would induce
greater thirst, so it was scarcely touched, but a small bag
of almonds rvas gratefully discovered, and sparingly doled
out. Without any further incident the afternoon passed
away, excepting that the Captain found a store of cloth-
ing and blankets in his cabin, which he distributed
amongst the most needy.
In this state of mental and bodily prostration these
wretched people, cramped up on the bulwark, rail, and
moulding, with but small resting places for their feet,
sat, with the sea dashing over them, huddled together
as close as possible for warmth and safety, to pass the
dreary hours of the coming night. Some in their be-
wildered senses snatched an occasional wink of sleep, and
ever and anon woke up from some dream of land to
listen to the terrible reality of the sea around them.
Others conversed in low and husky whispers, fearful to-
believe the worst, for while a plank or plate of the shivering
wreck held together, hope glowed within them.
A few long and weary hours passed away in this
manner, when suddenly a welcome vision of mingled red,
green, and white lights gleamed upon the western waves,
startling that wretched group of human beings from the
contemplation of their miserable lot, and appearing to them
a more glorious constellation than the famed Southern
Cross, which sparkled in the heavens above them. The
lights rapidly neared them, sending their variegated sheen
across the turbulent sea, and exhibiting to view the great-
hull and funnel of an ocean steamer. So close did she
approach the wreck, that between the lulls of the wind
and sea, the steady beat of the engines was plainly heard ;
and those with the keenest sense of hearing could dis-
tinguish the rush of waters from her bows. So close.


indeed, did she appear to them, that she seemed to be
steering right on to the rocks whereon they clung, causing
the Captain and others to exclaim involuntarily, “ Oh,
my God ! here’s another vessel on the reef!” This close
proximity once more encouraged their hopes of succour,
and they shouted udth maddened energy to the inmates
of that joyous ship. At this moment a rocket or blue
light would have been invaluable, and might in all pro-
bability have attracted the notice of those on deck. But
not a firework was left that would ignite, and every lamp
was extinguished in the surf. In vain their frantic cries
—in vain their efforts to display the white linen signals,
torn in despair from their backs. It is possible that
even these, had they been dimly seen and heard by the
night-watch patrolling the deck, would have been attri-
buted to the screams of the sea-birds, and the flapping
of their wings.
This large screw steam-ship was the “Bombay,”
Peninsular and Oriental Company’s boat, with the
European and Indian mails on board, one of the largest
class of ocean steamers afloat, carrying a most complete
equipment of boats and gear for any perilous service.
Oh ! that some power could have whispered to her gallant
commander, that he might have stayed within sight until
dawn of day, and then come to their rescue. Such, how-
ever, was not to be. Onward she sailed majestically until
her outline in profile was seen abreast of the wreck. Then
the red and green lights, perched upon their masts and
yards, altered their position with the white lights, like
the fantastic changes of a kaleidoscope, until they were
intercepted by the spars—then showing only their
blackened sides as the vessel speeded onwards to the east,
save the glowing lights from the stem cabin windows,
which rapidly faded away also, and all was gloom again.
Cold—bitter cold—and drenched with the briny waters,
these abandoned people sat shivering on the wreck, while
a shudder of despair shot through their hearts at this
second blow to their hopes of assistance from seaward.
Many an agonising thought passed across their minds.


racked with that awful consciousness which renders the
delusions of insanity a blessing. And thus they passed,
the watches of the night in doubt and dread, with feeble
hopes of the morrow. As the short hours winged their
flight towards the opening of another day, the breeze
lessened, and with it the sea calmed down, excepting the
swell of the rollers, which came at such regular intervals,
that the minutes and hours could be measured by
them.


CHAPTER III.
THE WRECK.
Second Day breaks clear and sunny—Sunrise on the Wreck—
Groups pictured on the after Part and fore Part—Fifteen
Men cross over to the after Wreck, leaving all the Women
and Children on the fore Wreck—Captain Harris dives for Provisions
and succeeds—Brandy thrown overboard and Edibles served out —No
fresh Water— A. Baft constructed on which Leach and Knapman volun-
teer to go on Shore—They are cast adrift on the turbulent Waters
—Perilous Voyage through the Breakers—They reach the Shore in
Three Hours—They are saved—Stricken down with fatigue they lie
on the warm dry Sand—Signal to those on the Wreck—Night approaches
They journey towards the Light-house—After Fourteen Hours they
reach it—Light-house Keeper rides to Telegraph Station—The sad
Tidings communicated by the Electric Wires through the length and
breadth of the land.
A second day of this their miserable existence now
dawned upon their sight. A day such as frequently
happens in the bright sunny regions of Australia. It was
Sunday, and the heavens seemed to spread a holy calm
•over the bosom of the deep, consonant with that day of
rest. The winds were now hushed, and the air was com-
paratively still, with only a gentle breeze from the shore,
which seemed to the keen senses of the shipwrecked people
—whose hopes were few of ever treading it again—to waft
some fragrance from the land, although, to the sight, it
appeared a barren coast. Excepting the ever-heaving
swell the sea was calm, with only the dull boom of the
rollers, breaking the awful stillness that reigned around.
In the East, ruby-tinted clouds floated in the intense blue
sky, glowing with the beams of the rising sun.


Even the haggard faces of the hapless survivors on the
wreck displayed a transient expression of joyousness, as
each one turned to look once more upon the glorious orb
of day. There in the broad glare of the sun, that group of
human beings presented a picture of misfortune which,
happily, rarely falls to man’s lot. The scene presented vari-
ous points of interest, notwithstanding the general aspect
of its misery. On the one side lay the fore-part of the
wreck, the mast gone, with the bows canted dp towards
the land in a northerly direction. On the other side,
about fifty yards apart, the poop and stern portion lay
almost parallel, and the engines and boilers lying between
them towards the sea.
As near as can be ascertained about fifty-six survivors
were on the after wreck. Among them were three ladies,
who with feminine instinct shrunk from the gaze of their
male companions. They were all single, and to them the
circumstances attending their position was particularly
trying. Not only were their fellow-sufferers attentive, as
far as circumstances would permit, but each one vied with
the other in sheltering them from the inclemency of the
weather during the previous day and night. One lady,
the weakest, was specially cared for by the Captain and
purser, whilst a manly group of arms protected the other
two—one of whom survived the catastrophe.
On the fore-part of the wreck, I ‘far sadder groups were
seen. Here the bulk of the survivors were women and
children, and if heartlessness was exhibited amongst the
men towards the feebler sex, it was by those who were
bound in duty to protect their wives and offspring. The
survivors on this portion of the vessel were fewex - , and
their ranks had been thinned by the falling of the mast.
Still mothers were there clasping their babes in their arms,
and with the grip of death clinging to the bulwarks and
rigging. One poor woman who was nursing her dead
child, refused to part with it until she followed it to its
watery grave. Others endeavored to pacify the despairing
children.that clung to them, but in vain. The male por-
tion, among whom were several seamen and one old master


mariner, saw at once that the after-part of the wreck was
the safest position. They hailed to their companions in
distress to heave a rope across for the purpose of assisting
them in their efforts to cross over. This was successfully
managed by one of the sailors, who was the first afterwards
to get ashore and spread the sad tidings through the
country. By this means fifteen men hauled themselves
safely through the surf, while two or three were drowned.
Amongst the latter was a father more affectionate than the
rest, who fastened his child upon his back, and in
thus striving to save it, he sacrificed his own life. Those
who were left behind were all the women and children, and
a few men whose courage was not sufficient to attempt the
perilous passage along the line through the surf.
The master mariner who had reached the after-part in
this manner, and whose name was Harris, now became the
most active man amongst the survivors, by making the
most of the means which lay in their power to support
existence or to devise plans of relief. He ascertained that
there were provisions and drinkables in that part of the
cabin which lay submerged. With indefatigable perse-
verance, he dived to the bottom, and groped about for the
lockers containing them. After unceasing efforts, aided by
the first and second engineers, he succeeded in fishing up
some beef and mutton, about ten lb. in weight, twenty lb.
of cheese, six bottles preserved fruits, five bottles of dessi-
cated milk, two bottles of porter, one of whiskey, and
several cases of brandy. In vain he sought for bread in
the lockers, but not a biscuit could be found.
The morning was spent in serving out their scanty store
of food. With praiseworthy self-denial every one curbed
their appetites, excepting a sailor who drank a bottle of
porter by himself. The others being afraid of the dread
effects of intoxication from the quantity of brandy disco-
vered, resolved that the fiery tempter should be cast into
the sea beyond their reach. This was accordingly done,
with the exception of a small ration served out in a wine-
glass to each, and mixed with dessicated milk. There was
a large quantity of eggs on board amongst the cargo.


packed in cases, which would have been an invaluable ac-
quisition to their slender stock of food, but none of these
could be secured A distribution was made also of what
was left of the .almonds and chee.te, and these gone, notan
edible was left, and not a drop of water to drink, with the
prospect of a hot sun over head during the day, Thirst
was to be dreaded more than hunger, and, although the
sea would be certain to rise should threatening clouds ap-
pear, yet many longed for a shower of rain to moisten
their parched throats. In this they were not gratified, the
weather continuing fine throughout the day, and such tem-
porary relief was forgotten in the one overwhelming
thought of a rescue from the land.
Again there was a consultation on this all-important
subject, and again the richer portion of the passengers
offered dame rewards to the seamen who would make the
O
attempt to reach the shore on a raft. Mr. Magarey said
he would give five hundred pounds to the successful man,
but this was overruled by Messrs. B. Rochfort, H. Fisher,
G. Fisher, and another gentleman, who would subscribe
one hundred each if they were saved. This was agreed
to, and the sailors set to work to make a raft. As all the
ship's tools were lost in the fore and middle compartments
of the vessel, there was no implement to be found but a
meat chopper to assist in the work. With great labor
they managed to cut the mizen-boom in two, also a por-
tion of the main-boom was chopped off with it. These
they lashed securely together, and with a rope fastened
to it, they launched the raft overboard. There were
several volunteers at first, but most of them shrunk from
the task, on considering the dangers before them, and their
powers of endurance to overcome the elements. At last
two brave mariners, John Leach and Robert Knapman,
who had often faced the angry deep before, agreed to take
charge of the raft together. They were instructed by the
Captain and their fellow sufferers, that should they be so
fortunate as to reach the shore to proceed with all speed
to the lighthouse, which was calculated to be about fifteen
or twenty miles distant, and give information to the head.


keeper of their sad disaster; who would doubtless hasten
on to the Mount Gambler telegraphic station, and obtain
assistance.
After these parting injunctions were given, each of the
survivors on the after part of the wreck shook the brave
fellows by the hand, many with tears in their eyes, and
hope glowing in their hearts, wishing them God speed !.
The men then leapt over the side of the wreck on to the
raft, when by a signal, those on board let go the rope,
and their rude raft was cast loose upon the turbulent
waters. The prayers of those in the fore-part of the
wreck, as well as the others, doubtless accompanied them,
for they felt conscious that their last hopes of being saved
depended upon the success of those hardy seamen. With
straining eyes and anxious hearts they saw it sweep before
the waves between the broken wreck, and fortunately as it
rounded the fore-part it was driven in the direction of the
beach. At every heave of the rollers it was exposed to
view, and then it sunk into the .trough of the sea, and was
lost to sight. Its re-appearance on the next mountain
wave was keenly watched to see if the two men were still
clinging to the spars. And thus it was observed in its
slow and baffling progress towards the shore. '
It was about two o’clock when these shipwrecked mari-
ners left the wreck, to peril their lives on that stormy
coast. It was with much difficulty that they could sit or
hold on to the raft, as the surf, eveiy now and then, came
with great force and washed them off. Then they had to
cling with all their strength to the spars to prevent being
driven away from the raft or dashed against it. Where it
was comparatively quiet between the rollers, they clung
with one hand to the raft, and paddling with the other,
whilst striking out with their feet, endeavored to propel
their lumbering float in the required direction. In tliis
they were at times successful,' but the labor was great, and
they became apprehensive that their strength might be
exhausted, so that their efforts to save themselves and to
obtain succour for their companions in distress might be
frustrated. Slowly, yet at times with resistless fury, were


they impelled through the angry element; and ;us they
knew that sharks were about, they dreaded being drawn
down by these hungry monsters of the deep. Their fears
however, were in this respect groundless, and (heir hopes
were buoyed up as the flag on the mizen-nm-t of the
wreck lessened in the distance behind, and the sandy
hummocks on shore loomed larger to the view.
For three hours did these hardy seamen battle with the
breakers, and steer their raft towards the shore. It would
have been an anxious and weary time to traverse so short
a distance under calmer circumstances, but the fury .of the
waves, which every moment threatened to engulph them,
sustained their alertness and infused into their spirits a
wild vigor. At last they grounded, and here new dangers
threatened. —The back draft of the rollers as they receded
from the beach, came with such force that they were
driven again towards the sea, until the return of the suc-
ceeding wave, which hurled them on the shore, to be
again sucked into the foaming vortex, until their strength
would be expended. Knowing this from experience, they
both quickly abandoned the raft, and dived under the
water, where they dug their hands into the sand, holding
on to the position gained; then, as the next breaker over-
whelmed them, they were impelled forward with irresisti-
ble fury through the surge, which ploughed up the sand
and almost choked them. Repeating again and again
this device, of holding on by the sand, they passed the
furthest roller, and with one wild bound they gained the
dry sandy beach.
They were saved! The feeling was one of unbounded
joy, but from the excessive fatigue they had undergone,
they lay there, for a time helpless, bewildered and stricken
down. The warm dry sand, however, soon restored them,
and they rose up and signalled to their friends on the
wreck that they were safe. This was seen by them, and
a prayer of thanksgiving ascended on high from that
forlorn group. Looking toward the declining sun, they
became soon alive to a knowledge of their position, and
the important mission they had undertaken, so they hied


them over the sandy hummocks, and along the beach
towards Cape Northumberland, to find a path to the light-
house. Famished, bruised, and parched with thirst, their
first search was for water, which after a weary time they
found in a marsh inland among the hills. Eeinvigorated
by the grateful element, they pushed on their journey with
good speed as long as daylight lasted. After sunset
they were cheered on for a short time by the light of a
young moon. Still it was a dismal and toilsome journey
along the loose sand, and over the hummocks, rounding
the points and curves of the land, making the distance
so much greater. Sometimes they came to gullies where
the ground was soft and wet, and at others they had to
wade across small inlets. By dint of perseverance they
overcame the chief obstacles, and their exertions were re-
warded by the welcome glare of the McDonnell light,
cheering them on to their goal.
Day broke as they wended their way over the hills
towards the Cape, and found a path through the brush-
wood, until at last, about seven o’clock, they knocked at,
the door of the light-house, and communicated the par-
ticulars of the total wreck of the “Admella” on the
Carpenter’s Eocks/to the head keeper, whom they urged
to proceed without delay to the Mount Gambier tele-
graphic station, and signal to all parts of the country for
succour. This was promptly assented to. He quickly
saddled his horse and rode to the station, which is about
forty miles distant, over a broken country, where he did
not arrive until three o’clock in the afternoon.


CHAPTER IV.
THE TIDINGS.
The Electric Telegraph conveys the sad Tidings to Melbourne and
Adelaide—A Tribute to the Genius that invented it —First Telegram at
Melbourne—Message from Adelaide —Anxiety and sorrow of the
Colonists-Light-house Boat—Peter, the Fisherman, from Guichen
Bay, reaches scene of Wreck —Message from Mount Gambler —Its
exciting effect upon the Community, notwithstanding the political
agitation of a General Election—Departure of s.s. “Lady Bird” for
Wreck—Cross Telegraph Messages cause delay—Government decline
giving a Guarantee for extra Insurance—Melbourne Merchants sub-
scribe—Proceedings of Inhabitants at Portland—Voluntary efforts of
Settlers on the Coast—Mr. Power's Account of their Attempts with the
“ Admella's" Boat cast on Shore—Failure—Night sets in—Watch-fires
and Bivouac—Volunteer Seamen from Stations—Thursday, the sixth
morn to those on Wreck—“Lady Bird” goes in search of Wreck—
—Cannot find it—Returns to Portland—Time lost, and hope sickens
within the hearts of those desolate People.
With lightning speed the cry of distress from these
shipwrecked colonists, thrilled along the electric wires
from that lone mountain station to the east and west,
where the capitals of the two colonies are situated, some
five hundred miles apart; and from thence the sad news
was communicated through the length and breadth of the
land, calling by its startling telegrams upon the Govem-
xnents and inhabitants for succour.
And here at the opening of the second act of this “ ower
true” tale, let us pay a tribute to the genius which has
given to man this wonderful power of annihilating space


and time. Like many other instances of the benefits which
have resulted from the working of this mysterious agent,
it may be said with truth, that hut for the establishment of
electric telegraphic communication between this out-station
and the settled communities, the fortunate results which
have transpired in rescuing a number of the survivors
would never have happened. These few would have suc-
cumbed, like their fellow-sufferers in death, “ unknelled,
nncoffined, and unknown,” on that rugged shore, whilst
the occasion of exhibiting the generous efforts of man in
rescuing his fellow man from destruction, here displayed,
Avould never have been consummated in the womb of time.
The following is the first telegram despatched to Mel-
bourne with the sad tidings ;
Mount Gambier, Monday, 3.30 p.m.
TOTAL WEECK OF THE “ ADMELLA” STEAMER.
I have just received intelligence from the head-keeper of
the light-house at Cape Northumberland of the total wreck of
the “ Admella” steamer at, or near, the site of the wreck of the
“None Valley.”' Two of the crew (it is feared the only sur-
vivors) came to the light-house at seven a.m. this morning.
She went ashore at five a.m. (on Saturday), and when they
left eleven [?] souls, including the Captain, were clinging to
the wreck.
The news conveyed by this despatch, travelled quickly
through the city, especially as the chief portion of the mer-
cantile citizens had not yet left their offices for their su-
burban residences. The utmost consternation was ex-
hibited by the people thronging to the Telegraph Office
and other public places of resort, to learn further intelli-
gence of the catastrophe, and many who knew that they
had friends and relatives on board, or who expected such
by her, were in a state of great excitement. A general
feeling of anxiety and sorrow was manifested by the colo-
nists, who, on carrying the sad intelligence to their house-
holds, made it the all-absorbing topic of the evening.
Many an eye moistened at a brief recital of the dramatic
message forwarded from Mount Gambier, whilst others


looked out upon the night to see if the weather was fine
or stormy. Happily, it was the former, although a brisk
wind blew from the N.W., and all anxiously awaited for
the morning papers to glean further news. These were
but scanty, and nothing of importance was added to the
previous day’s message. Amongst them appeared a tele-
gram from Adelaide shewing, that if anything, the inhabi-
tants of that city were more excited than the people of
Melbourne. The substance of it is as follows :
Adelaide, Monday Night.
Great feeling has been excited by the news of the loss of
the “Admella,” with several well-known South Australian
colonists on board She had a valuable cargo, and carried two
horses, Jupiter and Barber, for the Champion match. I sub-
join her passenger list.
The “ Admella” struck on a reef, and broke amidships; her
after part remained high above water, and the fore part sank.
The sea was high, but there being a boat at the light-house
(about fifteen miles from the wreck), hopes are entertained of
the cabin passengers being saved.
The boat herein-mentioned was a small kind of wherry,
unfit for rowing in an ordinary seaway, let alone the gi-
gantic breakers on a reef exposed to the swell of the
Southern Oceans. Consequently, nothing in the shape of
effective assistance was expected from that quarter, and
some censure was justly cast upon the authorities in charge
of the McDonnell light-house, that a better boat was not
supplied to the keepers.
As a laudable contrast to the above, may be mentioned
the dauntless courage and willing efforts of two fishermen
at Port Kobe, Guichen Bay, who on receipt of the first
correct intelligence as to the situation of the wreck, set off
in their whale-boat alone without a moment’s delay to the
rescue, although it was distant seventy miles, out on the
open ocean. The names of these men are Peter Donnell
and Demetrius Donnell, who were the first to sight the
wreck from seaward, but on account of its frightful posi-
tion amongst the breakers, and their very slender equip


ment and crew for such a perilous service, they reluctantly
had to abandon the attempt, which will be seen as the
narrative progresses.
The next telegrams received in Melbourne were as
follows :— ■
Mount Gambler, August 9.
A special messenger from Cape Northumberland brings
further particulars. The “ Admella” (says one of the two
survivors) when she struck was out of her course, having been
put before the wind while one of the race-horses on board was
shifted, and having been again put on her course without
allowance being made for leeway. The weather was foggy at
the time. The boats were washed adrift, and the quarter-boat
was lost through the carelessness of a passenger. It was last
seen drifting out to sea, with a man astride the keel. If these
boats could have been kept, there is every probability all hands
would have been saved. The ship broke into three pieces,
and ropes were used to got people from one part to another.
The second mate attempted to reach the shore by means of a
life-buoy, but was drowned in the surf. The two survivors
readied shore by means of a little raft they constructed out of
a boom, and they were offered 500 1, by Mr. Magarcy, one of
the passengers, if they would carry him with them. The
scene was heart-rending; bodies floating round the wreck,
passengers clinging to the-hull, and frantically offering money,
jewels, everything they possessed, to bo safely carried ashore.
It was believed that if timely aid had been afforded the
majority of the cabin passengers would have been rescued.
The “Corio” left Adelaide last night with the Government
life-boat.— E. 11. Dekezngton, Station Master.
Adelaide, Tuesday.
Business is entirely suspended, all classes being engrossed
by the wreck of the “ Admella.” The portico of the Ex-
change was crowded all day with friends of the passengers,
and great anxiety was shown to get the latest news by tele-
graph. The “ Gorio ” was despatched to Cape Northumber-
land last night, to render assistance if possible.
Both Houses of Parliament adjourned to day, two sons of
the President of the Council being among the passengers of
the “ Admella.”


The effect of this intelligence upon the community ge-
nerally may be better imagined than described. Although
it was the time of a general election, involving the most
important political considerations, even this did not affect
the intense interest felt in the fate of the survivors cling-
ing to the wreck of the “ Admella,” nor check prompti-
tude in devising means how to succour and rescue them
from their impending fate : —excepting amongst those
whose hearts are steeled against all sympathy for distress.
Or who sacrifice their duty to God and man—their honour,
principle, and friendship, for selfish ambition and elec-
tioneering tactics—and of such, Australia has some notable
examples.
Meanwhile the people of Melbourne were up and doing
to subscribe the necessary funds and employ the most
efficacious means to render assistance. The first thing to
be done was to despatch a steamer with life-boats to the
locality where the wreck lay. The one best fitted for the
occasion was the “ Lady Bird,” then at Melbourne, and
about to proceed on her voyage to Portland, by way of
Port Fairy, both in the direct route to Cape Northumber-
land. At the latter port the captain was “ instructed to
act instantly on any orders that might be awaiting him,
there, sent by telegraph.” A message had been received
on Monday, at 7.40 p.m., that the “ Havilah” was prepar-
ing to go immediately from Adelaide ; and on Tuesday
morning, at eleven a.m., that the steamer “ ‘ Corio/ had
left on Monday for the wreck, with life-boat and crew.”
The tenour of these messages from Adelaide was unfortu-
nate, as they were not correct in every particular, inasmuch
as the “Havilah” was then undergoing an overhaul of her
machinery, so that some considerable delay must take place
before she would be ready for sea. This was the first mis-
chance which happened on shore in effecting a speedy
rescue of the survivors, and may be noted as another in-
stance of what is termed “ fatality” in all the circum-
stances attendant upon this shipwreck. To the hopes
buoyed up and destroyed, which it has been our melan-
choly duty to relate in the preceding chapters, we have to


add mischances, delays, blunders, if not negligence, on the
part of those in authority, in assisting to carry out the
wishes of the people.
Time was precious—the owners of the “ Lady Bird,”
the Messrs. Henty, of Portland and Melbourne, were
waited on by a deputation of anxious citizens, when they
at once “ offered to telegraph the ‘Lady Bird’ to proceed
to the wreck without discharging - cargo, and without
charge of any kind, beyond a guarantee for reimbursement
of extra insurance.” This proposition was accepted by
the deputation, and as they considered the matter one of
national importance, they immediately waited upon the
Chief Secretary, as the head of the Government, to give
the owners of the steamer the required guarantee. That
member of the Executive, as a responsible Minister of the
Crown, shielded himself behind the cegis of the “Consti-
tution,” and stated that if an account of the extra dis-
bursements which had been thus incurred was sent into
him in writing, he would use his best endeavours to
obtain the sanction of the Executive and the Parliament
in paying the same. Under all circumstances he must
pursue the “ Constitutional course.” The deputation felt
rather chagrined at this method of dealing with a question
involving the sacred rights of humanity, to which the
laws of all nations and their Governments, whether civi-
lized or barbarian, must bow. They then retired, and
were so much disgusted with the reply, that they at once
sought to raise the guarantee among the merchants of
Melbourne, and the sum of t?.‘3.‘l() was speedily subscribed
to meet the emergency. Before this, however,,was at-
tempted, the Messrs. Henty had despatched a message by
telegraph to Captain Greig, of the “ Lady Bird,” to pro-
ceed to the wreck without delay, and render every as-
sistance in his power.
While these efforts were being made by the citizens of
the chief cities in the two colonies, the inhabitants of the
town of Portland, the nearest town in Victoria to the
scene of the wreck, and of Robe Town, in South Aus-
tralia, with commendable zeal, came to their succour, and


there was no lack of volunteers to rush to the rescue
among the settlers in the immediate vicinity of the coast
where the wreck lay. Amongst the foremost of these
were J. C. Lyon, Esq., Stipendiary Magistrate; David
Power, Esq., and John Livingstone, Esq., wealthy settlers,
whq brought their drays, horses, and other appliances into
requisition, and assisted materially in organising the
volunteers who flocked from the neighbouring stations to
the beach. Their proceedings were thus made known in
Melbourne :
Mount Gambler, Wednesday, 6.10 p.m.
The following message is from J. 0. Lyon, Esq., S.M. The
messenger states that he saw a steamer just heaving in sight
as he left the coast: —
“ Sea Coast, Wednesday, 2 p.m.
“No sign of the ‘Corio’ yet. They are still alive. We*
‘have now a telescope. There are twenty at least alive. Koch-
fort is certainly one ; in fact, we believe all the cabin passen-
gers to be safe. Power, the two sailors, and self certainly
recognised Eochfort. The boat from the light-house is so
small, it is of no use. We have found the ‘ Admella’s’ life-
boat about four miles off. We have been ever since daylight
dragging her down. It is fearful work—she is so heavy, and
the sand so deep. We have her now a short half mile from
shore. We intend to launch her. She is not much injured,
and we are now repairing her. It is doubtful whether we
shall be able to make the attempt to-night; but at daybreak
to-morrow, at the very latest, we hope to be able to rescue the
poor creatures. The weather is fine, and they may yet be
saved. No more bodies washed ashore yet.”
Under these circumstances the attempt was made to
rescue the survivors by the stranded life-boat, which, it
will be remembered, had gone adrift, with the brave
Soren Holm upon its upturned keel. We cannot do
better than to insert here Mr. Power's account of the
shore party’s proceedings at this time, as forwarded to the
“ Fund" Committee;
c


“At half-past four o'clock a.m. on Tuesday, Messrs. Lyon, Storey,
Dr. Webb, and I left Mount .Gambicr, and reached the sea coast,
near where the ‘None Valley’ was lost, about eight o’clock, but
were unable ‘to discover any traces of the wncrcabouts of the wreck.
Our party then proceeded towards the light-house, and were joined by
Mr. John Livingstone, a settler, near the coast. After going a few miles,
wo met a party consisting of Captain Germain, the head keeper of the
light-house, Messrs. Wood and Wilson of the telegraph office, Police
Trooper Dann, Mr. Scarvcll, Superintendent of the Mount Schank Station,
and several others, who informed us that they had just come from the
light-house, and had ascertained from the two sailors who had come ashore
on the raft that the wreck was near the Carpenter’s Rocks, and that when
they left the vessel, there were about sixty survivors. We accordingly/
under the guidance of Mr. Livingstone, made the best of our way north-
wards, and about ten came in sight of the ill-fated vessel; and there
indeed a melancholy spectacle awaited us. We could see the poor
creatures waving to us; and one man crawled up the mizenmast, and hung
out a flag. We immediately answered their signals. The sea was then
so calm, that Captain Gcimain told us he thought the small boat,
which was at the light-house, would be able to reach the wreck. (We harj
previously ascertained that there was no‘life-boat, nor even a whale-boat,
at the light-house; had there been, horses and a waggon would have left
the light-house that morning at daylight with her, and before night every
soul could have been taken off the wreck, for the sea was perfectly calm.)
However, we immediately started off messengers for horses to bring up
the small punt, but we know that she could not arrive before midnight.
We then walked up the beach to see if wo could find any bodies washed
ashore. After going about three miles, we came upon the ‘Admella’s’
life-boat high and dry on the beach, stove in two or three places ; and a few
yards from her we found the body of a man, with a life-buoy lashed to it,
(afterwards identified as the body of the second mate). While we were
absent, the others had caught throe horses, which had swam ashore—two
grey entires, the property of Mr. Magarey, and the race horse Barber. Old
Shamrock was lying dead on the beach, with both hind logs broken. That
night was a bitterly cold night, and at times it rained hard, When day
came, the gap among the poor creatures on the wreck was plainly visible.
In the middle of the night the boat from the light-house arrived; she was
hauled down on the beach as soon as it was light; but the sea had risen so
much that it would have been madness to have attempted to launch so
small a boat. Wo then resolved to try and get the * Admella’s ’ life-boat
-down opposite the wreck, as the only place a boat could possibly be
launched was under the lee of the reef on which the ship had struck. At
first the work was indeed disheartening. It took us nearly half an hour to
move her her own length ; however, by perseverance, we succeeded in getting
her along, and every hour we received fresh recruits. By five that after


noon we had got her opposite the wreck, and Captain Germain then picked
his crew, and the boat was launched; but all the efforts of the brave
fellows were in vain. They could not get through the surf; the boat was
swamped, and the attempt had to be given up for the night. It was,
indeed, dreadful to be near the poor creatures, and yet utterly unable
to help them.”
Night set in, and those gallant men, both at sea and
on land, had to relinquish their task until next day. It was,
indeed, a melancholy night. In all probability the sur-
vivors on the wreck felt it less so than their friends on
shore, for they had become inured to suffering, and the
knowledge that succour was at hand sent a thrill of joy
through their languid frames. Scarcely an eye closed
amongst that gallant hand assembled on the shore during
the tedious hours of the night. They kept “ watch and
watch/’ to feed with fuel the blazing fires they had lit upon
the barren hills, that they might cheer up their wretched
brethren on that sea-heat shattered boat. Around these
bivouac fires they sat in groups whiling away the time, by
relating tales of shipwreck' or suffering at sea ; for many
amongst that throng were “ sons of the ocean,” who had
abandoned their perilous occupation for the more secure
and pleasant labours of a shepherd’s life on shore. Years,
however, of this peaceful employment had not rendered
them the less courageous when duty called them to action
in the name of humanity, nor had they become less expert
in the ingenious handiwork of seamen. By the light of
their fires they set diligently to work to repair the life-
boat drifted ashore from the -wreck, in as efficient a
manner as the means and appliances at hand could furnish.
They picked up pieces of wood on the beach, with which
they made thole-pins for the rowlocks, and they patched
up the broken planks with fragments of timber.
Nor were the cravings of nature less thought of by the
judicious arrangements of Mr. Livingstone and other hos-
pitable settlers in the vicinity of that desolate coast, for an
ample supply of provisions had been conveyed to the spot
during the day. At last it was necessary that these noble-
hearted volunteers should refresh themselves by sleep, that
they might be the more able to renew their efforts at a


successful rescue on the following day. Accordingly each
one snatched as much repose before the daylight came, as
under the circumstances could be done. When at last the
morn of Thursday dawned upon the scene, it was the
sixth beheld by the survivors on that miserable wreck, and
the third witnessed by the rescuers on the beach. Among
the latter, after a hasty meal,, the boatmen prepared for
other attempts to reach the wreck, while the magistrate
and some others went up the coast to hold an inquest on,
and bury the body of the second mate, which had been
washed ashore.
About this time, after the failure of the first attempt to
rescue by the shore party, the “ Corio” steamer from
Adelaide hove in sight. Of the gallant but unsuccessful
efforts of those on board to save the shipwrecked people,
the following account from a local journal will
suffice;— • ,
“As early as possible after the receipt of the news on
Monday, the ‘ Corio ’ was fitted out in a hurried manner for
the trip, and the Harbourmaster, together with Messrs. Brown
and Warren, proceeded on board, and shortly before midnight
she received the pilot’s life-boat and crew on board at the
station, and sailed on Wednesday. She reached Cape North-
umberland light-house, where a signal was made informing
them the wreck was to windward, consequently, from not
having received authentic information of its position, she had
passed it, and it was not until 4.30 p.ra. that she returned to
the scene of the painful catastrophe. On reaching the reefs,
one of the most heart-rending spectacles that could possibly
be imagined presented itself, and with a fresh breeze from the
north-west a most tremendous sea was making a fair breach
over the wreck, which consisted merely of the after compart-
ment from the taffrail to the break of the poop. This frag-
ment was the only portion remaining of the ill-fated ‘Admella,’
except some part of the boiler which at times was visible in
the surf. The wreck had fallen over on the starboard side,
and as the heavy rollers tumbled in, they seemed with their
foaming crests to threaten instant annihilation to the only
hope on which depended the lives of so many human beings,
who were seen moving about, while some climbed the mizen
rigging and waved to the steamer with half frantic energy.


And although, the sea running made it utterly impracticable to
render the slightest assistance to them, yet the steamer was
able to proceed so near that the cries and shouts of the
unfortunate people were distinctly heard. As night ap-
proached, it was necessary to seek an offing, which was kept
during a night of intense feeling which prevented the idea of
slumber from entering into the minds of the persons on
board the ‘ Corio.’ Next morning she steamed close to the
reef, or within a furlong, and although the weather had some-
what moderated, yet it was impossible to proceed to the rescue
from seaward, and another obstacle presented itself in the
evident unwillingness of the crew of the life-boat to attempt
the passage between the rocks. Lewis Thomas (coxswain),
and Peter Smith, however, volunteered to make the attempt,
and Mr, Wells, Mr. Benjamin Coleman, and the Harbourmaster
having supported them, the crew, actuated no doubt by the
noble spirit of those disinterested men, at once returned to
their perilous duty, and manned their boat. ' After two
■attempts she took the narrow passage stern foremost, and
with a boiling sea around then proceeded through into com-
paratively smooth water between the reef and the sea beach
surf. In this dangerous manoeuvre the boat was piloted by
signals from the steamer, but after getting at the shore side of
the reef no further progress was made ; and the crew were
forced unwillingly to abandon the attempt, and beach the boat.
It was very unfortunate that the ‘ Havilah’ was not in trim to
go to the week, having had her machinery taken out to go on
the slip for repair ; so that the ‘ Corio,’ a smaller, less powerful,
and less speedy steamer was necessarily substituted.”
Meanwhile the “ Lady Bird” screw steamer was on her
way to join in the rescue, with many willing hands on
board. Unfortunately in this respect the first attempt to
render assistance, like so many others which had occurred,
was fruitless. In the following extract from the Captain’s
report, the particulars will be found :
“ Immediately after receiving atelegmm at Belfast, wo proceeded direct
to the supposed scene of the wreck—and I may here thank my Portland
passengers for the unanimous response to my request for carrying them past
their destination. At nine p.m. sighted Cape Northumberland light-house,
and at ten it then bore due north ; from ten p.m. until four a.m. continued
going half speed and slow; at that time the light bore E. by S. by our


compass, estimated distance fifteen miles; from four till half-past five a.m.
we stopped the engines, and the ship lay-to under the mizen, a strong wind
from the westward, and a very heavy, increasing sea ; at half-past five we
got under weigh, at half-speed, steering N. by W. to approach the shore by
daylight, with a very sharp look-out from aloft; and at half-past six on
Thursday morning, we were then only a safe distance from shore;
from half-past six until a quarter past eight, we steamed along the land at
half-speed, all hands looking out from aloft and every prominent position ;
and as I then considered we were twenty-live miles to the westward of
Cape Northumberland, I reluctantly returned without having sighted the
wreck. For your guidance, I may hero tell you that our information led us
to believe that she was fifteen, sixteen—and one report twenty—miles
beyond the Capo, and our accounts by the Warrnambool telegrams gave
such a meagre account of all that was left of her that it was the universal
opinion on board that the last scone of the ‘Admella’ had closed.. In
case, however, that we had approached the coast to the westward of where
she might have been, we returned at half-speed, skirting the breakers, and
with a distinct view of objects on shore until we were within eight miles of
Cape Northumberland. It was while returning, thatone of these treacherous
rollers struck the ' Lady Bird,’ throwing the passengers over the saloon
table, shifting everything moveable, and the ship for some seconds lay on her
beam-ends, the sea very heavy all day, and broke in about eight fathoms.
We reached Portland about 5.30 p.m., where the greatest excitement pre-
vailed, on account of its being known there were still survivors—then a
telegram that - all were saved by the “ Corio” that could be saved’ (recom-
mended with caution), and immediately after another telegram stating the
same vessel was obliged to leave, being unable to render any assistance.
Not a moment was deliberated upon, for I immediately said we should
proceed again at once. Life-boat, whale-boat, a supply of wood, provisions,
&c., were immediately ordered. After those orders were given the
gallant Captain Fawthrop went to the Telegraph-office and obtained
leave from his superior officer. Captain Ferguson, to use the life-boat.”
Again did another mischance frustrate the consumma-
tion of the wished-for rescue. Again was time lost, and
again did hope sicken in the hearts of these wretched
people. Such a continued succession of hopes, fears, and
hair-breadth chances of rescue,, probably never happened
to a shipwrecked group before. Each incident racked the
mind with its varied intensity of anxiety, yet they were
all as vivid, and regular in progression as the scenes of a
panoramic phantasmagoria. The coming and going of
the “ Havilah,” —the incident of the brave Soren Holm
struggling to help them amidst the gurgling waters, —the
passing of the “Bombay,”—the rapid disappearance.of


the second mate in Ms mission to the shore, where he
landed in death, —the efforts in vain of the boats’ crews
to lend them a helping hand, — the futile search of the
“Lady Bird,” —all form a chain of misfortune heaped upon
misfortune, that rarely or ever has before happened to
weak or erring mortals.


CHAPTER V.
THE WRECK.
The two Sailors seen to reach the Shore—A prayer of thanksgiving to the
Almighty —Bitter cold Night—Winter Season in Australia—Sufferings of
the Women and Children on the Fore Wreck—They drop off one by one
into the Sea—All Lost on the Third Night—Scenes on After Part—A
Negro dies raving mad—Those who succumb, delirious Twelve Hours
before they Die—Death of Miss Clendinning—Endurance of Miss Led-
with—Unmanly conduct of a Sailor—Man's inborn Selfishness exemplified
—Reflections thereon—Horrors of Thirst and Hunger—A Fireman
dies mad from drinking Saltwater—The water-tight Bulkhead driven in
by the Sea—The Cabin completely submerged—Several drowned—
Captain Harris at last succumbs—All now seek for safety on the Deck,
Bulwarks, and Rigging—Despair of Survivors—Bodies seen floating
round the Wreck—Welcome Sight: people seen on shore—Bivouac Fires
—Bitter cold Night—Eighteen Die from Exhaustion—Wednesday, Fifth
Day on Wreck —The Fishermen from Guichen Bay pass the Wreck—
Despair again unnerves them —Some yearn after their Worldly Possessions
—Fifth Night on Wreck—Sixth Day dawns—Circumstances of Mr.
Magarey’s Death -Misery at beholding the futile Attempts of a
Rescue — Wildly picturesque Scene around the Wreck on the Eve of the
Rescue —Lights on Shore—Fireworks on Steamers —Glittering Sea—
Scientific description of the “ Rollers” and Waves generally— Saturday
opens propitiously—First action of Rescuers by the Crews of the
“Admella’s” Life-boat and Portland Pilot-Boat— The Rescue accom-
plished by the Portland Life-boat under command of Captain Fawthrop
—Joy of the Rescuers—Emaciated appearance of the Survivors—
Johnstone’s Account of the Rescue —Remnant of Survivors safely on
board the “Lady Bird”—Arrival of the Rescuers and the Rescued
in Portland—Hospitable Reception of them by the Inhabitants.
Return we now to the hapless tenants of the wreck,
and resume the thread of our narrative after the two ad-
venturous seamen, Leach and Knapman, had gained the
shore in safety. This fact was known shortly after they


landed, and they were seen walking along the beach. Feel-
ings of a more satisfactory nature now buoyed up their
hopes, than they had hitherto experienced. In the fervour
of their renewed life, they prayed aloud to the Almighty
with voices of thanksgiving for this boon vouchsafed to
them. They had some religious books saved from the
wreck of their baggage, and appropriate passages were
selected and read by all in rotation. As it was not an
easy matter to be heard in the open air amidst the roar of
■the breakers, a number managed to find their way into
the Captain’s cabin, which was still out of the water, and
there, packed fourteen into a space of six feet square, they
continued their orisons far into the night.
Towards Monday morning it became exceedingly cold
and stormy. The comparatively calm weather of Sunday,
with its mild air, was now succeeded by a strong breeze
from the north-west, which soon brought up a boisterous
sea, making a clean breach over the wreck, especially the
fore part, which was lower in the water than the after com-
partment. The cold became so intense that the limbs of
those most exposed were quite benumbed, and one gentle-
man, Mr. Miller, who managed to reach the Captain’s
berth, had his hands and feet rubbed until the circulation
was brought back.
To our friends and fellow-countrymen and women in
the northern hemisphere, who have heard of the sultry
climate of Australia, this coldness in the Aveather may
appear anomalous in the month of August. It may be
proper, therefore, to explain that on the southern coast
this is the coldest and stormiest month in the year. For-
tunately for the survivors it was unusually calm and mild
for the season, and during their sojourn on the wreck the
weather was not even ordinarily inclement. Had it been
otherwise, and strong south-west gales, with heavy squalls
of rain set in, as might have been expected, not even the
weight of copper that kept the Avreck steady could have
saved it from instant destruction, and not a soul Avould
have lived to tell the tale.
As it was, the strong breeze which had hoav set in—


although off the land—drove the sea with such force against
the fore part of the wreck, that it threatened to sweep it
away bodily, with its living freight. These wretched
creatures were in imminent peril, and there was now no
chance of any one reaching the after part, which, as already
observed, was comparatively safe from the force of the
breakers. •On came the merciless sea, increasing in
strength as the wind rose, and sweeping every now and
then some helpless victim into the raging surf. The first
to succumb were the poor children, who clung with the
grasp of death to their mothers, and those around them,
uttering the most pitiful cries, which the roar of the waters
could scarcely drown. One by one they disappeared,
as their tiny fingers relaxed their hold upon the adults,
who, when they could no longer sustain themselves or the
children, dropped together into the raging surf. Among
these a mother clasped her dead babe to her bosom, and
refused to let the corpse be parted from her, although both
of her limbs were broken by the falling of a spar, and
thus she was precipitated into the waters clinging to her
infant. Little more is known of the sufferings endured
by those on the fore part, as none were saved after the
first party managed to reach the after wreck, and it was
with the utmost difficulty those in the cabin could discern
the people forward, not only from the blinding spray which
spread all around, but the danger of looking over the
bulwarks to catch a glimpse of their more wretched fel-
low sufferers. Enough, however, was observed to see that
their ranks were thinning fast, as they dropped into their
watery graves during Monday, and on the following day,
when they had all disappeared—some fifteen children,
sixteen women, and ten men, who remained behind on
Sunday.
Although more sudden in his visitation to the victims
who succumbed on the fore part, death was merciful to
them, compared to the lingering agony and madness with
which he encompassed the last moments of several on the
after wreck. The first of these, according to the state-
ment of Mr. M'Nair, the purser, was a negro passenger.


who died on Tuesday night or Wednesday morning. He
began to run about the wreck, and behaved so strangely
that it was thought he was drinking brandy. He denied
that, and though apparently light-headed, called attention
to the fact that his breath did not smell of spirits. On
this point, Mr. Miller thus bears testimony to the general
desire to avoid drinking the spirits :—“ Our fears of the
men taking the spirits was entirely groundless; the poor
fellows handed every thing to the Captain,” excepting the
sailor who drank the bottle of porter.
“Wien any of the sufferers from privation and ex-
posure began to drink, they generally became delirious
about twelve hours before they died. Perfect good order
was maintained among those who retained their faculties,
and there was no necessity to use force, except on one
occasion when the stewardess, Miss Clendinning, grow-
ing delirious, insisted upon getting down into the cabin
(then full of water) to take her dinner, which she fancied
was ready.”*' After this state of mental aberration this
poor young lady soon died, and she was followed in another
day by Miss Nugent, who, notwithstanding the careful
nursing of the Captain and purser, could not survive the
starvation and exposure. Thus, of the nineteen female
adults who were on board at the first, only one braved the
sufferings to be rescued. This was Miss Ledwith, a cabin
passenger, who possessing an unusually strong and robust
constitution, “ exhibited great courage aiid powers of en-
durance. The people at the same time kept her in the
midst of them to shelter her as much as possible from the
intense cold. Every possible care was taken to secure
the safety and comfort of the females at the outset; but
the danger was so imminent, and the exposure and depri-
vations so severe, that every one had enough to do to shift
for himself. ”■('
Prom some such feeling of an all-pervading sel-
fishness in the hour of extremity, may be ■ attributed
31‘Nair’s personal narrative, t ]bid.


the circumstances stated by this lady, that one unmanly
sailor seized hold of her blanket, and refused to give it
up ; and that when she asked • him to leave it with her,
he rudely refused her. If such happened, where were her
male companions, that they did not unite and force the
fellow to give it up ? Were they all so callous and pros-
trate from physical suffering, that the last spark of manli-
ness was extinguished ?
At all times shipwrecks are fraught with similar scenes
of moral prostration, where the sufferers linger out their
existence beyond the ordinary powers of endurance. Alas!
for poor weak human nature, such are not the only occa-
sions when man’s inborn selfishness exhibits the “mark
of the beast” upon him. In ordinary life and with all its
comforts, when confined within the narrow limits of a well-
provisioned ship, there is not one colonial reader who has
made the long voyage from Europe to Australia, but
could cite an example of extreme selfishness in his or her
own person, or that of others, which afterwards made their
cheeks to blush at the baseness of human nature. If,
under such circumstances, examples of the kind are found,
we cannot wonder therefore at its exhibition on the wreck,
where the wretched soul on the brink of eternity, forgets-
all its instincts of humanity in the love of life.
To the miseries of exposure and mental prostration, was
now added the horrors of thirst and hunger, the former in
a stronger degree than the latter. All were aware of the
insane danger of drinking salt water, consequently, as long
as reason held its seat in their minds, they abstained from
it. “ One of the firemen, however, persisted against all
advice in lowering his boots by a cord for salt water, which
he drank freely. He became delirious, lost his boots, and
then insisted on going to the water. The people tried to
prevent him, but he was a heavy man, and when he got
upon the slanting part of the wreck they could not push
him backso he dropped into the surf and mingled
with the bodies of those who had gone before him. “ When
life,in any case became extinct, the survivors lowered the
dead body into the sea without any attempt at ceremony.” -


Indeed, the few that survived after the fourth day on the
wreck, became so careless of life, and so callous to their own
situation and that of their fellow-sufferers, that at last they
were heedless of the efforts made by their friends who had
come to their rescue. In a measure also, this feeling was
created by the several ineffectual attempts to reach them
with the boats, as narrated in the preceding chapter.
Meanwhile, the water-tight bulk-head, exposed to the
full powers of the surge, began to give way, and there
was every fear of its being forced in. By the Captain’s
advice, the cabin was abandoned by all who were able to
leave it. The only one who could not move, was Mr.
Whittaker, of Kapunda. He had lost the power of his
limbs, and could not be brought up from the cabin when
it was found to be breaking up. “ The walls of the cabin
were.seen to yield, and then the water rushed in, sweeping
everything away. The deck heaved like a man breathing,
and they were greatly afraid the mizenmast would fall;
but it did not.”* Besides Mr. Whittaker, there were some
others below who were asleep at the time the water rushed
in through the bulk-head, and consequently were drowned.
“ One boy put his head out through one of the port-holes:
he could not, however, be saved. Captain Harris, who
was also below, with the aid of a rope, climbed up through
the cabin skylight, and for the time prolonged his exist-
ence, but this active man yielded to the fell destroyer in a
day or so afterwards, chiefly caused by the fatigues he had
undergone in diving for provisions. Notwithstanding his
vigorous frame, he sunk under the exertion, and thus
yielded up his life in endeavouring to prolong the exist-
ence of others. For so generous an act, he deserves the
highest tribute bestowed upon his memory ; and his be-
reaved widow and children the best support society can
afford them.
It was Tuesday, the 9th August, and on the fourth
morning of their wretched sojourn on the wreck, when the
* M‘Nail’s statement. + Miller’s statement.


sea burst into the cabin and drove them from their last
shelter. There was now a scramble for the safest places
on the deck, and starboard bulwark. “ The most shel-
tered part in the rigging was taken ,up at this time by the
crew.”* So the miserable passengers had to contend with
the greatest privation from the comparatively better shelter
they had experienced below. It was impossible to obtain
the smallest footing on deck, as it lay at an angle of about
fifty degrees. Those were fortunate Avho had secured a
place for their feet on the upper sides of the companion
and skylight. A few, who managed to hold on by the
cabin stairs, considered themselves well off, because they
could cut away the sheet-lead which covered the steps,
and chew it to allay the cravings of hunger and thirst;
others, more miserable, had to cling to the railing, exposed
to all the inclemency of the weather, with the sea continu-
ally dashing over them.
Despair now sat upon each brow, and the light of mad-
ness from hopes destroyed kindled up the eyes of all as
they gazed around upon the dismal scene. Looking
towards the stormy horizon, no friendly vessel was seen
to come to their , relief; and they turned with - longing
hearts to look upon the shore where their two companions
had safely landed two days before. Various were the
conjectui’es of what may have befel these two venturous
sailors. They might have sunk through fatigue and want
of food, to perish on the way, or perhaps had lost them-
selves in the thickets endeavouring to find a path to the
light-house. Their hopes were gloomy from the sad
occurrence of the morning, and they reverted to the cir-
cumstances whilst gazing on the ever-raging surf about
them. There, amidst the foam, was discernible the float-
ing bodies of those who had yielded up their lives, under
the combined miseries which threatened to crush every
soul on board. Sometimes the corpse of a strong sailor-
man was visible under the leeward rocks, tossing to and
* Miller’s statement.


fro in the angry surf, until the eddy would bring it into
the full sweep of a gigantic wave, when it was carried
away from view. Again, some one on the shrouds could
espy the floating garments of a woman or a child further
off, dashing upon the reef, not far from the fore part of
the wreck, from which they had dropped ; whilst, as near
as could be. seen by these half-insane spectators, bodies were
there, disfigured by sharks, that prowled among the rocks
seeking for prey. At such sights no tears came to relieve
their aching heads and hearts ; not even a groan gushed
from the throats of these people in affliction. With
parched and swollen tongues, they could scarcely essay an
effort at speech to comment upon the melancholy scene;
and with protruding eyes, fit up with the glare of insanity,
they thought how soon their lot would be the same.
Minutes seemed hours, and hours days, to their distem-
pered imaginations, in the expectation of succour. Fam-
ished and benumbed, they passed the livelong day in
doubt and dread, and some were hoping that one great
wave would come and end their misery.
At this time there were upwards of fifty survivors on the
wreck, many of whom had no hopes of seeing the morrow.
It was therefore with unbounded joy, that even the most
despairing soul heard some one utter hoarsely from the
rigging, that people could be seen upon the beach. This
intelligence implanted renewed vigour into their wasted
frames, and the stronger amongst them waved their ragged
signal flag with energy. These tokens of recognition
were returned by the party on shore, and the welcome
sight, of smoke curling aloft contributed to the genial
happiness. As night came on, the beacon fires gleamed
brightly on the land, and many a despairing heart was
cheered by the friendly blaze. The moon was by this time
well up in the heavens, and assisted by her light to render
the aspect of the scene less gloomy. Still the weather
was bitter cold, and the sea boisterous ; and as the night
grew apace these increased in intensity.
The weakest among the sufferers in vain strove to bear
up against the elements, and the words of encourage


ment whispered by their stronger companions fell dead
upon their ears. Many who had seen the day decline,
were destined never to see it dawn again. One by one,
at fearfully rapid intervals, they fell from their positions,
and with a last deep heaving sigh, or a groan, gave up the
ghost. To their shipwrecked companions it was a ghastly
sight to behold by the dusky light of the obscured moon,
every hour or half hour, a dead body dropping upon the
wreck. Still, even in this, the greatest depths of their
misery, a wretched kind of consolation was found by the
survivors, in appropriating the clothing and blankets of
the dead to their own use, as these were nolonger serviceable
to them. By this means many a shivering frame was com-
paratively reinvigorated, and some who could not other-
wise have survived the inclemency of the night, lived to
see the snn again. How many died during that melan-
choly night, the survivors cannot say, but their numbers
were now reduced to thirty-eight.
Wednesday, the Fifth Day upon the wreck, opened
with a stormy sea and sky, and no signs of the weather
improving. The wind blew a gale from N.N.W. As far
as the eyes of the shipwrecked people could see, the
horizon was a mass of foam and spray. Towards the south
no ship was visible, and if there had, it was ten chances
to one, that they could not have been observed amongst
the breakers. They turned again in the direction of the
land to see if their friends were able to assist them from
thence ; but, alas ! they had no hopes of a rescue, even
had boats been seen on the beach, for it would have been
impossible for them to have left the shore in the face of
such a sea. That one boat, however, did live in it outside
the wreck, was proved by that adventurous fisherman, De-
metrius Donnell and his mate Peter, who left Guichen Bay
on the previous day for the wreck. The Harbourmaster,
Mr. Melville, at Port Rohe, states in his report, that “this
brave and humane man was not to be deterred from pro-
ceeding in such weather, when he heard that there were
many survivors on the wreck. Having great confidence
in his boat, he started with his mate Peter, and all that


night steered her through the heavy sea, until he .got
abreast as he supposed of the locality. But it does not
appear whether he did see the wreck, as he imagines, about
daylight on Wednesday; at all events his tiny sail was
not seen by the survivors.” That he encountered the
dangers of the passage, is known from his arrival at Cape
Northumberland, in the course of the day.
Calmed in the, madness of despair from the fury of the
elements around them, and sickened at the prospects be-
fore them, with glazed eyes they became callous of exist-
ence. Several wrapped themselves in their blankets to
avait, in the drowsiness of delirium, the approach of death.
Seme viewing their fate as inevitable, prepared themselves
by religious thoughts to meet their doom. Others, of a
more worldly nature, sjooke of their means and possessions,
and while yet lingering on the verge of eternity, bade
adieu to their more robust companions with injunctions
concerning their property, handing over what money or
jevels they possessed.
It is not the less strange that it is true, when some in-
dividuals reach the last link in the chain of existence,
under circumstances such as are here related, that they
tun back with a longing eye to the means they have
aimssed, as the saddest parting they have to make. It
seem to be the universal token of man’s earthiness of na-
ture, that he should love to the last the gifts of Mammon,
when all his riches are of no avail. The instance here ex-
emplified by the wealthy amongst that wretched group,
was one of no mean consideration, for they could, on land,
coranand a quarter of a million sterling ; whilst at sea,
on the wreck, their possessions could not buy them a glass
of fresh water.
In this generally callous frame of mind the day was
passed, and as the fifth night of suffering came on, the
wind began to subside, which brought a fitful repose to the
stronger men. The watch-fires of the shore party glowed
brightly in the distance, and although a wide and stormy
gulf separated them from their friends around that bivouac,
still they were cheered through the tedious night. It did


not pass, however, without adding to the list of deaths ;
and when the sixth morning dawned, there were a few
more ghastly faces amissing from the group.
Amongst the most anxious yet remaining alive was
Mr. Magarey, who from time to time shewed a
desire to trust himself to the chance of reaching
the shore by means of a life-preserver or air-belt.
But not being able to swim he was dissuaded
from this by his friend, Mr. Eochfort. Nevertheless
he put on the belt and handed his great coat to tint
gentleman, as if preparing himself for the attempt. “He
was also very anxious about the preservation of a small
portmanteau, which he kept by him, in which he deposited
a memorandum to the effect, that they would be all lest
unless by the mercy of God some help came to then;
whilst upon the back of a receipt for one of the horses he
wrote, ‘ I think this horse got on shore.' That portnun-
teau was afterwards jucked up.”* Whether by accident or
done intentionally, is not known, but he slipped off the wreck
into deep water, and the cry that he was overboard, brought
some to the nearest point to assist him, amongst whom vas
Mr. Eochfort, who had been awoke out of his sleep. He
was then seen in the water alive, and a rope was thrown to
him. He got hold of it and endeavoured to raise himself
up to the wreflv, but could not do so, and drifted away ap-
parently alive, until he was lost from view. His body was
afterwards found on the beach, and his son carried the re-
mains to the family vault in the churchyard at Geelorg.
Thus were the ranks gradually thinning of the forlorn
and apparently abandoned shipwrecked people, when the
gallant efforts of'the shore party to rescue them began,
but unsuccessfully, as related in a previous chapter. The
arrival also from seaward of the “Corio” steamer and the
pilot’s boat, the “Ant" steamer and her boat, buoyed up for
a time their desponding hearts ; but, alas! from the many
failures, only to send them back again into the depths of
* M'Nair’s statement.


madness and despair. As each successive effort of that
gallant crew who manned the old life-boat was made to
reach them, and then repulsed by the furious rollers, they
blessed them in their despair, although all hope of rescue
seemed to them to be blasted. That day certainly was
calmer than the preceding one, nevertheless the tremen-
dous roll of the surge was unabated ; and the boats dare
not put off to make another attempt. There they were
grouped—the succourers and the shipwrecked—gazing
on each other in a state of helplessness. Like the fabled
sufferings of the wretched “ Tantalus,” these unhappy
denizens of the wreck looked imploringly to their friends
on the land, and strove in vain to reach the blessings of
food and shelter almost within their grasp. It was,
indeed, a frightful realization—a terrible reality—of the
ancient mythological tale.


CHAPTER VI
THE RESCUE.
Account of the Arrival of the “Lady Bird” steamer at Portland, and Pre-
parations for a final Attempt at Rescue, drawn up by Portland Committee
—Captain Fawthrop the Hero of the Rescue—His Account of the Port-
land Life-boat, Crew, and Equipment—“Lady Bird” starts from Wharf
on Thursday Night—Reaches the Wreck on Friday morning—Fawthrop’s
Description of First Attempt—Johnstone's Account—Discharging
Rockets with Lines—Description from the Shore by Melville—Lyon and
Power bear Testimony to brave Attempt—Pilot-boat and Crew—
Wildly picturesque Scene around the Wreck on Sea and Land on the
EVE OF THE RESCUE—Lights on Shore, Fireworks on Steamers, glit-
tering moonlit Sea —Scientific description of “Rollers" and Waves
generally—Saturday, August 6th, opens propitiously—First attempt of
Rescuers by the improvised Crew of the “Admella’s” Life-boat and the
Adelaide Pilot-boat—THE RESCUE accomplished by the Portland Life-
boat under command of Captain Fawthrop, and “Admella’s” Boat
under Mr. Germain—Joy of the Rescuers—Emaciated appearance of the
Survivors—Johnston’s Account of the Rescue —Remnant of Survivors
safe on board the “Lady Bird”—Arrival of the Rescuers and the
Rescued at Portland—Hospitable Reception of them by the
Inhabitants.
With feelings of satisfaction we now come to the next
act in onr melancholy drama, where the long-looked for
hour of rescue at last arrives, and the remnant of the
passengers and crew are saved from destruction, to tel!
their sad tale.
It will be remembered in a preceding part of this
narrative, that the “Lady Bird” steamer returned to Port-
land on Thursday after her fruitless voyage in search of


the wreck. The following extract from the “ Report of
the Portland Committee” gives the particulars of her
arrival in that port, and the preparations made by the
inhabitants to a further, and what happily proved to be
the successful, attempt at rescue :
“On Thursday evening, about five o’clock, the ‘ Lady Bird ’
returned. The jetty was crowded with people, anxious for inform
mation ; and a general feeling of disappointment was expressed, on
Captain Greig announcing that they had seen nothing of the wreck;
and that, if they had, it would have been useless to make any attempt
at rescue with the means in their possession, as the sea was running
mountains high ; that they had searched closely for twenty-four
miles beyond Cape Northumberland—far beyond the instructions
received from Melbourne—a very heavy sea breaking in eight
fathoms. Shortly after the arrival of the ‘ Lady Bird,’ a telegram
was received that all were saved that could be saved, but it was-
accompanied with a note from the stationraaster at Portland, that it
should be received with caution ; and soon after that report was
contradicted by another telegram, also stating that the 1 Corio ’ had
been unable to render assistance, and that there were still twenty-
five clinging to the wreck. Mr. Learmonth then weut on board,
and informed Captain Greig that another attempt ought to be made
with the Portland life-boat and crew, and directed the fires to be
kept banked up until he could consult Mr. Edward Henty, one of the
owners, but in the meantime to get everything ready for a start.
Mr. Henty having given his consent, wood was got on board, there
being a scarcity of coals, a volunteer crew procured, ropes, provisions
and other requisites obtained, and Dr. MacDonald was also requested
to accompany the expedition, which he readily did, with Mr. Tail as
assistant. Mr. Johnstone, a schoolmaster, of Portland, with some
rockets, also volunteered his assistance to attempt to throw a line
over the wreck. The ‘ Lady Bird’ left Portland about half-past nine
that evening, accompanied by Captain Pawthrop, the Harbourmaster,
with his crew, having the life-boat under their charge ; also by a
whale-boat, belonging to a Whaling Company in Portland, with its-
crew, the number of extra hands altogether amounting to thirty-six.
The steam-boat, freight, and cargo were at that time uninsured, but
the next morning Messrs. Henty and Learmonth received a telegram
from Melbourne, that insurances had been effected on the hull for
£9,000, freight £SOO, and cargo £4,000. Shortly before the ‘Lady
Bird’ left, a telegram was received from the Hon. Mr. Fisher, request-
ing that she might be sent immediately with the life-boat and crew.”


Of that gallant band on board the steamer, with the
most effectual means for a rescue, Avhich ultimately were
crowned with success, the gallant Harbourmaster of Port-
land, James Fawthrop, and his crew with the admirable
life-boat under their charge, deserve the first place on
the list of merit. Without detracting from the abilities
and efforts of others, Captain Fawthrop may be said to
have been the hero of the occasion. Others, doubtless,
assisted nobly in the rescue to the full extent of their
skill and capacity; and where is the man that wouldn’t
have done so ?—but to him who led the van of volunteers
when others were dismayed, who judiciously tempered
the zeal of younger but less prudent men when life might
have been vainly sacrificed ; and who, with his grey hairs
streaming in the wind, braved the fearful rollers until the
wreck was gained, and the survivors borne off in safety
—to whom but to such a veteran of the sea should not the
first homage be rendered, and the noblest reward given?
Here is his account of the boat and crew before action,
furnished to the Melbourne Committee, which glows with
the most ardent sympathyfor the sufferers not yet saved ;
“ The Portland life-boat was admirably fitted out under my own super-
vision, and completely equipped ;in fact a very model; the crew had been
exercised, and were all of them trustworthy men; and on Thursday
evening, the 11th ult., each one of the crew personally offered his services
as a volunteer to man the life-boat —no time was asked by them to take
leave of their friends or families—nor had they a second change of
clothing.
“ At nine p.m. on Thursday the life-boat was quickly taken from her
hiding place, and launched through the surf by a multitude of townspeople,
and at ten p.m. the gallant steamer took her in tow, and most gallantly
did she perform the service throughout. I need not add that our
departure was hailed by every lover of mankind wishing for complete
success as to our undertaking, and no doubt many fervent prayers were
also offered up; and it may be that those prayers, and the cries of the
distressed sufferers on the wreck, rose in a cloud of incense to the Throne
of the Most High, and was then answered. But to return: the gallant
steamer proceeded on her journey with every speed possible, towing the
life-boat like a wherry—only the sea was somewhat rougher than it would
be found in the Thames—the blinding spray covered the men steering;
but what was the spray to sucli men, who had voluntarily offered to bath®
in the breakers to save the lives of their fellow-creatures !”


At ten o’clock that night (Thursday, August 11), the
“ Lady Bird” started from Portland Wharf on her mission
of mercy, taking the whale-boat in tow, it then blowing a
strong westerly gale, with a heavy sea. She proceeded
under sail and all possible steam during the night:—
te About 7 a.m. on Friday, then about twenty miles past Cape Northum-
berland, wc sighted a small boat to seaward, and kept away, thinking to
get positive information from them of the position of the wreck; she
proved to be a boat from Guichcn Bay with two men in her, who had come
to render assistance, but were unable, and were then proceeding to Cape
Northumberland to beach their boat- The information I derived from them
was, that the wreck was ten miles further down the coast, and, after sup-
plying them with bread and beef, proceeded to follow out the object of our
mission.”*
“ The land was near, and wc coasted along, steering to the
north-westward until we discovered the wreck, which, in the dis-
tance, appeared like a small flat rock ; but on our nearer approach a
mast was seen, which confirmed it as the wreck, lying on a ledge of rocks,
with heavy breakers all round, about one mile and a*half from the shore.
The wreck was approached by the steamer until within a mile, and we
could plainly discover the unfortunate beings, perched like seals on a half-
tide rock, moving to and fro, and evidently waving for help. This sight
was heart-rending, and although the breakers rendered an approach very
hazardous, the call of mercy could no longer bo delayed ; and at nine a.m.
the word was given, “Man the life-boat!” Every man was at his post,,
and at 9.20 p.m. we cast off from the steamer, pulling in for the wreck,
having the Portland whale-boat in company with a boat-anchor and line to
drop just outside the surf; and, having accomplished her work, the whale-
boat remained outside whilst the life-boat pushed in for the wreck, veering
out the anchor-line, for the wind was blowing strong right on the wreck,
and unfortunately it was parallel to the breakers, keeping the life-boat’s
broadside exposed to the surf. This, however, could not be avoided, and
we pushed on ; and when about fifteen yards from the wreck, our rockets
were fired over the heads of the people, and these would certainly have
succeeded with dry linos, but by some accident they became entangled
and wet, and consequently failed. The bowman was then ordered to try
the hand-line, and thrice did the line reach the wreck, but was not laid
hold of by the people, who were clustered together, staring on us with
pitiful looks. But time was precious. Our lines had failed, and on came the
merciless breakers, covering us sea after sea, carrying everything before
it, washing one man overboard, and wounding two of the crew, but
Captain Greig’s statement.


most luckily our anchor-line held fast, and drew us out clear of the wreck
and breakers. The life-boat soon cleared herself of the water ; but our
principal working means were ■gone —viz., six of our pulling oars, both,
steer oars and rudder broken, having now only four pulling oars to come
out of the breakers with ; but most providentially a lull of the breakers
continued two or three minutes, and I called out to them to cheer up ; we
would return again. This lull enabled us to haul out to our anchor, and
ultimately, by seaman-like management, we succeeded in getting outside
the breakers, and reached the steamer, joyful that we had escaped from
imminent peril, but sorrowful at not having relieved the sufferers- Our
first attempt, in my estimation, was most gallantly performed, although
unsuccessful ; and truly no men could possibly have had a more narrow
escape from destruction, for rocks were strewn round the wreck, which
were not discovered from the life-boat, in consequence of the boiling surf,
and it is surprising that we should have escaped with only one slight graze.
The time occupied in the first attempt was exactly two hours.”*
Another version of this exciting scene is given in
o o
graphic colouring by Mr. Johnstone, the schoolmaster,
from Portland, who volunteered with rockets to send a
line from the life-boat to the wreck ; in discharging which,
he received an injury in.the left hand. In his statement,
forwarded to the Melbourne Committee, he writes as
follows ;
“ The life-boat was then ‘ manned, and in charge of Captain
Fawthrop, the Harbourmaster, proceeded to the wreck, having the
whale-boat in company, under the charge of James Cambray,
headsman. As a terrific surf was running at the time, it was
thought advisable to lower anchors, with a long line attached, in case of
loss of oars, &c. The whale-boat accordingly pulled in and dropped
anchor, passing the end of the line on board the life-boat, which also alter
a time dropped her anchor, and then backed in to the wreck. After
getting close in, two rockets were fired over the heads of the survivors,
who stood huddled up together, looking more like statues than human
beings; their eyes fixed; their lips black, for want of water, and their
limbs bleached white and swollen through exposure to the relentless surf,
which roared around like a hungry demon waiting for its prey. The
rocket hissed and whirled away, taking with it the line over—right over
their beads. Alas ! they could not hold it. Despair and exposure had
rendered them too weak. The line tightens, checks, and breaks. Quick,
another rocket; it bursts. Another—and again, with line attached, soars
the fiery missile and falls on the deck ; but, oh, God! with no avail.
* Captain Greig’s statement


Stout and stalwart arms heave lines with superhuman strength. Another
minute, and all will be well, when, like a trumpet, rings the Captain’s
voice, ‘ Hold on, men, for your lives !’ And like an immense white*
crested mountain, comes the surf; it breaks; the boat is overwhelmed, and
all its gallant crew are struggling in the water. Up comes the noble boat,
shaking herself free from the mighty surge. Again—again, and again does
the same thing happen. Eight oars are gone and broken out of the twelve,
all hope of rescue for the time must be abandoned ; and with one parting
cry of— ‘ We’ll come back again !’ from the noble and heroic old Captain,
who, with his white hair waving in the breeze, stood coolly and calmly
chopping tho axe-handlc to fit the tilled, the boat slowly commenced
moving through the surf —but, alas! backward; her anchor cable was
round the rocks. ‘Cut!’ was the order. Tis done. ‘And now, men,
pull for your lives !’ Nobly was the order responded to, till the oars bent
like whips. The coxswain, William Bosevear, springs forward and hauls
in the whale-boat line, and, in spite of the tremendous surf, never let go
—never flinched an inch. ‘ Hail the whale-boat!’ ’Tis done, and down
she came; her noble crew despising danger; they fasten to the life-boat,
and haul out the tow-line and pull away, and by the combined exertions of
the two crews the life-boat gets alongside the ‘ Lady Birdher crew worn
out and exhausted ; oars arc fitted, grummets prepared, and all got ready
for another attempt, Tho surf is higher than ever, roaring full two miles
seaward of the wreck. 4 Never mind,’ say the noble boatmen; ‘ they
must be saved.’ On go the life-belts—into the boat springs Cambray—
William King and other volunteers soon follow ; but in vain. The boat is
ordered not to go. Two dreary hours pass by. Hark to that despairing
cry ! Oh, God ! it curdles the very blood. The poor shipwrecked have
all united in one mournful wailing cry that would—so borrowing is its
sound—break a heart of stone. Again do these heroic men spring into the
life-boat, with the firm determination to do or die ; their compressed lips,
firm-set eyes, and contracted foreheads telling too well their indomitable
courage and resolution ; and again does that courageous coxswain, William
Bosevear, take his place, and Mr. Chesney, engineer, follows. But no—
it must not be : human life must not be uselessly sacrificed. A consultation
is quickly held, and it is determined not to let the boat go, but to wait
till the morning; and surf or no surf to go again. The men leap out of
tho boat disappointed ; and the whale-boat men determine to go and see if
they, unaided and alone, can do anything. Into the boat the men go, and
with them goes Captain Greig to reconnoitre. Again that wailing cry.
The boat returns. What are they shouting on the wreck? ’Tis ‘Water
—water. For God’s sake, come.’ When it is known, down many a rough
and weather-beaten face trickles the silent tear where tears never flowed
before, and many a hand is clenched in desperation that nothing can be
done —nothing. Yes, something can. Captain Greig gives the order.
‘Volunteers for the life-boat, I will go with you. I will never ask you to
face danger that lam not prepared to share with you.’ But it is getting
too dark. Only two come forward, and none got into the boat. The


* Ant,’ s., from Guichen Bay, comes within hailing distance, and the two
Captains arrange to lay-to off the wreck for the night, firing rockets, blue
lights, &c., alternately. Night comes on; the blue lights burn; the
rockets soar aloft; anxious eyes peer through the darkness, and many a
silent prayer is breathed to God for aid. Midnight comes ; the wind
changes; and, hurrah, it rains; but the wind; God help the ship-
wrecked.”*
■ Nor must we omit the following- sympathetic descrip-
tion given by Mr. Melville of this gallant attempt, as seen
from the shore. The writer, as Deputy Harbourmaster,
furnishes it to his superior officer at Adelaide, and excuses
himself in sensitive language from breaking through the
bounds of red-tape officialism, in the excitement of his
feelings, which are highly creditable to his heart as well
as his understanding. If such expressions of the inner
man were more frequently inserted in official despatches,
it would not only render those documents interesting to
the reader, which they are not generally, but tend to
unite the Government in something like bonds of sympathy
with the people :
“ Although, perhaps, not consistent with the character of an
official report, permit me to say that during the time the life-
boat was endeavoring to get alongside the wreck, the excite-
ment amo*gst the spectators on the shore was intense. The
sea appeared to break and completely smother the boat; and
some seconds she would entirely disappear, when the cry
would arise that she was lost; she would then appear again
almost perpendicular. After remaining some time in this
perilous position, she drew off from the wreck, and wo saw
that she had lost several of her oars, and, at the same time,
we thought some of her men. Joining the whale-boat, both
returned to the ‘ Lady Bird.’ What the feelings of those on
the wreck must have been we can only conjecture; on shore
we thought their last chance was gone, for few of us thought
they would hold out another night, or that the weather would
be more propitious on the morrow. The scene was now
gloomy beyond description—every eye on shore that had
watched this attempt to save them was moist, and every
* J. F. Johnstone’s statement.


heart, I think, must have ached as the ear caught the scream
that came from the wreck when the boat was leaving ; it
appeared to us a wild farewell wrung from them in despair
as their last hope appeared gone. But few, I think, who
witnessed this fearful scene will ever forget it. In a few
hours the whale-boat was seen again making her way to the
wreck, and, as we supposed, making signals to those on it,
after which it returned to the steamer. Another night was
now to be passed in dreadful suspense before their rescue
could again be attempted. As during the preceding night, we ■
kept up fires on the beach. About midnight the wind shifted
to the west; a little rain fell; the sea did not break so
heavily. Germain, myself, and the coxswain (Thomas)
awaited the approach of day.”
Messrs. Lyon and Power likewise add their testimony
to the gallant behaviour of the boat and crew during the
perilous attempt, as follows :
“With what feelings of suspense we witnessed that splendid
attempt of the life-boat ! —with what feelings of agony we saw
her crew obliged to relinquish the effort! —no words of GUI'S can
tell. The oars wo saw washed ashore too plainly told us how the
life-boat must have suffered, and wo greatly feared that some of
her gallant crew had met a watery grave. Oh! how anxiously we
watched the ‘ Lady Bird’ all that day, hoping another attempt would be
made ; and when sun set, we felt indeed that all hope was over 1 That
night wc never closed our eyes ;it blew bard; and wo felt sure that on the
morrow the sea would be higher than ever, As soon as it was light, we
saw, to our great joy, that there were still survivors on the wreck, and
that the sea was calmer than it had been since Tuesday.”*
It will be remembered that these gentlemen were on
the beach aiding in getting the “ AdmellaV’ life-boat
manned and repaired for service from the shore. To this
boat was now added the pilot-boat, which had left the
“ Corio” steamer that morning, and made a futile attempt
to reach the wreck, but suddenly, to the surprise of all,
made for the shore, where the crew beached her. It is
but fair that we should append the statement made by
* Messrs. Lyon’s and Power’s statement.


the Captain and coxswain of the boat in Adelaide, other-
wise they might be accused of cowardice, especially as they
refused to make another attempt during the day :
“ The first attempt to near the wreck was from seaward,
after leaving the ‘Corio’ on the morning of Thursday. The
boat proceeded through a narrow channel between the reefs,
and in doing so, headed, parallel with the shore, for the
wreck, and was within a quarter of a mile of it when
the people on shore hailed the boat, requesting she might land.
The terrific violence of the surges, as they rapidly dashed over
the people on the wreck, rendered it a matter of impossibility
for the boat to live near her, and the fact of her being one
hand short of her complement, may possibly have induced
the daring fellows to proceed ashore, when the coxswain and
Mr. Germain consulted on the best method of proceeding.
At this time the strong breeze from the N.W. had increased
the fury of the breakers, and after mature deliberation, no
further attempt was made on that day. The settlers and
others on the beach, whose nautical knowledge of the diffi-
culties to be encountered, has been very evidently erroneous,
attempted to induce 31 r. Germain and the pilot’s coxswain to
make another attempt on Thursday, but from their experience
teaching them that to launch would condemn the boats’ crews
to certain destruction, they resolved to await a favorable
change which might allow the boats to live.”
The various groups of human beings on shore and at
sea, with the attendant boats and appurtenances, tran-
sported to that hitherto desolate spot on Friday night—
the eve of the eescue — imparted a wild beauty to the
scene, which, but for the melancholy occasion, would have
been admired by the lovers of the picturesque. Here on
the sand-hills, covered with scanty brushwood, and down
upon the beach close to the surf, scattered about, were
numerous fires, each surrounded by its little band of
rescuers, listening to the opinions of their leaders on the
probabilities of their success, or descanting upon the
terrible “ rollers,” or stirring up the fire to make a blaze
for the benefit of the shipwrecked sufferers, or straining
their eyes towards the sea to catch a glimpse of the
wreck, or the attendant steamers. It was moonlight, and


the latter could be seen easily, moving about as near to
the reefs as was consistent with safety; while ever and
anon a rocket shot up into the heavens to cheer those upon
the wreck, and an occasional blue-light, with lurid glare,
lighted up the steamers and their occupants, so that the
forms of the vessels and the faces of the crews could be
distinctly seen. But beyond all in grandeur—approaching
sublimity—was the appearance of the dreaded gigantic
rollers, when their glittering snowy crests were lit up by
these lurid lights. Like the lightning’s sheen upon the
avalanche, it darted fitfully over the surface, whilst the
loud reverberating roll of these sea-cataracts upon the shore
resounded like thunder among the Alps. Oft have we sat
upon the beetling cliffs of the Australian coast where the
South Pacific rolls these tremendous messengers of
destruction with even greater force than they strike the
southern shore, and contemplated them by night and by
day, with a strange fascination that increased in intensity
the longer we gazed upon their curling crests.
To those who have never seen these gigantic broken
waves, it is difficult to conceive their power. Not that
they are different in their character from ordinary waves
breaking on the beach in a channel,- bay, or land-locked
harbour. They are all subject to the same laws of motion.
It is their magnitude in bulk and force which overwhelms
the spectator with awe and wonder, and in the case of
shipwrecked people with feelings of terror. To under-
stand thoroughly the descriptions of them given from time
to time in this narrative, it is necessary to premise that
“ when a wave of the sea is seen to advance towards the
shore, the water appears to be moving in the same direc-
tion ; but this is not the case. The only necessary motion
of the -water being in a vertical direction, so that the
water may be perfectly at rest while the wave is moving,
except this vertical ascent or descent.” It is, therefore,
the force or momentum imparted to the water, and not
that element itself, that we see rushing towards the land
when a roller dashes along the shallow shore. On a still
night these may be witnessed on a small scale within the


limits of Port Phillip Harbour or outside the Heads, where
they break in twelve or fourteen feet depth of water. Some
idea, therefore, may be formed of their magnitude when
these rollers break in eight fathoms, or fifty feet deep, two
miles from the shore, as reported by Captain Greig of the
“ Lady Bird.” This sub-aqueous force is first originated
many hundred miles distant from the shore on which
its power is expended, and it increases as it proceeds, not
only in horizontal momentum, but it continues to deepen
in its power, the sea becoming agitated at soundings of
eighty to a hundred feet, so that it first strikes a shelving
coast at from three to four miles distance from the dry
land, and gives evidence of the same on the surface
where it shallows to about one-half in depth and distance
from the strand, and then rises in curling foam, with a
lucid crest, to a height of twenty or thirty feet, rushing on-
wards at the rate sometimes of twenty miles an hour.
"With these few scientific remarks on the nature of the
dreaded waves, so frequently mentioned, the reader will
be better able to estimate the difficulties the brave
rescuers had to contend with in overcoming such obstacles
in their career towards the wreck, which the dullest
imagination by this time will have discovered to be in the
very midst of them.
Saturday, the 13th August, and the seventh day in
the annals of the weary shipwrecked beings, opened. more
propitiously than any day since Sunday. Hopes were rife
in the bosoms of the rescuers on land and sea. No
sooner had daylight rendered the shattered wreck plainly
visible, than with a satisfactory sigh each one saw a
number of survivors still clinging to it. They felt glad
that they were not yet too late to save life.
The first movement for action was on shore. Daylight
had just thrown off the mantle of night when the crews
of the “ Admella’s” life-boat and the Adelaide pilot-boat
were launched into the surf by a hundred willing hands
through the first line of breakers, and then they were left
to the skill and management of their crews. Prom the
published account of the part taken by these two boats in


the successful day of the rescue, the-narration continues as
follows ;
“ The persons in charge had made arrangements to act in
concert for mutual safety, and to keep a sharp look-out in case
of accident. The pilot-boat, it must be observed, had com-
pleted her complement of five pulling hands, by shipping a
volunteer from the shore, who shared the perils of each
attempt. She was the first to reach the wreck, and on getting
alongside, or as near as was practicable, a rope was thrown
from the boat and made fast. In another instant a breaker
filled, and in twenty minutH' after she had made fast, the
‘ Admella’s ’ boat came alongside, and first a seaman and sub-
sequently a passenger passed down her by means of the painter.
The Captain was standing among the crowd of unfortunates,
and threw off - his coat to make a line fast round himself, which
was cast off, when he had taken his place beside Germain.
By this time the pilot-boat was free from the water, and those
three persons got into her, and seeing the life-boat from the
‘ Lady Bird ’ nearing the ill-fated vessel, she cast off and
proceeded ashore, leaving the ‘Admella’s’ life-boat to take
out. one man after she had started. The reef breakers were
left behind in safety, but on making the shore, surf, some idea
may be formed of its magnitude from the fact that the boat,
though over thirty feet long, was thrown completely over-
end, and being stern on carried away the sternpost, but landed
the passengers in safety. Willing hands wore ready to haul
the boat high up out of the surf when Germain was seen to
be nearing it, and in a moment, when within one hundred
yards of the shore, the boat capsized and all hands were
immersed. To launch the pilot-boat again was a short task,
and she reached the boat in time to rescue the crew and Mr.
Germain from their perilous position, but the unfortunate
passenger who had lived out the week of terrible suffering and
privation on the wreck was drowned, though not before the
most gallant exertions by Germain proved unavailing in saving
him. By this time the boat from the ‘Lady Bird’ was
alongside, and had received the remaining portion of the
passengers on board.”
Captain Fawthrop thus describes in manly, seaman-like
language, the consummation of the rescue :
“At daylight, the wind having veered to S. W., we stood in for the wreck.


and, as we approached, we found thebreakers lessheavy, and aclear prospect
before us of being able to approach the wreck. The life-boat was imme-
diately manned, and at nine a.m. we pulled in for the wreck, anchoring the
life-boats about the same spot as on the previous day, and veering out our
line quickly, we were soon near the wreck—threw a line over them, which
was fortunately received —and we were only a few minutes in receiving into
the life-boat the living remnant of nineteen human beings. At the same
time we could see a boat’s crew of noble fellows who had left the shore, and
by the aid of a line were endeavoring to haul the wrecked people through
the surf—by which means they happily rescued four of them—but on their
return, as we afterwards learned, the boat was upset in the surf, and one
of the four drowned; but the heroic bravery of that boat’s crew cannot be
too highly eulogised, and my pen shill add a testimony to their noble
daring in thus risking their lives for their fellows. Having received our
precious charge, we soon cast off from the wreck, and one exultant cry rose
from every creature in the boat; it was a tumult of joy ; and I found it
difficult to keep our crew silent till we reached the steamer, being assisted
in towingbythe whale-boat outside the breakerstillalongside the steamer.”
Among that gallant boat’s crew there is one man
worthy of special notice, viz., Thomas Tweeclale, who
was the first one to step on the wreck, and gallantly carry
Miss Ledwith, the only surviving female, over the broken
bulwarks to the welcome boat below. The appearance of
the rescue from the “ Lady Bird” steamer is thus given
by Mr. Johnstone, who volunteered with the rockets in
the first attempt: —
“ The life-boat is manned ; the shore boats are seen hovering
about the wreck ; the coxswain’s order is, ' Pull, men; pull, or we shall
save none.’ Away go life-boat and whale-boat, and rapidly they near the
wreck. Every glass is in requisition, and every eye strained. Five
minutes elapse; 'they are alongside;’ five minutes more, 'they are
pulling away.’ Up goes the whaleboat; and takes them in tow. Very
various are the conjectures. Some say they have got none ; they had not
time. Others, they have all been taken on shore. ' No, no; I can see
their heads ; they are saved!’ 'Nonsense.’ 'Yes!—hurrah—here they
come.’ Eyes glisten with delight; brave and honest, manly hands met in
silence, and wrung each other with a firm and manly grasp. Alongside
they come. 'Let go!’ 'Hold on!’ Various are the orders. The rope
slips, and away drifts the life-boat. Down goes the whale-boat again to
the rescue, picks up the line, and tows them alongside; and then, oh,
God of Heaven ! what a sight! eighteen men and one woman in the last
stage of existence I Prominent nostrils, bloodshot eyes, mouths parched
dry, with their tongues cleaving to their palates; their eyes black and
swollen, forms half-clothed, with brine-soaked tattered rags, limbs bleached
and horribly swollen ; with the low maniac chuckle, and the husky half


audible cry of ‘Take all I’ve got, but give me drink/ were the marks of
the frightful and horrible sufferings which they had endured for seven long
days and nights, exposed to all the inclemency of the weather, with the
spray beating over them, nought to eat and nought to drink.”
At last the long-looked for gallant act was achieved. The
remnant of the passengers and crew of the “ Admella ”
were saved. The long and weary week had come to a
close. Their sojourn on the shattered meek, lingering on
the confines of death, had ceased, and there was hope that
again they should mingle, amongst their fellow-men, and
breathe on the sunny shores of Australia the balmy
fragrance of its groves. Few, however, of that miserable
remnant of the living freight which were cast upon the
reef could entertain, even in imagination, the joyful reality.
The sufferings of some had been so great, that now when
they were over, their feelings were blunted. When the
more robust among them called to their, weaker fellow-
sufferers that the life-boat had at last penetrated through
the breakers, and now lay alongside the wreck ready to
receive them, some appeared careless, and scarcely to
comprehend the import of the news, so that urgent ex-
pressions were used to make them seize the life-line, from
which they could drop into the arms of the noble fellow
ready to receive them in the boat. One or two, befon
doing so, looked back at the spot they had occupied so
long in despair and suffering with a strange expression of
regret, as if their tenancy of the wretched place had raised
feelings of affection for it in their bosoms like the
“Prisoner of Chillon,” who left his chains and dark
dungeon with a shade of sorrow on his brow when he was
told that now he was free, and could roam unfettered-
through the living world.
Again we quote from the brave Captain Fawthrop’s
statement, who rejoiced in his success, while handing up
the emaciated survivors safely on the deck of the “Lady
Bird”
“ The sufferers were quickly supplied with every comfort and attendance
that humanity could suggest. The agent of the ‘Admella/ Mr. Croaker,
Mr. Oswald, and a medical officer, besides several others, were on board
the steamer: and the kindness exhibited by these truly humane gentlemen
D


will ever be remembered by me with feelings of admiration. In enumerating
these services, I would further add my testimony to the efforts of every one
on board, for all were truly deserving. Our second attempt occupied
exactly one hour ; and at ten a.m. the gallant steamer, with signals flying
for information to the shore—which had previously been arranged before
leaving Portland —took her departure, with the life-boat in tow; and .at
6.30 p.m. we had the satisfaction of arriving at Portland and anchoring, the
sufferers remaining on board and receiving every attention that humanity
could suggest. On Sunday they were landed and comfortably lodged in
various parts of the town, and are gradually recovering.’’
Need it be told that the survivors were received with
open arms by the hospitable inhabitants of Portland.
Indeed so excited were the good people on shore who
had not an opportunity to render 'assistance at sea, that
it was deemed prudent to keep the survivors on hoard the
“ Lady Bird ” all night, that they might not suffer from
the over-zealous kindness of their friends. Shall we relate
how the shipwrecked people were carried ashore on
Sunday, the most of them being unable to walk—how they
were attended by the best medical skill, and nursed by
the most careful of servants—how the gentlemen in the
neighbourhood took home their friends among the cabin
passengers—or how Miss Lediwth, the only female sur-
vivor, was received by Mrs. Huxley at her own house, and
where that worthy lady cheered the sufferer at her bed-
side —in fact how the people of that pleasant little town of
Portland made themselves famous for their hospitality on
the occasion ? Incidents like these, and more of a generous
kind, will occur to the sympathising reader, and not
require to be particularised ; for good actions shun pub-
licity, and require no chronicler but in the hearts of those
who have imbibed on such occasions that richest nourish-
ment of the soul, so eloquently expressed, and called by
the immortal dramatist—
“ The milk of human kindness.”
Thus, out of one hundred and thirteen soids who sailed
from Adelaide, in the enjoyment of life and its ordinary
blessings, seventy-nine perished on the wreck, comprising
the sad enumeration of fifteen children and thirty-four
women. Of those saved, including the two sailors who


first reached the shore alive, there were twenty-two men,
one woman and one boy, making twenty-four, all of whom
have recovered under the care and attention bestowed
upon them, and are likely to attain their wonted strength
and energy.*
Amongst the several descriptions of the attempts at a
rescue, and the voluntary efforts of the South Australian
colonists to save the shipwrecked people from destruction,
we cannot close this chapter without alluding more promi-
nently, than the sequence of the narrative allowed us, to
the gallant conduct of the crew on board the small
steamer “ Ant,” from Port Eobe, Guichen Bay, so ener-
getically despatched to the scene of the wreck. The
following extract from the log of that vessel gives a
concise and truthful account of the proceedings on the
occasion ;
“Arrived in Port Robe, Guichcn Bay, Thursday, 11th of
August, at three p.m. Discharged part of deck cargo. At
3.30 the owners received the following telegram from C. B.
Fisher, Esq., Adelaide ;— 1 Can you forward four or six men
to go to the wreck by land immediately ? There is a life-boat
on shore opposite the wreck, but no one to man it. If
possible, send them down on horseback immediately. Will
Captain Shorwin go 1 If thought necessary send a light raft,
with oar, for the boat. “ Corio’s ” boat cannot reach the
wreck.’ Immediately after the receipt of the above, a message
was received per telegraph to the effect that all are saved
that can be saved. About six p.m. another message was
received from Mr. Fisher that they were yet on the wreck.
Immediately on the receipt of this Mr. Ormerod started on
horseback, with a crew of six men, carrying with them lines,
rowlocks, <kc. At 11.5 p.m. received the following message
from Mr. Fisher : —‘ Would wish the ‘ Ant’ to proceed to
wreck, if it can by any possibility be accomplished ;’ to which
the reply was that she would be ready in an hour. Got steam
up for sea Took on board a mounted gun, with chains and
lines, to endeavour, if possible, by that means to throw a lino
* See Appendix (A).


over the wreck. Took also materials to construct large kites
should the wind be favourable to carry the line towards the
wreck. It was. a matter of general regret that there was no
life-boat stationed here suitable for using upon such an
occasion. Provided timber to construct raft. On Friday
morning at 2.30 the ‘Ant’ left the Bay, taking with her
extra men. At nine a.m. spoke the steamer • Corio,’on her
way to Guichen Bay for firewood, about ten miles from the
wreck. At quarter past ten saw the steamer ‘ Lady Bird,’ and
shortly after discerned the wreck lying on an extensive reef
running off what is marked on my Admiralty chart as
Eslaing Bay, but called by many persons the Carpenter Bocks,
a tremendous surf breaking over* and around her for a long
distance. From the tremendous swell and heavy rollers,
found it quite impossible to proceed sufficiently near' to fire
a line over the wreck. The mizenmast was still standing,*
with her stern towards the shore, the fore part having broken
off, and lying some distance from her ; detached parts of the
wreck discernible. Could plainly see there was a number of
persons on board sitting and clinging to the mizen rigging and
poop-rail. At sunset the ‘ Lady Bird’ spoke the ‘ Ant,’ and
an arrangement was made to burn blue lights every two
hours throughout the night, we having determined to get an
offing, and wait till daylight On Saturday morning, at 6.30,
both steamers approached the land, and reached the wreck at
7.15. Found there was not so much surf near the wreck as
on the previous day. The ‘ Lady Bird’ launched the life-
boat and whale-boat, when they proceeded towards the wreck,
accompanied by the ‘ Ant’s’ quarter-boat. The life-boat,
manned by twelve or fourteen men, succeeded in getting along-
side the wreck, and we could see the passengers jumping into
her. When all were on board, the life-boat was taken in tow
by the whale-boat and the ‘ Ant’s’ quarter-boat, and proceeded
to the ‘ Lady Bird.’ When the passengers were on board, the
‘ Ant’ stood for Guichen Bay, where we arrived at seven p.ra.
on Saturday. Spoke the ‘ Corio’ on the passage, standing
towards the wreck, distant about eight miles. The life-boat
brought by the ‘ Lady Bird’ from Portland is a remarkably
fine boat, built upon improved principles for the Victorian
Government ; and there are similar boats stationed at several,
if not all, the Victorian outports.”


CHAPTER VII.
REWARD AND RELIEF FUNDS.
Progress of Events telegraphed to Melbourne and Adelaide—Telegrams
received on Wednesday at Melbourne from Adelaide, Portland, and
Cape Northumberland —Thursday’s message from Geelong and Mount
Gambier —Erroneous Despatch from Mount Gambier that the Sur-
vivors had been Saved on Thursday—True Version of News given Five
Hours later —Telegrams on Friday from Adelaide and Mount Gambier
—Saturday, 13th August, Message from Portland announcing Success of
Rescuers, with List of Survivors —Enthusiasm increases at Portland—
Attention of Stationmasters—Noble advocacy of the Press in the
Cause of Humanity—Leading Article from the Age, Melbourne daily
Journal, on the Subject, forcible and truthful Language—Public
Meeting at Melbourne, Adelaide and Portland —Resolutions passed at
the Melbourne Meeting—Formation of Committee—Public Reception
of the Captain and Crew of “Lady Bird”—Letter of Congratulation
Meeting at Portland—Committee appointed—Public Meeting at Ade-
laide, Governor Chairman—Reward and Relief Fund Committee-
Resolutions passed—Speech of J. H. Barrow, M.L.A., at a Meeting—
Reflections on the Conduct of the Victorian Government Proceedings
of Melbourne Committee zealously conducted by the Honorary Treasurer,
J. H. Blackwood —Conflicting Statements furnished to Committee and
Printed —Proposal to Adelaide Committee to amal gamate Funds, andmake
one uniform Distribution not acknowledged—Onerous task of awarding
Medals and Pecuniary Rewards to Rescuers—Plan adopted—Relief
Award to the Widow of Captain Harris, Relatives of Soren Holm and
Others —Impartial Decisions by the Committee in apportioning the
Rewards —A Moiety of the Donations reserved for the Approval of the
Donors to form the Foundation of a Sailors’ Home at the Port of
Melbourne.
Whilst these stirring scenes in this drama of life and
O £
death were being enacted on that lonely, sea-beat shore,
the inhabitants of the wealthy cities of Melbourne and
Adelaide were not less active in performing their part to
relieve, as well as to sympathise with, the survivors and
their relatives.


From time to time the progress of the several parties
engaged in this noble work of humanity were duly tele-
graphed to the anxious colonists in the principal towns.
The following brief messages, received at Melbourne, will
serve to show the general tenour of the information trans-
mitted, and illustrate the dramatic character of the
narrative :
“ Adelaide, Wednesday, October 10.
“The wreck of the ‘Adrnella’ is still the sole topic of
conversation and inquiry, hundreds crowding the Exchange all
day for news. Both Houses of Parliament are adjourned till
Tuesday. Extreme indignation is expressed at the statement
that the Victorian Government have refused to interfere, in
sending the ‘ Lady Bird’ or otherwise.”
“ Portland, Wednesday, 2.30.
“ Steamer ‘ Lady Bird ’ passed tn route to Cape Northum-
berland, to render assistance to survivors on wreck.”
“ Cape Northumberland, Wednesday, 7.30.
“ People were seen on the wreck this morning. They were
signalling for help. No assistance arrived up to that time.”
“Geelong, Thursday, October 11.
“ A great deal of excitement prevails amongst those in-
terested in the fate of the “ Adrnella,” and numbers continue
to crowd round the Telegraph Office, waiting for the latest
intelligence. Each succeeding telegram adds its quota of
horror'.”
“ Mount Gambicr, Thursday.
“ ‘ Corio ’ close by wreck. Far fewer survivors than last
night. Rochfort, Captain, first mate, Magaroy, and woman
recognised. Surf too strong for a boat to live. Boat started
twice from shore, but driven back. Two seemed to drop off
the wreck into the water this morning since daylight. No
food since Saturday. At time message left (teu o’clock),
lowering life-boat from ‘ Corio.’ ”
“ Mount Gambicr, Thursday, 5.30 p.m.
“ Afesscngcr just returned from the ‘ Corio ’ brings infor


mation that all who were on the wreck have been taken on
board the steamer. The names of the survivors will bo sent
soon.”
»
This message was received with the most joyful feelings
of satisfaction in Melbourne and Adelaide, but unfortu-
tunately the intelligence of a successful rescite by the
boats was premature; and how the erroneous information
gained credence at the Mount Gambler telegraph station to
he officially transmitted by the Stationmaster, has not been
satisfactorily accounted for. The effect of it in Melbourne
was to elicit a brilliant article on the subject from the
editor of the leading journal, with heart-felt congratula-
tions on an event which had not happened. In Adelaide
a more serious result ensued. It reached that city just as
the “ Havilah” steamer was proceeding to join hr assisting
the rescuing party, while on her voyage to Melbourne.
With this impression she started, and consequently the
Captain considered that his sendees were not necessary.
Serious neglect might have resulted from this error, had
the “ Havilah” been required to aid in the rescue. The
false news was, however, quickly contradicted, and the
true version given of the failure of the attempt made by
the “ Corio’s” life-boat:—
‘•‘Mount Gambier, Thursday, 10.15 p.m.
“ Daniel M‘Eachern left the wreck at 3.30. He states that
the life-boat of the ‘ Corio ’ was launched soon after twelve
o’clock, with five men in her, but could not approach the
wreck. She came round the reef, got inside, and ran ashore,
nearly foundering—the boat was thrown on the beach.
Another attempt was to be made with both boats at low
water. There were still ten or twelve persons on the wreck.
Rochfort was recognised as one. Soma- one was seen re-
sembling Magarey. One woman was still alive.
“The ‘ Lady Bird’sailed from Portland at ten p.m.”
*
“ Portland, Thursday, 9.45 p.m.
“We returned to Portland after searching twenty-four
miles beyond Cape Northumberland, far beyond the informa-
tion I had. A very heavy sea was breaking in eight fathoms.


No boat could live; but we return at once, and will do our
best. We take with us a life-boat, a whale-boat, Ac. We
are well manned, and carry a doctor. We will leave at ten,
after coaling. —P. Gkeig, Master of the ‘ Lady Bird.’ ”
“ Friday, T3O a.m.
“No further intelligence from wreck. A special messenger
left this place for the wreck at nine p.m., and will return about
ten this morning, with full particulars,”
“Mount Gambler, Friday, October 12,
“ Inspector Scott and 0. Lyon, Esq., write from the wreck,,
noon, to-day ; —‘ Lady Bird,’ ‘ Ant,’ and ‘ Corio,’ steamers arc
at the wreck. The life-boat made an attempt to rescue the
survivors, and nearly succeeded in throwing (by means of a
rocket) a line over the wreck.. The boat, however, was beaten
back, with the loss of some oars and slight damage. Every
effort is being made. The Portland Bay boat behaved splen-
didly, and rode over most tremendous seas. Another trial
will be made again soon. There are still hopes of saving the
ten or twelve survivors yet remaining on the wreck.”
“ Adelaide, Friday, October 13.
“ Intense anxiety as to the survivors from the ‘ Admella ’
continues, but very little hope is entertained of their
safety.
“ The weather is very threatening.
“ A large prayer meeting, of all denominations, was held in.
the Wesleyan Chapel this afternoon.
“Business is completely at a standstill.”
“ Mount Gambler, Friday, 6 p.m.
“ The steamer ‘ Lady Bird ’ here with the Portland life
boat. They made one'attempt but failed, with loss of oars
and damage to boat. Had to put back to repair. Will make
another attempt before night. The boat behaved splendidly.
A fearful surf, and breakers very high. Two 'rockets with
ines were fired over the wreck, but without success. Boat’s
crew report having seen fifteen on the wreck. The ‘ Ant,’
from Guichen Bay, is here with another boat’s crew.—Station-
master.”


“Mount Gambier, 12.15 am.
“There is no further intelligence from the wreck, and none
is expected to-night. Office open all night.—E. H. Deebino-
ton, Stationmaster.”
“ Mount Gambier, Friday, 12.25 p.m.
“ Latest Intelligence from the Wreck of the ‘ Admclla.’.
“ Have just received message from the wreck, dated 7.30
this morning. Both boats were tried again and beaten back.
About a dozen survivors yet on the wreck. As soon as boat’s
crew have recruited a little, they will try again. Sea moun-
tains high. —D. Power, pro Stationmaster.
“ Special messenger not yet returned.”
“ THE ‘ ADMELLA.’—LIST OF SAVED.
“Portland, August 13, 7.20 p.m.
“ ‘ Lady Bird ’ has arrived with nineteen from the wreck.
The following;is a corrected list of those saved by the ‘Lady
Bird’ :—Passengers—Rochfort, Miller, H. Fisher, Miss Led-
with, M. Forrester, H. M'lnnis, J. Webb, G. W. Richardson,
P. Garrick, T. O’Halloran. Crew—James Hutchison, first
mate ; M'Nair, purser; D. Peters, fireman ; R. Wright,
trimmer ; C. Locke, seaman ; George Hills, fore cabin steward ;
John M‘Dermott, second cook ; J. Duckering, lamp-trimmer;
George Ward, cabin boy. Saved by ‘ AdmelhW life-boat from
beach —Captain M‘Ewan ; Davis, seaman ; Andrew, servant to
Mr. Rochfort, and a passenger. These last four are on shore
at the beach. Total saved by ‘ Lady Bird,’ 19 ;by boat from
beach, 4 ; total, 23 (passenger in the ‘ Admella’s’ boat drowned).
“ Those on board the ‘ Lady Bird ’ are terribly exhausted,
but the unremitting care and attention of Dr. M'Donald have
considerably alleviated their sufferings. The untiring perse-
verance and gallant conduct of Captains Greig and Fawthrop,
and the crews of the Whaling Company’s boat and the life-
boat, are beyond all praise. The last, in particular, are
described as acting in positions of extreme danger.
“ Enthusiasm here is immense. Conveyances and stretchers
were ready to receive and convey the sufferers to Mac’s Hotel,
where every comfort is prepared for them.
“ Two died yesterday on the wreck, and one fell from the
wreck exhausted.
“As soon as some of them have recovered,
further intelligence will be obtained from them.”


To comment upon the foregoing telegraphic messages
would, indeed, be a work of supererogation on the part of
the compiler. They speak for themselves, and the intelli-
gent reader, who has carefully followed the thread of the
narrative, will readily fill up any blanks in these truly
graphic communications, and correct any error inad-
vertently given by the stationmasters. The indefatigable
attendance of these officials on this occasion was in every
degree praiseworthy; they kept the electric communication
open day and night, irrespective of pecuniary considera-
tions. Indeed if a fault was committed, it was when zeal
outrun discretion at the Mount Gambler station, as already-
referred to.
Nor must we omit to record the efforts of the colonial
Press at this juncture in the cause of humanity. No
sooner had the telegraph batteries flashed the intelligence
from station to station on that Monday afternoon, than
the next morning’s journals published the sad tidings in
every city and town possessed of this invaluable means of
communication through the whole group of colonies, from
Gulf St. Vincent to Moreton Bay. As the excitement
grew in intensity, the Press urged upon the people and
Government to succour and rescue the shipwrecked
colonists with all possible speed, and .at any cost. Al-
though, as it has already been stated, that public attention
was engrossed by politics at the time, the journals of
Melbourne and Adelaide, throwing aside all partisanship,
united in one loud trumpet blast to rouse the people and
the authorities to aid in the rescue. While maintaining
their position as the bulwarks of the people’s rights at a
critical political period, they did not ignore the eternal
rights of man in the cause of humanity. As an example
of the manner in which the subject was treated, we cannot
do better than subjoin an article from the Age, a Mel-
bourne daily journal, which gives a retrospective glance
at the leading features of the event, couched in forcible
and truthful language ;
“ TwENTYfrwo saved! The electric wires on this con-
tinent never before flashed such welcome tidings as in the.


announcement on Saturday to the anxious public of Melbourne
and Adelaide. The rescue of a remnant of the ‘ Admella’s ’
passengers and crew from suspense in the jaws of death, a
thousandfold harder to brave than death itself—a suspense
protracted through a week, which seemed a life-time of terrible
days and nights ! A thousandfold harder to endure, indeed,
thau any death, was that ever-recurring, ever-baffled hope !
During the first days, the signals from the shore, and after
that the brave, rowers striving to bring help, repulsed in each
attempt by the furious surges pitilessly refusing to be robbed
of their prey ! Death around the shipwrecked, above and
below—in the howling storm, the raging waves—the quivering
planks threatening every moment to part beneath them—and
yet they could not resign themselves to die, with succour,
deliverance in view—in view, though kept aloof by that reach
of boiling sea ! In all the records of human suffering which
store the annals of ‘ old father ocean’ —in all the severest trials
which have befallen those ‘ who go down to the sea in ships,’
we have not read or heard of an ordeal surpassing this expe-
rienced by the survivors of the ‘ Admella.’ It has been said
that —
“ Men’s hairs grow white
In a single night
From sudden fears.” •
But here was not a single night—a single day of agony—but
many ? It was simply the old ghastly story of ‘ life in death’
reduced to matter of fact.
“ ‘ Each night carried off its victims,’ says the mate.
‘ About twenty died on Tuesday from cold—jt was a bitter
night.’ And many during the four last nights. They dropped
off one by one as nature wore out—as strength and courage
sunk conquered by hunger, cold and despair. ‘ They had
nothing to eat or drink since Monday,’ and the survivors were
five whole days without sustenance. One of the passengers,
Captain Harris, of the ‘ Waitemata,’ behaved nobly. ‘He did
all a man could do in diving for provisions, whereby he
suffered so much, that he perished from exhaustion on board,
close to Eochfort.’ ‘ All their legs were dreadfully swollen.’
They had huddled together on that portion of the deck which
remained above water “ at an angle of 54 degrefes,” and which
was only kept firm in that position by the circumstance of
fifty tons of copper being in the hold below.' There they lay
in a protracted anguish of soul and body, more complicated


than the fabled tortures of Tantalus—within sight of shore —
with help stretching towards them, but debarred from grasping
it by that gulf of breakers in which no boat could live. No
wonder that, according to the statement of the survivors,
* several died mad, throwing themselves overboard.’ '
“ And little less than the agony of the shipwrecked was that
of their relatives on land. Parent and spouse, child and
sister, condemned almost to see .the loved one perish inch by
inch, as the electric wires noted for us each change that could
be discerned on the wreck. The announcements, hour after
hour by the telegraph, had a fearful interest. 1 Two more
have just dropped off,’ or ‘ the Captain,’ it would be said, ‘is
still holding on,’ or ‘ we can distinguish Rochfort’ or ‘ Magarey,
and a female, and several others whom we cannot recognise.’
With what terror the friends of those particularised looked
forward to the next bulletin to see if they still survived ; and
with what feelings the kith and kin of the unmentioned rushed
to learn whether the next lightning message would bring
word of the objects of their solicitude being among ‘ the
recognised !’ W ell, indeed, might the* usually lethargic city
of Adelaide lay aside all business, and become alive with
anxious sympathy for their shipwrecked and bereaved towns-
folk. Well might Melbourne, as each fresh despatch was
announced, drop its thousand bustling cares, and crowd to the
telegraph office in Collins-street And in the anxiety for the
fate of so many of their citizens we may pardon the reproach
of apathy impulsively cast on Victoria by our South Australian
neighbours. t Save in the Executive Council there was no
insensibility here, but the truest and most ardent sympathy
among all classes, from the Messrs. Henty, who at once
ordered down their vessel, the * Lady Bird,’ to the watermen
of Sandridge and Williamstown, who volunteered to start and
assist in reaching the wreck. The eleven hundred pounds
collected on the very first day the subscription was opened for
relief of the survivors and reward of those who saved them, is
another eloquent token of Melbourne feeling in the matter.
* “ It is difficult to speak in adequate terms of the conduct of
the rescuers. When the ‘ Lady Bird’ reached the wreck on
Friday morning, standing off about a mile and a-half from the
reef on which it lay, ‘ a terrific sea was running.’ The life-
boat and whale-boat were nevertheless despatched at, once.
The crow of the life-boat forced her close to the wreck, and


fired rockets with lines attached, hut the surf washed into the
boat, and the lines got foul and were broken. ‘ Immediately
after,’ says the account, ‘ four heavy seas struck the boat,
smashed eight oars, tiller, &c., filled her each time, washed one
man overboard, who was, however, picked up. For three
minutes they all appeared to be lost. All they had now to
depend upon for their own lives, was the line attached to the
anchor, which had been dropped outside the surf. They
returned to the steamer quite worn out.’ In this attempt they
were only a boat’s length from a rock which, had they struck,
they would have been all launched into eternity. The sea,
moderating, another attempt was made that night with the
whale-boat, but the surf was still impassable. The next
morning at dawn the crowning effort took place, and with
infinite risk the life-boat brought off the survivors. Twenty-
two fellow-beings snatched from death is the result of the
heroism of those boats’ crews; and truer heroism was never
exhibited at the cannon’s mouth or In the ‘ imminent deadly
breach,’ than amid the foam ■ of those breakers, whose hidden
rocks sought the catastrophe of the ‘Admella.’ And even such
calamity is not without its consolation, when it brings to light,
as on this occasion, the noblest traits of human nature—the
gallantry which encountered the most trying danger to bear
life to the despairing, and the generosity which comes forth
liberally and gracefully to help the destitute and honour the
brave. The rescue of the survivors of this shipwreck is a deed
well worthy of a tablet in the Melbourne Exchange. And,
at the same time, we trust that the public at large will not be
backward in following the example of the good Samaritan set
in this matter by so many of our chief citizens. Let ther'e be
no stint on this occasion. The subscription-list should be
opened to all classes —handed round the city and over the
colony—that the demonstration may be the tribute of a
nation’s syihpathy and gratitude. It well becomes a youlig
nation to honor and reward its heroes. It will do its heart
good to cherish and commemorate the heroic.”
Not the least important movement, which arose out of
this melancholy catastrophe, is that alluded to in the
last portion of the above article. Committees were at
once formed throughout the colonies of Victoria and
South Australia for the purpose of obtaining suhscrip


tions for relieving the most distressed of the survivors or
their relatives, and rewarding the bravest amongst the
rescuers. The general response to this call upon the
generosity of. the colonists was immediate ami munificent;
and if we take the ancient adage, “his'dot qui cito dot”
as a standard whereby to judge of the value of the dona-
tions, so freely a’nd rapidly bestowed, the subscriptions
then become most princely. Within two' days after the
matter was set afloat, about d? 2,000 was subscribed in
Melbourne, i?l,000 in Adelaide, and i? 500 in Portland,
which continued augmenting as the movement spread
to the inland towns until it reached double that sura
at the time of distribution —as will be found particu-
larized in the sequel —which has no parallel in the history
of the Australian colonies ; and, taking the population
into consideration, has probably not been exceeded in
any other country for a like noble and disinterested
purpose. (See Appendix B.)
It has been said of‘these Australian communities,
especially that of Victoria, that the “ thirst for gold ”
the desire to acquire wealth rapidly —has deadened the
activity of tho 4 more noble sentiments of our nature ;
and that men are appreciated more by the standard of
Mammon than of Merit. There is too much reason to
fear that such is the case amongst a large portion of the
colonists who have arrived on these shores since the advent
of th'e gold discovery; and to a certain extent there is
much truth in the remarks, made to that effect in the
mother-country, applicable to the older colonists, which it
would be as well that there were less reason for believing.
No doubt this results in a great measure from 'the chief
occupations of the people being gold-mining and com-
merce, which, from time immemorial, have imbued
nations, as well as individuals, with a preponderance of
selfishness. Be this as it may, it is a fact registered from
time to time by not only old residents in Australia, but
strangers visiting these shores, who have made inquiry into
tlie character of our social relations, that when assistance
has been asked for the support or advancement of any


really deserving object, whether religious or secular, it
has been munificently responded to, and the cry of distress
and suffering has never been heard in vain, whether at
home or abroad. As an instance of the latter, we may
point to the sum of J? 50,000 raised by individual sub-
scription, .and a vote of the Legislature, on behalf of the
widows and orphans of the brave soldiers who fell in
India. In the case of shipwreck, now under considera-
tion, we have a special example of the same Samaritan
spirit which ennobles such gifts. The chief item in the
distribution of the money is the sum given for the benefit
of the widow and children of one of those who sacrificed
his life in endeavoring to preserve that of his fellow-
sufferers on the wreck —a donation alike creditable to
those who gave it, and the Committees who bestowed it.
The initiative of this movement was taken at Mel-
bourne on Monday, the 15th August, at a meeting con-
vened by the Chamber of Commerce, with which was
amalgamated some gentlemen from the general body of
the inhabitants, who had also advertised a meeting on the
same day for the same purposes —viz., to consider the
most appropriate way of receiving the Captain and crew
of the “ Lady Bird,” on their successful attempt to rescue
the survivors from the wreck of the “Admella.” The
objects of the meeting were, however, extended as the
subject was discussed in all its phases by the individuals
present. A series of resolutions were passed unanimously
for the furtherance of the objects in view. The Hon. T.
H, Power, Member of the Legislative Council, in an
eloquent and feeling speech, moved, and Mr. Service,
Member of the Assembly, seconded the first resolution, as
follows ;
“ That this meeting sincerely sympathises with the unfor-
tunate sufferers by the wreck of the ‘ Admella,’ and desires to
record its cordial praise for the gallant attempts made for the
sufferers.”
The second resolution was proposed by the Hon. Mr.
Fraser, M.L.C., and seconded by Captain Cole, among the
oldest colonists in the city ;


“ That in the opinion of this meeting, subscriptions should be
entered into for the purpose of rewarding all those who were
engaged in the perilous service, and also for the relief of the
sufferers by this dire calamity.”
The third resolution embodied the following, as pro-
.posed by Mr. Hall, and seconded by Mr. Murphy :
“ That, as a lasting expression of the high appreciation by
the public of the gallant conduct of those noble mariners who
were instrumental in rescuing the survivors from the wreck
of the ill-fated 1 Admella,’ a marble tablet, suitably inscribed
to their honour, should be placed in the Melbourne Exchange,
Custom-house, and other public buildings.”
The fourth resolution, proposed by Mr. Cohen and
seconded by Mr. Campbell, was carried unanimously, as
under :
“ 1. That the special thanks of this meeting are due to the
Mcssr.,. Henty for their promptitude in despatching the ‘ Lady
Bird’ to the wreck of the ‘Admella.’
“ 2. That a copy of the foregoing be engrossed on parch-
ment, and formally presented to the Messrs. Henty by the
Committee.”
In order to carry out the foregoing resolutions, the
following gentlemen were appointed as a Committee :
“Messrs. T. H. Power, Jas. Blackwood, William Nicholson,
A'. Gilles, D. C. M‘Arthur, T. J. Sumner, E. Klingender, G.
Eolfe, W. M. Bell, J. M‘Culloch, J. H. Blackwood, H. M.
Murphy, T. J. Nankivell, F. B. Franklyn, 11. Henty, W.
Fairfax, C. Mackinnon, W. Lawrance, J. Henriques, Captain
Cole, H. Fraser, M. Mitchell, J. Stewart (Williamstown), H. B.
Donaldson (Sandridge), J. G. Francis, D. Little, A. Cairns, C.
E. ■•Bright, G. Ottoway, J. 0. Gilchrist, with power to add to
their number. J. H. Blackwood, Secretary and Treasurer.”
In pursuance of the first resolution passed at this
meeting, the Chairman and Committee proceeded on the
following day, Tuesday, the 16th August, to -the Wharf,*
and congratulated the Captain and crew of the “ Lady
Bird” steamer on their successful services, in conjunction
with Captain Fawthrop and the crew of the Portland
life-boat, Captain Germain and the crew of the “Ad-
mella’s” life-boat, which combined to save the twenty-
two survivors left upon the wreck. The particulars of


their reception by a large concourse of citizens, and the
proceedings of the Committee, are thus given in the
journals of the day :
“RETURN OF THE ‘LADY BIRD.’
“It is seldom our lot to have to record an event so
interesting as that which took place yesterday, mi the occasion
of the return of the Captain and the crew of the ‘ Lady Bird,’
from relieving the survivors from the wreck of the ill-fated
. ‘ Admella.’ Some thousands of persons were assembled along
the quay to honor those, who, in a boisterous sea, had acted
so coolly and nobly. The. ships in the river were handsomely
decorated, and gave innumerable flags to the wind. For
some time before her arrival, a large space in front of the
river was guarded by constables, a clear spot having been
preserved, so that the Committee might present their address
without interruption. At ten minutes past one the ‘ Lady Bird,’
conspicuous by lier fine proportions, was steaming forward to
take up her position at the Queen’s Wharf. A first note of
welcome was then given by a hearty hurrah. Captain Greig
mounted the bridge, and the air was rent with shouts of
applause. As soon as the vessel drew alongside, and the gang
plank shoved out, several gentlemen rushed forward, and
cordially shook the Captain by the hands. Nothing could
exceed the enthusiasm that marked the appearance of the
gallant crew, who scrambled together on the deck. Loud and
frequent were the cheers. The crowd could no longer be kept
back. In an instant every available spot was occupied.
Many, in order to secure places and avoid the crowd, stationed
themselves in the rigging of the boat, quite regardless of the
apprehensions which their elevated positions created in the
minds of those below them. The Captain and crew having
then mounted the poop, the following address was read by
Mr. William Nicholson ;
“ To Captain Peter Greig.
“ Steamer ‘ Lady Bird.’
“ Dear Sir, —At a very numerous and influential public meeting of
merchants, bankers, and all classes of the community, held at the
Chamber of Commerce yesterday, for the purpose of raising a fund to
reward those engaged in the rescue of the survivors from the wreck
of the unfortunate ‘ Admella,’ it was resolved that a deputation from
the meeting should be appointed to wait upon you on your arrival, to
express to you personally the high sense of admiration entertained by,
your fellow-citizens for the energy, bravery, and humanity which,


under the providence of Almighty God, enabled you to save so many
lives from the anguish ol death, under such appalling circumstances.
To yourself for the promptitude with which you responded to the cry
of distress, and proceeded to the scene of disaster—to your foresight
and alacrity in returning during the night to Portland for the life-
boat, with extra hands, so as to meet every possible emergency,—to
the noble daring of those who, under your direction, braved the
elements at the imminent peril of their lives,-- are the survivors
indebted for their preservation from lingering, suffering and certain
death, despairing relatives and friends for their restoration (let us
hope) to renewed health, and the colonies for another example of the
sympathy and bravery of British seamen. As a permanent record of
this noble deed it has been resolved that your names shall be
inscribed in marble and placed in some public building, as an ex-
pression of the unanimous feeling of ycur fellow-citizens on the
occasion ; and, further, as a practical proof of their sympathy, a
subscription has been entered into for the purpose of distributing
rewards to the most deserving, and assistance to the bereaved and
distressed through this dreadful calamity.
“ Wishing you all every happiness that this world can afford,
“William Nicholson,
“ Chairman of the Public Meeting.’’
“ Mr. Nicholson then presented him with the address, and
a copy of one of the daily papers containing a report of the
proceedings at a public meeting held yesterday afternoon at
the Exchange.
“ Captain Greig, who was evidently overcome with emotion,
responded briefly. They did not expect to receive so flattering
and warm a reception. The gratitude of those whose lives
they had been instrumental in saving was a sufficient recom-
pense to them for what they had done.”
Of course it will be understood that this ovation was
tendered to the Captain and crew of the “ Lady Bird” by
the deputation from' the public meeting, as much on
account of the absent heroes who led on and rowed the
Boats to a successful rescue. It was the first opportunity
they had of giving expression to the sentiments they were
delegated to convey by the resolutions of the meeting on
the previous day, and the response of the Captain of the
“ Lady Bird” should he taken as including the thanks of
his companions in the rescue, who had returned from the
scene of the wreck to their several places of abode in
Adelaide and Portland.
At the latter named town a meeting was held on the
day following for the same object as that at Melbourne.


The telegraphic message reporting the proceedings, is as
follows :
“ Portland, Tuesday, August 15, 1859.
■ “ A meeting was held this day to take into consideration ,
the best means of evincing the gratitude of the people of this
district, towards the various persons engaged in the rescue of
the unfortunate creatures from the wreck of the ‘ Admella’ ;
and for the relief and aid of the survivors. The meeting was
well attended, and a considerable sum raised at once, which
will be distributed under the control of a large and respectable
Committee, who beg to suggest that all subscriptions from
various quarters may be sent to them for distribution, they
being on the spot, to judge of those most deserving.— Edward
Henty, Chairman of the Meetins.”
7 ° •
The Committee appointed at this meeting acted promptly
in raising a subscription amounting to £750, with which
they relieved the most distressed amongst the survivors,
and paid the charges made by the medical men and others
for their attendance, and supplies furnished to the tarnish-
ing and exhausted people. They also, as soon as was
consistent with the preservation of the health of the sur-
vivors, took evidence upon the cause of the wreck, and
drew up a report, which they forwarded to the Melbourne
Committee, with the balance of the funds in hand,
after all necessary disbursements.*
At Adelaide a similar movement was initiated, and, to
the credit of the Government and the Legislature of
South Australia, the Governor, several Members of the
Executive Council and Legislative Assembly, took the most
prominent part in it, .while the colonists came forward as
liberally with their donations as they did in Melbourne.
The following is a report of the proceedings on that
occasion
“SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ( ADJIBLL.a’ SHIPWRECK REWARD AND
RELIEF FUND.
“At a public meeting held on Monday, August 23, 1859,
See Appendix (C.)


at the Exchange, in Adelaide, in compliance with a requisition
addressed to the Sheriff of the colony, His Excellency the
Governor-in-Chief in the chair —
“It was proposed by the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, seconded
by his Honour the Chief Justice, supported by S. Tomkins,
Esq., and carried unanimously—
“ That this meeting deeply deplores the loss of those who have
perished in the late shipwreck of the ‘ Admella, ’ and sympathises
with their relatives and friends.”
“ Proposed by J. H. Barrow, Esq., M.P., seconded by the
Rev. Mr. Smythe, and carried unanimously—
' “ That this meeting desires to express its admiration of the heroic
exertions made hy the Captains and crews of the ‘Lady Bird,’
‘ Corio,’ ‘ Ant,’ and the life-boats, and of those who co-operated from
the beach in attempting, at the risk ot their lives, the rescue of the
survivors.”
“ Proposed by the Rev. T. Q. Stow, seconded by the Rev.
W. Butters, and carried unanimously—
“ That a Committee be appointed to collect subscriptions through-
out the colony, to reward, in the first instance, the heroic men by
whose exertions the twenty-two survivors were rescued; and,
secondly, to assist the widows and orphans and others, who by this
severe calamity are deprived of their natural means of support The
Committee to be as follows: —The Lord Bishop of Adelaide, His
Honour the Chief Justice, the Hon. G. S. Kingston, the Hon. John
Morphett, the Hon. A. Scott, the Rev. F. Vv. Cox, the Rev. J.
Smythe, the Rev. J. Gardner, the Rev. William Butters, Samuel
Tomkinson, Esq , J.P., W. L. O’Halloran, Esq., J.P., with power to
add to their number.”
“ Proposed by Mr. Alderman Lazar, seconded by the Hon.
S. Davenport, and carried unanimously—
“ That this meeting has much pleasure in expressing its thanks to
those merchants, shipowners, and others, in Melbourne and else-
where, who, at their own cost and risk, sent the steamers ‘Lady Bird’
and ‘ Ant ’ to assist in rescuing the survivors from the wreck of the
‘Admella.’ ”
“ Proposed by William Giles, Esq., seconded by the Rev.
John Gardner, and carried unanimously—
“ That the thanks of this meeting be given to the gentlemen who
devoted so much time and made such untiring exertions to afford
assistance from the beach to the poor sufferers on the wreck, and
who took such prompt and effective means, by communicating with
the telegraph station at Mount Gambier, to lessen the intense anxiety
of the citizens of Adelaide.”
“Proposed by the Horn J. Morphett, seconded by Mr.
Alderman Glandfield, and carried unanimously—


- “ That a vote of thanks be given to the officers of the Telegraph
Department, to the proprietors and managers of the two newspapers,
and to Mr. Green, for the cheerful and obliging manner in which they
submitted to much extra work and expense in gratifying the intense
public anxiety naturally felt during the week of suspense preceding
the rescue of the twenty-two survivors.” •
“ The Speaker proposed a vote of thanks to His Excellency
the Governor, for his kindness in presiding on the occasion,
which was carried bj acclamation ; and the meeting ad-
journed. Richard Graves Macdonnell, Governor-in-
Chief, Chairman.”
Amongst the speakers on this occasion, Mr. J. H.
Barrow, M.L.A, animadverted in strong terms upon the
conduct of the Victorian Government from the backward-
ness exhibited by the Chief Secretary in aiding the efforts
of the people to rescue their suffering fellow-colonists on the
wreck ; and the excuse which that Member of the Govern-
ment made to the deputation, asking for a guarantee of
extra insurance on the “ Lady Bird” steamer, that he
must take'the “ constitutional course,” and consider upon
it. The following extract from the report of the meeting
illustrates the feeling manifested on the occasion, which
we should not transcribe here, if the views of the speaker
were not these, as they assuredly are, of every lover
of humanity and denouncer of the “ circumlocution
office” ; . «
“ At the public meeting held in the Exchange, Adelaide,
on Monday last, the Governor in the chair, for the purpose of
forming a reward fund, for the gallant men who rescued the
survivors from the wreck of the ‘ Admella,’ the conduct of
Mr. O’Shan assy and his colleagues was thus animadverted
upon by J. H. Barrow, M.L.A., amidst the plaudits of the
assemblage : —He (Mr. Barrow) never for a moment suspected
the courage or the humanity of the people of Victoria. The
self-same feeling that absorbed the public mind here thrilled
simultaneously through the hearts of the people in Melbourne.
They also felt that the cause was theirs —the sorrow and the
responsibility also theirs. And why should they not 1 Were
there not the wives and children of Victorian husbands on
board that vessel ? Men and women returning to their
families in Victoria rendered it impossible to regard the
* Admella ’ as a South Australian vessel solely. No ; the


vessel and passengers fairly represented both colonics, and it
•was proper that both colonies should sympathise in the
dreadful calamity which had overtaken it. (Hear, hear.)
Without wishing to offer any remark that was incompatible
with the greatest respect for His Excellency, it was Ins (Mr.
Barrow’s) opinion that the Victorian Government betrayed in
that matter great heartlessness. (Applause.) It had been
said that even upon the strand near Mount Gambier that there
were men mean enough to filch away the blue shirts which
had been fastened to the raft; but it was a greater shame to
a responsible Government to allow so many human beings to
cling to a wreck and not burst the bonds of red tape and send
to their relief It was not that the Chief Secretary of Vic-
toria had no heart, but it was environed in forms and enveloped
in red tape —(hear) —he would make no effort to save the
poor people if he could not do it constitutionally and in due
form. (Hear, hear.) However, gentlemen would have* an
opportunity next day to read the correspondence which had
taken place, in which the Chief Secretary (O’Shanassy)
declared that he could not undertake any steps which involved
an expenditure of money that had not been authorised by
Parliament. (Hear, hear.) If it was constitutional to
leave people t > die until all the forms of the circumlocution
office was complied with, he was sick of it. (Applause.)
But he did not believe that such was the Constitution of
Victoria any more than it was of South Australia. There
was a general election in that colony, and he was gratified to
see that in every case the candidates were asked to support an
inquiry into the conduct of the Government in relation to the
‘ Admella.’ He had not met a case in which any one ventured
to defend, although some palliated, the conduct of the Chief
Secretary of Victoria.”
Thus it is, amongst the noblest acts of man there are
always some shades in the bright picture of his destiny.
Pain would the humble chronicler of this sad event in
the history of our embryo nation, draw the curtain over
aught that would damage the sombre, yet bright, colouring
of his picture ; but, as the circumstance mentioned by the
South Australian Legislator in such eloquent language
became a portion of the public history of the colony for
the time being, the narrative would be incomplete in its


relation of the attendant circumstances on the shipwreck,
if it was omitted. In the foregoing portion of our tale it
has been our pleasing task to record the noble exertions
of those men who braved the dangers of the deep to rescue
their fellow-men from a frightful doom, and likewise the
generous hearts who have come voluntarily forward to
“reward the brave and relieve the distressed.” What
shall Jpe said of those who withheld their assistance in
aiding the generous efforts of their fellow-colonists ? It
is not our part to condemn a me'thod of procedure sanc-
tioned by the laws of the Constitution, but we cannot
refrain from observing that in obeying the one code, a
greater law has been transgressed—viz., the law of
humanity, to which all other human laws are subservient.
Doubtless the delinquents are punished in themselves by
a qualm of remorse for their- backwardness, when the
acclamations of the people, welcoming the arrival of the
rescuers, was heard resounding along the streets and
public places, within hearing of their official residences.
In pursuance of the resolutions passed by fhe public
meeting at the Chamber of Commerce, the Melbourne
“‘AdmelLi/ Relief and Reward Fund,” appointed upon
that occasion, set vigorously to work in collecting sub-
scriptions for the object in view. Without detracting
from the labours of the other gentlemen who cheerfully
undertook a portion of the task committed to their care,
the Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, J. H. Blackwood,
Esq., deserves the thanks of the community for his
untiring zeal and sacrifice of time in managing the details
of collection, and becoming the responsible custodian of
their munificent contributions.
That the Committee had undertaken a responsible task
was quickly discovered by the conflicting statements sent
in from various quarters, concerning the merits of the
several individuals who assisted in the rescue. Some
jealousy was exhibited by parties at the honours heaped
upon the first to carry the welcome tidings to Melbourne,
but this was partly dispelled when it was known that the
honor rendered to those present, was meant to include all


who were absent. For the information of the members,
and in order to assist in deciding the amount of awards to
be given, these statements were printed in extenso for the
use of the Committee —extracts from which have been
given in the body -of the narrative.
With the view also of making the awards uniform be-
tween the two colonies, the Melbourne Committee proposed
to their Adelaide confreres , to amalgamate the funds of
both, and make one general distribution, but to this pro-
position no definite reply was forwarded, so they had to
decide upon the dispensing of the Victoria fund alone,
which included the Portland subscriptions. These as it
will be seen on reference to the report of the Committee at
that town, was very nearly all expended in disbursing the
bills for medical attendance sent in by Messrs. Macdonald
and Brewer; the hotel bills, and sundry other items in-
curred, in attending to the bodily wants of the sufferers,
besides furnishing the most needy with clothing, and small
supplies of money to carry them to their destinations.
Next came the most onerous portion of the task—whom
to Reward and how to apportion the awards. After con-
siderable discussion it was resolved, that gold and silver
medals should be given to those only who had imperilled
their lives in an open boat. The gold medals to be given
to the leaders of the boats crews, and those of silver to the
men, including the two sailors who came on shore from'
the wreck, and gave the first intelligence. To apportion
the pecuniary rewards was a more difficult matter to settle.
At last it was proposed that a fixed sum should be laid
aside for this purpose, amounting to one-half the fund
collected, and take the opinion of the subscribers at a public
meeting to retain the other moiety in establishing a Sailors’
Home in Melbourne. This proposition met with the
unanimous approval of the commit tee when it was broached,
but the result of the public meeting has not yet transpired.
The names of the recipients, the services rendered by them,
and the honorary and pecuniary awards granted will be
fourrd in the appendix, as well as the names of those who
rendered assistance, for which the Committee have sent


them letters of thanks.* Besides the rewards, a tablet is
to he erected in the Hall of the Chamber of Commerce,
after a neat design, with the names of the rescuers en-
. graven thereon under a suitable inscription. The design
for the medals, approved of by the Committee, emblazons
the cover of this work.
The principal award for “ Relief” which came within the
duties of the Committee was the case of Mrs. Harris, the
widow of the master mariner who accelerated his death by
diving for provisions. Being left destitute in Adelaide
with a young family, she has received the highest awards
of both committees, as will be seen in the appendix. Un-
der this head the claims of any relative of the brave Dane
Soren Holm has not been forgotten, and a sum has been
laid aside should any sister, brother, or parent claim the
award as given by a grateful community irrespective of
class or country, to shew their appreciation of bravery in
moments of danger. Other claimants applied for relief
which the Committee decided upon favourably or otherwise
after due inquiry into the merits of each case.
That the awards of the Committee will meet the approval
of every one is not to be expected. The gentlemen be-
longing to that body who have devoted most tune for the
consideration of this question—and who, as it generally
happens in such cases, form only a minority of the whole—
have been guided by the strictest impartiality in their de-
cisions, therefore they are entitled to the thanks of the
community in distributing the donations at their disposal.
At the commencement of their labours it was never anti-
cipated that the subscriptions would increase to the amount
which they have done, consequently they have used their
best judgment in recommending that only one moiety of
it should be dispensed, trusting that the subscribers will
endorse their recommendation to apportion the other half
in founding a Sailors’ Home in the Port of Melbourne—a
proposal, which we are satisfied will meet with the appro-
See Appendix (D).


i-l*
bation of the brave fellows who rescued the survivors of
the ill-fated “ Admella.” It will be a proud day for them
when they can point to a handsome building for this pur-
pose, (some of whom may possibly inmates,) and say that
they laid the foundation of the Institution by waiving a
portion of their rewards, received from a generous public
in the cause of humanity.
Of the manner in which the first fund was collected and
expended for extra insurance on the “Lady Bird,'" and
coal consumed on the trip, the particulars will be found
in the report by Wm. Bayles, Esq., and J. H. Blackwood,
Esq., who, besides subscribing liberally, undertook the
onerous task.* Much credit is due to Mr. Bayles, who
had the special charge of this fund, for the careful and
judicious mode in which it was expended.
• See Appendix (E.)


CHAPTER VIII
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Reflections on the conduct of Individuals mentioned in the Narrative, not
in Judgment but Instructive—Inquiry into probable cause of Wreck —
Evidence unsatisfactory—Strong current chief influence—Captain of the
"Admella” navigated the Passage a hundred times—Too much confi-
dence often begets disaster—Incorrect Charts of the Coast from Cape
Otway to Guichen Bay—Cow tan’s political Views on the Subject-
Incident of Soren Holm referred to—Horne’s Communication to the
Argus on the subject; also Life-buoys and Swimming—Conclusion—
Less interest in Narrative to Strangers than Colonists —Moral teachings
to the Millionaire, the Gold-Digger and Religious Devotee—Dispassionate
Sentiments of Contemplative Mind —Liberal Donations; if they express
equally generous feelings, then the WRECK OF THE “ADMELLA” has not
happened in vain.
In the course of the foregoing narrative of the most
disastrous shipwreck which has occurred on the Australian
coast, and one which has few parallel cases of mental
and bodily suffering in the whole annals of such catas-
trophes, the intelligent reader will have remarked many
circumstances arising out of the unfortunate chain of
events, which, if greater foresight had been displayed,
and the slightest precautions taken, the sad occurrence


might have been averted, or the sufferings of the ship-
wrecked people mitigated. Let it not be understood, how-
ever, that the Author, in venturing to give his opinions,
und to make any remarks upon the events narrated, that he
does so in judgment against those whom he considers to
have erred, but he is simply desirous of pointing out what
he conceives to be neglect or unskilfulness on their part,
so that should any one who peruses these pages be unfor-
tunate enough to encounter similar dangers and priva-
tions, they might profit by the sad experiences of others.
It is the old story of the battle being lost for want of a shoe-
nail, combined with the overbearing confidence of those to
whose care the lives of so many of our fellow-creatures
was committed.
How this sad occurrence happened is given in the
preceding chapters as impartially and faithfully as the
Author could do; but wherein lay the cause of the
catastrophe has not been satisfactorily explained, and in
all probability never will be. The general impression at
first, that the “ Admella” had been put off her course “ in
shore” while the race-horse Jupiter was being secured, is
fully contradicted by the evidence of the Captain, and
several of the passengers saved, who were witnesses of the
circumstance. On that occasion, they state that the
vessel’s head was put “ out to sea,” and kept under steam
for about an hour, so that she ought to have made an
offing, under ordinary circumstances, of at least five miles,
when her course was resumed as before—steering S.E. by
S., which. was subsequently altered to S.E., and S.E. by
E. just before the vessel struck. As it was thick and
murky at that time, with lightning in the heavens during
the night, it was presumed by the Captain that the electric
state of the atmosphere had disarranged the compasses.
Such might have been the case in some degree, but the
true agent of destruction was in all probability the current,
having set “in shore stronger than usual, with heavier
rollers ” from the S.W., which the mate or the Captain
had not allowed for sufficiently in steering the usual
courses.


Be this as it may, and although we have no desire to
accuse either of these mariners of unskilfulness as navi-
gators, or negligence as sailors, still we are not altogether
sure that they are entirely free from blame. The Captain'
is reported to have made the passage between Melbourne
and Adelaide, and vice versa, more than a hundred times,
and was thoroughly conversant with the coast, where he
could navigate his vessel safely in all weathers, and through
every current, while he had made the shortest passage
from port to port of any of his contemporaries. May not
the latter fact partly account for it in this way—that
finding he had lost time by putting the vessel off her
course, he was anxious to make up for it by “ hugging the
land,” as nautical men express it, he being so confident
of his knowledge of the coast,- that he,could run no danger,
so long that a good look-out was kept, which was unfor-
tunately entrusted to the mate at the time the ship struck
on the.reef. For ourselves, we are always suspicious of
the navigation of these too-confident master mariners,
who boast of being able to sail On the verge of destruction
with perfect safety ; and would at all times prefer sailing
with an over-cautious skipper, or even a timid .sailor,
who gives a lee shore a good wide berth.
Of the deceitful nature of these currents, the incorrect-
ness of the ordinary charts of the coast, and the desira-
bility, if not the necessity of an immediate re-survey of
the inter-colonial shore from Cape Otway to Cape North-
umberland, and from thence a careful inspection of the
reefs as far as Guichen Bay, there can be no doubt.
The following practical communication on ‘the subject,
inserted in the Argus, deserves the utmost publicity, and
the serious attention of the Governments of Victoria and
South Australia:—
“ TO THE EDITOK OF THE AEGUS.
“ Sir,— The late wreck of the ‘ Admella ’ prompts me to
crave the attention of my fellow-colonists, to a public work,
which 1 regret has not hitherto been attended to (if oven
thought of) by the Governments of this colony and South
Australia. I was for some years a shipmaster, trading be


tween the different ports of Australia, and many an anxious
night and day have I spent, caused by the fact' that the only
charts then at my disposal were those compiled from the
surveys of blinders. Of late years the surveys of the
Beagle have been public property, through the Admiralty-office
of Great Britain ; and I have noticed that the Government of
this colony have sanctioned the expenditure (from the public
revenue) of a sum for a correct ‘ survey of the Bay of Port
Phillip.’ But lam not cognizant of any other official charts
having yet been published wherein the ’coast line from Cape
Otway (in this colony) to Encounter Bay (in the colony of
South Australia) has been accurately delineated, excepting the
Victorian Government charts of the ports of Portland, Belfast,
and Warrnambool. The necessity for this work I will
endeavor to illustrate by what has cohic under my notice.
“ First. As to the knowledge of any sheltered nooks on this
line of coast where the shipmaster, finding himself on a Icc-
shorc during a tempest, might run his ship, and perhaps
prevent loss of life.
“ Secondly. As to the* existence of reefs, or sand-banks, not
laid down upon any chart,
“ Thirdly. Showing the necessity for the ocean currents
being accurately examined and reported upon.
First. Flinders’ charts only represent this coast line by
dotted lines, which every mariner is aware, indicates that the
coast has not been accurately surveyed, consequently they
are not to place confidence in them. In 1839 the barque
‘ Children,’ the property of the Messrs, Hcnty, on a voyage
from Launceston, Van Piemen’s Land, to Adelaide, was,
during the continuance of a heavy westerly gale, drifted upon
a lee-shore, and she was wrecked upon the Bold Projection
—the Captain and some twelve or fifteen souls perished.
The survivors discovered that had the vessel been run ashore
one quarter of a mile farther north than she was) in place of
going upon rocks, she would have run into a nice sandy
bay, where, although the ship and cargo would have been lost
probably, all lives would have been spared. The r Schomberg’
(although further in-shore than a prudent captain would have
taken her) was ‘ about,’ and standing off shore, when she
struck upon a sandbank not then known to exist. About
thirty months since the captain of the ‘Champion’ steamer, on
his way from Portland to this place, discovered a reef ofrocks ,


lying about throe miles off the coast, near the mouth of the
Shaw River. A careful coasting captain would not go so
close in-shore with his sailing vessel, but steamers appear to
be fond of keeping close in-shore.
“ Respecting the ocean currents, I would call the particular
attention of scientific men to the fact, that a few days after
the wreck of the ‘ Schomberg’ (which occurred about forty-
five miles south of east from this port), an iron tank filled
with flour, a cask of vinegar, and other matters from that
vessel, were picked up on the shore beach of this bay. Some
days after the wreck our beach was strewed with pieces of
the wreck of the ‘ Admclla,’ which occurred about 100 miles
north of west from tliis port. On one occasion, on my way
from Adelaide to Launceston, Van Diemen’s Land, I fancied
my ship near Cape Otway,—l found myself near the
Harbinger Reefs, off King’s Island. A current must have
set me to the south of east. To a similar cause I attribute
the wreck of the ‘ Catar'aqui,’ and the loss of over 400 souls.
On another occasion I was off .Moonlit Head, bound here, and
deemed it prudent to haul off the coast, as I could not reach
tliis port before dark. At eight on a summer’s evening
Moonlit Head bore due E. seven or eight miles, my course to
this port was N.W. by W., the wind moderate from S. to
S.S.W. I shortened sail, and stood off shore close upon the
wind. My vessel never fell off to the N. of W., and went
through the water from three to four miles per hour. At two
o’clock in the morning I heard the roar of the surf, went aloft,
and plainly saw the surf astern, and on my lee. I at once
made sail, and at four o’clock (fortunately daylight) my ship
was not more than ten miles from the “ Bold Projection” (any
nautical man will understand this statement); consequently I
must have experienced a very strong current setting to the
north of west. I will at the same time (to protect myself
from the imputation of want of skill in having found myself
in these awkward positions) appeal to. any master of a .sailing
vessel upon these coasts, whether at one time or another he
has not experienced similar occurrences. But I will state two
circumstances which will further illustrate what I wish to
explain respecting the ‘ ocean currents.’ One morning two
vessels were seen running for this port, and the movements of
one plainly indicated that the people on board did not know
where they were. Captain Campbell, the present Harbour


master at Melbourne, boarded this vessel, and found her
captain had mistaken this port for Port Phillip Heads. In
the meantime, the other vessel hauled her wind, and stood
out to sea. On board the latter vessel (the ‘ Look In’) was a
man who had been whaling here, who informed his captain
that he was not off Port Phillip Heads. These schooners
were from Launceston, Van Diemen’s Land, bound for Mel-
bourne. Not long since a vessel was running in here, and
was boarded by our Harbourmaster, who had difficulty in
convincing her captain that he was not off Port Phillip Heads.
This latter vessel was from England, but the two schooners
must have experienced an extraordinary current, as neither
captain could tell how he got off Cape Otway. The several
wrecks which have occurred near Cape Northumberland
(namely, a vessel supposed to be the ‘Maroon,’ in 1851, where
not one soul was saved, and the wreck only discovered by
dead bodies being found along the coast; the ‘Nene Valley,’
‘ Iron Ago,’ &c., and now the ‘ Admella’), it is to be supposed,
were placed out of the positions their commanders imagined
themselves to be in by the force of an unknown current. So
long as our Government had at its disposal for such purposes
only sailing vessels and whale-boats, I did not deem it prudent
to direct the attention of the public to this great want; but,
now that they have the steamer ‘ Victoria ’ and life-boats at
their command—and, as has been proved by the case of the
‘ Admella,’ men who have the ability and courage to work
these boats—surely the time has come when this portion of
the Australian coast should be surveyed, either at the expense
of the British or Colonial Government. Should the latter
have to pay the cost, I feel certain the importance of the work
will be so fully acknowledged, that neither my fellow-colonists
nor those of South Australia will object to have its cost
charged to the general revenue of their respective colonies.
“JOHN COWTAN.
“ Port Fain-, October 4, 1859.”
Among the many painful incidents which strew the
narration with mournful regrets, perhaps the most
affecting, and at the same time the direst mishap which
occurred subsequent to the vessel striking, was the loss of
that brave sailor, Soren Holm, through the insecure


fastening of the line. We have no desire to recur to the
particulars, but we have heard upon good authority that
the slovenly lyiot was made by the Captain himself. Of
this incident, and that of the second mate endeavoring to
reach the shore by means of a clumsy life-buoy, we have
pleasure in appending a communication by a good
authority on such matters, as well as the important
accomplishment of swimming ;
“to THE EDITOR OF THE ARGUS.
“ Sir, —Now that the painful excitement caused by the
wreck of the 4 Admella’ has abated, and the health of the
survivors is in a fair way of being re-established, will you
permit me to offer a few words on the unnecessary loss of life
which has occurred ? My only motive is the hope of pre-
venting a recurrence of such disasters in similar cases of wreck.
“ The first attempt made at lowering a boat was a failure,
not in consequence of the sea or the wind, but the fouling of
the tackle. This fouling of the tackle, or its bad management
in other respects, happens almost invariably during great
excitement when a boat has to be suddenly lowered. Every-
body knows this, and every seaman ought to know that a
simple machinery has been invented several years ago, by
means of which a boat can be lowered flat upon the water by a
single person. Scarcely any vessel is ever' provided with
such a tackle, and the consequence is, a boat that is suddenly
lowered, under exciting circumstances, always arrives end-on,
or on one side, and is instantly swamped. This is common in
all weathers ; but during a gale such a result is almost certain
where life is in danger.
44 The next thing to which I wish to call attention is the
courageous act of Soren Holm, who volunteered to swim with
a rope to recover the swamped boat. The rope selected was
not long enough. Had they not a longer rope I At any rate,
the bending an additional piece would only require a careful
seaman’s hand. Several seamen were there, and surely the
important service would not have been left to a landsman 1
Be it as it may, the ends of the ropes were inadequately put
together—got loose—and the brave Soren Holm was lost.
The boat, therefore, by means of which many lives, and per-
haps all, might have been saved, was lost with this poor
sailor.
K


“ We next find in the narrative of one of the survivors,
that Mr. Magarey, when struggling in the water, near the,
wreck, had a rope thrown to him. He" caught the rope ; and
we are then told that “ the person” who had hold of the other
end, let it slip through his fingers ! Surely the confusion of
the moment must have caused the writer of this statement to
be in some error'? Is it possible, with all those still on 'the
wreck, that only one person could be found to hold a rope,
on which the life of a fellow-creature —any living creature—
not to speak of a friend and fellow-passenger, depended 1
There must be some mistake here, must there not 2
“ But how are we to understand the loss of the self-devoted
and too confiding cabin-boy 2 I beg to state most distinctly,
that none of these comments are intended as reproaches
against anybody hi .particular, nor _ against any persons col-
lectively, inasmuch as the narrators of these events may not
clearly have seen all that occurred, and at the same time
their own lives probably depended upon the life of the boy
over whom they should have been so watchful, for every con-
ceivable reason, and for *every human feeling. Additional
pieces of rope are bent on, to enable him to reach the boat,
when suddenly. “ somebody” lets the rope slip out of his
hands, and the heroic boy, together with the boat, ivhich
might have saved them all, is carried out to sea.
“Again, it appears that this precious charge is left in the
hands of a single person. Can this really have been so 2
Could it have been left in the care of some landsman, whose
fingers were benumbed with the cold, and with several seamen
standing near 2 The statement to me seems incredible. I
feel sure, Sir, that the public are entitled to some explanation
of these most perplexing and painful circumstances. I have
touched this subject as tenderly as possible, considering the
dreadful punishment which ensued to all on the wreck, in
consequence of the boats being lost, with the lives of those
who swam to recover them.
“What effect, Sir, do you suppose these statements, if
really representing the facts, are likely to have upon swimmers,
on any similar occasion 2 Not very much, I believe, ,if the
wind and tide are shorewards, even with breakers between ;.
but with the, certainty of being taken out to sea, if two or
three people, seamen or not, cannot hold fast the end of a
rope on which all their lives, probably, depend, and th


swimmer’s life, as the first condition, it may bo fairly ques-
tioned whether the finest swimmer would not hesitate, if the
recollection of the fate of poor Sorcn Holm, of the ‘ AdmeU%’
should cross his mind.
“ Permit me to add, while on the subject, that it seems not
improbable but that Mr. Magarcy might have reached the
shore ; and as to the mate, I have little douht but he would
have safely landed had it not been for the life-holts they both
wore. These air-belts are only fit for persons who cannot
.swim, or very imperfectly; in other cases, they are not only
incumbrances, hut they retard, or utterly thwart the will and
the efforts of the wearer, and reduce him to the condition of a
float or a buoy at the mercy of the waves. ,
“ Let me again express a hope that some satisfactory ex-
planations will bo given with reference to the painful accidents
to which I have, with considerable reluctance, begged to call
your attention.
■ “ I am, Sir, yours, <tc.,
“ R. H. HORNE.”
In conclusion ; —As already observed, the foregoing
nairaticn in its details, as far as it presents to readers who
have no local interest in the Australian colonies, a har-
rowing tale merely of shipwreck, contains nothing new
that the chronicles of human suffering have not registered
in a thousand instances of the kind before ; and as to the
actual loss of life, local wrecks have been mentioned
wherein this has occurred in a four-fold degree. What
renders it remarkable, not only in Australia, but through-
out the civilised world, are the attendant circumstances
which have developed in a striking manner the most
generous, and at the same time, seme of the most selfish
instincts of our nature.
The moral teachings disseminated hy such a narrative
as this are many and profitable to mankind generally, hut
specially instructive to every thinking member of the
motley communities which have settled down on the
Australian shores. In this .golden province of Victoria,
it is to he hoped that seme good will result frem these
awfully practical and that the efforts of the


humble narrator have succeeded in placing the lights and
shadows of his word-pictures where they may improve
the minds and hearts of his fellow-colonists. Millionaires,
luxuriating in the comforts of their stately mansions, will
shudder doubtless at the wretched plight some of their
own class were subjected to by the eternal laws of Nature
on that foam-girt rock ; for such may be their own lot
some day, and in thinking thus, it is to be hoped that they
will become of the “earth less earthy.” Hardy gold-
diggers emerging from their subterranean labours on
terra firma, disconsolate and disheartened in their search
for the coveted metal, will read with moistened eyes the
sufferings and dangers encountered by their fellow-toilers
on the unstable deep, and they may return to their - occu-
pation with a more contented spirit. Religious devotees,
kneeling in their soft-cushioned pews, murmuring mecha-
nically their orisons to the seductive harmony of the
organ, will, it is to be hoped, become more earnest and
sincere in their devotions, when they think of that
awful prayer meeting within the shattered hull of the
ship, amongst a group of despairing humanity, whose
munnurings were ever and anon drowned by the roar of
the merciless surge, as it thundered against the iron frame
without, like the dread knocking of Death for another
victim at the gates of Life.
Whilst thus each individual or family in our social sphere
may derive lessons of comfort or reproof, as their natures
are sensitive or callous, the contemplative mind, less
influenced by the allurements of wealth, or that ambition
which hardens the jieart, looks with pity and compassion
upon the dreadful sufferings of his fellow-creatures ; while
a thrill of gladness glows within him at the bright gleams
of love between man and man, which lighten up the
picture. And thus he ruminates on those who have so
generously laid their contributions on the altar of Relief
and Reward : If, in proportion to these gifts their future
social relations towards each other become expanded in
this land of their adoption—a land far away at the utter-
most parts of the earth from that glorious mother-country


which instilled into them with the milk-draughts of their
infancy, a love—a passion-—for deeds that are brave,
generous, and honourable—if result be as indicated,
even among a small portion of this community, then may
it be said with truth, that out of sorrow cometh gladness !
out of woe springeth joy ! and this melancholy tale of
how the “Admella” was shepwkecked hasjiot been
written in vain.


APPENDIX (A).
List of passengers and crew of the “ Admella,” as near as
could be ascertained by the Author from the many conflicting
lusts published. Of the correctness of the total numbers who
left Port Adelaide, ho gives the Melbourne agent of the vessel
as his authority ; but in the absence of a detailed list of the
names of passengers and crew he has been obliged to guess at
some of those numbered among the lost, not only as to their
names, but whether they belonged to the crew, or were only
passengers. Probably the non-publication of the complete
list of the latter arises from the fact that some of them came
on board after the vessel had cleared at the Customs—a
matter which, under any but (he melancholy circumstances
herein narrated, would bring down censure upon those who
sanctioned such a breach of port regulations.
LIST OF THOSE SAVED.
PASS ENG ISKS:
Miss Ledwith, Adelaide ... ... ... Cabin.
Benjamin Rochfort, Adelaide ... ... do.
Hurtle Fisher, Adelaide ... ... ... do.
James Miller, Victoria ... ... ... ... do.
Thomas O’Halloran ... ... ... ... Fore-cabin.
Thomas Richardson ... ... ... ... do.
Patrick Garrick ... ... ... ... ... do.
Michael Forrester ... ... ... ... do.
Hugh Mclnnes ... ... ... ... ... do.
Andrew, servant to Mr. Rochfort ... ... do.
James Webb ... ... ... ... ... do.


CREW:
Hugh McEwen, master.
James Hutcheson, first mate.
G. B. McNair, purser.
George Hills, fore cabin steward.
George Ward, cabin boy.
John McDermott, second cook.
David Peters, fireman.
Robert Wright, trimmer.
Robinson Duckcring, lamp trimmer.
Charles Locke, able seaman.
John Welch, able seaman.
Robert Knapman, able seaman.
John Leach, able seaman.
In all twenty-four individuals.
LIST OF THOSE LOST.
PASSENGERS :
James Magarey, Geelong ... ... ... Cabin.
Holbrook, Adelaide ... ... ... do.
Dr. Yaux, Ship Norfolk, ... ... ... do.
Whittaker, Adelaide ... ... ... do.
George Fisher, Adelaide ... ... ... do.
Miss Nugent, Adelaide ... ... ... ... do.
Harris, master mariner, Adelaide .... do.
Mrs. Goode ... ... ... ... ... Fore-cabin.
Patrick Lennan ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Lennan ... ... ... ... ... do.
John Watson ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Watson and two children ... ... do.
Mrs. Ramsay ... ... ... ... ... do.
Fernando Bade ... ... ... ... do.
George Watkins ... ... ... ... do.
H ester Watkins ... ... ... ... do.
Charlotte Short and four children ... ... do.
Benjamin Baker ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Coxell and child ... ... ... ... do.
Johnßattrick ... ... ... ... :.. do.
Mrs. Bowie ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Keith and four children ... ... ... do.
Edwin Chambers ... ... ... ... do.


George Forrester ... ... ... ... Fore-cabin.
Mrs. Forrester ... ... ... ... ... do.
Eliza Paul ... ... ... ... ••• do.
John Tregeagle ... ... ... ... ... do.
Patrick Arthur ... ... ' ... ... ... do.
J. Carmichael ... ... ... ... ... do.
James Davidson ... ... ... ... do.
J. Davis ... ... ... ... ... ... do.
Wilhelm ... ... ... ... ... do.
Alfred French ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Gold ... ... ... ... ... do.
Henry Grosse .. ... ... ... ... do.
Edward Haynes ... ... ... ... do.
Wilhelm Hermann ... ... ... ... do.
Edwin Jackson ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Kenvin and three children ... ... do.
Eichard King ... ... ... .. ... do.
Thomas Mensforth ... ... ... ... do.
Mr. and Airs. Murray ... ... ... ... do.
John O’Brien ... ... ... ... ... do.
William Rosewell ... ... ... ... do.
William Taylor ... ... ... ... ... do.
Walter Underwood, a youth ... ... ... do.
Mrs. Weatherall ... ... ... ... do.
Mr. Williamson ... ... ... ... ... do.
Mr. Wood ... ... ... ... ... do.
CREW:
Aliss Clendinning, stewardess.
Margaret Aleagher, fore cabin stewardess.
Soren Holm, able seaman.
J. Johnson, second mate.
James Hare, cabin steward.
Simon Munro, first engineer.
Walter Brown, second engineer.
J. Orr, first cook.
Two assistant stewards.
Three seamen.


APPENDIX (B).
Extracts from the Report of the Portland Committee.
The ‘‘ Admella ” was expected to have arrived at Portland on the
afternoon of the day on which she was wrecked ; her non-arrival,
however, did not excite much attention, as it was thought she might
have been late, and passed in the night without calling.
The first intimation of the disaster was a telegram from Mount
Gambier received on Monday, the Bth August, stating_that she was
wrecked off Cape Northumberland, near the place where the “ Nene
Valley” had been lost a few years since; that the intelligence had
been conveyed to the light-house at Cape Northumberland by two of
the crew who had got on shore on a raft. The same day a list of the
passengers, officers, and crew, known to be on board, was obtained
by .Messrs. Lord and Croaker from the agents of the vessel at
Adelaide.
At this time there was not a single vessel in the harbor, except
the “ Ruby,” a small steamer intended for the Murray navigation,
on her way from Melbourne, which was disabled, and consequently
unserviceable.
On Tuesday, the 9th August, a telegram was received from Mount
Gambier, stating that the “ Corio,” from Port Adelaide, would be at
the wreck that night.
On Wednesday, 10th, another telegram stated that the 0 Corio ”
had not arrived, but a boat was *being got down from the light-
house.
On the same day a telegram was received by Messrs. Henty and
Learmonth from Belfast, stating that the “Lady Bird,” which
should have arrived at Portland that afternoon, was ordered to the
wreck ; and at three p.m. she was seen about seven miles off, passing
the bay at full steam. Mr. Learmonth then telgraphed to Belfast,
inquiring whether the Harbormaster, Mills, was on board, and the
Belfast life-boat with him ? The answer was in the negative. The
same afternoon another telegram announced the arrival of the
“ Cff io,” and that an unsuccessful attempt to reach the wreck from
the shore had been made with the life-boat of the “ Admella.”
The survivors were received at three of the principal hotels in
Portland, where preparations had been made for their reception, with
the exception of Mr. Fisher, who was removed to the residence of
Mr. Learmonth, Mr. Miller to that of Mr. Croaker, and Miss
Ledwith—the only female survivor—was received by Mrs. Huxley at
her own house. Every care and attention was paid to all of them,
and they rapidly recovered their health and strength, with the
exception of George Hills, fore-cabin steward, who was badly injured
when the wreck parted by a mast falling on him, breaking his thumb
and severely injuring him internally. It is one of the most remarkable
features connected with the event, that being so severely injured, he
should have lingered so long, and at length recover. Qeore Ward,
cabin-boy, also is still suffering severely from pains in his legs ; it
was at one time thought that amputation would be necessary, but
happily, under judicious treatment, this has not been required.


On the 16th August a public meeting of the inhabitants of Portland,
convened by the Chairman of the Municipal Council, was held, at
which a Committee was appointed to raise subscriptions, and to
communicate with the Committees being formed in Melbourne and
Adelaide, and the sum of £7OO has already been subscribed, but other
contributions are expected from different parts of the country round
Portland.
On the*! Bth August news reached Portland that the body of Mr.
Magarey had been found about thirty miles off on the beach, west of
Bridgewater. The Coroner, on "being applied to, directed it to be
removed to Portland for the purpose of holding an inquest. THr.
Eochfort having taken on himself all expenses which might be
incurred, the body was accordingly brought to Portland, and an
inquest was held, which resulted in a verdict of “Found drowned.'”
Mr. Magarey’s son in the meanwhile arrived, and he caused the
, remains to be removed to Geelong for interment.
Without wishing to detract in the slightest degree from the .merit
due to Captain Greig and his crew, it is considered that the highest
praise is due to Captain Fawthrop, who commanded the life-boat on
both attempts ; Coxswain Kosevear, who on both occasions steered
the boat; Mr. Johnstone, a landsman, who went the first time in the
life-boat, and fired the rockets, and in doing so, severely injured one
of'his-hands, from the effects of which he will never quite recover ;
and the crews who manned the life-boat on the two occasions, whose
names are set forth in Captain Fawthrop’s official _ report; next to
these should be ranked the crew% who on the two occasions manned
the whale-boat in attendance on the life-boat. At the same time it
is not wished to detract from the merits of those brave men, who,
after many attempts to come off from the shore, had succeeded in
landing the Captain of the “ Admella” and two others : the full
particulars of their proceedings will appear in the appended report of
Messrs, Power and Lyon, of Mount Gambier. There is, doubtless,
merit due to the Captains and crews of the “Ant'’ and “Corio,”
particularly the boat’s crew of the “ Ant,” who gave great assistance
in towing off the life-boat after the rescue.
As soon as the survivors were pronounced convalescent, a£(l a
desire had been expressed by some of them to proceed to their several
destinations, a Committee waited on them and took down a short
statement from each as to the circumstances, the losses they .had
sustained, and any facts they might wish recorded ; and particularly
took full statements from James Hutcheson, the chief officer, and
David Peters, fireman, as to what had come under their personal
knowledge. A copy of all the evidence is included in the Appendix
to this Report. Mr. Eochfort’s statement, which has already appeared
in the Adelaide papers, is also included ; also that of Mr. Miller, a
cabin passenger ; one from Mr. Xearmnnth, and another from Mr.
Croaker, the agent of the vessel in Portland. Captain Fawthrpp’s
official report, extracted from the “Melbourne Gazette,” is also
appended.
It is to be hoped that the services of the Portland life-boat will
never again be required on this coast, but the present opportunity >is
embraced of referring in the highest terms to her noble qualities.


From the evidence of eye-witnesses it is understood that on two
occasions she was completely submerged, but righted herself almost
instantly. The general feeling amongst those brave men who
manned her was, that they would have no hesitation in venturing in
such a boat through any sea, as it is impossible to capsize her. It is,
however, suggested that other means should be placed at the disposal
of the Harbourmaster at Portland —such as rockets, lines, and any
other appliances that professional men may recommend—so many
wrecks having occurred within the last few years off Cape North-
umberland. Attention is also directed tO'the evidence of Hutcheson,
the chief officer Of the ‘‘ Admella,” from which it may be strongly
inferred that had there been a light-house at Cape Nelson, this
wreck might not haveoccurred, as the vessel would have kept further
to seaward,, with a view to making Cape Nelson, without coming to
sight the Northumberland light.
Signed on behalf of the Portland Committee, 20th September,
1859.
■ aoSST!
APPENDIX (C).
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS
TO THE
REWARD AND RELIEF FUND.
COLLECTED IN MELBOURNE;
£ 8. d.
Messrs*Gideon Rutherford .. ... .. 250 0 0
Robert Power ... ~.. ... 100 0 0
E. B. Green ... ... ... 52 10 0
W. Nicholson and Co. ... ... 60 0 0
Gilles, Nicholson and Co. ... ... 60 0 0
Klingender and Co. ... .. ... 50 o 0
Fanning, Nankeville and Co. ... ... 0 0
Henry Miller ... ... 50 O' O
Denmstoun, Brothers and Cb. ... ... 60 0 0
P. A. C. O’Farrell ... ... ... 26 0 0
Sir Henry Barkly .. ... .. 25 0 0
Messrs; Brown and Stewart ... ‘ ... ... 25 ,0 o
De Pass Brothers and Co. ... ... * 25 0 0
Cleve Brothers and Co. ... ... 25 0 0
Sichel and Co. ... ... 25 0 0
W. Deg raves and Co. ... ... 25 0 0
David Moore * ... ... ... 25 o 0
W. Philpott ... ... ... 25 0 0


£ 6. d-
Me*srs. W. M. Bell and Co. ... ... ... 25 0 o
Joshua Brothers ... ... ... 25 0 0
Fraser and Cohen ... .. ... 25 0 0
Vaughan and Wild ... ... ... 25 0 0
Grice, Sumner and Co. ... ... 25 0 0
Kolfe and Bailey ... ... ... 25 0 0
G. W Cole .... .. ... 25 0 0
Bright Brothers .... .. .. 25 0 0
T. 11. Power .. .. .. 25 0 0
McPherson, Francis and Co. .. .. 25 0 0
W. Powell and Co. .. .. .. 25 0 0
R. Towns and Co. ... ~ .. 26 0 0
Callender, Caldwell and Co. .. ... 25 0 0
Holmes, White and Co. .. "... 25 o 0
Charles Brown ... ... ... 25 0 0
K. and P. Turnbull ... ... ... 25 o 0
Victoria Sugar Company ... ... ... 25 0 0
Messrs. J. Murphy and Co. ... ... ... 25 0 0
Kay and Butchart ... ... ... 25 0 b
Dalgety and Co. ... ... ... 25 0 0
Win. Lyall ... ... ... 25 0 0
Bank cf Australasia ... ... ... 25 0 0
Union Bank ... ... ... 25 0 0
Bank of N. S. Wales ... ... ... 25 0 0
London Chartered Bank' ... ... ... 21 0 0
Messrs. C. B. Wight ... ... ... 20 0 0
Ray, Glaister and Co. ... ... 20 0 o
T. Churnside ... ... ... 20 0 0
Dove and Oswald ... ... ... 20 0 0
Professor Anderson ... ... ... 20 0 0
Melbourne Glee and Madrigal Society ... ... 20 0 0
Messrs. Wilkinson Brothers and Co. ... ... 15 0 0
E. Westby and Co. ... ... ... 16 0 0
W, H. Bland ... ... ... 10 10 0
11. M. Murphy ... ... ... 10 10 0-
Gibbs, Ronald and Co. ... ... 10 10 0
Cairns, Wilson and Amos ... ... 10 10 0
Sands and Kenny ... ... ... 10 10 0
Charles Roberts ... ... ... 10 10 0
Lorimer, Mackie and Co ... ... 10 lo O
Briscoe and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
A. G. McCombe ... ... ... 10 10 0
Purchas and Sawyer ... ... ... 10 10 O
White, Brothers and Co. .. ... 10 10 0
Smith, Merry and Co. ... ... 10 10 0
H. W. Farrar ... ... ... 10 10 0
EW. Uraphelby ... ... ... 10 10 0
W. M. Tennent and Co. ... ... io 10 0
H. A. Coffey ... ... ... 10 10 0
J. F. Don and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
Raleigh, Dauglish, White and Co. ... 16 10 0
T. S. Martin and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
John Clarke ... ... ... 10 10 0
Bligh and llarbottle ... ... ... 10 10 0
A . Wilson, Nephew and Co. ... ... 10 10 0
A. Woolley, Nephew and Co. ... ... 10 10 0
E. A. Sottish Bank ... ... ... 10 10 0
Messrs. Melchior and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
Geo. Kirk ... ... ... 10 10 0
Ryan and Hammond ... ... ... 10 10 0
Bale, Dickson and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
HenriQues Brothers ... ... 10 10 O
Fred. Fenton ... ... ... 1010 0
No. 2 Pilots .. ... 10 10 O
Messrs. Westgarth, Ross, and ... ... 10 10 0
F Fulton and Co. ... ... ... 10 10 0
T. Brown, jun. ... ... ... 10 0 O


£ 8. d.
Messrs. Revert Simpson ... ... ... 10 o o
Smith, Adamson and Co. ... ... 10 o 0
Herald ... ... ... 10 0 0
Messrs. Henry Burge ana Co. ... ... 10 o 0
J. Katzenstein and Co. ... ... ID o 0
P. Langwill and Co. ... ... ... 10 0 0
J. Service :.. ... ... 10 0 0
Smith, Strachan and Co. ... ... 10 o 0
No. l Pilots ... ... ... 9 9 0
Messrs. J, Levy and Son ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. A. Henry ... ... ... 5 5 0
T. A. Brown ... ... ... 5 5 0
slichaelis. Boyd and Co. ... ... 5 5 0
Porter and Robertson ... ... 5 5 0
Hall and Bakewell ... ... ... 5 5 0
Lord and Co. ... ... ... 5 5 0
Jfaguire and Co. ... ... ... 5 5 0
Hennith Brothers ... ... ... 5 5 0
K. W. Paterson ... ... ... 5 5 0
A Stranger ... ... ... 5 5 0
Messrs. Heape Brothers ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. Richardson ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. Welch ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. Thompson ... ... ... 5 5 0
Gilchrist and Greig ... ... ... 5 5 0
Butterworth Brothers ... ... 5 5 0
Walker Sloane end Co. ... ... 5 5 0
L. L. Campbell ... ... ... 5 5 0
Campbell Brothers ... ... ... 5 5 0
Macrorie and Co. ... ... ... 5 5 0
A. Sutherland ... ... ... 5 5 0
H. Langlands ... .. ... 5 5 0
Jennings and Coote ... ... ... 5 5 0
General Macarthnr ... ... 5 5 0
K. Watkinson ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. W Donnell ... ... 5 5 0
Robertson, Goodlet and Co. ... ... 6 5 0
J. Wisewould ... ... ... 5 5 0
Wallis Brothers ... ... ... 5 5 0
L. Stevenson and Son ... ... 5 5 0
C. Bradshaw ... ... ... 5 5 0
W. Hurst ... ... ... 5 5 0
W. F. A’Be' kett ... ... ... 5 5 0
A. Cumberland ... ... ... 5 5 o
John Carson ... ... ... 5 5 0
J. C. Young and Co. ... ... ;> 5 0
A. B. Donaldson ... ... ... 5 5 0
L. R. Scoltrich ... ... ... 5 5 0
Henry Clarke ... ... ... 5 5 0
G. H. Vaughan ... ... ... 5 0 0
Dickson, Williams and Co. ... ... 5 o 0
E. <sainea ... ... ... 5 0 0
L. Rostron ... ... ... 5 0 0
W. G. Archer ... ... ... 5 0 0
M. Moss ... ... ... 5 0 0
A. Michie ... „. ... 5 0 0
Holmes ... ... ... 5 0 0
Hines and Sandwell ... ... ... 5 0 0
Captain Ferguson ... ... ... * o 0
Messrs. F. Bryant ... ... ... 5 0 0
J. Blyth ... ... 5 0 0
W. C. Yuille ... ... ...'5OO
T. Stubbs ... ... ... 5 0 0
J. A. Sparks and Co. ... ... ... 330
O. L. Handbury ... ... ... 3 3 0
A. Henriques ... ... ... 3 3 0


£ s. d.
Messrs. F. T. Gell .. _ ... 3 3 9
J. Jamieson ... _ ... 3 3 0
Muttlebury and Co ... ... 3 3 0
A. Merson ... .« ... 3 5 0
W. Bidding ... ... 3 3 0
lounghusband and Co. .. ..330
B. K. Brodrib ... ... ... 330
John Atkins ... ... 3 0 0
VV. Macredie ... ... .... 2 12 «
Joseph Lukey ... ... ' ... 2 10 0
T. Martin ... ... ... 2 2 0
D. Ploos Van Amstel... ... ... 220
A Friend . ... ... ... 220
Messrs. Heyward and Co. ... ... ... 2 2 0
A Friend ... ... *2 2 0
Messrs. G. E. Staite ... . ... ... 220
Cordon and Gotch ... ... ... 2 2 0
T. Maurice .. _ ... 220
W. Fairfax and Co. ... ... 2 2 0
G. Handyside ... ... ...2 2 0
» E. Hartley- ... ... ... . 2 2 0
G. J. Dickson ... ... ... 2 2 0
Henry Lange ... ... ... 2 2 0
E. L. Mcntefiore ... ... ... 2 2 0
King Brothers ... ... ... 2 2 0
Rev. D. J. Draper ... ... ... 2 2 0
Messrs. Flaxman ... ... 2 2 0
G. and K. G Ulaghan ... ... ... 220
B. J. Binney ... ... 2 2 0
.A. Macarthur ... ... ... 2 2 0
* N. Dennistoun and Co. .. ...'220
J. ToppandCo. ... .. ... 2 *2 0
Houghton and Williams ... ... 2 2 0
F. A. Walsh ... ... ... 2 2 0
C. M. Bennett ... ... ... 2 2 0
N. G. Moule ... ... ... 'jl 20
M. McCrae ... ... ... 2 2 0
Septimus Martin ... ... ... 2 2 0
E. S. Harley ... ... ... 2 2 0
D. Wilhlem ... ... ... 2 2 0
Stewart, Carrick and Co. ... ... 2 2 0
J. Gregory ... ... ... 2 2 0
Inglis, Adam and Gresham ... ... 220
D. K. Gregory ... ... ... 2 2 0
White and Dickson ... ... ... 220
C. B. Smith ... ... ... 2 2 0
Bishop and Keep ... ... • ... 2 2 0
W. Harris ... ... ... 2 2 0
J.LiGrindley ... ... ... 2 0 .0
D. Masterton ... ... ... 2 0 0
J. W. Barnett ... ... ... 2 0 0
X. I- ... ... ... 2 0 0
John Carter .. ... ... 2 0 0
Hancock and Duffet ... ... ... 2 0 0
A. M k Cracken . . ... ... 2 0 0
J. I* Estrange $ ... .. ... 2 0 0
Rhodes ... ... ... 110
T. Hubert ... ... -v. 1 1 0
T. J. Loly ... ... ... 110
Batchelder and O’Neil .. 110
G. Winkfield .. 110
S. Downey .. .. * .. 110
N. G. Mayfield .. .. 1 1 0
N. P. McGill .. 110
H. M. Gannmell .. 110
N. Lee .. .. ~ l l 0
John Ellerkcr .. .. .. 1 1 0


. £ s. d.
Messrs. IJ. E. Thompson •. .. .. X i o
J. B. Houghton ~ .. .. 1 1 ®
John McGregor .. ..110
W. Kent Hall .. .. ..110
N. U. Leitchfield .. .. ' .. 110
S. Toynbee .. .. 1 I 0
W. Osborne .. .. ’ .. 110
J. Guthrie .. .. .. 110
G. A. Jeffrey .. .. 110
li. S. Anderson ... .. -. 1 l 0
.T. D. A. .. .. ..110
John Lee .. 110
E. Higby .. .. ... 110
Geo. Mather .. .. .. l l o
C. Anderson .. .. .. 110
W. K Yirgoe .. .. l 1 0
S. H. Oi .. ..110
W.J. Meek .. 1 1 0
J. O’Sullivan .. ... .. 110
C. Hall . .. .. ..110
W. Bird . - 110
A Friend .. i 1 0
Messrs. J. Myring .. 110
Charles Iloche .. .. .. l 1 0
J K. Sawyer .. ~110
G. F. Verdon .. .. .. 110
J. Moxham .. .. 110
J. Smellon and Co. .. .. .. l 1 0
John Turnbull .. .. .. 110
D. Thomas ~ .. .. 1 1 0
A. Boyle ~ .. .. 110
J. Sandeman .. .. .. 110
W. Morley ... .. I I 0
L. Pemberton .. .. ~ 110
F. Liardet ~ .. 110
Wm- Bray ~ .. 11®
Geo. Harvey , .. ..110
John Young .. ~ 110
S. A- Woolley .. ~110
Hope and King .. .. 110
Thos. Jackson ~ .. * ..110
Thos. Hall .. 110
F. Gardiner .. ~ 110
B McNaughtou ~ ~ 110
H. Tullett .. ... 110
J. M. Thomas ~ .. ~110
Y. and M. .. .. ~110
Thos Platt ~ .. .. 110
Thos. Platt .. .. ..100
T. Lambert ~ .. 10 0
A Friend .. .. I 0 0
Messrs. Wm. Wright .. ..100
Lightf lot and Fowler .. .. —lO 0
J. Salomon .. .. 10 0
J. Johnson .. 10 0
E. H. Grestara .. •• 10 0
H. Beel ..100
Chips .. ~100
W. Barnett .. ..100
J. Lee .. ..100
W. L. Bulks .. .. ...100
W Mcßonough .. .. 10 0
W. S. Fyfe .. .. ..100
Brours .. .. ..100
W. Benson .. .. 10 0
Crerrand ~ .. .. 10 0
J. Brock - .. ..100


£ s. d.
Messrs. J. Ware .. I 0 0
T. J.Goold .. .. 10 0
Andrew Hurraj .. .. .. 10 0
S-T. Harenty .. .. 10 0
M Mackintosh ~ .. .. 10 0
D. Broadfoot .. .. .. 10 0
Dr. Mackay ~ .. .. I 0 0
■ ■ —* Simon .. .. .. 10 0
N. G. Hurray .. ~ 10 0
F. H. Hart .. .. 10 0
11. C. Pirani .. .. 1 0 0
J Young 1 ~ .. 10 0
Wm. McLean .. .. .. 10 0
S Biworthy .. .. .. 10 0
Robert Byrne .. .. ..100
Mr. Jervis .. .. '..100
D. R. Long .. • 10 0
R. L. ... .. . .. 0 10 6
R. Chadwick .. '.. 0 It 6
A Sutherland ~ .. .. 0 10 0
Thomas Webb .. .. .. 0 10 0
J. McAulav . .. ' .. .. 0 10 0
I*. S. Philips .. .. 0 30 0
H. B. Wilson .. .. .. 0 10 0
G. D. Dalrymple .. .. .. 0 10 0
W. ilav .. .. 0 10 0
J. H. Allan ~ .. .. 0 10 0
C. P. Curie .. .. .. 0 10 0
J. Mills ... .. 0 10 0
J. Campbell .. .. .. 0 10 0
Captain Lessing -• 0.10 0
Messrs. Thompson .. .. .. o*lo 0
Wilkman .. .. .. 010 0
Sundry small sums under 10s. .. .. 121 4 0
J. F. Don and Co.’s workmen .. .. 11 5 0
Cornish and Bruce’s workmen.. .. 12 18 6
T. Fulton and Co.’s workmen .. .. 19 18 0
Collected by the Misses Henty .. ..960
COUNTRY SUBSCRIBERS.
Bacchus Marsh :
£ s. d.
Messrs, Watson Brothers ... ... ... 2 2 0
James Young ... ... 2 0 0
Geo. B. Purnell ... ••• 10 0
Henry .Walsh ... ••• 10 0
T. Taubman ... ... ... 10 0
James E. Cook ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... .• •• 2 10 0
Yackandandah :
£ s. d.
Messrs. Welshman ... ... ••• 3 0 0
E. EL Chatterton ... 10 0
R. J. T. Spence ... ... ... 10 0
K. Mackay ... ... ... 10 0
J. Cunningham ... ... ... 10 0
A. B. Lane ••. 10 0
W- Roper ... ... .. 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ••• 8 10 0


Maldon :
£ s. d.
Messrs. N. P. Smith ~ ... * ... 1 1 0
N. Philips ... ... ... 110
David Watt ... ... ... 110
James Warrock ... ... ... 110
James Hill ... ... ... 110
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 2 2 6
Dunolly;
£ 8. d.
Messrs. R. N. Hammond ... ... ... 110
J. Briggs ... ... ... 110
Jackson and Co. ... ... ... 110
Julius Wogel ... ... ... 1 1 0
J. W. Dunbar ... ... ... 10 0
John Ferguson ... .... ... 10 0
E. Ernsteiu ... ... ••• 10 0
J. Jebb ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 17 6
Buckland :
£ s. d.
Messrs. J. Dunphy and Co. ... ... ...'2OO
H. W. DeMole ... ... ... 10 0
O. Evans ... ... ... 10 0
O. O. Bradley ... ... ... 1 0 0
A. Martin ... 1 0 0
amounts ... . ... 1 15 0
Heathcote ; *
£ s. d.
Messrs. W. Robertson ... ... ... 2 0 0
H. B. Chomley ... ... ... 1 0 0
J. Churchward . ... ... ... 10 0
Mrs. Awning ... ••• 10 0
F. Taite ... ••• ••• 10 0
G. R. Hyde ... ... ... 10 0
Wm. Wait ... ... ... 10 0
G. B. Shakespeare ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 10 0
Geelong :
£ s. d.
Theatre Royal ... ••• so o o
Messrs. Holmes. White and Co. ♦ ... 10 0 0
J. Quarterman ... ... ... 5 0 0
Wilson, Buchanan and Co. ... ... 5 o o
R, C. Hope ... ... ... 5 0 0
Taylor and Buckland ... ... ... 5 0 0
Ogil vie and Robinson .. .. ... 2 2 0
H. Guthrie ... ... ... 2 2 0
Hugh N. O. Phillimey ~ ... ... 2 2 0
Love and McKenzie ... ... ... 2 2,0
Smith, Gunn and Co. ... ... ... 2 0 0
James Simson ... ... ... 2 o o
John Webner ... ... ... 110
Geo. Wright ... ... ... 110
H. B. Cotton ... ... .... lio
J. McKinnis ... ... .. 110
Bright and Hitchcock ... ... 1 i o
A Friend ... ... ... 110


£ s. d.
Messrs. C. B. Dawson ... ... ... 1 l 0
W- A. Tolmft ... ... 110
John Noble * ... ... ... 1 1 0
J. Ilollswortb ... ... ... 110
J. Page .. ... ... 110
Sirs .Raymond ... ... ... 110
W. Burrows ... .. ... 1 l 0
C. J. Denny ... ... ... I 0 0
J, Noble ... * ... ... 10 0
L. C- Mcßrough ... ... ... 10 0
J. Oowie ... ... ... 10 0
J. Harwood ... ... ... 10 0
J. Atty ... ... ... 1 o O
Thos. Dowling ... ... ~. 10 0
H. Larmour ... ... 10 0
Geo. "Warner ... ... ... 10 0
Foster and Carr ... ... 1 0 0
John Hill ... ... ... 10 0
E. C. Dunn ... ... ... 1 0 0
V. W. Gibbon ... ... .. 10 0
G. A. Stephen ... ... ... 10 0
J. M. Anderson ... ... ... 10 0
M. Little ... ... ... 10 0
Franks and Jackson ... ... ... 10 0
W. McKellar ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 4 4 1
Pleasant Creek:
£ a. d,
Messrs. Houston ... ... 6 0 >o
Geo Maciedie ... ... ... 5 0 0
Davidson, Pond and Co. ... ... 3 0 0
Pyrenees Store ... ... ... 2 2 0
Neill, Bruce and Co, ... ... ... 110
J. Schlater ... ... ... 110
B. Smith ... ... ... 10 0
N. H. Thompson ... ... .. 100
E. Harvey ... ;.. ... 10 0
A. Campbell ... ... ... 10 0
E. Grant ... ... ... 10 0
Geo, Lament ... ... ... 10 0
Wm, Grant ... ... ... 10 0
Mantle and Moffat ... ... —lO 0
3luirandCo. ... ... ... 1 0 0
Sutherland and Louttit ... ... 10 0
From seventy-two Reefers, ... ... ... 10 10 6
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 29 8 0
Brighton :
£ 8. d.
Messrs. John Allee ... ... ~. 5 0 0
R. Keys ... ... 110
John Bignell ... .~ 1 1 0
W. Coates ... ... 10 0
Peter Hulstone ... ... ... 10 0
Wm- J. Millmore ... ... ... I o 0
Thomas Warner ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 10 0
, Wangaratta ;
£ s. d.
Messrs. Joseph Docker ... —2OO


£ a. d.
Messrs. John. Reid - - 1 o o
15. Chadford ... ... 10 0
F. J. Moore ... ... ... 10 0
C. A. Reid ... .~ ... I 0 0
W. S Kobioson ••• 1 0 o
W. Smith ... ... 10 0
Mis. Smith ... —lO 0
A. Tone ... ... 1 0 0
D. Reid ... ... 1 0 0
Henry Chadworth ... ... ... 6 10 0
Woodland :
£ s. d.
Messrs. Richard Blackwood ... ... ••• 2 2 0
C. N. Simson ... ... ... 2 2 0
George Kwbank ... ... 2 2 0
. J. McFad/ean .. ... ... 10 0
G. McFad ean ... ... ... 10 0
W. D. Gray ... ... - 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 3 15 0
Raglan :
£ s. d.
Messrs. Colin Campbell ... ... ... 110
William Wiiloby ... ... ... 3 10
M. Arason ... ... ... 110
Henry Fowler ... ... ... 1 i’o
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 5 £ 6
Ararat:
£ s. d.
Messrs. M. Kerr ... ... 110
J Howe ... ... ... 110
Nuthall and Banfield ... ... ... 110
Boucher and Co. ... ... 110
J. Chadwick ... ... .. 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... .... 20 3 0
Ballaaeat :
£ s. d.
Municipal Council ... ... ... 20 0 0
Messrs. J. Stewart ... ... ... 10 0
W.C. Smith ... ... ... 10 0
K. Smith . ... ... 1 0 0
R. Lewis ... . ... I 0 0
11. or. Hassell ... ... 10 0
William Shiiloch- ... ... ... 10 0
M. Campbell ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... * ... 3 5 0
Cbeswick :
* £ s. d.
Messrs. G. A. Amos ... ... 2 2 0
H. N. Taussen ... ... ... 10 0
William Spain ... ... ... 1 0 o
J. L. Collier ... ... .... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 0 16 0


Mount Blackwood :
£ s. d.
Mr. T. E. Edward ... ... 1 1 a
Sundry amounts ... ... ... I 10 o
Kiluobs:
£ s. d.
Messrs. W. Hamilton ... ... ... 10 0
J. Maxfield ... ... ... 1 0 o
A. M‘Crae ... ... ... 1 0 o
J. Ferrell ... ... . ... l 0 o
R. Othwaite ... ... ... 1 0 o
J. K Joiner ... ... ... 10 0
John Doyle ... ... ... 10 0
W. E. Ferguson ... ... ... 10 0
L. Hume ... ... ... 1 o o
W. Heffcrnan ... ... ... 10 0
31‘Pherson and M‘Donald ... ... 1 0 o
D. W. Nicholson ... ... 10 0
James Horne ... ••• ... 1 0 o
. John Griffin «. ... ... 10 0
ilathew Kelly ... ... ... 1 o o
James Cropley ... ... ... 10 0
Hector M‘Donald ... ... ... l 0 o
IjJßourke ... ... 10 0
J. Clarke ... ... ... l 0 0
W. Spurly .. ... .... 1 0 o
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 6 ll 0
Castlemaine :
£ s. d.
Messrs J. G. ... ... ... ... 5 6 0
Blyth Brothers ... ... ... 2 2 0
William Frcomes ... ... ... 2 2 0
Murray Christie ... ... ... 2 2 0
Matheson and Co. ... ... ... 2 2 0
W. Blgnell ... ... ... 110
N. Lockyer ... ... ... l I o
D. Duffy ... ... ... 110
Uphill and Burnett ... ... ... l 1 0
E. Casey ... ... ... 10 0
J. Watson ... ... ... 10 0
W. Ornshan ... ... ... 10 0
George Farrell ... ... ... I 0 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 12 5 6
Avoca : £ s. d.
Messrs. Meyer and Co. ... ... ... 2 2 0
Harrison and Co. ... ... ... 2 2 0
Mitchell and Barnett ... ... ... 2 2 0
Mrs. Millgate ... ... ... 1 0 o
Messrs. F. K. Orrae ... ... ... l o o
W. Templeton ... ... ... 10 0
L. A. Gilbcry ... ... ... 1 0 0
Mrs. Kanott ... ... ... 10 0
Rev. J. B. Garlick .. ... ... 10 0
Messrs. J. Holland ... ... ... 10 0
P. and E. Bostock ... ... ... l 0 0
C K. Pearson ... ... ... . I 0 0
TilbeyandCo. ... ... ... 10 0
N. Campbell ... ... ... 10 0
H. Truniticle ... ... ... 10 0
Sundry amounts ... ... ... 6 17 0


Sale:
£ s. d.
Messrs. J. G. Lightfoot ... ... ... l l 0
W. T. Davison ... 1 l 0
W. Montgomery ... ... ... 110
K. Thomson ... ... ... l 1 0
J. Buchanan ... ... ... 110
J. W. Jones ... ... ... 10 0
Caledonian Diggings :
£ s. d.
Messrs. C. M Carr ... i 0 0
A. Frazer ... .. ..100
W. H.Gatty Jones .. .. 10 0
W. Randall .. .. ... l 0 0
Sundry amounts .. .. .. 15 0
, Sandhurst:
£ s. d.
Admella .. ..100
Port Albert :
£ 8. d.
Mr. J. M. M'Kenzie .. 10 0
APPENDIX (D).
LIST OF RESCUERS;
THE SERVICES RENDERED BY EACH; THE HONORARY
REWARDS PRESENTED, AND THE SUMS AWARDED BY
THE MELBOURNE COMMITTEE, FROM THE FUND COL-
LECTED IN VICTORIA.
(1.) James Fawthrop, Master Mariner, and Harbour-
master, Portland. Commanded tire Portland life-boat,
and twice led the crew on to the rescue at the peril
of his life. The first attempt was frustrated by the
heavy breakers driving the boat from the wreck, with the
loss of eight oars and a broken rudder. The second was
made on Saturday morning, tire 13th August, 1859,
when he succeeded with his gallant crew in saving nine-
teen of the survivors clinging to the wreck.—Awarded a
O O
gold medal, and the sum of one hundred pounds.


(2.) B. Germain, coxswain “ Adrnella’s” life-boat, light-
house keeper, McDonnell Light, Cape Northumberland.
Commanded the “ Admella’s” life-boat, which had been
picked up on the beach considerably damaged ; and, after
repairing it, ventured to make for the wreck through a
mountainous surf on five occasions, when his bold attempts
to reach it were in vain, until at last he succeeded with
his gallant crew in throwing a line over the wreck on the
morning of the 13th August, taking the Captain and
three others of the shipwrecked people into his boat,
which was swamped in the breakers before it reached the
shore, when unfortunately one of the survivors, a passenger,
was drowned.—Awarded a gold medal, and the sum of
one hundred pounds.
(3.) Peter Greig, master, ‘ Lady Bird ” steamer,that
carried the men and boats to the successful rescue, and
which he commanded with skill and prudence on the
occasion. He also volunteered in the steamer’s life-boat,
with his crew, on the evening of Friday, the 12th August,
and endeavoured to reach the wreck, but was unsuccessful
in his attempts to throw a line over it, and then returned
to the vessel, where he cheered the sufferers through the
night by burning blue lights, and firing off rockets. Next
day, when the nineteen survivors were brought on board,
he showed them unremitting attention until they were
safely sent on shore at Portland.—Awarded a gold medal,
and the sum of one hundred pounds.
(4.) William Eosevear, coxswain of the Portland life-
boat. Steered the boat in both attempts with undaunted
bravery and cool judgment, at the peril of his life.—
Awarded a silver medal, and the sum of fifty pounds.
(5.) John Leach, seaman on board the “ Adraella,”
One of the survivors, who volunteered on the raft, which
carried him and his mate ashore through the boiling
surge, on Sunday afternoon, the 7th of August ; after
which they travelled all night along the coast and through
the brushwood until they reached the McDonnell Light, on
Gape Northumberland, about daylight, when they commu-
nicated the sad intelligence, which ultimately was the;


means of saving the lives of twenty-two of their fellow-
sufferers.—Awarded a silver medal, and the sum of fifty
pounds.
(6.) Eobert Knapman, seaman on board the “ Admella,”
who accompanied John Leach in the above-mentioned
perilous journey.—Awarded a silver medal, and the sum of
fifty pounds.
(7.) Demetrius Donnell, a fisherman of Port Eobe,
Guichen Bay; who, with his brother Peter, on receiving
the first intelligence of the wreck, and learning that there
were survivors , clinging to it, proceeded without delay in
boisterous weather at night in their whale-boat to the
scene of the disaster, although it was more than seventy
miles distant; but, on reaching'the locality, found that
their feeble attempts would be useless, so they proceeded
on to Cape Northumberland, meeting the “Lady Bird”
steamer on the way, and gave information to the Captain
as to the precise spot where the wreck lay.—Awarded -a
silver medal, and the sum of fifty pounds.
(8.) Peter Donnell, a fisherman of Port Eobe, Guichen
Bay, who accompanied his brother in the perilous enter-
prise described above.—Awarded a silver medal, and the
sum of fifty pounds.
(9.) John P. Johnstone, a volunteer from Portland, who
proceeded in the life-boat at the first attempt with rockets,
having lines attached thereto, for the purpose of commu-
nicating with the wreck, but they unfortunately failed to
reach it on being discharged, from the lines becoming
entangled and wet. In discharging the rockets he received
an injury in the left hand.—Awarded a silver medal, and
the sum of fifty pounds.
(10.) Thomas Tweedale, carpenter on board the “ Lady
Bird,” who volunteered to proceed in the Portland life-
boat as an oarsman. He was the first to leap on to the
wreck, and assist the survivors into the boat.—Award :
A silver medal, and the sum of twenty-five pounds. >
(11.) Abbot Carey, one of the Portland life-boat’s crew,
who rowed manfully in both the first and second attempts
when he .got cut in the thigh.


■ (12.) Charles Patterson, one of the same crew.
(13.) Phillip Francis, one of the same crew.
(14.) William Kirken, a fisherman, and one of the same
crew. Each of these four brave men awarded a silver
medal, and the sum of twenty-five pounds.
(15.) James Cambray, headsman of the Portland Wha-
ling Company’s boat, which assisted the life-boat in both
attempts to reach the week —Award : A silver medal,
and the sum of twenty-five pounds.
(16.) Henry Smith, a seaman employed on shore in the
neighbourhood of the wreck, who volunteered as an oars-
man in the damaged life-boat of the “Admella,” picked
up on the beach, and in which, along with his gallant
mates, rowed through a fearful surf five several times to-
wards the wreck, which they were the first to reach on
the day of the rescue, when they saved three of the suf-
ferers.
(17.) Charles Allmack, one of the same crew.
(18.) William Mahen, do.
(19.) Henry Wylie, do.
(20.) Thomas Anderson, do.
(21.) Willia ; Baker, • do.
These brave men were each awarded a silver medal,
and the sum of twenty-five pounds.
(22.) George Edwards, one of the “ Lady Bird’s ”
crew, who volunteered in the Portland life-boat on the
second and successful attempt, when he rowed manfully
through the breakers. —Award : A silver medal, and the
sum of twelve pounds ten shillings.
(23.) William Melrose, one of the same crew. —Same
award.
(24.) William Wright, one of the whale-boat’s crew,
who volunteered for the second and successful attempt as
an oarsman, when he did his duty bravely.
(25.) John Morgan, one of the same crew.
(26.) George Scoffal, do.
(27.) James Dumond, one of the Portland Harbour-
master’s crew, who rowed in the life-boat at the first
attempt.


(28.) Thomas Ward, one of the same crew, who got
injured in both hands.
(29.) Hugh McDonald, a fisherman, who volunteered
in the first attempt.
(30.) James Kean, a lighterman, and one of the same
erew.
(31.) William Guy, a lighterman, and one of the same
crew.
(32. John Oustney, a lighterman, and one of the same
crew.
(33.) William Booth, one of the “ Lady Bird’s” crew,
who volunteered in the first attempt.
The foregoing ten brave fellows were each awarded
, £5 O
a silver medal, and the sum of twelve pounds ten shil-
lings.
(34.) William King, one of the crew of the Portland
whale-boat, which accompanied the life-boat, and mate-
rially assisted in the rescue.—Award: A silver medal,
and twelve pounds ten shillings.
(35.) John Spiers, one of the same boat’s crew.—Same
award.
(36.) John Morgan, one of the same boat’s crew.—
Same award.
(37.) John McChesney, chief engineer of the “ Lady
Bird,” who volunteered in the steamer’s life-boat, which
made an unsuccessful attempt on the evening before the
rescue.—Awarded the sum of twenty pounds.
(88.) James Mclvor, a seaman on board the “ Lady
Bird,” who volunteered on the same occasion.—Awarded
the sum of twelve pounds ten shillings.
(39.) Henry Mclvor, cook’s boy, who offered to swim
to the wreck with a line, and shewed much disappoint-
ment when the captain of the steamer refused to let him
go in any of the boats.—Award: The sum of twenty
pounds.
(40.) William Lucas, first mate of the “ Lady Bird,”
recommended by the captain to the notice of the Com-
mittee for his zealous exertions on the occasion, awarded,
the sum of twenty pounds.


('41.) Peter Nelson, second mate, under same recom-
mendation, awarded the sum of ten pounds.
(42.) Amos Bowman, second engineer of the “ Lady
Bird,” awarded, on the same recommendation, the sura
of ten pounds.
In addition to the foregoing pecuniary rewards, the
Committee voted the sum of two hundred pounds, to be
forwarded to the Adelaide Fund, for distribution amongst
the masters and crews of the “Corio” and “Ant” steamers,
. one hundred pounds to each vessel.
It was also agreed that, in addition to the honorary
awards of gold and silver medals, as enumerated, the
Committee should send letters of thanks to the following
■ gentlemen and Government employees, who assisted on
the occasion ;
J. C. Lyon, Police Magistrate at Mount Gambier, who
zealously superintended the movements of the shore par-
ties on the beach.
David Power, Esq., who ably assisted the above-named
gentleman in his arduous duties.
John Livingstone, Esq., a settler in the neighbourhood
of Mount Gambier, who rendered valuable assistance by
furnishing horses, provisions, &c., to the shore parties,
gratuitously;
George Ormerod, Esq., of Robe Town, Guichen Bay,
who took an active part in sending the “Ant” steamer,
and assisting in equipping the crew for the attempt.
Mr. Storey, of Mount Gambier; Mr. Scarvill, of Mount
Schank ; and Messrs. Crouch, Mitchell, Davenport, and
Dr. Webb, of Portland, who rendered valuable assistance
on shore.
Mr. James, of Melbourne; and Messrs. Woods, Wilson,
and E. H. Derrihgton, of the Telegraph Department,
Mount Gambier, who remained at their posts with unre-
mitting attention day and night, during the anxious week.
Inspector Scott, of the Mounted Police, and troopers
Dann and Budd, who performed more than their duties
with alacrity.
To sum up the foregoing list of medals and moneys


awarded, the totals are as follow: —Three recipients of
gold, and thirty-three of silver medals, for which £’2oo
was voted. Three recipients of -£’loo each’ six of £?3O,
twelve of £,’25, three of £’2o, sixteen of £*l2 10s., two
of £lO, besides the two general awards of £IOO each—
making a total of £1,580 expended, in the shape of
EEWAEDS TO EESCUEES.
As the Author of this Narrative is desirous of making
mention of every individual who contributed in any
manner whatsoever to the consummation of the rescue of
the survivors, he will regret if any deserving person’s
name has been, omitted, even though they reached the
scene of the disaster when their services were not required.
Under this head it is proper to mention the names of the
boatmen who volunteered from the port of Melbourne and
proceeded in H. M. S. “ Niger ” to Portland, where she
reached after the event. The Captain of that vessel
received the thanks of the community, at the public
meeting held in the Chamber of Commerce. The names
of the volunteer boatmen are as follow : —J. Anderson, J.
Banner, W. Bowen, W. Chambers, A. Daniels, W. Gray,
and P. McCarthy, of Sandridge; and George Hill, of
Williamstown.
LIST OF AWAEDS FOE EELIEF.
Mrs. Hands and family, the wife and children of Captain
Harris, a master mariner, and passenger in the “Adrnella/’
who dived for provisions in the submerged cabin of the
wreck, when he succeeded in securing the small supply
obtainable, but succumbed afterwards, chiefly through his
exertions on that occasion.—Awarded the sum of two
hundred and fifty pounds, which has been placed at the
disposal of the Adelaide Committee.
Mrs. Jackson, the wife of a passenger who was lost
with a large sum of money in bank-notes on his person.
—Awarded the sum of one hundred pounds.
Mrs. Hermann, the wife of a passenger who was lost,
end in consequence has been left in a destitute condition.
•—Awarded the sum of one hundred pounds.


Miss Ledwith, the only female survivor.—Awarded the
sum of fifty poupds.
Hugh Mclnnes, a ship carpenter, and passenger on
board the ill-fated ship, who lost some money and all his
tools.—Awarded the sum of fifty pounds.
Henry Short, who lost his wife and four children,
besides a quantity of furniture. —Awarded the sum of fifty
pounds.
E. Underwood, a master mariner, and father of a lad
among the lost passengers, who was intrusted with his
nautical instruments. —Awarded the sum of twenty-five
pounds.
Charles Lock, a seaman, and survivor of the wreck.
—Awarded the sum of twenty pounds.
John McDermott, second cook, on board the “ Admella.”
—Awarded twenty pounds.
William A. Ramsay, a mechanic, who lost his wife and
a quantity of tools.—Awarded the sum of fifteen pounds.
Besides the above, fifty pounds was awarded to the
parents, or any relation, of the brave Soren Holm, who
lost his life in endeavouring to secure the ship's life-boat,
as particularly mentioned in the narrative.
In order that no one should be overlooked in the awards
for relief or reward, the Melbourne Committee keep their
lists open at the time of the publication of this work, and
consequently defer their statement of receipts and ex-
penditure. The total amount for relief as above stated
is J? 680, which, added to the Rewards (J? 1,580), gives
a grand total of £2, 260.
APPENDIX (E).
"LADY BIRD” INSURANCE FUND.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE.
Melbourne, November 1st, 1859.
As some degree of censure has been thrown upon
the merchants and other influential inhabitants of Mel-
bourne, for not taking earlier steps towards the dispatch.


of a steamer to the rescue of the unfortunate sufferers
clinging to the wreck of the “ Admella,” the under-
signed, who have acted on behalf of these parties and
for themselves in this matter, beg to submit the fol-
lowing statement of facts to the’ public, in vindication of
their promptitude of action, and their exertions in devising
means for that purpose, especially in guaranteeing the
extra insurance on the “ Lady Bird,” which carried the
main body of the rescuers to the successful accomplish-
ment of their mission. The following diary contains a
faithful account of the circumstances -which came under
their notice, and as they transpired :
“ Monday, Bth August.—About 5 p.m. intelligence
arrived in Melbourne of the wreck of the “ Admella,”
by telegraphic message from the Stationmaster at Mount
Gambier, giving some particulars of the catastrophe
which appeared in the morning journals. Shortly after-
wards, about 7 p.m., Messrs. McMeckan, Blackwood and
Co. received a telegram from Adelaide, stating that the
‘ Havilah,’ s.s., should be dispatched at once to the wreck.
“ Tuesday, 9th August.—Several messages were re-
ceived in the morning that the ‘Havilah’ could not he
sent at once, in consequence of her machinery being in,
pieces, for the purpose of overhauling and cleaning the
engine. It was also announced at the same time, how-
ever, that the steamer 1 Corio’ would be dispatched for the
scene of the wreck that day, taking with her the Adelaide
pilot-boat and an efficient crew-. This intelligence, in
the absence of any official information, at once lulled us
into security, and we concluded that everything had been
done to save the unfortunate sufferers, never dreaming
but that the ‘Corio,’ in taking the pilot-boat with her,
would have eveiy means and appliances put on board
to make a successful attempt at rescue. How r ever, in
this w’e were soon undeceived, and further telegraphic
messages of an urgent nature were received by us. At
10 p.m., while in the Exhibition Building, the following
telegram was handed to us: —‘For God’s sake, induce
Henty’s to send “ Lady Bird.” They (the survivors) w T ere


alive on board this morning/ After consulting together
■we arranged to guarantee the extra insurance and cost
necessary for the vessel to proceed to the wreck, which
was beyond the limits of her policy. We called first upon
Mr. James, at the telegraph office, that it might be kept
open all night for the transmission of messages, which he
readily complied with. By this time the ‘ Lady Bird J
was on her voyage to Portland via Warrnambool and
Belfast. About midnight Mr. Blackwood called upon
Mr. James Henty, one of the owners of the vessel, at
Richmond ; shewed him the telegraphic message, and
urged him to send instructions to the Captain to proceed
without delay to the scene of the disaster immediately
on her arrival at Warrnambool, where she would arrive
at daylight, so that if she proceeded at once, in all pro-
bability she would reach the wreck before dark that day.
Mr. Henty thought it would be judicious to consider over
the matter, and it was decided next morning to send on
the steamer from Belfast.
“Wednesday, 10th August.—At 9 a.m. we called upon
the Messrs. Henty, accompanied by Mr. Little, the agent
of the ‘ Admella/ whom we met on the way. We then
learnt from Mr. Herbert Henty, that the firm would
telegraph to Belfast, instructing Captain Greig to proceed
from thence to the westward of Cape Northumberland,
to the scene of the wreck, without calling at Portland to
land passengers or cargo.
“ After this we consulted together, and were unani-
mously of opinion that as it was a matter of public
import, it would be advisable to see the Chief Secretary,
and request him, on behalf of the Government, to insure
the guarantee we had given by making it a supplementary
charge on the expenditure. Mr. O’Shanassy told us that
he would not make any promise in the matter. He talked
much of living under a Constitutional Government, asked
us to make out a written case, which he would lay before
his colleagues, and at last—but not until the question
was most press!ugly and pointedly put to him—he wont
so far as to intimate that personally he would be favorable


tor the claira. We then left most disagreeably impressed,
both with the words- and demeanour of Mr. O’Shanassy,
and resolved rather to- collect the money required for
the purpose by publicly soliciting subscriptions, than to
trouble him again. Accordingly we called upon our fellow-
merchants and other citizens of Melbourne to subscribe
the amount guaranteed, which they readily and liberally
responded to. Before doing this we went to several
insurance offices to be certain that the risk would be
taken, which we had no difficulty iq negotiating.
“In our exertions to fulfil this self-imposed task we
have much pleasure in recording the generous co-operation
and sympathy manifested by the subscribers to the ‘Lady
Bird ’ Insurance Fund; and it will not be deemed
egotistical if we take this opportunity of stilting that we
feel highly satisfied that by our exertions on this occasion
we have been—along with the owners of the ‘ Lady
Bird’ and the noble baud of rescuers—the means, through
Divine instrumentality, of saving so many of our fellow-
creatures from a dreadful death.
“ We now beg to lay before the Subscribers the annexed
statement, showing the amount collected, and the various
disbursements made on account of the Fund. Amongst
the payments are a few items which do not strictly come
within the meaning of the object for which the money
was given, although connected strictly with the wreck of
the ‘ Admella •’ but as there was no other Fund for
such purposes at the time the debts were contracted, we
have paid all the amounts, trusting that the Subscribers
will sanction the same.
“WM. BAYLES.
“J. H. BLACKWOOD.”


Subscription List to defray Insurance, &c., & c .,
INCURRED ON DESPATCHING “LADY BIRD/’ S.S., TO
Eescub the Survivors seen on the Wreck of
THE “ AdMELLA,” S.S. ;
Grice, Sumner, & Co £lO 10 0
J. Blackwood 10 0 0
J. Badcock . . . . . . . 10 0 0
W. Bayles &Co 10 0 0
W. P. White & Co. . . . . . .55 0
Henriques Brothers . * . . . . .550
McMeckan, Blackwood &. Co. . . . .550
Thomas Norton 5 5.0
Brown & Stewart . . . . . .550
R. and P. Turnbull <k Co. - . . .550
William Degraves 5 5 0
W. M. Bell &Co 5 5 0
Miles <fc Co 5 5 0
Dalgety & Co. . . . . . . .550
Sichell &Co 5 5 0
Chas. Brown . . . . . . .550
Clove Brothers. . . . . . .550
Peninsular and Oriental Co. . . . .550
Gilles, Nicholson, &Co 5 5 0
R. Towns & Co. . . . . . .550
Gibbs, Ronald, & Co. . . . . .550
Goldsbrough & Co. . . . . . .550
Jno. Connell . . . . . . .550
Wilson & Mackinnon. . . . . .550
Flower, McDonald, & Co 5 5 0
Henry Miller . . . . . . .-550
Joshua Brothers . . . . . .550
Jas. McEwan & Co. . . . . . .550
Bright Brothers & Co. . . . . .550
Fanning, Nankivell, & Co. . . . .550
G. &T, Barker 5 5 0
Fulton &, Co.' ,550
De Pass Brothers &Co 5 5 0
W. Lawrence . . . . . . .550
S. Ramsden . . . . . . .550
W. J. T. Clarke 5 5 0
Raleigh, Dauglish, & Co. . . . .500


Lorimer, Maokay, &Co ' n 0
Dennistoun Brothers . • • , • ’ > k' a
W. Easey & Co. . *. ■ • • 0 5 ”
Geo. Ward Cole ' r a a
Wm. Crosby k Co.- ‘ q o a
Dove & Oswald . • . • • • „ _ .
E. Westby &Co o a
J.W. Cadell . . • • , • ■ • o o a
Jas. L. &C. Burke . • • ■ ■ 3 “ J
_ Drysdale, Esq. (Wilkinson Brothers) . . J U
H. A. Coffey . o a
Fallonstein <h McKechney o a
T. S. Martin . . • • • ■ • 6 "
Callender, Caldwell, & Co. ■ ■ ■ • “ “ ”
Katzonstcin it Co ' o a a
Alexander Walker . • • • • ' o o a
Kay k, Butch art ' o o a
C. L. Throckmorton o a
J. McNamara kCo I % «
Downie & Murphy ’ o o a
Smith, Merry, & Co. . . •' ’ ' o o a
Fraser & Cohen
Gustavo, Bockx, & Co. . • • • ' o o a
11. Burge & Co 2 A
E. llandysido
0. 11. Ebden o a
Kobortsori, Goodlet, & Co. . ■ • . -1 0
H. Langlands 9 a
Philip Dowling . . • ■ • ' “ I "
J. Cook • ' O A A
G. A. Mouritz . . . - • .2^o
Bargin Brothers . . . • • .220
Chas. Wedcl 3 L 0
,Tno. McDonnell . • • ■ • “
W. M. Tcnucut A Co, . . ■ • 3 2 ”
Lord k Go. . . ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 2 2 ‘
T3ios. Lewis , . . • * • ,
William Duthio . . • • *
Parbury, Lamb, & Co. . . ■ •
James Boulton . • ... • • .2*o
(1 Burrell . 2 " f ’
Fisher, Picards, it Co. . . • • 2 0


Dickson, Williams, is Co. . . .. .£220
Harcourt and Learmqnth . .. . .. .220
Rolfe & Bailey • . . , >. ■ . . 2 2 0
Symons k Perry . . .. . .. .220
Stewart & Garrick . . . . .220
John McKenzie . . . . .220
Miller Brothers . ... . ..220
David Moore . . . . . ..220
McPherson, Francis and Co. . . . .220
Burstail k Campbell . . ; . . .10 0
Hugh Taylor 110
Anderson & Marshall . . , . .110
Symons & Lewis . . . , . .110
James Hurst . . . . .. . .'llO
J. Paterson . . . . . . .110
A. Borthwick . . . . . . 1 .1 0
John Sprent, (Customs) 110
G. Collie ... . . . ,110
John McGregor 10 0
J. Whitelaw . . . . . . .110
M. Gerrand . . . . . . .10 0
J. W. Russell 110
J. Smith .110
W. Lamond . . . . . .110
A. Rose, (Tasmania) . . . . . .10 0
J. 11. White, junior .110
Capt. Knarston . . . . . .110
L. Joseph . . . . . . .110
Ward and Bargin . . . . . .110
J. Guthrie . . . . . . .110
Smith, Strachan and Co. . . . . .110
J. Lukey . .110
Thos. J. Laby . . . . . . .110
Samuel House and Co. . . . . .110
Robert McGeorge . . . . . .110
11. Smith . . , . . . .110
J. Hastie . * . . . . .110
Thos. Hamilton . . . . . .110
Kirchner, Sharp and Co. . . , . .110
Captain Dalgarno . . . , . .110;
Polits & Rose . . . . . . .110
W. H. Dodd .10 0


Pigott Brothers . . . . . .£llO
D. S. Campbell . . . . ; .110
Woolley, Nephew and Co. . .■ . ,110
D. S. Galbraith. . . . . . .110
Captain Saunders . . . . . .110
.£384 2 0


Insurance — Du.
£
s.
cl.
£
s.
d.
On. . £
3.
d.
£
d.
Hobart Town L. Co., extra, £3,500, u Lady)
Bird,” nt 15s.... ... ... ... ... j
20
5
0
l By amount of Subscriptions re- 1
! ceivcd j
384
2
0
Derwent Tamar, extra, £-4,500, “Lady Bird,” }
at 15s 1
33
15
0
“ allowance for James Henty)
& Co., for rope, &c.. still y 6
0
0
Victoria, £1,000, extra, ‘‘Lady Bird, ’ at 40s.
20
0
0
i on board
Canton, £500, on freight, pas mng, at 40s. ...
10
0
0
1 “ allow,uica to do. for blankets )
0
Victoria, £1,000, on goods, at 40s.
20
0
0
■ &c....
t w
0
Cornwall, £1,0'j0, on goods, at 40s.
Canton, £1,000, o:i goods, at 40s.
20
20
0
0
0
0
15
,
Victoria, extra for deviation on goods, £2,000,
at 25s. ... »
20
0
0
170
0
0
Henry Learmonth & Co.’s account
44
10
10
/
James Ilenty k Co.’s account for coal, ex. June...
15
15
0
H..J.K “Niger” do. do.
22
10
0
/
Cowtan k Bland’s do. do.
51
15
9
/
93
0
9
/
Dove & Oswald's account for sundries
13
0
1
Captain Groig’s account for victualling and sup-1
plying wines and spirits to the volunteers, >
23
3
1
'
and to the rescued ex “Admclla’,.. ...j
James Henty & Co.’s account for telegrams, boat (
hire, kc. } kc. ... ... ... ... ... )
8
10
0
Postages
1
3
4
Advertising
G
15
0
/
Printing Kepcrt, kc
6
6
0
; /
To Balance ... ...
32
0
5
! /
£
899
2
0
| By Balance...
... £32 03. 5d.
£
399
2
0
Examined and Found Correct— \V:.i. Wii. BAYLES.
Melbourne, 2nd November, IS39>
ACCOUNT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE.


