

OWNER'S
MAN UAL
for
Car and Utility Models
BUILT BY GENERAL MOTORS - HOLDENS LTD.
NATIONAL AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE COMPANY
(Division of General Motors-Holden's Ltd.)


PRECAUTIONARY INSTRUCTIONS
When using producer gas, there are certain precaution-
ary measures that must be borne in mind for the better
operation of the vehicle and the safety of the operator.
Don't pour petrol into the tank if the generator is
hot.
Don't park a producer-equipped vehicle in an en-
closed garage until the carbon monoxide gas
has been allowed to escape. Keep the garage
windows or doors open until the fire dies right
down.
Don't open the generator lid when close lo petrol
pumps.
Don't look into the generator immediately after lift-
ing the lid.
Don't allow the fuel —charcoal or water —to get
lower than prescribed.
Don't fail to remove charcoal dust from the seals
before closing doors.
Don't expect to do all hill-climbing on lop gear —
change down.
Don't expect the same performance from producer
gas as from petrol gas.


Foreword
This manual is designed to cell you how to
operate and care for your NASCO Gas Producer.
We would recommend you to study rather than
read these instructions because the operation of a
mobile gas producer calls for certain duties and
attention, not necessary when a vehicle is oper-
ating on petrol.
These duties are quite simple, and easily per-
formed, as you will realize after studying this
manual. They are, however very important and
the successful operation of your gas producer
almost entirely depends on the attention you give
to it. You know, of course, that you will not get
from producer gas the same power that you would
from petrol. This lowered power output is not
necessarily inconvenient except when rapid accel-
eration is required, or when travelling up a steep
incline with a heavy load. However, a lower gear
is always available for use on such occasions.
The position in regard to supplies of petrol,
however, demands the substitution of alternative
fuel, and the NASCO Gas Producer which you
have purchased, has been designed and built by
General Motors-Holden’s Limited to give you the
best possible performance within the limits that
producer gas imposes.
May we again remind you that the operator
is the most important factor in the successful
operation of a Gas Producer Unit.
NATIONAL AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE COMPANY
(Division of General Motors-Holden s Limited)
3RD EDITION. MARCH, 1942


INSTALLATION
It is presumed that, in the majority of cases, the purchaser of
a NASCO gas producer will have it fitted to his car at the
Dealers’ service station from which the unit is purchased. In such
cases the purchaser will take a test run to be entirely satisfied that
the unit has been properly installed and is operating satisfactorily.
At such time the purchaser will notice a small reduction in maxi-
mum speed and probably a slower but not necessarily sluggish
acceleration; otherwise the car should perform very much the
same as when operating on petrol.
To those purchasers who fit the unit themselves, we would
emphasise the necessity of first making sure that the engine of the
vehicle is in first class condition before installing the producer.
It is obvious that good results from producer gas cannot be
expected if the engine does not operate entirely satisfactorily on
petrol. Worn or dirty valves, rings, contact points, spark plugs,
etc., which may operate reasonably satisfactorily when using petrol
will certainly affect performance to a greater degree when oper-
ating on producer gas.
So give your Producer Gas Unit a fair start by first tuning up
the engine, and replacing parts as necessary, before fitting the
Producer.
Installation Instructions have been printed separately and are
included with each unit. These should be followed carefully.


The Working Principle of a Gas Producer
The principle of the Charcoal Gas Producer is the production
of a combustible carbon gas from charcoal burned in a furnace at
high temperature, about 1200°C.
In the decomposition chamber which lies in the middle part
of the furnace, the carbon gas generated is reduced to carbon
monoxide gas by combining oxygen derived from the air and
steam.
It will be seen from this how important it is to supply the
correct volume of water vapour to the fire zone, because it has
such an important bearing upon the volume of carbon monoxide
gas formation. This problem is very simply overcome with the
NASCO Unit, in that it is automatic due to the steam being drawn
in with the air.
The main source of motive power is the carbon monoxide gas
which is drawn into the cylinders of the engine, and which ex-
plodes when compressed and ignited by the spark plug, in exactly
the same way as with petrol vapour.
Hydrogen which is produced in the fire zone is also drawn
into the engine together with carbon dioxide and nitrogen and
also burns together with the carbon monoxide gas.
The mixture ratio of fuel and air in the case of carbon gas is
approximately 1 to 1, whereas in the use of gasolene fuel the
ratio is usually about 1 to 15.
NOTE
The NASCO Gas Producer Unit for Car and Utility models is
available in three sizes, i.e.:—
Model Cl, for fitment to Cars and Utilities up to 20 h.p.
Model C 2, for fitment to Cars and Utilities between 20 & 30 h.p.
Model C 3, for fitment to Cars and Utilities between 30 & 40 h.p.
and unless the correct model is fitted in accordance with the
above, the warranty becomes null and void.


Brief Description of Operation of the
NASCO Producer
The diagram (page 5) shows die operation of the NASCO
Gas Producer and the passage of gas from the generator to the
engine.
The air after entering the intake pipe is mixed with the steam
and this mixture of steam and air is then drawn into the fire
zone through the Tuyere. This steam and air after contact with
the highly heated charcoal, and combining with the charcoal car-
bon, produces the gas which, when cooled and thoroughly
cleaned, is fed to the engine and fired by the spark plugs in the
same manner as when the vehicle is operating on petrol vapour.
The gas leaving the fire zone is drawn through a grate into
the primary cleaning chamber. After passing first up and
then down a rectangular passage, the gas strikes a baffle plate
which causes the heavier particles of unburnt fuel to be pre-
cipitated to the bottom of the cleaner chamber. The gas is then
taken up and around the water tank —thus heating the water in
the tank and creating steam —and finally down a baffle at the side
of the generator and out through the off-take pipe.
It then travels along the transfer pipe and into the secondary
cleaner. The secondary cleaner comprises a shell in which is con-
tained a series of fabric bags which are kept separated by cor-
rugated metal sheets. The gas must pass through these fabric bags
before entering the security filter chamber which is located on
top of, and forms the cover of the secondary cleaner.
The security filter is placed here simply as a precautionary
measure against failure of the secondary cleaner. It comprises
three cylinders of f in. special composition felt measuring Ilf in.
long by 2|- in. inside diameter.
After passing through the Security Filter the gas is then
drawn along the gas line to the Mixer Valve. The NASCO Mixer
Valve (Type C 2) is of the venturi type, specially designed to mix
automatically the correct proportions of producer gas and air for
all speeds from full throttle to idle.


The "SPEEDWAY,” fitted as standard equipment on Type
Cl and Type C 3 units, can be described as a positive sealing
poppet Valve. By the operation of two poppet valves working in
tandem, the operator can, with the greatest ease, supply the
engine with: —
(a) full petrol mixture,
(b) full charcoal gas mixture, or
(c) a shandy-gaff of petrol and gas in any desired proportion of
mixture.
Typical Illustration only
REMINDER
It is recommended that operators always carry spare sealing
gaskets, clamps, etc. Specially packaged Service Kits are available
for this purpose and can be obtained from all NASCO Dis-
tributors and Dealers.


Diagrams
These drawings and the list of descriptions will assist you to
recognize the various components, and also explain the construc-
tion of the main units of the Producer. Reference to these
diagrams when reading the following instructions, will greatly
help you to identify the parts to which the instructions refer.
Typical Illustration only
GENERATOR:
1. Hopper
2. Filler Lid
3. Cleaning Door
4. Grate
5. Lighter Feed Tank
6. Lighting Wick
7. Lighting Door
8. Air-steam Passage to Tuyere
9. Air and Steam Transfer Pipe
10. Air Intake
11. Water Filler Neck
12. Baffle
13. Cleaning Door
14. Gas Offtake Baffle
15. Gas Offtake Pipe
16. Water Tank
17. Primary Cleaning Chamber
18. Tuyere
19. Lighter Feed Tap


SECONDARY CLEANER:
20. Cleaner Shell
21. Filter Bags
22. Corrugated Metal
Sheets
23. Security Filter and
Cover Assembly
24. Felt Cylinders
25. Chromium Hand
Nuts
26. Offtake Pipe
27. Dust Chamber
28. Cleaner Cap
29. Cleaner Element
No. of Cleaner Bags
Type C1 —3 bags
C2—4 bags
C3 —5 bags
Typical Illustration only


MIXER VALVE:
Typical illustration
only for Type C2.
For specific models
see fitting
instructions.
32. Producer Gas
Intake.
33. Air Intake.
34. Mixing
Chamber.
35. Change-Over
Valve.
36. Fuel Butterflies
(in tandem).
37. Outlet to Intake
Manifold.
On the next page is shown an illustration of an instrument
panel, which obviously differs in detail from the numerous
designs of various makes and models of cars and utilities.
The number of controls for operating the NASCO Gas
Producer however is the same for every installation and
will differ only in location.


Driving Instructions, Type C 2
(for Types Cl and C 3 see Page 11)
DRIVING CONTROLS
39. Petrol Control
40. Ignition Switch
41. Gas and Petrol Hand Throttle
42. Change-Over Control
43. Petrol Choke and/or Gas Air Valve
Starting from Cold (see also diagram on page 6).
(1) Turn on petrol by pulling out the knob marked "P”.
(2) Pull out change-over Valve (42).
(3) Switch on ignition key (40).
(4) Press starter button to start motor.
(5) With car operating on petrol set the hand throttle (41) to
fast idle.
(6) Open Generator Lighting Door (7). Turn on tap (19)
on lighter feed tank until wick (6) is flooded with a
50% kerosene-petrol mixture, then turn off tap. Ignite wick.
(7) With engine kept idling fairly fast, by using the acceler-
ator pedal, push change-over valve control in slightly only.
This creates a draught through the Producer system to
draw the flame from the lighting wick through the
charcoal.
(8) Should the engine show signs of stalling, it indicates that
the change-over valve has been opened too wide. To relieve
this condition, the valve should be eased back slightly.


(9) Inspect the fire through the lighting door and when the fire
has built up satisfactorily, close the lighting door. The car
can then be driven away on petrol.
(10) The change over to gas can now be made as follows. Note.
—It is recommended that the change be made while run-
ning in one of the low gears so that the engine revolutions
will be high.
(a) Gradually push in change-over valve control to full
"in” position.
(b) When engine is pulling well, indicating a good supply
of gas, switch off petrol, by pushing in control knob
(P). The engine will still run on petrol until the car-
burettor bowl is emptied.
(c) When the carburettor bowl is emptied the engine
speed will drop due to too much air being drawn into
the Mixer valve. To correct this, gradually pull out the
choke button (43).
(d) Adjust the choke to the position which gives the best
performance. This can be determined by the operator.
The car is now operating entirely on producer gas.
(11) The idling on gas differs slightly from petrol, and, when
a stop is made the hand throttle should be adjusted.
Restarting: Providing the car has been stationary for only a
short period the engine can be restarted on Producer Gas. In this
case the normal starting procedure is followed.
Stops of longer duration can usually be made without re-
lighting the fire by means of the asbestos wick. However, it is
advisable to start the engine on petrol carrying out the method
described under "Driving Instructions,’’ Item No. 7, and then
inspect the fire through the lighter door. Even the smallest glow
will indicate that it is not necessary to re-light the fire. The
draught caused by starting the engine will quickly build up the
fire.
Note. —It is wise to turn on petrol just prior to a long stop so that
the carburettor bowl will be filled ready for an instant start on petrol.
This saves possible drain on the battery when re-starting.


Driving Instructions for Masco Gas Producer
fitted with Speedway Mixer Valve
(*Types C1 and C3 see illustration overleaf)
Two additional controls are fitted to the Instrument Panel.
1. Heavy duty chrome plated change-over valve control (Out on petrol,
In on gas).
2. Black bakelite air control (In, lean mixture; Out, rich mixture).
Starting from Cold—
1. Turn on petrol by pulling out change-over valve (chrome knob).
2. Close air valve by pulling out air control (black knob).
3. Start engine on petrol as is normally done.
4. Set engine to run at fast idle by adjusting the hand throttle.
5. Open generator lighting door. Turn on lighter feed tap until the
lighting wick is flooded with lighting fluid. Turn off tap, ignite wick.
6. The natural draft through a by-pass hole in the gas change-over valve
in the mixer valve will draw the flame from the wick into contact
with the charcoal and ignite it.
7. When the charcoal is alight, drive off on petrol.
8. When the car attains reasonable speed, slowly push in the change-
over valve (chrome knob). It will be necessary to adjust the air valve
control (black knob) in conjunction with the change-over valve to
keep the engine running.
9. Until the fire builds up it may also be necessary to move the change-
over valve in and out intermittently to keep the engine running.
10. When the car has been running for several hundred yards with the
change-over valve almost full in, close it right off, immediately
adjusting the air control (black knob) to the position which gives
the best performance.
The engine is now running on producer gas.
11. A mixture of producer gas and petrol may be obtained as required.
This can be effected by pulling out the change-over valve to give the
proportion of mixture required.
For re-starting instructions refer to the section under the heading on
Page 10.
*Type Cl—Cars and Utilities up to 20 H.P.
C3 —Cars between 30 and 40 H.P.


Typical Illustration of a
Speedway Mixer Valve
fitted as standard equipment on NASCO Gas Producer
Type Cl —Cars and Utilities up to 20 H.P.
C3 —Cars between 30 and 40 H.P.


Maintenance Instructions
Under this heading we have described all those actions neces-
sary to maintain the NASCO Producer in its best condition. This
includes the attention while travelling and the cleaning oper-
ations which must be done at the stipulated mileages. It is to the
owner’s advantage to follow these instructions religiously. By so
doing he will continue to get the best performance from the Pro-
ducer. Failure to comply renders the Warranty accompanying the
Unit null and void.
GENERATOR (see diagram on page 6)
The hopper should be kept well filled with good charcoal
(refer to Section later in this book for a definition of what is
meant by good charcoal).
Amount of Fuel: On no account should the amount of char-
coal be allowed to become lower than one-third of the capacity of
the generator, or the fire will burn through, resulting in a weak
gas supply, combined with excessive heat.
Refilling: The generator can be topped up at any time. It should
be remembered that when travelling with heavy loads or over
hilly country an increase in the consumption of charcoal will
occur, and refilling will be needed more frequently.
Flare Up: When refilling the generator with charcoal the fol-
lowing instructions should be very carefully observed. If the gen-
erator is warm, stand clear immediately after opening the lid.
When the lid (2) is lifted a burst of flame will appear. This is
caused by the gas above the charcoal mixing with the air when
lid is lifted, and being lit by the fire below causing a ' flare up.’’ If
this does not occur immediately, a lighted match should be
thrown into the generator to cause the "flare up, which will occur
only once after opening the lid. No sparks are thrown from the
"flare up’’ so there is no danger of setting anything alight; how-
ever, the danger lies with the person who looks into the generator
before the "flare up" occurs.


Clinker: Clinker is actually molten sand and dirt which solidifies
and adheres to the mouth of the tuyere. The amount of clinker
formation therefore depends on the cleanliness or rather the
dirtiness of the charcoal.
The accompanying photograph shows the amount of clinker
which formed on the orifice of a tuyere after only 250 miles of
travel, obviously using dirty charcoal. This naturally affected the
performance of the unit by blocking up the tuyere inlet, almost
entirely preventing the production of gas.
Therefore, it is wise before refilling the generator to poke the
charcoal away carefully from the tuyere and poke away any
clinker formation which may be there.
Inserting Charcoal: After pouring the contents of the charcoal
bag into the generator make sure that no portion of the bag has
caught fire. It is possible for the fine fibre at the mouth of the bag
to become ignited and smoulder for some time. If the bag is
tossed among other bags or inflammable material there is a dis-
tinct risk of fire.
Closing Generator Lid: Considerable stress is placed on the
importance of properly closing the lid. The lid is so designed to
make a perfect air-tight seal, so carefully brush or wipe away all
particles of charcoal dust from the packing and before closing the
lid care should be taken to ensure that the lid is centralised on
the sealing ring; then the locking lever is pressed right down.


A leak through the generator lid will cause the fire to spread
and ignite on top of the charcoal with resultant waste, loss of
power, and excessive generator temperature.
Check the asbestos packing ring frequently and if necessary
replace with a new ring. It is always advisable to carry spare
gaskets.
Water Tank: Keep the water tank filled to within two or three
inches of the top of the tank. This allows for expansion and
steam. Use clean water and keep in mind that it is important to
keep the water level well up to almost full.
Cleaning: The amount of cleaning required is dependent on the
type of charcoal used; however, it is x good habit to clean out the
generator at regular weekly intervals, although it may only be
necessary about every 500 miles.
This operation of course should be done when the generator
is cold.
Open the door (3) located below the fire bed and scrape out
the contents of the generator. This should be thrown away or
sifted to remove all the ash and clinker. The good charcoal may
be put back into the generator. The ash door must be closed
securely, making a perfect air-tight seal. Inspect the asbestos gas-
ket and replace if damaged.
Keep gaskets pliable by coating regularly with Graphite.
SERVICING THE CLEANERS
The following cleaner servicing of the NASCO Producer
should be carried out at the mileages shown hereunder. Failure
to do this will mean a falling off in power and also render the
Warranty null and void.
Primary Cleaner; Clean every 500 miles.
Secondary Cleaner: Clean every 500 miles and replace the
fabric bags every 7500 miles, or sooner if necessary.
Security Filter: Inspect every 500 miles, clean and replace
when necessary.


Note. —These mileages represent the maximum period allowed
between cleaner servicing and are based on the assumption that
good quality charcoal is used. The use of dirty or wet charcoal
will of course make it necessary to perform these cleaning oper-
ations more frequently.
Primary Cleaner: Open the door (13) and scrape out the par-
ticles of charcoal dust that accumulate here. Before closing the
door inspect gasket and replace if damaged. This door when
closed must make a perfect air-tight seal.
Secondary Cleaner: This cleaner will operate up to 500 miles
without attention.
The cleaning service of this cleaner is effected by unscrewing
the hand nuts (25) and removing the security filter and cover
assembly (23). The cleaner element (29) is then removed and
the filter bags (21) cleaned with the brush provided. This oper-
ation can be performed better by using an air line, blowing the
air down into the bags; however, the brush method is quite
satisfactory.
Before replacing the cleaner element, remove the cleaner cap
(28) from the base of the dust chamber (27) and brush out the
accumulated dust. If water is used to wash out the cleaner case,
make certain that it is perfectly dry before replacing the element
assembly.
Inspect the cloth bags carefully for damage or tears. The
average life of this material is approximately 7500 miles under
normal conditions of operation and handling. When in doubt,
replace bags. After replacing the cleaner element in the case,
replace the security filter and cover assembly carefully. Make
sure that the cleaner element is centralized and the lid tightened
down evenly to safeguard against air leaks.
Security Filter: When the security filter and cover assembly is
removed to clean the secondary cleaner (every 500 miles), the
felt cylinders should be inspected and cleaned or replaced as
necessary. The best way to clean these cylinders is to blow com-
pressed air through them in the reverse direction to the normal
flow of gas.


GENERAL
Engine Lubrication: With the vehicle operating on producer
gas, the engine is running at a slightly lower temperature. More-
over, the gas is much drier but, as the vehicle has a greater load
to carry, the normal S.A.E. engine oil should be used. If special
oils as marketed by reputable oil companies are obtainable, they
should be used as tests have proved these to be eminently
satisfactory.
The change of oil in the crankcase should be made regularly
at not more than 1000 miles. However, should there be any indica-
tion of foreign matter in the crankcase it should be drained more
often. When the oil is changed, the sump should be effectively
flushed.
Ignition Timing: Ignition timing should be advanced for pro-
ducer gas operation, usually about 20°; however it is wise to seek
the advice of your Dealer before altering this setting.
Spark Plugs: Spark plug setting does not have any appreciable
effect on power output —petrol as against producer gas —and
therefore at this juncture no change from standard setting is
recommended.
It is important, however, to inspect and clean the plugs regu-
larly, replacing worn or broken plugs immediately. Remember
the economical life of any spark plug is 10,000 miles. AC Spark
Plugs are recommended when making replacements.
Don'ts
When using producer gas, there are certain precautionary
measures that must be borne in mind for the better operation of
the vehicle and the safety of the operator.
Don’t use wet charcoal.
Don’t pour petrol into the tank if the generator is hot.
Don’t park a producer equipped vehicle in an enclosed garage
until the carbon monoxide gas has been allowed to escape.
Keep the garage windows or doors open until the fire dies
right down.
Don’t open the generator lid when close to petrol pumps.


Don! continue to drive when a noticeable falling off in power
is evident.
Don’t look into the generator immediately after lifting the lid.
Wait until the gas remaining in the generator mixes with the
incoming air which results in rapid combustion or flare-up.
To accelerate this, throw in a lighted match.
Don’t allow the fuel —charcoal and water —to get lower than
prescribed.
Don’t use \\ in. grade charcoal when operating on short runs —
use 4 in. grade for this purpose.
Don’t use 4 in. grade charcoal when operating on long runs —use
T|- in. grade for this purpose.
Don’t use too heavy an oil in the crankcase.
Don’t fail to remove charcoal dust from the seals before closing
doors.
Don't expect to do all hill-climbing on top gear —change down.
Don’t expect the same performance from producer gas as from
petrol gas.
Don’t have any easily ignited material in the vicinity of the
hopper when the lid is lifted.
Don’t allow heated charcoal to fall on to bitumen road surfaces
or to lie in the vicinity of dry grass, when cleaning the hop-
per. In brief, see that no coals drop out that might cause a
fire. Clean the hopper in safe positions, and only when cold.
Even then, care should be taken to see there is not an odd
piece of hot charcoal which may be fanned into flame.
Don’t take a gas producer unit into situations where hazardous
materials are stored, or hazardous processes are carried out,
as there is always the danger of explosion and fire.
Don’t load material against the hopper even if the hopper is not
open.
Don’t neglect to check the rear view mirror to make sure that the
gas producer does not obscure the rear view.


Facts Relating to Charcoal
The successful operation of a gas producer depends to a very
large extent on the use of good charcoal.
%
Good charcoal can be recognized by the following points: —
It should be hard, well burnt, clean and dry. It should show the
original texture of the wood, be firm to the touch and not easily
crushed. When broken it should not splinter or crumble but pre-
sent a clean fracture, and have a metallic sound. It should be free
from loose ash, grit, dirt, earth and sirftilar matter.
Size: Best performance is obtained when the size of the charcoal
is mixed within the limits of 4 in. to l\ in. Charcoal smaller than
-4 in. is not economical and also causes unnecessary restriction to
gas flow through the fire. Charcoal larger than 1-| inches does not
pack close enough and thus allows the air to pass through the fire
without obtaining sufficient contact to form good quality gas.
The wise operator will therefore watch this and if necessary
grade the charcoal himself, using the smaller grade (down to
4 in.) when operating on short runs, and the larger grade (up to
I-! in.) when operating on long runs.
Handling and Storing: Care should be taken when handling
charcoal, particularly while in the bag, because of its tendency to
disintegrate rapidly when subjected to even slightly rough treat-
ment. So always handle charcoal carefully to prevent it from chip-
ping and forming small particles.
Too much stress cannot be placed on the importance of keep-
ing it DRY. Unfortunately it absorbs moisture very readily and
therefore it should be stored only in a dry place.


Diagnosis in Emergencies
Fire Will Not Light: When difficulty is experienced with the
lighting of the fire, it is necessary to check the following: —
1. Clinker formation at nose of the tuyere (see page 14).
2. Cleanliness of cleaners, both primary and secondary (page 16)
3. Cleanliness of gas delivery pipes.
4. Height of charcoal in generator (page 13).
5. Wet charcoal (page 19).
6. Air leaks (pages 14, 16).
Overheating of Generator: This would indicate that there is
insufficient charcoal in the generator or that an air leak exists,
causing the fire to spread.
Loss of Power: Two of the most likely causes of power fading
are (1) dirty cleaners, or (2) an air leak somewhere in the
system.
Complete Stoppage: The most likely cause of complete stop-
page is the blockage of the Security Filter, in which case it will
be necessary to check for failure of the Secondary Cleaner.
Fire Lights, but Only Very Weak: This could be caused by any
of the conditions enumerated under the heading of Fire Will
Not Light.”
Popping in Generator : If air leaks through the generator lid
this may cause the top layer of charcoal to ignite, and in some
cases, small explosions will occur causing blow back of charcoal
through the lighting door.
Availability of Replacement Parts
National Automotive Service Company recognises its obliga-
tion to you in respect of replacement parts. This applies to all
parts, not only the larger parts such as the Generator and
Cleaners, but also to all the small parts, namely, packing rings,
gaskets, pipes, attaching parts, doors, etc.
When through normal wear or because of accidents you
require new parts, they should be obtained from an Authorised
NASCO Distributor or Dealer.
Such parts are of the exact quality and dimensions as the
original parts of your Producer, and the use of other than these
renders the Warranty null and void.


warranty
“Fine materials, scientific research and design and painstaking
workmanship go into every product distributed by National Auto-
motive Service Company, Division of General Motor s-Holden’s
Limited, to ensure the maximum satisfaction in the users hands.
Conscious of this inherent quality in our products, and confident of
the service that they render, and as tangible evidence thereof, we
subscribe to this warranty which accompanies the NASCO
Producer
This Warranty is valid for 90 days from the date of delivery of
the Producer to the owner, or for the first 4000 miles of Car oper-
ation, whichever termination is first reached.
Should any defect in material or workmanship develop in any
part within the period of this Warranty, the said part will be
repaired or replaced without cost to you for labour or material at
our nearest authorised Dealer s establishment.
The NASCO Gas Producer Unit for Car and Utility models is
available in three sizes, i.e.: —
Model Cl, for fitment to Cars and Utilities up to 20 h.p.
Model C 2, for fitment to Cars and Utilities between 20 and 30 h.p.
Model C 3, for fitment to Cars and Utilities between 30 and 40 h.p.
and unless the correct model is fitted in accordance with the
above, and unless the size of the tuyere conforms with the speci-
fications stipulated in the fitting instructions, the warranty be-
comes null and void.
For the stipulated Warranty to apply the unit must be fitted in
accordance with the fitting instructions made by National Auto-
motive Service Company, Division of General Motors-Holden’s
Limited, and the following service work must be performed at the
mileages indicated, viz.: —
PRIMARY CLEANER: To be cleaned every 500 miles.
SECONDARY CLEANER: To be cleaned every 500 miles, and
each fabric bag to be completely replaced every 7500 miles.
SECURITY FILTER: To be inspected every 500 miles. Clean
or replace when necessary.
Should the original design or construction be in any way varied
or altered, or should the foregoing cleanings not be rigidly adhered
to, or should the unit be operated contrary to instructions in this
Manual, the Warranty becomes null and void.
■ It is understood that this Warranty is null and void on any
Producer where parts not made or sold by NASCO are used in any
replacement or otherwise.


Authorised Distributors
QUEENSLAND
E. G. Eager & Son Limited, Breakfast Creek Road, Ncwstcad, Brisbane
Motor Supplies (Pty.) Ltd., Perry Street, Brisbane
NEW SOUTH WALES
Bennett & Barkell Limited, Meagher and Chippen Streets, Sydney
Bennett & Wood Limited, Pitt and Bathurst Streets, Sydney
Boyded Pty. Limited, 109-119 Phillip Street, Sydney
W. T. Coggins Pty. Limited, 117 Parramatta Road, Camperdown
Gibson, Battle & Co. Pty. Ltd., Cr. Liverpool and Crown Streets, Sydney
Holden’s Motor Body Builders, 182 William Street, Sydney
Larke, Neavc & Carter Pty. Ltd., 177-185 William Street, Sydney
W. H. Lober & Co. Limited, 80-92 McElhone Street, Woolloomooloo
McLeod, Kelso & Lee Pty, Ltd., 23-33 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
Motor Traders (Victoria) Limited, Albury
Reo Motors Pty. Ltd., 171-175 William Street, Sydney
Stack & Co. Pty, Limited, Crowle House, 105 York Street, Sydney
Wcstcott, Hazell & Co. Limited, 225-227 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Young & Green Limited, 673-675 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
VICTORIA
Brooklands Accessories Limited, 68-78 Sturt Street, South Melbourne
S. A. Cheney Pty. Limited, 22 Flinders Street, Melbourne
Holden's Motor Body Builders, Cr. Fcrrars and Munro Sts., South Melb.
E. A. Machin & Co. Pty. Limited, 535 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Preston Motors Pty. Limited, Cr. Russell and Lt. Collins Sts., Melbourne
Queen’s Bridge Motors Pty. Ltd., Queen’s Bridge Street, South Melbourne
Rhodes Motor Company Pty. Limited, 401 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Southern Motors Pty. Limited, 131-137 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
Stuart & Harrison Pty. Limited, Deakin Avenue, Mildura
Winter & Taylor Pty, Limited, Malop Street, Geelong
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Battery & Electrical Service Company, 208-210 Pulteney Street, Adelaide
Freeman Motors Limited, Grenfell Street, Adelaide
Messrs, Duncan & Co., 107-109 Pirie Street, Adelaide
Motor Parts & Service Limited, 161 Pirie Street, Adelaide
Motor Traders (S.A.) Limited, 83-89 Flinders Street, Adelaide
United Motors Limited, 252 Pirie Street, Adelaide
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Atkins (W.A.) Limited, 894 Hay Street, Perth
Attwood Motors (1934) Limited, 22-32 Stirling Street, Perth
J. A. Dimmitt Limited, 379 Murray Street, Perth
Sydney Atkinson Motors Limited, Temple Court, Perth
TASMANIA
Motors Pty. Limited, 165-171 Brisbane Street, Launceston
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Limited, 115 Macquarie Street, Hobart
e. w. cricn a sons pty. ltd.
