

NATAL
Verse
by E.C




'f c/ i^
' “‘ J .^1
Natal Verse
/tT\
Us.<a.C.)
&u ptetl
*9tt. A




CONTENTS
At C lte Old Curt an.
orm
Sonnet To IPr\nc^,e.
TTieMain Irloacl.
Solitude.
Tte Amtvtious Spruit.
Car tan
Tt e et atle -Sarnnir:
July' at Spencer j^arm,
Ton'icj-tt.
Sunrise, Vattey oj aTtousand Hills
6tee r s ?^^Nkfis^ e rs-
T/te
jSeyoncl tfie"Vetl.




AT The OLD FORT DURBAN.
C 'W7 , , .
W licet a krave tale tills sunken trenck could tell!
It lets its secret, and it keeps it well.
tkis jmr garden; deep die scars dioct kide
eneadi its Hoorn. Once lieroes jbugkt and died
On tils same sod, now, krlgkt with jragrant plot.
JOrave lives were forfeit to redeem dus spot
"Nlgli elgkty years ago. /\nd still itfc story
A radiant gem in 6 nglandk crown of glory.
iHr'ynoiyin krlgkt profusion creepers cling;
f rom tkeir Wllllant skewers of klossom |Ung
swooning, perfume on tke laden kreexe,
t-ssayinq to steak tkeir meaning; and ky tkese


Send ap the only mead of praise they know.
The hard worked bees toil on: hut as they go
'j’rcm Uoom to bloom, soft eulogies they ham.
The birds with Jail- voiced panegyrics come.
The sconshala pipe their pcean beneath the hough.
gentle breeres o'er' the stillness sough.
Vome join in homage with the bihds.and jlowers,
To those Wave men who kept Jair HWban oars.
Hcep green the memories that knit
The Cmpire. I'N.ecp alive the torch they lit
Of love and loyalty to the firttish throne—
Oise how can we thetr'stxcrifice atone?
13« neath th’ ouphobia,hard hy thev rest.
The men who gave their all for this begaest:
Peace. "Now eight decades fair Peace has shed
Her calm on our fair town, for this they tded,
Hers hungered, thirsted, Joaght, and still hung on
'To this then arid acre in the sun.
Here, while heir number dwindled, food grew spare.
Out numbered, sore distressed, and in despair
They cl sent for hdp. I3ick King hod now keen gone
y utl many a day-—■ and still they, starved, held on
and fewer grew 'Smiths little hard,
StiUTMo surrender* was his staunch command.


Th’encroocKing trenches neared, on every, side,
J'rom wounds and dire disease the leaguer cd died.
Had it to come - surrender and defeat ?
e weary sentry trudged his lonely heat
Ccpon a star-besjangled dark June night,
\& 7 hen suddenly a streak of brilliant light
Hent the black sky, and up and up it sped
J\b ove the Back-beach bush, to burst o’er head.
'Staggered, and half afraid to trust his eyes,
The sentry flatted, yaztntj- at die skies,
% en shouted, as another burst in showers
2\ohijo ( boys, Jiring rockets! and its ours! ”
Then what glad joy, and answering- signals sped.
But calm beneath th’ Ouphobla slept the dead
Their a reat release had come.to them, before
(donch and the Southampton reached the shore
0 Stranger! come in reverence to ttie shrine.
Dior tear the clusters Jrom the flowering vine.
come too loudly with your boisterous laugh
To do the sights* and take a photograph.
J3v these the vision and it's spell you loose.
Tts "only he who knows takes off his shoes.


THE STORM.
day tbe sun upon the parched, veldt beat,
*Tbe heavy air buna ouiverino in the beat.
swift the wind has changed, see|rom
*Cireat tanks cf clouds are riatno- up abreast.
C Ke -Drakensberg against die darkening* shade,
JD lends with the background till its outline© fade.
lightning*, flashing; splits the seedling sky
The pealing- thunder-clap g*oes booming* by
leave the echoes bufjetlng* die-kills
TUI some far mountain their presumption stills.
i*\nd nearer no** tine blackening storm-clouds loom,
wlgbty galleons thro tbe tjioom,
'OJitk yard-arms wideband wildly flapping sail,
t M veadlon^ p tiny sweep tbe sky before the
Then rudderless they swirl, and clash, i burst,
i'-nd burl their contents to tbe veldts thirst.
Tsie trickling strmm, and gently flowing- drift,
Owell into rapine- torrents, cruet and swift,
Driving before them all that bars tbe way:


Oer-J lowing banks, and flooding deep the vlet.
Wow crashing thunder-bolt? have ceased,
Me lowers his cennons black Into the- Oast;
Thro’ their dense folds he rumbles as they
i\-njl thenar off hortxon sink below;
I®KINGie. a hundredyears
have passed away
peerlessly 'South p\frica you
j Wm has she changed sc, sivcp yemr cadence
Oftll worth the lute: the lutanists decay.
JNJpr has one risen yet to win a way
bays, which highest on temple hang:
J~or,at your coming, frem the bush~velat sprang
'South Rfrics fairest Whuse ■ — still yours today.
]Vow let the humblest singer of the \lddt
01od homage pay to a oreat Men.crv,
i\nd join the praise which dioir more sings.
Jsut neer a more appreciative knelt „
before a shrine on a centenary
Than th’ one who this unworthy tribute brinos.
w


The Main Road
Th c lßoad,the lRocul
The pJLrmrWo*,
It whispered them Vte challenge
' fm-it knew their hearts were stoat.
Its spell had catujrht and gripped them.
Its subtle force they felt,
wkrn but a rouoh track marked it out
J\c ross die virgin veldt.
dramas here were acted!
mat scenes of vivid. life I
brave romance and tragedy
Its birth and growth are rife.
Ns7hat high pe& it has cradled.
What secrets dead it knows
Of tke treks of die first lone white men
Who from die sea. arose.
visions it hots dazzled,
VKk promises it shone;


This is tine lure of the Ivlain fdoad.
That draws the seeker on;
it winds along* the valley.
It curves high on the hill,
2\,nd oct every bend, it beckons
i\nd the seeker follows still.
The same that s\hodes set out by
To wondroudy achieve,
i.t loves die souls courageous
Who in thflr strength believe.
It loves the dauntless spirits,
It loves the hearts with pluck,
.fVnd it urges them to victory.
JFVnd gives them its priceless luck.
These are men it waits for
Bearing them on their way,
But it puts its brand, on the failures,
J\vd they tramp it, in vain, for aye:
them it has no ending,
j'br them no vision's shoum.
But there it winds and stretches—
Otill beckoning its own.


SOLITUDE.
Oh lightly tread! you who would Jind the zone-,
V^ 7 hich Peace and >solitude account their own*.
VXThcre Stic nee holds mute undisputed sway,
Kxr in the towering bush, mid krantxes grey
Sy crumbling* chasms filled with stillness deep
Corfic gently lest a wayward boulder leap
'‘Thundering* its reckless and abandoned, way
J\down steep klocjs, where nerve-racked Ochocs
To join, with shrieks, die mad and hurtling
Oh softly step! lest they the calm displace.
seek no pageants but hushed "[Matures own,
Th rough Jorest shades and caverns vast and tone;
NVhere Bounds come deadened on the soothing* wind
left the madding* crowd lost Jar behind,
\)Clth all itsjret and pomp, its mirth, its strife,
\)onch wise men shun who com— & fools call life!
Oh, lonely tread! who Jind this realm of Peace,
iumult rise, and restful >3ilence cease/-.
Where Jittered bueh4ight hesitates and peers,
As though to penetrate the gloom it fears.
/•Down through dense boughs subdued die s^pbe^trn


To hurst tfie hidden strcptocctrpus huds,
6u pjde stems sway slowly to riie song*
Oojt Zef ujrus is whispering- along-
Tiie proves of great gnarled hnoh-thorns proud. Mar
He roh riiem of one vagrant leaf in mood
CCnruly; hut witli faint and yearning* sigh
He moans a lingering word—then passes hy,
though lie fain would loiter if lie dare,
i3ut knew \was deatli to itarry on riie air
iAnd so aweary jrom rile \Ckst he shrinks,
wntil at leng-rii exhausted, faint he sinks,
Rnd ceases, lonely, cm the trackless veldt;
Or out where faint waves on the ocean meff.
for & hush! as deep as o’er his grave,
V&here wind, and wave, and man have ceased to rave,
/ ar jrom rite haunts of humans halter-led;
ftace and Quietness arc forever wed.
CWeat Oolltude! alone the soul h j^ce,
Whidi solace finds, Oh! happy state, in thee.


The
AMBITIOUS
SPRUIT.
‘Xv/
VVeiling-to the- surface
Splng* the mountain sjorult,
octgerV it rushes
13own tine eteejy route,
Hurled through simmering* epmy clouds
Ov*r Woof ffiLte,
Vwld to plough the ocean,
Headlong* lbs advance.
iDown into the valley.
Out across tine vlci,
Underneath the culvert,
Swift upon its way
fathering' jbree it widens,
Singing* of Its powers;
Hurrying on a dream attest
through unnoticed flower*.


'Soon its hasting- rij?j?le
Join* the rivers Jlow;
"XV idens where the drift runs,
Decjoens just below.
Otill tlie dower river
*To the Ocafit Utte wends,
Dreaming too, of vastness,
Ot riving- f or great ends.
Pleading- jbr the wide sect
great tides are whirled,
OountVng- on a course stretched out
and round the world,
T3l the slackentno cur rent
finds out all too soon
jbr vain ambition!)
Its endct locked lagoon.


Flamboyant
Durban
JDurban flamboyant! now die wixard band
l4 a& been,once more, upon its yearly round;
eacli pole- IPoincianct tree is found
Touched here and dicr? with an illuming brand.
Qu|c% it kindles, die bright flares expand
J rcrTtl to botufb ttie scarlet tongues
conflagration bright £Cntil flame crowned
/TOb dazdiny sheen die trees all btaziny* stand.
.Now ccurrtteae beacons, flcttnincr tiers of fire,
li/tark out die sireeptrup roads. *\X?Hlie still a few
Slue embers giearn, where Jakamndas sway
skyey Old pyre
Qlows brighter still to wdcome im die Ivew.
t e rd 13urbcm flaunts IVlid-^oitmmeri bright
display


THE VEGETABLE-SAMMY.
from door to door, around, from year to year,
Grey bearded, turbaned, like beared vixier
from out the payee of some wierd romance,*
(War 1c66 bis story, when fas writ, perchance!)
Stooping and wrinkled, than bis I years far older
Me hawks bis laden baskets o'er bis shoulder,
’Suspended from a springy bamboo strip.
Mis cmakyx steps just match tbe baskets dip,
d\nd Keep tbe bobbing* rbytbm well sustained.
Hu bow-legged spindle-shanks a gait have gain
-ed
""which mark him oat ~ a master cf bis trade.
Hie thread-bare coat, long* elbowed through and
frayed,
"Might make one think he had no saved-up horde;
JSut strings of sovereigns hanging from a cord
Around me neck oj his bejewelled spouses
Wo pity jbr his tattered state arouse.
Mts sloq-an shrill, repeating oft hell keec;-
%ice r
MIS-SIS? PieWTY CMCAP!


Servile, and cringing; Jor your -patronage.
Me'lt you chea|dy, pum pklns, or inwall, sag-e,
"White all the time ~ you foolish pale-face clan I
Me saps your Ufa's- olooa, does ihe hring-alt
man.
Mis wag*cs tow, so all else you condone.
His children, educated, oust your own
M Olll skilled trades, tradinyand the office
stool.
% case your toil, you hroug4rt "him as your
To work your cane-Jiclds, tool
jroin across the seas:
A. two edyed tod, yourc teaming l>y degrees.
And who’s to tdame liim seeking; if he can,
To wrest a heritage from the white-man.
13y many ways have Peoples fought t won
k lheir jdir possessions, places in the sun,
J3y high diplomacy, or in the jVay
with sword and rifie-fire. And who's to say
Mamsammy& way is not as o*ood a wccy:-
<mce aReeNY-BeANies ‘ *
MS-616? CM6AP TODAY!


July at Spencer Farm.
jßroum is the gross on tfie kopje,
And lank 'tween the scattered boulders,
©lack and charred are the fields around,
'Sffihere file wake of the grass jire smoulders.
JDark is the hush in its wintry hue
On the elopes of the circling- hills,
jwow have the upland rivers Bunk,
Vty are the spruits and rills,
bomber and thirsty the dusty veldt
Stretches h cyond oar gaxe,
j*ar where the peaks of “die d3rakensherg
TVUtr in the distant haxe.
Mere in "die hollow ties 'Spencer jam
It peeps from Its wattle hower;
Wcadi die hrilltant hue, and the fragrant scent,
Of die hurnished wattle jlowcr,
A splash of gold, on die barren veldt.
Audit seems to me os though


The tWvens bad just let jdtl a star,
/And left it there to alow,
gladden the heart of 'wntcr.
In all her dreariness drest;
And gleam on die c horrid background,
X/ike a jewel on her breast.
TO-NIGH.
fairyland akin tDnio4it—
Opread out betwixt the circtinyßidge & Jshff
though her spangled robe were notenoagh,
J\gvin,her lights are mirrored,gbntingbrtght*~
ifcfzaa grid-streaks jazzher6ajifxhlttj3ay,
"wkiile oxWhead die crescent moon y&des slow,
A»id not too tmightty; lest it dull the glow
_'W 6 %!! 1 «A of stars. Of/air array
. IhcOiMihern Cross ftanys «serU> in die sky
*]whtle here & there thejftfut wind has brought
Wp tfurjy clouds of grey; as though it thought
*Xhc scene was nigh too grand jbr mortal eye ;
/And sought to hide, In part,
fitdl on ©arth, mankind shajS? view
Perfection.


SUNRISE oer
the VALLEY of a
THOUSAND HILLS
Seaward the- ek yr ablushing- red and crotd,
Bespeaks nativity of radiant day:
The wind-swept cloud-rifts widen, and away
The woolly cohwehs of the night are rotted.
a fleay canopy of white,
Oafc sheltered from the early wind, still jilts
The sleeping* "Valley of a Thousand Hitts,
v And leaves nouolit hut die verdant toys, in
&reen turrets in ayxmiv sea. ‘Uie Sun,
Mounting' the earths round rim, with rose-
Wow sets die hoae-hungA&tley wide oJmcw^ 6
As (hough some fairy loom that sheen had spurt
aneroid ides, and roseate hittows glow,
A weird, enchanted, archipela^jv.


SLEEP.
14 At L, peaceful Vrtnger of forgetfulness!
Come jree the soul, that waking ius oppress.
And waft me g-ently to die iLotus-land,
"Where yawning sentinels of >Slumber stand
To guard old 'Somnus, in his dreams sublime,
lm pillowed on tits fecdhet y coucti of Time:
There in the broodincr twdioht of his cave
A peaceful niche of darksome gloom, 1 crave,
%crt,\ f lUewA, mm and impl ore,
perchance from out his flask of hom, he ll f>our
Clod of Oleep! here let me drowsing* stay,
■SurrmmcU tyWep fcnsioners of >Sleep,
Who on a leash, the restless dreams do keep,
catch die rain~drop and the soft snow-jlake,
And hush the gentle breeze, lest thou shoulcUt wake,
fieneath die encirding" shade ofMorpheus’ shrine.
There would 1 be, where creeping night-weeds twine:
"Where great chameleons, blackening*, hesitate,
With lazv r eye, to watch the dxm gate,
Un which the sulky oule perch, glum and mute.


fi>r dormant Ocko answers not tkeir suit:
slnggidt Jouguas Jiao a lazy wing>
<u««r a sconskat to the gloom may sing
In skeltered nook, wkere Nights narcotics missed
Tat ktdden sleeky song-eel ventrikxmist.
A region dunk, wkere legions all asleep
splendour of we darkness keep;
"Wkere nodding maidens sink tkeir dreamy heads
And drink tke odour of die pappy teds.
Tere Oykele in star-heapangled, cloak
Imprisoned IDarkness, ere in Jtames awoke
Insulting I3ay, to Jtnd kis prying t~lays
jSanisked, Jor throwing on chaste Night tkeir gaze.
Tvas tken the noisy rotsterous cocks took flight
To woo flown 13awn, and scape pvrpetuoa Night:
"While hats, with Uinking eyes, must sadly stay
Awake, and mourn tkeirexilednigkt of day.
And tkere wkere Cynthia spreads
U no pdf-throated diolr their vespers sing
1 seek no music, or sweet lullabies
Seside that opiate stream wkere Lethe Iks:
No sound save rhythmic breath of cl nepers wan
A fitting welcome to oUivion.
l*latl, meek-eyed Sleep! tkou ever welcome
Come hear me to that paradise of rest.


Exiles.
1 know, in r r > ...
Mow die rtew-chuma heart
IVluet yearn for fta IDaJfodiiio,
j£r IVe teen ajar
(J\* tkeee ex'lte are),
wy cam iPrc-tea dad kill*.
1 know ike Irloee
fair, ©nokxnd erovwe.
The iDaby op tier j’ield,
Tke Onowdrop iky
BenecdkjreyTV
And oil tier jragrant yield.
Ive eeen tke IMtede-
~toe, and Thistle,
The tta«-telt, ttue, 1 ken,
Ive -picked ike ooree
On Tifeekirefc course.
The Meatker in me jten.


fiat my thoughte would stray
To jar away,
jvr in my minis locked eye
the ldocm
Of ‘die Hojfir~l?oom,
forked out on an axure Ay:
iPoineettta wancis
Oer jLotue
The denee.
Theoorcreoue 0 anna,
Thelvotaoiana,
The hrigkt Irtihuecus fence*.
Tito Jacaromda,
And, Oleandra,
TheOdden-ehower ajleam,
Afar from them oil
In twNorrive Ueok
I'd doee my eyes and dream.
They eay our flower*
Make scentless loowere,
1 do not eay they're wron<r;
fiat 1 would n't trade


The blooms that shade
The land where 1 belong;
>So 1 know, in part,
M env the new-chum's* heart
"Must yearn Jor the wild iPrimrooe,
jor I've been a lone-
-ty exile flown
J>om the Viet where the Aram grows.
The Ricksha-Boy.
13 eplu-med as Choka's warriors oj old
teeming* o'er the plains, In impis, reflect ~-
Thus, once, lie sprang; with shield and assagai,
% thundering- X£s«tal 'battle-cry'
Oj Chaka's leg- tons. Wow 'neath civil
As lithe he leaps to shout of Ricksha!
A beast of burden to the white-manfc whim,
'Vfho's taught him many tricks, and named
him Jim.
Wee learnt the love of g-atn, the tickeys. lure,
jVever till he knew mali wos he poor.
Today contentedly, he touts jor loads,


And pulls the tang*uid rntungu oer the roads.
Sut comes, at times when idly sitting*
there,
Seside the curbstone hoping* for a |are
A Jleeting* vision, spanning- the tong- years,
Again vvsutul ring's toua in his ears:
Me Inears tlie gathered tribes yell in their
mig-k,
'Uhe fierce demented heat cj drums they smite:
Me secs them surging J-crward, ranks on
* „ ranks
*lhe subtle horns extending- on their Jlanks;
Me sees his sav&g-e fathers in the j ray,
Athirst for blood, ana swooping* on their prey.
tßtd war-mad impis, hurting- death to those
Unhappy creatures, Ohakai tribal joes
But swijt the vision Jades, the hosts with*
m draw.
Trom o’er the street a shout:- iKichsha 1
Richsha!


BEYOND THE VEIL.
THe CMCftAUD-CttCKOO in
tine yellow- wood,
plaintive cjuery skrill envotws tine sly;
Jo«t only echo mocks its questioning cry,
-And leaves it on lifei mystery to bt*ood
Vv nanswered. IVor is man who lias pursued.
Cartks teamed doctrines and pkilosopky,
Tke realms of spirits and tkeir pmopkecy,
A wkit tke nearer, witk solutions crude.
for all Ins probing's into, secrets deep
14e finds out eckoes of kis jdesk-bound
pinny back at kirn. So mortals be
content
Tooo unanswered. TVor essay to peep
Beyond tke \iil, witk kuman Jears
distraught;
B«t leave tke workmy~out to One witk
kigker bent.
