

NATIVE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.


■J.


NATIVE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read March 16, 1900.)
Western Australia contains an estimated area of 978,299 square
miles, or, inclusive of the contiguous islands, about 1,057,250
square miles, being about eight times the size of Great Britain. It
is the largest of all the colonies of Australia, containing more than
a third of the entire area of that continent. In the southwest
coastal districts there is much land suitable for farming operations,
and farther north there are extensive grassy downs, capable of de-
pasturing immense numbers of sheep and cattle. Considerable
areas are gold-producing, chief among which may be mentioned
Coolgardie, Cue, Marble Bar and Kimberley—comparable in ex-
tent to some prominent European kingdoms. By far the greater
portion of the colony, however, consists of vast arid tracts of sand
and scrub, which is practically a desert.
REPRINTED PROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., YOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


In the present preliminary paper it is intended to give a brief
outline of the social organization, rites and customs of the native
tribes sparsely distributed over the whole of that portion of west-
ern Australia lying to the north of the twenty-eighth parallel of
south latitude. Compared to the size of the territory occupied the
number of the aboriginal inhabitants is insignificant.
On the Murchison, Greenough, Sanford, Roderick, Wooramel,
Gascoyne and Lyons rivers the several native tribes are each divided
into four sections, called Buljerry, Kiemarra, Boorong and Boogar-
loo. The intermarriage of these divisions, and the sections to
which the resulting offspring belong, will be readily understood
when arranged in tabular form, as under:
Husband.
Wife.
Offspring.
Buljerry
Kiemarra
Boorong
Boogarloo
Boorong
Boogarloo
Buljerry
Kiemarra
Boogarloo
Boorong
Kiemarra
Buljerry
These sectional names, with some modifications, are found among
the natives at Weld Spring, Bonython Creek, Lake Throssell, Elder
Creek, Glen Cumming, and extend eastward into South Australia,
where a similar organization exists among the Andikarina and
Arrinda tribes, particularized by me in previous publications.
If we travel northward from the Murchison, Gascoyne and other
streams above mentioned, we discover that the tribes occupying the
Ashburton, Fortescue, Yule, Shaw, De Grey and Oakover rivers
are likewise divided into four sections, the names of which are
Butcharrie, Kurrimurra, Burronga and Banaka, being simply varia-
tions of the nomenclature tabulated in this paper, Banaka taking
the place of Boogarloo. These sections reach easterly into the
northern territory of South Australia.
Proceeding still farther to the northward from the Oakover to
the Fitzroy river, the four sections are known as Baljarra, Boorungo,
Kimbera and Bannicka, the men of one section marrying the
women of another in a certain fixed rotation. In all the tribes
referred to in this paper there are aggregates of totems attached to
each section or pair of sections, and descent of the children is
counted through the mothers.


In the northeastern corner of western Australia, comprising the
region watered by the Ord River and its tributaries, Sturt Creek,
Margaret river and the Upper Fitzroy, are a number of native
tribes, particulars of whose divisions and the limits of their territory
are described in papers which I have communicated to different
learned societies.
In all the country dealt with in the present article, with the ex-
ception of a strip along the western coast from about Geraldton to
Onslow, all the youths are circumcised. Some time after their
recovery they must submit to a further mutilation, consisting of
splitting open the urethral canal from a point a little way from the
scrotum almost to the glans, but leaving the latter intact, the inci-
sion being about two inches in length. In some tribes the glans is
also split, the cut being carried right into the urinary orifice. After
a man recovers from the effects of splitting the penis he is allotted
a boy who has not yet been operated upon. This youth is a brother
of the woman whom the man is entitled to claim as his wife. The
boy is used for purposes of masturbation and sodomy, and con-
stantly accompanies the man.
The natives who inhabit the barren desert country are much in-
ferior to the coast tribes, both in personal appearance and in their
weapons and utensils. Their mode of camping at night during the
cold months of the winter is as follows: They scoop out a circular
depression in the sand, about eighteen inches deep, the diameter
varying with the number of individuals who are to use it. In this
depression they light a fire, and gradually replace the sand they
have scooped out until it is all sufficiently heated. At bedtime
each person scrapes a trench in the warm sand and lies down with-
out any clothing, letting the loose sand fall in around his body,
except the face. A man, with his wives and children, would per-
haps occupy one of these sleeping places, several young men
another, some unmarried or old women another, and so on. It
not unfrequently happens that pebbles are mixed with the sand,
and these retain the heat for a longer time. Although not suffi-
ciently hot to burn the skin of the sleepers, yet on lying against a
person’s body for a long time they raise blisters, which sometimes
become sores, especially on the tender skin of children. No fire is
kept alight during the night, but on emerging from their lairs in
the morning fires are lit to cook any animal food they may have on
hand.






