

J\f
y!'
ISt~/
fe-TO jq ,
/~ - * .
W 1
fJ&Oi**** }


■
I
f
**
■I,


been given by Bisbop Jewell, in his
unanswerable “ Apology,”and “De-
fence ; ” which, in its most impor-
tant features, is reluctantly acknow-
ledged by his violent opponent Mr.
Harding : but as enough has been
said to invalidate every exclusive
claim of Roman Catholicism on the
ground of its extraordinary sanctity,
I shall conclude this section in the
words of Mr. Townsend,* in his re-
ply to Mr. Butler, the elegant and
learned advocate of the Church of
* Jewell’s Works, passim ; Town-
send’s Accusations of History, p. 15].
Rome : “ I would not sully my pages
with the details which are given by
their own writers, of the scandalous
of society, when Romanism
flourished from the ninth to the thir-
teenth centuries. For one hundred
and fifty years together, out of fifty
Popes, scarcely one can be found who
was not notorious for wickedness. I
could draw a picture of the manners
of the religious of this period, from
your own authors, which the present
age would hardly credit, though the
authorities are most unimpeachable! ”
{To be continued .)
NATIVES OF NEW-HOLLAND.
[ln the year 1818, Captain Philip P,
King, R. N., entered upon the survey
of the Intertropical and Western Coasts
of Australia, under the direction of the
Lords of the Admiralty. He completed
that service in 1822, when he returned
to England. From the (< Narrative”
of his discoveries, in two volumes, Bvo.,
just published, we copy the following
curious account of an interview with
the natives, on the South-west coast of
New-Holland.— Edit.]
Having at a former visit refitted at
Oyster-Harbour, I wished, Dec. 24th,
1821, to try Princess Royal Harbour;
but as I was both unacquainted with
its entrance, as well as its conveni-
ence for our purposes, excepting
from Captain Flinders’s account, 1
hoisted the boat out early in the
morning, to make the necessary exa-
mination before the sea-breeze com-
menced. Whilst the boat was pre-
paring-, a distant shouting was heard;
and upon our looking attentively to-
wards the entrance, several Indians
were seen sitting on the rocks on the
north head, hallooing and waving to
us; but no farther notice than a re-
turn to their cull was taken until
after breakfast, when we pulled to-
wards them in the whale boat. As
we drew near the shore they came
down to receive us, and appeared
from their gestures to invite our
landing; but in this they were dis-
appointed ; for, after a little vocife-
ration and gesture on both sides, we
pulled into the harbour, whilst they
walked along the beach abreast the
boat. As the motions of every one
of them were attentively watched, it
was evident they were not armed :
each wore a kangaroo-skin cloak over
his left shoulder, that covered the
back and breast, but left the right
arm exposed. Upon reaching the
spot which Captain Flinders occupied
in the Investigator, I found that the
brig could not anchor near enough to
the shore to carry on our operations
without being impeded by the na-
tives, even though they should be
amicably disposed. Our plan was
therefore altered; and, as the an-
chorage formerly occupied in the en-
trance to Oyster-Harbour would be,
on all accounts, more convenient for
our purposes, I determined upon
going thither.
By this time the natives had reach-
ed that part of the beach where the
boat was lying, and were wading
through the water towards us; but*,
as we had no wish at present to com-
ffiUflteate with them* for fm that, by
refusing any thing we had in the
boat, for which their importunity
would be very great, a quarrel might
be occasioned, we pulled off into
deeper water, where we remained for
five minutes parleying with them,
during which they plainly expressed
their disappointment and mortifica-
tion, at our want of confidence. Upon
making signs for fresh water, which
they instantly understood, th°v called
out to us, “ Ba~doo-ha~doo and
pointed to a part of the bay where
Capt. Flmders has marked a rivulet.
Ba-doo, in the Port-Jackson lan-


guage, means water; it was there-
fore thought probable that they
must have obtained it from some
late visitors; and in this opinion we
were confirmed.
Upon our return towards the en-
trance, the natives walked upon the
beach abreast the boat, and kept with
her, until we pulled out of the en-
trance, when they resumed their
former station upon the rocks, and
we returned on board.
Upon reaching the brig, the anchor
was weighed, and with a fresh sea-
breeze from the south-east we soon
reached Oyster-Harbour; but in
crossing the bar the vessel took the
ground in eleven and a half feet
water, and it was some time before
we succeeded in heaving her over,
and reaching the anchorage we had
occupied at our last visit. Whilst
warping in, the natives, who had
followed the vessel along the sandy
beach that separates the two har-
bours, were amusing themselves near
us, in striking fish with a single
barbed spear, in which sport they
appeared to be tolerably successful.
As soon as we passed the bar, three
other natives made their appearance
on the east side, who, upon the boat
going to that shore to lay out the
hedges, took their seats in it as un-
ceremoniously as a passenger would
in a ferry-boat; and upon its return-
ing to the brig, came on board, and
remained with us all the afternoon,
much amused with every thing they
saw, and totally free from timidity
or distrust. Each of our visitors was
covered with a mantle of kangaroo-
skin ; but these were laid aside
upon their being clothed with other
garments, with the novelty of which
they appeared greatly diverted. The
natives on the opposite shore, seeing
that their companions were admitted,
were loudly vociferous in their re-
quest to be sent for also; but, un-
fortunately for them, it was the lee-
shore, so that no boat went near
them ; and as we did not wish to be
impeded by having so many on the
deck at one time, their request was
not acceded to, and by degrees they
separated, and retired in different
directions.
As soon as the brig was secured.
two of our visitors went ashore, evi-
dently charged with some message
from the other native ; but as he
voluntarily remained on board, no-
thing hostile was suspected : we
therefore landed, and dug a hole
about three feet deep among the
grass, about two yards above the
highest tide mark, for water.
After an absence of an hour, our
two friends returned; when it ap-
peared that they had been at their
toilet; for their noses and faces had
evidently been smeared over with
red ochre, which they pointed out to
us as a great ornament; affording
another proof, that vanity is inherent
in human nature, and not merely the
consequence of civilization. They
had, however, put off the garments
with which we had clothed them, and
resumed their mantles.
Each brought a lighted fire-stick
in his hand, intending, as we sup-
posed, to make a fire, and pass the
night near the vessel, in order to
watch our intentions and movements.
On returning on board we desired
the native who had remained behind
to go ashore to his companions ; but
it was with great reluctance that he
was persuaded to leave us. Whilst
on board, our people had fed him
plentifully with biscuit, yams, pud-
ding, tea, and grog, of which he ate
and drank as if he was half-famished;
and after being crammed with this
strange mixture, and very patiently
submitting his beard to the operation
of shaving, he was clothed in a shirt
and a pair of trowsers, and named
Jack, by which title he was afterwards
always called, and to which he readily
answered. As soon as he reached the
shore, his companions came to meet
him, to hear an account of what had
transpired during their absence, as
well as to examine his new habili-
ments, which, as may be conceived,
had effected a very considerable alter-
ation in his appearance; and at the
same time that the change created
much admiration on the part of his
companions, it raised him very con-
siderably in his own estimation. It
was, however, a substitution that did
not improve his appearance ; he cut
but a very sorry figure in his check-
ered shirt and tarry trowsers, when


standing among his companions*
with their long beards, and kanga-
roo-skin mantles thrown carelessly
over their shoulders.
Upon being accosted by his com-
panions, Jact was either sullen with
them, or angry with us for sending
him on shore ; for without deigning
to reply to their questions, he sepa-
rated himself from them ; and after
watching us in silence for some time,
walked quietly and slowly away, fol-
lowed at a distance by his friends,
who were lost in wonder at what
could have happened to their sulky
companion.
At daylight on the following morn-
ing, the natives had again collected
on both sides, and upon the jolly-
boat’s landing the people to examine
the wells. Jack, having quite re-
covered his good humour, got into
the boat and came on board. The
natives on the opposite side were
vociferous to visit us, and were hold-
ing long conversations with Jack,
who explained every thing to them
in a song ; to which they would fre-
quently exclaim in full chorus, the
words, “ Cai , ccati t cai , cai, caigh ; ”
which they always repeated when any
thing was shown that excited their
surprise. Finding that we had no
intention of sending a boat for them,
they amused themselves in fishing.
Two of them were watching a small
seal that, having been left by the
tide on the bank, was endeavouring
to waddle towards the deep water :
at last one of the natives, fixing his
spear in his throwing stick, advanced
very cautiously, and, when within ten
or twelve yards, lanced it, and pierced
the animal through Urn neck • when
the other instantly ran up, and stuck
his spear into it also; and’then beat-
ing it about the head with a small
hammer very soon dispatched it.
This event collected the whole
tribe to the spot; who assisted in
landing their prize, and washing the
sand off the body : they then carried
the animal to their fire at the edge of
the grass, and began to devour it,
even before it was dead. Curiosity
induced Mr. Cunningham and my-
self to view this barbarous feast, and
we landed about ten minutes after it
had commenced. The moment the
Vol. VI, Third Series, May, 1827,
boat touched the sand/ the natives,
springing up, and throwing their
spears away into the bushes, ran
down towards us; and, before we
could land, had all seated themselves
in the boat, ready to go on board;
but they were obliged to wait whilst
we landed to witness their savage
repast. On going to the place, we
found an old man seated over the re-
mains of the carcase, two-thirds of
which had already disappeared ; he
was holding a long strip of the raw
flesh in his left hand, and tearing it
off the body with a sort of knife : a
boy was also feasting with him; and
both were too intent upon their
breakfast to notice us, or to be in
the least disconcerted at our looking
on. We, however, were very soon
satisfied, and walked away perfectly
disgusted with the sight of so hor-
rible a repast, and the intolerable
stench occasioned by the effluvia that
arose from the dying animal, com-
bined with that of the bodies of the
natives, who had daubed themselves
from head to foot, with a pigment
made of a red ochreous earth mixed
up with seal-oil.
We then conveyed the natives,
who had been waiting with great pa-
tience in the boat for our return, to
the vessel, and permitted them to go
on board. Whilst they remained
with us, Mr. Baskerville took a man
from each mess to the oyster-bank :
here he was joined by an Indian car-
rying some spears and a throwing-
stick ; but on Mr.Baskerville’s call-
ing for a musket that was in the
boat, (to the use of which they were
not he la& hi§
spears, which probably were only
carried for the purpose of striking
fish, and assisted our people in col-
lecting the oysters. As soon as they
had procured a sufficient quantity,
they returned on board, when, as it
was breakfast time, our visitors were
sent on shore, highly pleased with
their reception, and with the biscuit
and pudding which the people had
given them to eat. They were very
attentive to the mixture of a pudding,
and a few small dumplings were made
and given to them; which they put
on the bars of the fire-place; but,
being too impatient to wait till they
2 A


were baked, ate them in a doughy
state with much relish.
Three new faces appeared on the
east side, who were brought on board
after breakfast, and permitted to re-
main until dinner-time : one of them,
an old man, was very attentive to the
sail-maker’s cutting out a boat’s sail,
and at his request was presented with
all the strips that were of no use.
When it was completed, a small
piece of canvass was missing; upon
which the old man, being suspected
of having secreted it, was slightly
examined ; but nothing was found
upon him : after this, while the
people were looking about the deck,
the old rogue assisted in the search,
and appeared quite anxious to find
it; he, however, very soon walked
away towards another part of the
deck, and interested himself in other
things. This conduct appeared so
suspicious, that I sent the sail-maker
to examine the old man more closely,
when the lost piece was found con-
cealed under his left arm, which was
covered by the cloak he wore of
kangaroo-skin. This circumstance
afforded me a good opportunity of
showing them our displeasure at so
flagrant a breach of the confidence
we had reposed in them ; I therefore
went up to him, and, assuming as
ferocious a look as I could, shook
him violently by the shoulders. At
first he laughed; but afterwards,
when he found I was in earnest, be-
came much alarmed : upon which,
his two companions, who were both
boys, wanted to go on shore; this,
however, was not permitted until I
had made peace with the old man,
and put them all in good humour by
feeding them heartily upon biscuit.
The two boys were soon satisfied;
but the old man appeared ashamed,
and conscious of his guilt; and al-
though he was frequently afterwards
with us, yet he always hung down his
head, and sneaked into the back-
ground.
During the day, the people were
employed about the rigging ; and in
the evening before sun-set, the na-
tives were again admitted on board
for half an hour. In the afternoon
Mr. Montgomery went to Green-
Island, and shot a few parakeets and
water-birds, some of which he gave
to the natives, after explaining how
they had been killed, which of course
produced great applause.
The next day was employed in
wooding and watering, in which the
natives, particularly our friend Jack,
assisted. We had this day twenty-
one natives about us, and among
them were five strangers. They were
not permitted to come on board until
four o’clock in the afternoon, except-
ing Jack, who was privileged to come
and go as he liked; which, since it
did not appear to create any jealousy
companions, enabled us
to detain him as a hostage for Mr.
Cunningham’s safety, who was busiljr
engaged in adding to his botanical
collections from the country in the
vicinity of the vessel. In the even-
ing, Jack climbed the rigging as high
as the top-mast head> much to the
amusement of his companions.
Our watering continued to proceed
without molestation from the na-
tives ; the number of whom had in-
creased to twenty-nine; besides some
whom we had before seen, that were
now absent. During the afternoon
of the 28th, the wind freshened from
the south-west, and blew so strong
as to cause a considerable swell where
we were lying; but towards sun-set
the breeze moderated, and the na-
tives were again admitted on board :
there were, however, only eleven ;
for the rest, having worn out their
patience, had walked away.
They were now quite tractable,
and never persisted in doing any
thing against our wishes. The words
“ by and by ” were so often used by
us in answer to their cau-wah, or
“ come here,” that their meaning was
perfectly understood, and always sa-
tisfied the natives, since we made it
a strict rule never to disappoint them
of any thing that was promised,—an
attention to which is of the utmost
importance in communicating with
savages. Every evening that they
visited us, they received something ;
but as a biscuit was the most valuable
present that could be made, each
native was always presented with one
upon his leaving the vessel. During
the day, they were busily occupied in
manufacturing spears, knives, and


hammers, for the evening’s barter;
and when they came in the morning,
they generally brought a large col-
lection, which their wives had pro-
bably made in their absence.
On the 29th, we had completed our
holds with wood and water, and pre-
pared to leave the harbour. In the
evening we were visited by twenty-
four natives, among whom was our
friend Jack. When they found us
preparing to go away, they expressed
great sorrow at our departure, parti-
cularly Jack, who was more than
usually entertaining ; but kept, as he
always did, at a distance from his
companions, and treated them with
the greatest disdain. When the time
came to send them on shore, he en-
deavoured to avoid accompanying
them, and, as usual, was the last to
go into tiie boat; instead, however,
of following them, he went into a
boat at the opposite side of the brig,
that was preparing to go for a load
of water, evidently expecting to be
allowed to return in her.
This friendly Indian had become a
great favourite with us all, and was
allowed to visit us whenever he chose,
and to do as he pleased ; he always
wore the shirt that had been given to
him on the first day, and endeavoured
to imitate every thing that our people
were employed upon; particularly
the carpenter and the sail-maker at
their work: he was the only native
who did not manufacture spears for
barter; for he was evidently con-
vinced of the superiority of our
weapons, and laughed heartily when-
ever a bad and carelessly-made spear
was offered to us for sale : for the
naiiyg§; finding that m taek evefy
thing, were not very particular in the
form or manufacture of the articles
they brought to us. He was certainly
the most intelligent native of the
whole tribe, and if we had remained
longer, would have afforded us much
information of this part of the coun-
try; for we were becoming more and
more intelligible to each other every
day: he frequently accompanied
Mr. Cunningham in his walks, and
not only assisted him in carrying his
plants, but occasionally added to the
specimens he was collecting.
The next morning, the 30th, the
anchors were weighed, and the warps
laid out; but from various delays,
we did not reach a birth sufficiently
near the bar to make sail from, until
the water had fallen too much to allow
our passing it: the brig was there-
fore moored in the stream of the
tide.
At eight o’clock, the natives came
down as usual, and were much dis-
appointed in finding the brig moved
from her former place. After the
vessel was secured, the launch and
jolly boat were sent to the watering
place in the outer bay, where the
eastern party were assembled with a
bundle of spears, throwing-sticks,
and knives, for barter. Upon the
return of the boats, our friend Jack
came on board, and appeared alto-
gether so attached to us, that some
thoughts were entertained of taking
him on our voyage up the west coast,
if he were inclined to go. As he did
not want for intelligence, there was
not much difficulty in making him
understand by signs, that he might
go with us ; to which he appeared to
assent without hesitation; but that
it might be satisfactorily ascertained
whether he really wished to go, it
was intimated to him, that he might
tell his companions of this new ar-
rangement. Mr. Bedwell accordingly
took him on shore, and purchased all
the spears the natives had brought
down, that, in case they should feel
angry at his leaving them, they might
have no weapons to do any mischief
with.
When Jack landed, he instantly
informed his companions of his in-
tended departure; and poin|§d fq
the sea, to show whither he was
going; but his friends received the
intelligence with the most careless
indifference, their attention being
entirely engrossed 'with the barter
that was going on. After the spears
were purchased, Mr. Bedwell got
into the boat followed by Jack, who
seated himself in his place with ap-
parent satisfaction.
While Mr. Bedwell was purchasing
the spears, and other weapons. Jack
brought him a throw-stick that he
had previously concealed behind a
bush, and sold it to him for a biscuit;
but after he had embarked, and the
2 A%


324 Sentiments on tie Wesleyan Missionary Society.
iff ai r°““ som Ba3ken ’ !lle > after Purchasing'
Proofofthe 3 ft*
tions. n upon getting l into hnof h* i
upon getting into the boat he looked
hLI l i v ° lu, ' teer ; but Jack, having
£ead !n! e t,° f Se ? si( i knes3 > sh °ok his
fmeW h i"” back :he was there-
toie kft on shore. Upon the boat's
J’ eac h> the natives dis-
usna1 d f ° r * l6 P lgllt >' but Jack, as
self from 3 • rCe,ml t0 se P ara te hirn-
ivalk mv. 113 companions, and to
walk away without exchanging a
word with them. 6 ®
{To be concluded in our next?)
About an hour after lw
turned and I had determined Jpon
taking him, the breeze freshened and
rmsed a short swell, which causing i
slight motion, affected our frieml’s
head so much that he came
AXJT his tongue, and poSu
mg to the shore, intimated his wish
te speak to the natives. He was
therefore, immediately landed, and
—«s■
REGARD
h h . J^ftXZT’T*****-**
g^ssaasae
tion and pastoral engagements from S ® ens ibilities and enjoyments
attending this year, four various S * 7 ?htene( ! a « d refined,-It“
sionary meeting's convened in Arm'l P 1 lnci P^ es # were invigorated,— fire was
and May, which may be most” mpha- itS
lically regarded as hallowed andde !!vT P °' Ver to lts faith,—liveliness
lightful seasons at which the feast of which I f°) Pe ’~r? d a stimulus afforded,
love is enjoyed, and a feeling of sub „i * * lre ' v hfe and energy into the
lime pleasure, arising fronfthe cul P ld « s . conce rted, the desires cherished
tivation and prevalence of holv zea the prayers preferred. O e ,vas
and benevolent emotion, is ct [shed lcli by 3 ho 1?
I well and gratefully remembergiving al nf ! n °‘ me . re 7 Pleasure, but
my attendance at your missmnarv aJm ostexistence to inhale. On these
anniversary last May, and the im- § ebestf r’ and f xcited I hope by
pression produced by the powerful l, - have endeavoured;
eloquence, the enlightened and ar ? 7 a de sultory and hasty man-
dent piety, the disinterested and God- Urate°adT"’’7 il is ’ that> I cul-
like philanthropy, which were then dee P- se »ted and a growing
so will o a f me,lt towards the l&sleyaf
soon or easily be obliterated, or „ feel the most
deed weakened. Ido not desire to ® Xq , enjoyment, in giving mv
have removed from my remembrance ttendance at its regular armiver-
that glowing and mLt Ta?S thZ*lf™" «
spint of benevolence and zeal, chas°- whfeb ; i and P rom ment reasons
tised and purified by the Gosnel of I; induce me to love your Mis-
Jesus. which threw y so attSve a S/y^T s ’ and t0 «*»ice
charm and so heavenly a radiance !« V , the au S m entation of its
around all your proceedings. It was sn e l .lr? 1 ' 5 ’ and the inc «ased
at once interesting and advantageous mostS ™/ Successes - ut-
to be with you. The attention was y o n “Tj d appear to PO'vade
not only arrested, the taste was not Sint There is a oll eness of
only gratified, the understanding abont von b ’v , pilrpose ; a,ld nature
was not only enlarged, by the exhi? rA ,.7 V’ which to me is deeply and
t. -*»<, a. » z X,SSSSt,&ssS£


they were sentenced, could not an-
nihilate them ; for in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries this sect sprang
up again under the names of Hen-
ricians, Petrobrussians, Poplicians,
Cathari, &c. The, seed sown by them
in Germany and England produced
the heresies of the Hussites, and
Wiclifites, and prepared the way for
Protestantism itself.”
Such is the testimony of an enemy;
we may therefore safely regard these
people as possessing, at different
periods, astonishing influence and
success.*
The Monophysites, so called from
holding only one nature in Christ,
(and frequently denominated Euty-
chians, or Jacobites, from Eutyches,
and Jacobus Baradasus, two eminent
defenders of the opinion,) enume-
rate among their advocates the chief
part of the Armenian, the Coptic,
and Ethiopia Christians; forming al-
together another immense body of
opponents to the tenets of the Church
of Rome; and furnishing another
proof of the want of “ Catholicity ”
in that community.
Dr. Buchanan, speaking of the Ar-
menians, says, “ They are to be
found in every principal city of Asia;
they are the general merchants of
the East, and are in a state of con-
stant motion from Canton to Con-
* See also Petri Siculi Historia :
Greece cum Lat, Vers, edita per Matt.
Raderum. Ingolstad, 1604. 4to; and
Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Ro-
man Empire, voi. x. chap. 54.
stantinople. They are settled in all
the principal places of India, where
they arrived many centuries before
the English. The proper country of
these "Christians is Armenia, the
greater part of which is subject to
the Persian government; but they
are scattered all over the empire, the
commerce of Persia being chiefly
conducted by Armenians.”
Of the Coptic, or Egyptian,
Christians, it is stated by Brerewood,
that although at the time he wrote,
there were not supposed to be more
than 60,000 ; yet at a former period
they had amounted to above 300,000 :
and that at an early period, such was
the importance of the Abuna, or
Bishop, of Ethiopia, or Abyssinia,
that the seventh place was assigned
to him in the General Councils.*
To these different and Anti-Romish
classes of Christians, must be added
the various denominations of Pro-
testants in Europe and America, with
their numerous colonies throughout
the world; and the extensive fruits
of their Missionary efforts in the
West Indies, the South Sea Islands,
and other distant and populous re-
gions ; forming altogether an indis-
putable refutation of the haughty
and exclusive claims of the Romish
Church, as founded on the plea of
Catholicity, or Universality.
(To be concluded in our next.)
Buchanan’s Christian Researches,
p. 242 ; Brerewood’s Enquiries, pp.
191—214 ; Yeates’s Indian Church
History, passim .
NATIVES OF NEW-HOLLAND.
(Concluded from p, 324.)
The weather, at day-light the next
morning, December 31st, was too
unsettled, and the breeze too strong
from the westward to think of mov-
ing from the anchorage. Jack and
another native were down on the
rocks at an early hour, hallooing and
waiving to us; and at eight o’clock
some natives appeared on the oppo-
site shore, with spears and knives to
barter; but we had no communica-
tion with them.
During our visit we have obtained
from these people about one hun-
dred spears, thirty throwing-sticks,
forty hammers, one hundred and
fifty knives, and a few hand-clubs,
the value of each being at from half
to one-eighth of a biscuit. We saw
no fizgig, shield, nor boomerang; it
is probable that they may have such
weapons, but did not produce them
from a dislike at parting with them ;
but the knives, spears, and hammers,
which did not require much labour
to manufacture, were always ready


Natives of Ncic-Hollancl.
Pind g^eate|l ' } part 1 wre? like tai aS t the stone itself - The hammer
Pindar s razors, only made for sale t t 9? e P ound weight.
iiathes ge of er T 6 Si *' V about fort 7 the 1 °f “ taa P>“ is Perhaps
natives, of whom tea were bovs- ,1,1 Ul(,est instrument of the sort
they were m most respects simiwlo !l, f V ® r T as made - Th e handle is
then neighbours, having the same a oi ! t t 'y ell ’e indies long, scraped to
ong curly hair, and slight U'° f h Polat like hammerf and has at
they did not appear to be a navigable $ e ,J? thep T'’ three or four spu’ers
tribe ; for we saw no canoes, mo d,' 1 quartz, stuck on in a
SWSSJtsrssrii-a
accustomed even to swlmmin" ( “ an the othe , r > t! >ey saw through and se-
fam bhuders is mistaken, £?* the flesh - Every ifative cal
.As
»A.“ '“ dl,pe "“'“ e
o f ur plt'Tpre- W e '% *f''or
Jlmylmc much 0 InorcMll the°
tv SS.s'.Ss 1 :
Uob at the handle, for the p"S If, 3 ' s s attered about in different
of scraping the points of • parts when the natives went
£■££s ssS
...d two feet six hS£ to,“ k '“ d - I!«er.lly reZnrtl"?" pSy
- -TK IS*- Sffl%psa SUB,y
Swarnnv’ V’** gro ' vs abundantly in times- ll 8 80 arl .' lved at different
to ten P feet hn S ‘ tlle , y , are from nine a evi d .enc ly came front
r»^»“ tirs• if
= ,e * ,e “ ““ £
he tdZZ er ’f ° r ff 0 ' 7 ’ ‘o "kin’ ! which serious notice
i i • only for the purpose nF D tn i I 1 attempt made to
breaking open shell-fish ancfkilling fi f lat frora one of the boys'
seals, and other animals, by striking ie . n 16 vvas llij nself at the oyster
wmm mm?k
long, having one end scraped to a ST? d t y * attended onfy by his ser
ff ssr “s/SoT'ia **
fixed and cemented by a mass of t ? lned tie nitention of his walk ant)


for which they evinced a great dis-
like. One of their encampments was
about a mile and a half off; but,
curious as we naturally were, to know
their mode of living, and to see the
females and children of their tribe,
we never succeeded in persuading
them to allow us to gratify our
curiosity. On one occasion it was
necessary to lay a kedge anchor out
in the direction of their dwelling-
place; and upon the boat’s crew
landing and carrying it along the
beach, the natives followed and inti-
mated by signs, that we should not
go that way; as soon, however, as
the anchor was fixed, and they under-
stood our intention, they assisted the
people in carrying the hawser to
make fast to it.
They were well acquainted with
the effects of a musket, although not
the least alarmed at having one fired
off near them. Every thing they saw
excited their admiration; particu-
larly the carpenter’s tools, and our
clothes : but what appeared to sur-
prise them above all other things was,
the effect produced upon the flesh by
a burning-glass, and of its causing
the explosion of a train of gun-
powder. They perfectly understood
that it was from the sun that the fire
was produced; for on one occasion
when Jack requested me to show it
to two or three strangers, whom he
had brought to visit us, I explained
to him that it could not be done
while the sun was clouded : he then
waited patiently for five minutes,
until the sun-shine re-appeared, when
he instantly reminded me of the re-
moval of the obstacle. He was a
good deal surprised at my collect-
ing the rays of the sun upon my own
hand, supposing that I was callous
to the pain, from which he had him-
self before shrunk; but as I held the
glass within the focus distance, no
pamful sensation was produced; after
which he presented me his own arm,
and allowed me to burn it as long as
I chose to hold the glass, without
flinching in the least; which, with
greater reason, equally astonished us
in our turn.
They were all furnished, as has
been before mentioned, with a cloak
of kangaroo-skin, which is always
taken off, and spread under them,
when they lie down. Their hair was
dressed in different ways ; sometimes
it was clotted with red pigment and
seal-oil, clubbed up behind, and
bound round with a fillet of opossum
fur, spun into a long string ; in which
parrot-feathers, escalop-shells, and
other ornaments being fixed in dif-
ferent fanciful ways, gave the wearer
a warlike appearance.
Their faces, and sometimes their
whole bodies, were daubed over with
a mixture of seal-oil and red pig-
ment, that caused a most disgusting
effluvia; but the only colouring*
matter that our friend Jack used,
after his acquaintance with us, was
the carpenter’s chalk ; which he
thought particularly ornamental.
Bracelets of dog-tails, or kanga-
roo-skin, were commonly worn ; and
one had several escalop-shells hang-
ing about him, the noise of which, as
they jingled together, he probably
thought musical.
The noodle-bnl, or belt, in which
they carry their hammer and knife,
is manufactured from the fur of the
opossum, spun into a small yarn,
like worsted : it is lightly bound at
least three or four hundred times
round the stomach ; very few, how-
ever, possessed this ornament; and
it is not improbable that the natives
who had their hair clubbed, those
that wore belts, and the one who was
ornamented with shells, held some
particular offices in the tribe, which
it would be difficult for strangers to
discover.
On the 2d of January, at ten
o’clock, the water rose suddenly
eighteen inches; upon which the
anchors were lifted, and the brig
warped over the bar to an anchorage
in three and a half fathoms off the
outer watering-place, to await a fa-
vourable opportunity of going over
to Seal Island; near which it was in-
tended to anchor, in order to refit
the rigging, and otherwise prepare
the vessel for our voyage up the west
coast.
In the afternoon we procured a
load of water, and permitted the na-
tives, thirteen of whom were as-
sembled, to pay us another visit. On
their coming on board, it was noticed


388
«... of tliem M ° J Gn ‘™-
aa^Sfina;
Jiiucli raised I, o» fc£? o i“‘ .™ •% TOe’,2 o'n’.f®*'’' Af,er '«>
Pounder, loaded V £ a mne- L * ie sen J on shore.
<” ssy, a %
="‘fes £ “S ; ASWs
sfsrr ass. Aft 1 r
the Weight of the | v n" l l P ,,se at rock near Ia Ui } s huilt upon a
after they iLd all ’ l ' pou ’vWch, ten oZ 6wa . At
b dlB t e^
y M,,w * -'■ “»-A VS
Th„, i, IEAKNINC of mottos,
of a nersrtn’o a n instance nf i\t *i .
•SeV a :fc £"'K'P' , ;“ s
a» .i‘. s&?&*
literal aim.-. V; e “«'«»ll» ..,el"„, r , Ea f l' e »., lie ,v„ “1"
tthffi&sszs
fetis
vs^war-- 3 * 5 *
a as;;sa-»r.sT ”!“••' «i'S;s
s.rSK“-
' v ?rks are written in y *. Hls writing contdn .1 tho ? e wh ose
nnxed with poetry Till v’• 11}^er ” the ancient r!i -i le sen tiwents of
?. om « ihas leius Albert as Apu.
■an; hut is much more cnM> i ltu ,' tedious to name”’ m ' ( too
SS§PsllfiS
uninteresting'. jjj q nf j is not Aristotle ” aC ? Porphyry
n printed eeparafej, i,a (lie cyljeciion
’ n fstrouoiny, W ] tJl Hy ,


■


V j
