

National Economy
National Responsibility
An Appeal by an Australian
to his Fellow-Countrymen
Published with the Permission
The STATE WAR COUNCIL
Adelaide, January, 1916
G. HASSELL & SON, 104 CURRIE STREET




A PLEA FOR NATIONAL
ECONOMY.
An appeal to the human sympathy in us all never
fails of a worthy response, and the result of the individual
effort on Australia Day is an evidence alike of the depth
of that sympathy and of the sacrifices each and all are
willing to make. I propose now to make an appeal
to the good sense of my fellow-colonists, but the expres-
sion of it must be in a way which cannot claim any
publicity for its reward. The plea must go to the heart
as well as to the head. It will not, of course, be popular,
and any adequate reply to it will entail personal sacrifices
such as I am sure have not been yet made.
I want all men and women to ask themselves what
is their duty in this present national emergency, and in
what way they can help to carry it to a successful con-
clusion. They thoroughly understand that one way is
for the able-bodied young men of every grade to go to
the front—that is a duty of the highest order—but what
they have not grasped is that the thousands who cannot
respond to that high call must also do something.
Has it ever struck you that you are letting the
precious moments slip by when all you “stay-at-homes”
could practise economy? Have you not realized that
saving at home means the strengthening of the resources
at the firing line? Does it not dawn on you that every
penny put by here adds to the money strength of your
country? Have you ever considered the question at all,
or have you put it aside heedlessly on the ground that no
good can come of your small contributions to thrift?
The money value, in the aggregate, of its practice is an
unknown quantity, but there is something even more
important. Do you realize for a moment its moral
value?
You have joined in the sentiments which have
resulted in the national unity of purpose in prosecuting
this war, and your duty is now to give expression in a


2 NATIONAL ECONOMY
more tangible form. How can each of you practise
national economy? You have to remember that the
Australian case is not necessarily on all fours with any
other part of the Empire, and that the arguments used
in England, for instance, do not apply, in their entirety,
to this country.
You must have due regard to the necessity of a
continuance of work in our industrial concerns. It would
be false economy to stop your orders to such an extent
as to throw workers out of employment, but there must
be reduced consumption, or use, of many articles locally
produced. Workers must be prepared for a reasonable
share of sacrifice.
It is, however, difficult to lay down anything but a
general rule for all, but what I want to impress upon all
now is that they must make savings. If you will not do
this voluntarily while it is yet possible to be of immense
benefit to your country, the time will come when you
will be compelled to do it, and compulsion is distasteful
to us all, and it comes, too, usually at a time inconvenient
to each.
Do you realize how many of the things you eat and
wear come from overseas—England, Europe, America,
and other countries—and do you realize the immense
money value you have to provide by hard work to pay
for them? Just at this moment your country requires
much of this money value for its share of the war
expenses, and this is where you men and women can
help—the women especially.
I was glad to see that, the Women’s League formed
recently made this question of economy a part of its
constitution. It might perhaps have been satisfied with
a full prosecution of that virtue for the present. How
many luxuries now enjoyed by us all can be dispensed
with? Let each ask himself or herself that question, and
if it be found, as is more than likely, that they are
brought into this country from overseas, let them be
dispensed with for a time.
It is not difficult for each one to ascertain what are
“luxuries”—it is much more difficult to settle in the mind
of each of us what are the “necessities,” so-called, which
can be done without. So much depends on the purchas-
ing power we can command, realizing, too, that the
necessities of to-day become the luxuries of to-morrow.
I am appealing to the rich man, to the man with a
good income, to the man with only a moderate salary,


to the man on a weekly wage—all are able to save, and
all are called upon to make a contribution to national
thrift.
You must not accuse me of holding a brief for the
success of the Commonwealth Loans, but the first duty
of the rich man, the well-to-do man, the man with surplus
mon~y, is to invest in it—don’t ask yourselves whether
the rate of interest in a good one, or whether the other
advantages are generous enough—what money you have
over and above the cost of ordinary necessaries should go
to help their successful flotation.
Your second duty is to stop buying, at once, all
articles of luxury, to discontinue gratifying expensive
tastes, to give up ostentatious display, to decline to
accept elaborate entertainments; and your third duty is,
after having set the above example yourself, to endeavour
to inculcate it in others. The actual cash saving you will
effect will be very large even in your own individual case,
and will enable you to assist in the future financing of the
war.
And what can you men with only a moderate income
or salary do? Cannot you do without one suit of clothes
a year? Cannot you give up, in the national interest, for
one year at all events, many of your recreations which
cost you more than you care to admit? Will not your
wife, if properly appealed to, be ready to sacrifice her
desire for that superfluous hat or gown? Would she not,
having realized the national duty, exercise a more
scrupulous care over the household expenditure? And
would she not feel it her duty to share in your sacrifices?
You, too, could save in these ways, and your savings
would strengthen the national resources.
And dare I hope to catch your eye, you wage earners,
with this appeal? If so, will you consider it? I believe
your wife makes tremendous sacrifices already. Does
she not mend and make for your family, numerous or
otherwise? Does she have the full opportunity to breathe
the God-given fresh air? Do you see that she and the
children are reasonably clad and fed? Well, if you do, you
are doing a great deal, but you can do more. You are, after
all, only doing your common duty to the woman who
shares your but you, yourself, cannot you give up
something? I am not writing down at you; I want you
to think whether you cannot save something a week, if
it is only half-a-crown—nothing is too small to put in
the Savings Bank. Do you know that" the grouping of


the savings of the masses also helps the country in a
time like this? Your shillings mount up into thousands
of pounds, and they must be saved by you, yourself (not
your wife) giving up some pleasure or enjoyment, at any
rate during the war. And you may live to realize and
appreciate the tremendous moral effect of this war upon
your habits.
This is true, too, of every man and woman and of
every class—rich or poor, this dedication of one's life
to sacrifice. Who is to say what national good may not
come of it? Who is able to gainsay the moral and
spiritual effect upon the nation?
Will you ponder over these matters? Will you start
to-morrow to carry them out? Will you abandon the
selfish personal habits and consecrate yourselves to the
highest call man and woman can receive in this mundane
sphere?
Your country not only calls for men, but it calls for
morality; not the smug unctuousness we have all been
guilty of, but downright personal service of the highest
kind.
The nation calls for the expression of the highest
that is in us all. Will you respond with all your heart
and soul?
NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
The foregoing appeal for the exercise of thrift by all
classes of the community, mainly because of the necessity
for the consequent savings to be diverted to the country’s
use, was directed principally to the people as consumers.
Incidentally, it embraced that portion of the people who
are providers as well as consumers, and it would be
manifestly unfair, while dealing with the latter, not to be
a little more explicit as to some of the duties of the
former.
They constitute a small part numerically, but their
power is obviously very considerable. They are manu-
facturers, importers, retailers, employers of labour, some
probably holders of large stocks of unnecessary articles,
that is, unnecessary under present financial conditions.
So far as the production of locally-made goods (and I
mean, of course, those made in Australia) is concerned,
I made a point of the false economy which would be the
result of not keeping up our demand for them.


AND RESPONSIBILITY. 5
If my call for thrift is responded to there will be a
less demand for even Australian manufactures, and the
pinch will be felt, sure enough, but the effort is likely to
be less accentuated if the consumer or user will be
patriotic enough to ask for our own productions in
preference to those which are imported from abroad.
This has a direct bearing on the employment of
labour, and even though the demand for goods may be
less than normal, it may be sufficient t:» provide
continuous work for a good part of each week. The
point I want to make is that your call for our own goods
will enable employers of labour engaged in certain busi-
nesses to continue the employment to their men, women,
boys, and girls, thereby ensuring the earning of some
money weekly by all.
Obviously if you fail to give this support to our own
industries you are helping to bring about unemployment
earlier than I fear may be likely with the times which
are ahead of us. It is fairly certain that with a continua-
tion of the war and its drain upon our resources, some
trades must suffer, and it will strain the ingenuity of
Governments, labour bureaux, and the like institutions,
to stave off the troubles of unemployment. Even were
the war to be terminated to-morrow, the aftermath will
bring with it a crop of troubles which the greatest local
good fortune can only mitigate and certainly cannot
prevent.
After all is said and done, the real duty of all is to
save —to economize in requirements, and to rigidly pre-
vent waste. This duty lies at the door of the provider,
whether he be manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer, or
anything else, and I particularly wish such to view the
duty from a moral standpoint.
You can so organize your work as to provide employ-
ment for the whole of your staff of employes, only cutting
down their time from full to three-quarters or to half,
as the exigencies of the case require from week to week.
If you assist by this means in keeping them all in work
you will have done something towards strengthening the
country’s resources. But you can do even more than
this.
You have been in the habit during the last few years
of good times of making very substantial profits on your
annual turnover. If you practise your share of the
national thrift you can afford to do with less than these
previous profits, and it will enable you to continue tg


6 NATIONAL ECONOMY
employ your staff as stated above, and to mark down
your goods to something nearer what will be the pur-
chasing power of the people under adverse circumstances.
M hy not anticipate these coming circumstances and sell
your goods at prices much nearer the ratio of cost? You
surely will not be a party to exploit your fellow-men at
such a time as this!
Why not take a hand in breaking down what has
been thought smart business” in the past in writing up
prices in anticipation of a short supply (or in anticipation
of increased costs) on goods already in stock purchased
at much lower prices? Of course, this appeal is not
“business,” but it is “moral.”
You will tell me that to differentiate is impossible—
it would entail this, that, and the other trouble—but if
you look at it from the highest ground you may find the
will to do it.
While on this question of profits I have heard some
quaint arguments against their taxation, engendered, of
course, by the introduction of the Bill for the imposition
of a War lax; but it is well nigh impossible to obtain a
hearing for any suggestion that is equitable, either from
the owners of the businesses returning profits, or from
the men who have very considerable incomes from any
source.
It is considered an iniquity to most of them for any
of this income to be diverted at all—for its disposition to
be taken out of their hands. It is not for them a question
of their duty or their ability to pay, it is a sheer obstinate re-
fusal to allow any sense of responsibility to enter into the
consideration of the question. Surely none of us in our
inner consciousness decline to accept the truth of the
absolute necessity for the War Tax, and none of us, I
hope, will do anything to reduce the amount payable, by
any transfer of property which is really ours. Let us not
be guilty of the meanness of evasion of responsibility.
We have all done our best to encourage the young
men of the community to enlist in the Expeditionary
Forces and to fight for the protection of everything dear
and sacred to us. Recruiting is in full swing at this very
moment, it is being pressed all over the continent, by all
classes and all creeds, and surely you will not send these
men to war, ill-equipped, without due regard to the
continuance of the supply of good food, and without
adequate and sound ammunition in their pouches. You
will be guilty of a hand in such a crime as that would be,


if you evade, by any means, your proper contribution to
the fighting fund.
Therefore keep your investments in your own names.
Let your incomes remain at the highest possible
individual level. See that, for purposes of your balance
sheets, your assets are valued at their true worth, and
that no item in the expenditure side of the profit and loss
statement is such that will not bear the strictest scrutiny.
There must be no juggling of figures, no transfer of
capital or income-bearing investments into such channels
as will lessen the amount you ought to pay in War Tax.
Some of you men of business, and you men of more
than ample means, have sent your own sons into the
fighting line; how do you square that with the intent to
evade the money payment to enable him to be kept there,
fed, clothed, and supplied with ammunition?
You would escape the ignominy of public opinion if
it never became known, but you cannot escape the effect
of such action on your own conscience. You would be
lashed with remorse for the rest of your days; your self-
respect, or vanity, as the case may be, would be for ever
shattered. What would you think of yourself if your son
died on the battlefield?
1 he loss of the sense of proportion by many strikes
one on a visit to the shopping centres. Displayed in
many of the windows are some very fine, inspiriting
posters calling for recruits, while alongside are some
alluring cards by the shopkeeper calling attention to his
goods; but worst of all are the advertisements in the
daily papers by this same man offering what I have
before called “unnecessary*’ wares. In times like these
why not be above tempting the public to purchase what
it does not need? Why not be public-spirited and put
these things away until the purchasing power of the
nation is rehabilitated? Keep them on your shelves; and,
if there is any depreciation, accept it as part of your share
of the general financial burden. You are much better
able to bear it than the masses, and, as a matter of fact,
you have no ethical excuse for wishing to pass it on to
them.
I despair of the possibility of doing much good by
these appeals when such a reference as the following is
published in one of the leading Australian dailies:
“COMMERCIAL INTELLIGENCE.
“Merchants have, up to the present, had the
advantage of rising markets, which have appreciated


8 NATIONAL ECONOMY
the values of their stocks and caused an expansion
of profits in several sections. But the time is arriv-
ing when the replenishment of stocks can only be
done at extremely high prices, so high in many
instances that consumption must be appreciably cur-
tailed. Merchants are, therefore, fully seized of the
fact that immediately the war is over there will
be a slump, to which the advance during the last
year may be a circumstance. Profits made on the
upward movement of values require, therefore, to be
carefully preserved as a set-off against that decline
in commodity prices which is considered inevitable.”
The writer is himself surely the “merchant” who
admits having successfully exploited the public, and now
sets about finding a way of escape for himself under
coming adverse conditions. If this is “commercial intel-
ligence,” how can I reach his “other intelligence”?
THE DUTY OF GOVERNMENTS.
Having dealt with the duty of the various members
of the body politic, it is thought not out of place to make
some reference to the duty of Governments—either State
or Federal—in the present crisis and in the coming diffi-
culty. These crises should bring home to both the
governed and those who govern some truths which it
would be idle to mention under other circumstances, with
the possibility that the experience may teach a useful
and lasting lesson.
As it is still preferred to have these questions
looked at from the ethical standpoint, it may be of little
use to present them to the professional politician—to the
man wedded to the party system, who cannot look beyond
his immediate interest, and whose attitude is always that
of its vote value.
Some day, let us hope, a real man —a statesman in
the true sense of the word —will arise, who will be strong
enough to be above party, who will make his interest
subservient to his national duty, and who will purge the
present system, oblivious of his chances at the next
election.
It is such a man who is wanted at the present critical
juncture. The duty of his Government would be plain.
It would be to stop waste in the great spending depart-
ments, to organize them with the help of experts so that
the money’s worth would be given by all suppliers, so


that labour should give of its best and its fullest for its
due reward, and so that the work undertaken should be
of permanent value to the State or to the Commonwealth.
There are likely to be bad times ahead for a good
many of us, the wage earner as well, and I hold it to be
sound policy and a duty of all Governments to carry out
national works in times of depression or adversity, not
because those works can be done for less money then,
but because such action reduces distress and tends to
continue employment with as little disruption as possible
in the ordinary habits of the people.
The competition by Governments in times of pros-
perity, when labour is fully employed at remunerative
rates in its ordinary avenues, is an interference at once
unnecessary and unsound, and subversive of the best
interests of both employe and employer—in other words,
of the whole body of the people.
And it is in this organization of labour, with its
subsequent use and the settlement of what are good,
sound national works, that the value of the expert comes
in. What has been, and is being, done in all countries at
the present moment with the production of munitions
can just as well be applied to my proposition, and I
believe the experience gained in this war in this respect
will force it on to the lasting benefit of all.
Is it any use appealing to either political party on
these grounds? Is anything to be hoped for from the
one steeped in tradition and fearful of its rights, privi-
leges, and patronage? But what about the other party?
Has it not a glorious opportunity? It has the power to
introduce something new, something logical, something
economically sound, shorn of all the old-time subservi-
ency, but even its present constitution and aims would
require radical amendment.
There are signs of this regeneration in some minor
respects, and were the leaders, who after all are the
brains of the party, to use their endeavours in proving
to it the national benefit of such a change in public
policy, there would be some hope for purity of govern-
ment in the future.
It may seem a paradox to suggest spending money
while one is driving home lessons of thrift, but economy
in expenditure and stoppage of waste is really, under the
circumstances mentioned, of the same order.
One wonders why the present Commonwealth
Government has pursued its policy of continuing un-
necessary and unproductive work, say, at Canberra,


10 NATIONAL ECONOMY
especially as it has been in possession of inside informa-
tion, ever since August, 1914, of the possible duration of
the war, and of the financial burden which will be thrown
on the people in consequence. And the same may be
said of many other places where money is being spent by
them without due regard to present necessities.
It is surely the duty of all Governments to give a
lead to the people in these times, and to show not only
that they understand the situation, but are courageous
enough to tackle it.
It is some gratification to read, although late in the
day, of the intention of the Commonwealth Government
to practise economy, but the task will prove a very heavy
one owing to previous carelessness and probable wilful
waste. In London Sir John Simon very properly
described it in the following words:
“Extravagance, always a folly, becomes in war
time a crime—thrift, always a virtue; becomes in war
time a great national duty.”
Why should there not be a Ministry of Industry or
Labour, assisted by expert advice, for the proper
organization of the worker, and why should it not be
possible to convince the labour unions that it is to their
advantage to support it? Anything suggestive of com-
pulsion is repugnant, but with the official department
and the unions co-operating in the work, friction should
be reduced to the minimum, if not altogether removed,
with the resultant general benefit.
The primary object of this appeal was to bring home
to every person of every class the absolute necessity for
thrift and care, at any rate during the war, but it will do
no harm to summarize the various suggestions:
1. Every man, woman, and child should save
money. They should buy only the absolutely
necessary things to ensure moderate comfort, and
preferably those things which are produced in
Australia.
2. Every person having money at his or her
command should invest it in the War Loan.
The rich man has a special duty to do so, but
it is incumbent on all to help its successful flotation.
Some of the reasons given in connection with the
War Loan in England apply equally to our position,
and I quote them:


(a) “At this moment it is incumbent upon every
business man to take an immediate financial
interest in his country by subscribing to the
War Loan."
(b) “If every director will see that his firm's
reserve funds are lent to the country much
will have been done to bring the war to a
successful issue."
(c) “Your money is the only thing you can fight
with. If you were young and strong and free
from responsibilities you would carry arms.
You cannot fight for your country, but you
can make your money fight for you."
(d) “It is every man's duty to subscribe, so that
you and your children may the sooner be the
citizens of a nation victorious and at peace."
(e) “The man, be he rich or poor, is little to be
envied who at this supreme moment fails to
bring forward his savings for the security of
his country."
(f) “If you have a relative in the army, help him
to win by giving his country the money it
needs. The youth of the country has respond-
ed nobly. Will you who have the money do
your share, too?"
3. Will the business man, also from a sense
of duty, be satisfied to conduct his operations with
only a very moderate profit?
4. Will all men and women with taxable
incomes realize that the War Tax is, under the
circumstances, just and necessary, and will they do
all in their power to make their contributions full
and effective?
5. Will Governments who are asking for these
full contributions see that the money is wisely
spent, and that their departments are so managed as
to avoid waste and extravagance, and to visit those
guilty of jobbery and corruption with heavy punish-
ment?
What more can be said? Unless the men and
women in this country are seized with the seriousness of
the situation and take a firm grip of their individual
responsibility, there is little chance for it or the Empire.


hb'S-0
The foregoing was published in a series of articles
about the middle of 1915, but the duty urged upon all is
as important now, and perhaps more so than then.
It would not appear that the lessons which were in-
tended to be brought home to every person in the Common-
wealth had become at all impressed upon them.
Spending goes on apace, both by the individual and
by Governments, and it is very doubtful whether thrift
is being seriously practised by any.
It is more than likely that the well-to-do have cut
down their ordinary expenditure in some avenues, but
these fortunate people have, it is hoped, not been
injudicious in so doing. They have the power to assist,
in a very large measure, in alleviating distress in times
of adversity; and their capital is so large and their
incomes so considerable, that there is little sacrifice
entailed. Their paramount duty is to put all their avail-
able wealth at the service of the State to assist in prose-
cuting the war, and it may be assumed that they have
done so, and thus helped to make such a success of the
flotation of the first Commonwealth Loan. They will
have a further opportunity of showing their appreciation
of a distinct duty at the end of the present month by
subscribing to the second War Loan of £10,000,000, and
it is well within their power to find this sum.
What rather appals one is the comparative reckless-
ness of the people generally. It is beside the question to
say that wages have not risen in comparison with the
added cost of living—ordinary necessities do not repre-
sent anything like the average earnings. It is the un-
necessary things which run away with what might, and
ought to, be saved; but it is a very difficult matter to
convince anyone of the direct and indirect benefit, both
to the individual and to the nation, of a policy of thrift
fully and properly practised.
It must be patent to anyone who takes the trouble
to think that, if in these times, when the financial strain
is heavy and likely to become a greater burden, the
people do not save voluntarily and so assist in carrying
through our share of the cost of this war, that the Gov-
ernment will be compelled to force economy upon all
by heavier and heavier taxation—indeed, this seems the
only way to bring home to most of us a lesson we should
all have realized long ago.
If the people do not know, or will not learn, what
their moral and material responsibilities are, what other
way is there of teaching them?
Surely it would be to our credit to carry out our
obvious duty rather than be made to do it.


—yc**-^/ 7
zrir
£*^<
/C« «•


/Tteirf* (_ /
