

National Socialist
Germany
As A Factor Of
European Peace
Speech by Dr. Goebbels,
Minister of the Reich, before
the Intellectual Union in
Warsaw on June 13th, 1934
M. MULLER & SOUHN G.M.B.H., BERLIN SW 19


It is no easy matter to explain exhaustively to an audience of
foreign listeners the political phenomenon of National Socialism
to which Germany owes her new form. Nevertheless I make this
attempt because I know that modern Germany cannot be under-
stood without a knowledge of National Socialist views. I do so
with sincere gratitude to my hosts who have given me this opport-
unity. The Reich is so clolesy woven together, both in form and
spirit, with the idea of National Socialism, that the two coalesce
and the one cannot be imagined without the other. For Natio-
nal Socialism is a typical German phenomenon, bound up with
the German peculiarities of character and blood and German
history, arising out of the past, dominating the present and point-
ing the way to the future. Nothing would be more erroneous
than to assume that National Socialism, as a spiritual mani-
festation, is inspired with the ambition to extend its activities
beyond the frontiers of the Reich and to carry out a spiritual
expansion policy beyond the limits drawn by political conditions.
It is deliberately content with the solution of the tasks allotted
to it in the Reich at home and abroad.
The statement once made by Mussolini about Fascism applies
also to National Socialism: “It is not an export article”. It has
to fulfil purely German internal tasks. In so far as the Reich
has to establish foreign political relations or to represent world
interests, it does so, like any other State, as a nation upholding
its right to live. National Socialism carries on no other foreign
policy beyond this.
It is the world’s right and its political duty to discuss this phe-
nomenon. But this discussion would lead to no tangible result, so
long as the world merely attempts to dissect and scrutinise
National Socialist Germany apart from its conditions and requi-
sites. Like every other spiritual manifestation National Social-
2


ism can claim the right to be understood of itself and not to be
criticised according to standards which may suit the examiner
but are in no way adaptable or tolerable to the object examined.
The Minister then spoke of the essence of the National Social-
ist revolution, its dynamics, methods and results. He emphasised
that there had never been a Government in Germany which
could boast of its agreement with the broad masses of the people
like the National Socialist Government, as was proved by the
92 percent majority obtained at the elections on November
12th, 1933.
The Minister then continued as follows:
This must be emphasised in order to create a possibility of
mutual understanding between the new authoritarian Germany
and the largely democratic surrounding world. The people and
the Government in Germany are one. The will of the people is
the will of the Government and vice versa. The new State con-
struction in Germany is a kind of ennobled democracy in which
government is carried on on authoritarian principles by the
mandate of the people without there being any possibility of
falsifying and rendering unfruitful the will of the people by
parliamentary meddling and machinations.
The meaning of the revolution that we have made is that the
German nation has become a people. Its most pronounced
characteristic is its determination. It was a rising of determin-
ation against political impotence. The German people now looks
to the future with firm confidence and trust. Instead of a
devastating impotence which surrendered before the existences of
life, which would not admit them or fled from them, came a
heroic view of life which now permeates the whole of Germany,
which accompanies the peasant when he draws the ploughshare
through the fields, which has restored to the worker the meaning
and higher object of his hard struggle for life, which gives the
unemployed fresh hope and fills the grandiose work of German
reconstruction with a manly and powerful rhythm.
This is also expressed and is visible to the casual obser-
ver, in the economic sphere. Class differences, which formerly
tore Germany asunder and rendered impossible every political
formation of her will to live, have been overcome and have had
to make way for the conception of a creative community of
a people at one with itself. The nation has set to work in sober
determination. The illusion that where distress is greatest help is


readiest to hand has given way to the conviction that the fate of
Germany lies only in her own will to live and work.
Dr. Goebbels then described in its main lines the grandiose
reconstruction work of the past seventeen months. He showed
how the authoritarian State had acted as an honest broker be-
tween the economically strong and the economically weak and
had dissolved the classes without making light of or ignoring
conflicting interests. He bore testimony to the respect at present
paid in Germany to work as such and spoke of the miracle which
seemed impossible and had nevertheless been rendered possible
by a sacred spirit of devotion in the struggle against the paralys-
ing problem of unemployment. Dr. Goebbels concluded this
part of his speech with the question: If it is true that a Govern-
ment should only be judged by its results and that the judgment
of history is given not on motives or intentions, but only on facts
and achievements, is it presumptuous for the Government of the
National Socialist revolution today to call for this supreme
judgment?
With regard to the relationship of the National Socialist revo-
lution to art, the Minister said inter alia:
The profound and honest solicitude which the new Germany
devotes to the brain-worker is shown by such great cultural
acts—to mention only a few —as the foundation of the Reich
Chamber of Culture, the erection of the House of German Art,
the extensive building plans for Berlin and Munich, the large-
scale transfer of a number of representative theatres to the State,
the new Editors and Theatres Law, and the energetic assistance
given by the National Socialist Government to the film industry.
These are all proofs of the uplifting of our political life to an
extent which cannot be matched in the past history of Germany
either before or after the war.
But the people have a right to demand that, if the man in the
street ist bound by iron fetters to the eternal laws of his national
existence, the intellectual should as well have the duty and
responsibility of recognising these laws and making them the
guiding principle of his life and work.
This does not mean that National Socialism has the intention
of placing the intellectual under its party tutelage. We are well
aware that by so doing we should be imposing compulsory laws
on him which would very soon stifle creative genius and put an
end to the organic growth of artistic work.
4


The hunger which has seized upon the German people is not
merely a physical hunger. It also extends to the soul and
demands to be appeased. Like every great revolution, our revolu-
tion also aims at a revolutionary reconstruction of our cultural
possessions and creative work. No criticism has touched us so
deeply as the critism that National Socialism is spiritual barba-
rism and must ultimately lead to the destruction of the cultu-
ral life of the German people. We have again released the
creative forces of the nation. They can now develop unhindered
and bear rich fruit on the tree of a recreated nationality.
Dr. Goebbels compared this position with the anarchic and
chaotic forces of Marxism and Communism. If, he said, the
unsocial exponents of these ideas were excluded from the com-
munity of the people and endeavours made to train them in con-
centration camps to become again useful members of human
society, this was an act of self-defence which in view of the
immensity of the acute danger was carried out with the most
humane means. What did it matter that a few thousand anti-
social individuals should be taken care of, so that a nation of
66 millions might have its life restored!
The Minister went on to say that the world had every reason
to consider honestly and without prejudice the new form of State
development, which pursued no other object than to release Ger-
many by her own efforts from the crisis and thus to relieve the
world as a whole of its cares.
The Minister then dealt with the Jewish question. It should
be borne in mind, he said, that before we came into power the
Jews in Germany exercised a paramount influence on the whole
of intellectual life; they possessed most of the movable and
immovable capital invested in the country; they had the press,
literature, stage and film absolutely and unreservedly in their
hands; in large towns, for instance in Berlin, they represented
up to 75 % of the total medical and legal professions; by impos-
ing excessive interest rates they brought agriculture to the verge
of ruin; they made public opinion; they controlled the stock
exchange and had Parliament and the political parties under
their protection; while at the same time they represented only
0,9 %of the population. It will be understood in the* light of
these facts that the defensive measures against them were
inevitable.
We have no reason to fight shy of the truth in respect of the
Jewish problem. We would, however, wish and hope that the
5


honest fight for truth should not be poisoned from the outset by
tales of atrocities and the almost grotesque lies of emigrants
which cannot stand the slightest objective examination.
In this connection may be mentioned the imputation that
National Socialism intends by unscrupulous propaganda to under-
mine the constitutions of other nations and to endanger their
existence. We are too busily engaged in practical work on intern-
al German problems to find time or opportunity to assume a
more or less mystic world mission outside the boundaries of our
own country. As Youiig Germans we respect every other nation
which arranges its internal affairs in accordance with its own
character and tasks. We respect its honour and self-reliance.
National Socialism has no international mission to fulfil in an
aggressive sense. While Marxist Communism is inspired by the
desire to impose its ideology on other peoples and nations in
order thereby to draw them into an international world revolu-
tion, we respect the individuality of each nation and believe
that it is only on the basis of such understanding that per-
manent European cooperation can be guaranteed. We are firmly
convinced that this is the best way to secure world peace. We
Young Germans are filled with the belief that there is no problem
in Europe which could make a war necessary. We are not a
sabre-rattling race of conquerors; we regard it as absolutely cri-
minal to believe that the damage inflicted by the last war, which
it has been impossible to repair during fifteen years of peace
work, would have to be removed by a fresh war. And we also
possess the courage to give expression to this conviction before
our own people and before the world. We have supported it by
words and deeds. We have rendered possible what seemed to
be impossible in this respect. But we do not think we are asking
too much in wishing and hoping that the world should try
to comprehend this honest endeavour and show us the same
respect as we have shown for the world’s troubles.
The agreement with Poland, before whose esteemed repre-
sentatives I have the honour of speaking today, is a proof that
Adolf Hitler and his Government are serious in their efforts to
bring about a far-reaching reconciliation of the nations and to
bridge the differences which have driven Europe almost to the
verge of collapse. Our withdrawal from the League of Nations
and the Disarmament Conference was not in contradiction with
this desire. An honour-loving nation can negotiate and work
only with Powers who respect its honour and grant it equality
6


of rights. Honour is a factor in the international life of
nations which cannot be accorded or withdrawn at will. It is
only a proof of the sincerity with which we respect the honour
and the national life of other peoples when we desire that our
own honour and national life should be equally respected by
other peoples. Does a nation which, after losing a war and
undergoing the severest moral, economic and political disturb-
ances, applies again its own strength in a gigantic endeavour to
avert destruction, shrinks from no sacrifices to place its own
house in order and shows no lack of courage or industry—does
such a nation deserve to be despised and cold-shouldered by
the rest of the world?
Should not rather the rest of the world welcome any attempt
to tackle the solution of the great problems of the time by new
methods?
The world cannot leave these questions unanswered. Germany
is waiting for this answer and, with her, are waiting all nations
who, tired of phrases and disputes, have a right to demand from
their statesmen that the infinitely tortured European continent
which is bleeding from thousands of wounds may ultimately
regain its internal order and that peace which is so warmly
desired by all.
Germany is prepared to cooperate in this noble work with
the profoundest conviction. She still holds out her hand to her
former enemies, of whom she can only desire that they may
some day become her friends.
The world asks with apprehension: When will this hand be
grasped?
7
