

i:
i
\ * d: :
[ I Sii i
' i Cm'
#p< i
- ? (
I 1 r :l
&>l: Ijls
i I
� qdt ,? i c\ if tf . i
I -Xcltiomil ' JpgctlfjJ* |
THE COLONIES AND THE
MOTHER COUNTRY.
4 -A. lecture ijg
Si by. ii
rf\ the honourable : -m
Si
|ji WILLIAM EDWARD HEARN. P
1: ? ill
W)|; 'MELBOURNE : :|L.
STILLWELL AND CO., COLLINS STREET EAST. ! |M
1879 ? P
PRICE SIXPENCE.
viii ife


s.
? '%* o i .
? ? 4. .
j ;. ?


Rational :
THE COLONIES AND THE
MOTHER COUNTRY.
A lecture on the above subject was de-
livered by Dr. Hearn, M.L.C., under the
auspices of the Political Reform Association,
in the Free Library, Geelong, on Wednesday
evening, February 26. There were nearly
300 persons present, and the chair was occu-
pied by the mayor (Mr. J. H. Connor),
Having been introduced to the assemblage,
Dr. Hearn said, ?Mr. Chairman and Gen-
tlemen, ?I propose to address you this even-
ing upon a subject of no common interest,
of no common importance, of no com-
mon magnitude. I need not dwell in
a meeting of colonists upon the interest
which attaches to our relations, whether
they be friendly or whether they be un-
friendly, with the dear mother land. The
importance, too, of the subject, when we bear
in mind the theories that but recently have
been in vogue in England respecting the
colonies, and- the cruder, although, per-
haps, less dangerous notions that we some-


times hear among ourselves the im-
portance, I say, of the subject is equally
obvious. But that character of it which at
this moment most presses upon me is its
magnitude. In the brief space of time that
is at my disposal, I know not how, if I seek
for something better than to while away with
sentimental platitudes an idle hour, I can
give you a clear and intelligible statement of
the history and the principles of colonisation.
Gladly would I tell you of the earliest move-
ments of which history preserves any trust-
worthy record. Gladly would I tell you of
the Hellenic emigrant, taking with him the
holy tire from his Prytaneum, and setting
forth under a chief who, after death, was to
be the guardian spirit of the new settlement,
to establish across the seas a new community,
politically independent indeed of its
metropolis or mother state, yet ever turning
to that metropolis with the deepest senti-
ments of reverence and love. Nor is the
temptation less to enlarge upon the primi-
tive colonia or plantation (for such is the
meaning of the word) of Rome. That body
was not a band of emigrants seeking their
fortunes, nor did they cross the seas, nor
did they found a separate community. The
Roman colonists were a brigade of citizen
soldiers, despatched upon a special service.
They were to garrison in behalf of the city
Rome some conquered or half conquered
Italian town. So far from severing the old
tie, they held their colony as sons held
their acquisitions for the use of the
family of which they were members. Much,


too, I might say of our own early colonisa-
tion. But it is not of Grecian, or of Roman,
or even of English colonisation generally,
that I am about to address you. I must
speak this evening of one part only of this
great subject?of that part which directly and
immediately affects ourselves. I propose, in
a word, to describe to you, as best I may, the
structure and the organisation of that re- V
markable political product of modern times,
the constitutional colony of the British j
Empire.
I must commence with a proposition which
will sound to you all as a mere truism. That
proposition is, that we colonists are the natural
born subjects and liegemen of the Queen.
On this point there is no room for doubt. The
tie of allegiance is in its nature personal; and
its consequences, both of protection on the
one side and of obedience on the other,
extend and continue, so long as the relation
lasts, through every part of the world. A
British subject who buys or sells slaves in
Brazil, although he may be resident in that
country, and although by the law of that
country his traffic is permitted, is by English
law guilty of felony. He is safe, indeed, so
long as he remains in Brazil, but if he be
found, either on the high seas or in any
part of Her Majesty?s dominions, he will be
punished as the law directs. A fortiori, then,
the English law is binding upon Her Majesty?s
subjects who merely remove from one
portion of her dominions to another portion.
Nor is it merely the burden of the law that
thus follows us. We take its benefits


as well as its burdens. Our ancestors on all
great occasions have 'always claimed the
common law, not as a matter of policy or on
any ground of expediency, but, to use their
own emphatic words, as their birthright. In
the Great Charter and other similar instru-
ments the words used are those by which
landed property in its highest form, that of
an estate in fee simple, has always been
conveyed. The King for himself, his heirs,
and successors, grants their liberties and free
customs to his subjects and their heirs for
ever. There is no limitation of time or place.
And so it has always been held that English-
men who emigrate from England take with
them those liberties and free customs, or so
much, at least, as the nature of the case
renders possible. Thus when a new com-
munity is formed in some distant place, Her
Majesty may, by her prerogative, organise
and incorporate that community, just as she
may incorporate any number of people for
any lawful purpose in England, and she may
prescribe the form of their government and
of their courts. But that government must
be representative ; no tax can be raised, and
no new law can be enacted except with
the consent of the community, as ex-
pressed by their representatives ; and the
courts must proceed by the rules of the com-
mon law, and by no other method. Such is
the doctrine of the common law, and although
colonies are now usually founded by act of
Parliament, and not by prerogative, these
fundamental rules are scrupulously ob-
served.


Thus the principles by which Englishmen
are governed are the same all the world over.
But the application of these principles
varies, as the circumstances of each case
vary. It is almost, if not altogether, phy-
sically impossible to govern from Londonlarge
communities at the other end of the world
Nor would any attempt to do so be
consistent with that right of self-govern-
ment which, as we have seen, forms
part of our birthright. Hence arises
a very peculiar organisation, peculiar, I mean,
in its results, for it is a mere extension of a
simple and familiar principle. As every
town in England makes its own bye-laws,
while it is subject to the general law of the
land, so in the extended aggregate which we
call the empire, each colony makes its own
laws for its own wants, while in all other
respects it remains subject to the central
Government. Or, to put the matter in
another aspect, colonists are subject to two
kinds of law, one personal, the other terri-
torial. To the former they are subject by
virtue of their allegiance ; to the latter they
are subject by the common law right of self-
government, confirmed and regulated and
applied by the constitution which has
been given by the Imperial Parliament.
We have thus in Victoria, and in every other
constitutional colony, two distinct legislative
organs. The one is our own Parliament, the
other is the Imperial Parliament. Both these
powers are in active operation. Most
people are not fully aware of the extent
of Imperial legislation for the colonies.


The general rule is that no act of the Im-
perial Parliament binds the colonies unless
they are expressly mentioned. But not a
session passes in which there are not acts
which expressly relate either to all the
colonies or some of them. Such, to take but
a few recent examples, are the acta relating
to naturalisation, to extradition, to merchant
shipping, to governors? pensions, to colonial
attorneys, to colonial clergy, to kidnapping,
to Chinese passengers, and many others of
the same kind. It becomes, therefore, a
question of great interest and importance
to ascertain by what means the action of
these two legislative bodies is reconciled.
That they are reconciled is obvious, because
ever since our existence as a colony they
have worked together, and yet their working
has been so smooth that it is almost un-
noticed. I think that the controlling agen-
cies are?l. The supremacy of the Imperial
Legislature in any case of conflict. 2. The
care with which, by the practice of the Im-
perial Parliament, conflicts are avoided. 3.
The moderating influence of the Crown under
responsible Government. As to the first
point, the supremacy of the Imperial Legis-
lature, the rule of law is fundamental and
unquestioned. It was well settled by
common law, and it has been declared by an
act of Parliament (28 and 29 Yict., c. 63),
passed in the year 1865, which is well
worthy of your attention. Originally the rule
ran, much in the same form in which power
is usually given to corporations to make bye-
laws, that a colonial act must not be repug-


nant to the law of England. Such a restric-
tion, if it were construed literally, would
have proved too severe ; and accordingly re-
pugnancy was defined to imply, not diversity,
but conflict, that is, if there were an Imperial
law and a colonial law on the same subject,
but with different enactments, the Imperial
law must prevail. Thus, for example, when,
some years ago, the law of primogeniture was
repealed in this colony, some persons thought
that such a departure from the rules of the
common law was beyond our powers. But
primogeniture was never made by any Im-
perial law binding upon the colonies, and it
was therefore quite within our compe-
tence to alter the rule if we saw fit to
do so.
Upon a much smaller matter a case oc-
curred some years ago which illustrates the
present subject, and which also shows the man-
ner in which, by a little courtesy and good
feeling, difficulties when they arise between the
two Legislatures are removed. Certain acts of
the Imperial Parliament (54 Geo. 111., c. 15;
5 and 6 Win. IV., c. 62 ; 14 and 15 Yict.,
c. 99, s. 11) contained certain provisions
relating to the admission of evidence in any
court of law within any of Her Majesty?s
dominions. These provisions, however useful,
were not particularly interesting. They dealt
with the substitution of declarations for oaths,
and for the admission of public documents
without proof of the authenticating seal or
signature, and with similar details. Shortly
after the commencement of our new Legis-
lature, the Parliament of Victoria passed an


act (No. 8) to consolidate and amend the
law of evidence. In this act our Parliament
repealed the Imperial acts I have mentioned,
and re-enacted in another form and with a
different arrangement their provisions. The
act received the Governor?s assent, but the
Colonial Office objected to it on the ground
that it professed to repeal acts of the Im-
perial Parliament expressly applying to the
colonies. The offending act was not, how-
ever, disallowed. An act of the Imperial
Parliament was passed repealing, so far as
Victoria was concerned, the Acta of Geo.
111. and Wil. IV., which we had affected
to repeal, and enabling the Legislatures
of other colonies to repeal these acts if they
thought fit. On the other hand, the Parlia-
ment of Victoria repealed the act to which
objection was taken, and passed a new Evi-
dence Act (No. 100), avoiding, of course, its
former mistake; and in this act it recognised
and declared that the section of the act of
Her Majesty which in its former act it had
attempted to repeal, and which it was neces-
sary to retain as part of the Imperial law, is
in force in Victoria. Thus, when the mistake
was pointed out, the Imperial Parliament
hastened to give the Victorian Parliament the
power that, in relation to a particular subject
it desired ; and the Victorian Parliament was
not slow to acknowledge that it had exceeded
its powers, and of its own accord to with-
draw a pretension that could not be sustained.
It may be asked how is this superiority of
England law enforced. The answer is that
such superiority is part of the law of Vic-


tori a, and is consequently enforced in the
same way as all law is enforced. The judges
have to administer the law, and the Imperial
acts which bind the colonies form a part of
the law with which the judges are charged.
If there is a collision, or a seeming collision,
between any parts of that law, there are rules
which guide their decision. Such conflicts
are not unknown to lawyers. The statute
law may conflict with the common law ; two
statutes may conflict with each other; the
schedule may conflict with the body of its
act. In all these cases the rules of construc-
tion are familiar to every lawyer. So, too,
where the local law clashes with the Imperial
law, there is a fixed rule which determines
the action of the court. It is for this reason
that we find a notable difference in these
colonies and in America between the relations
of Parliament and the judges from that
which exists in England. In England the
validity of an act of Parliament is never
called into question in the courts. An act is
published as law by Her Majesty in the
usual way, and the courts will not go behind
it,or inquire whether it was or was not passed
with the proper forms. But in America there
is a written constitution, which imposes cer-
tain limits upon the Legislative power, not
only of the separate states, but of Congress
itself. This constitution is part of the law
which the Supreme Court administers, and
that court is, therefore, bound to ascertain
whether any given law conflicts with the con-
stitution or not. For the same reason our
courts are bound to take notice whether an


act has been passed in the mode required by
the Constitution Act. The Constitution Act
and the act to which objection is taken are
alike part of the law which it is their duty
to administer ; and it is not competent
for them to evade their duty, however
unwelcome its performance'may.be.
There is another and still more effective
method for securing the harmony of the two
Legislatures. There is an old saying that
prevention is better than cure. Of this homely
truth the subject of which we are now speak-
ing affords a remarkable illustration. The
Imperial Parliament possesses the power of
legislating for the colonies, and it has occa-
sionally exercised that power, and has
frequently intimated its readiness to exercise
it. But this power, like every other public
power, ought to be exercised in a reason-
able manner and in pursuance of a wise
discretion. It is therefore a fundamental
maxim of Parliamentary law that it is un-
constitutional for the Imperial Parlia-
ment to legislate for the domestic affairs
of a colony which has a Legislature of its
own. You will observe the important dis-
tinction between that which is legal and that
which is constitutional. It is perfectly legal
for the Imperial Parliament to pass laws
without consulting the colony, or even against
its expressed wishes, upon every subject that
is of interest to us?for constructing public
works, for disposing of public lands, for ap-
propriating public money. If such laws were
passed, they would be binding upon us,
and it would be the duty of the


courts and of the Government to enforce
them. But such an exercise of power would
be contrary to the usages of the country ; it
would disappoint the reasonable expectations
of the colonists, and it would not be in pur-
suance of a sound discretion. ?The trans-
cendental power of Parliament over every de-
pendency of the British Crown,? said Mr.
Canning, in a speech quoted with approba-
tion by Sir Robert Peel, ?is an arcanum
of empire which ought to be kept back
within the penetralia of the constitution. It
exists, but it should be veiled. It should not
be produced on trifling occasions, or in cases
of petty refractoriness, or temporary mis-
conduct. It should be brought forward only
in the utmost extremity of the state, where
other remedies have failed, to stay the raging
of some moral or political pestilence.? There-
fore, the Imperial Parliament sedulously
abstains from all interference in matters of
purely local legislation, that is, in matters
which affect the colonists exclusively, and do
nor directly concern others of Her Majesty?s
subjects. The only cases in which the Inr
perial Parliament consents to intervene are?
first, when its action is invited by the colonial
Legislature; and second, when the colonial
Legislature is, so to speak, out upon strike,
that is, when it habitually refuses or neglects
to perform its proper functions. Of the
former case there are many examples. Our own
Constitution Act and the Constitution Acts
of the other Australian colonies were, passed
by the Imperial Parliament at the request of
the respective colonial Legislatures. On the


other hand, the constitution of Jamaica, one
of the oldest of the British colonies, was but
a few years since taken away by act of Par-
liament upon the request of the colony itself.
The occasions on which the Imperial Parlia-
ment has interfered with the action, or rather
the inaction, of a refractory Legislature are
rare, partly because other means have usually
been sufficient to induce a return to wiser
counsels, and partly because the intimation
that Parliament would be asked to interpose,
and the knowledge that it had the power
so to interpose, rendered unnecessary any
active interference. Thus in 1838, when the
Legislature of Jamaica refused to provide the
necessary supplies, power was by act of Par-
liament given to the Governor in Council to
pass the usual appropriation acts, if the
Legislature persisted in its refusal. We our-
selves have not escaped without a significant
hint. In January, 1866, Mr. Cardwell, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, wrote to
the Governor of Victoria in the following
terms: ? 1 ?lt is not to be supposed that in
any province of the Crown peopled by the
British race, and enjoying representative in-
stitutions, there will he wanting that
spirit by which alone representative
institutions flourish, of obedience to
the law and of reasonable concession
in order to avert violation of the law.
Her Majesty?s Government cannot doubt
that a firm determination in years past
to observe the law, and an appeal in
this spirit to the colony will be re-
sponded to and accepted by the general


sense of the community. It would be very
unfortunate that the colony should be unable
by its own forbearance and wisdom thus to
solve its own difficulties, and I should greatly
regret if any necessity should ever arise for a
reference of such difficulties to the decision of
the Imperial Parliament; but in an extreme
case, that course is always open, and undesir-
able as I should hold it to be, it would be in-
finitely preferable to a violation of the law.?
There is a third means by which the har-
mony of the two Legislatures is maintained.
That means is the authority and the influence
of the Crown. The Crown is, indeed, the
bond by which the huge and scattered em-
pire is held together. Partly this influence
operates vaguely upon the community at
large through the sentiments traditionally
generated by the common allegiance. But in
its legal aspect the Crown operates as the
great central force of our political system. It
is Her Majesty that makes laws, both in the
Imperial Parliament and in the colonial Par-
liament. In each case Her Majesty is assisted
by different advisers, but the action is in both
cases that of Her Majesty. She therefore
has the opportunity of reconciling the con-
flicting pretensions of her separate Parlia-
ments, of keeping each within its proper
limits, and of averting the danger of colli-
sion. In the first place, the consent of the
Governor is necessary for all colonial legisla-
tion. But the Governor is the officer of the
Queen, is bound to obey her command?s, and
is removable at her pleasure. There are cer-
tain classes of bills to which by his instruc-


tions he is not permitted to give the Royal
assent, and which he is required to reserve
for Her Majesty?s special consideration. Her
Majesty may in such cases give or withhold
her assent, unembarrassed by any action
of the Governor. In all cases, how-
ever, after the Governor has assented
whether rightly or wrongly to a bill, the
Crown retains the power of disallowing that
bill within a period of two years. Hence the
announcement which we sometimes see that
such and such acts will be left to their opera-
tion. This means that the acts, after having
been assented to by the Governor, have been
sent home, have been there considered by
the proper officers in the Colonial Office, and
that it is not intended to advise Her Majesty
to exercise in respect of these bills the power
of disallowance. I think that the exercise of
this power must be now very rare. Ido not
recollect any instance of it in this country,
nor can I recall any conspicuous instance
of it elsewhere in recent times. We have,
indeed, not unfrequently cases in which from
reserved bills the Royal assent has been for
various reasons withheld. The most fre-
quent ground of objection has been that the
colonial Legislature has exceeded its powers.
For example, at the time when our acts were
consolidated, a bill was prepared consoli-
dating into a single statute the numerous
acts relating to the customs and excise, and
re-arranging their provisions. It was simply
a consolidating bill, and did not affect to
make any substantive change in the
law. It passed both Houses, but under


the Governor?s instructions it was neces-
sary that, as affecting the customs, it should
be reserved for the Royal assent. That
assent was withheld because the bill con-
tained a provision to guard against smuggling,
prohibiting the touching casks of spirits
floating in the sea within 100 leagues of Vic-
toria. Undoubtedly such a clause was in
excess of our powers, for our Parliament
makes laws in and for Victoria, and not for
300 miles out at sea. But the clause was
copied from the existing Customs Act, which
in turn had without any thought been ori-
ginally copied from the English act. The
curious result of the loss of the bill is that
that very section to which objection
was taken still forms part of our Cus-
toms Act ; and if some day the customs
authorities prosecute some skipper for taking
up some casks of good brandy that he finds
knocking about 20 miles outside the Heads,
the Supreme Court will have to determine
whether a conviction under that section of
the Customs Act of 1857 can be sustained.
Sometimes, although more rarely, the Home
Government objects to a colonial bill on the
ground of its policy. It then states the
ground of its objection ; if the colonial Par-
liament feels the force of these arguments,
the bill is either modified or quietly falls to
the ground, and no more is heard of it. If
the arguments are not convincing, an ani-
mated correspondence ensues. But unless third
parties are affected, the Home Government
is usually content with having secured full
and renewed consideration of the subject,


and after having had ita say, generally yields
to the wishes of the colonists. It sometimes
happens that the object which the colonists
desire cannot be obtained without an act
of the Imperial Parliament. In this case,
the action of responsible government be-
comes apparent. Just as one great function of
the Ministry is to prevent any collision be-
tween the Crown and Parliament by taking
upon itself the burthen and the blame of the
controversy, so the Ministry also inter-
poses when the two Parliaments are likely to
disagree. As a general rule, the Imperial
Parliament will pass any bill relating to the
colonies that the Government in which it has
confidence recommends, and will not pass
any bill not so recommended. It, of course,
retains its right of criticism or even of
rejection, but as a general rule, unless, as has
sometimes happened, the matter be made for
some reason a party question, Parliament is
content to accept the advice of Ministers, and
is reluctant to act without the guarantee of
their responsibility. Thus the two Legisla-
tures rarely come into direct collision. The
matter is fought out between the Colonial
Government and the Colonial Office. If the
latter yield, the desired act is passed with
little discussion. If it keep firm, the colo-
nists mustcontentthemselves with grumbling
until a more pliant Minister sits in Downing-
street. Such, for example, was the question
relating to the imposition of differential
duties in favour of the other Australian colo-
nies. Under the provisions of the Constitu-
tion Act it was not competent for our Parlia-


ment to pass such a measure, the reason
being that such duties were inconsistent?or
supposed to be so?with Her Majesty?s treaty
obligations with foreign powers. At length,
most reluctantly, the Colonial Office gave
way, and the desired act was passed. It is
obvious that no such bill, if proposed by a
private member, would have, or indeed ought
to have, received a moment?s attention. It
is strange that after all the disturbance and
all the tall talk, this act has remained simply
a dead letter. Nor is it likely to have any
effect so long as the systems of finan-
cial policy in the several colonies are
fundamentally different.
I have so far spoken of the relation between
the Legislatures of the mother country and of
the colony. We have now to consider the
relation between their respective Executives.
In other words we have to consider how
responsible government, as it is called, in the
one country can be reconciled with responsible
government in the other country. I must first
remind you of what I have already said as to
responsible, or, as it is perhaps better called,
constitutional, government. , It assumes
invariably the legality of the acts in ques-
tion. There is no question in it as to law,
but only as to discretion. But as the whole
administration of the law is vested in the
Crown, the discretionary powers of the Crown
are enormous. It is lawful for Her Majesty
to make war or to conclude peace, to pardon
every criminal, to confer every title of dignity,
to distribute as she pleases the vast patron-
age of the empire. No person can dispute


her powers in any of these respects. But it is
obviously of vital importance that these im-
mense powers should be wisely exercised.
To secure this object the law provides that
Her Majesty shall act officially in a certain
way, and through certain specified servants.
Further, the practice of the constitution is
that Her Majesty shall select and retain those
servants subject to the advice of Parliament.
By this remarkable contrivance, the result of
the controversies of many generations, and
perfected only in our own time, the Queen
employs certain professional advisers ; while
she continues to employ them, she follows
their advice. If they give her advice of
which she cannot approve, she seeks other
assistance. If the advice which they give,
and upon which she acts, be not in accordance
with the views of Parliament, Parliament
makes no attempt directly to interfere with
the functions of the Crown, but advises Her
Majesty to change her principal servants. If
Her Majesty be disinclined to accept this ad-
vice, she may change her Parliament? i.e.,
may dissolve the House of Commons ; and as
between the existing Ministry and their oppo-
nents the decision of the new House is final.
These principles are applied in the colony in
the same way in which we have seen that the
rules for legislation are applied. In all purely
colonial matters, that is, in matters exclu-
sively affecting the colony, the Governor
exercises his discretion with the advice of
his Ministers, and subject to the general
superintendence of the Parliament of Vic-
toria. It is necessary to observe that in the


colony, as in the mother country, these rules
relate exclusively to matters of discretion.
Everywhere, whether in the mother country
or in the colony, the legality of the act is
taken for granted. With Englishmen the
law is always supreme. "* It is no excuse for
the Queen, much less is it an excuse for
the Governor who is the servant of the
Queen, that illegal acta have been committed
in conformity with the advice of Ministers.
When King James 11. lost his throne, the
famous resolution which declared the throne
vacant recited various offences which he
had committed ?under the influence of evil
advisers.? And if this be true in such excep-
tional circumstances as those in which the
Sovereign, against whom the law provides no
remedy, is concerned, much more so is
it the case when the servant of the Crown
is concerned, for whom the law enter-
tains no delicacy, and for whose misconduct
it provides very sharp and specific remedies.
If a Governor commit any illegal act in his
colony, whether he has been advised to do so
or not by his Ministers or by any other per-
sons, he is liable to be prosecuted when he
returns to England before the Queen?s
Bench. No proceedings can be taken against
him in the courts of his own colony, and he
is of course liable to removal from office if
Her Majesty think fit; but when he is out of
office criminal proceedings may be taken
against him in England, as they were recently
taken against Governor Eyre, and as, in former
years, they were' taken with success against
many colonial Governors. In no circumstances


does the law accept as an excuse for an offence
the advice of any other person. In matters of
discretion, for constitutional purposes, for
the censure of Parliament, and the conse-
quent removal of Ministers, such an excuse
may be sufficient. But as I have said, no
constitutional act can be illegal, and the
assumption is that every subject of Her
Majesty, and above all, the confidential ser-
vants of Her Majesty, must have sufficient
judgment of their own to keep them within
the limits of the law.
It may be asked, what is a Governor
to do if his Ministers, backed up by public
opinion, press upon him some illegal
course? The answer is very simple. He
must at all hazards continue to say ?No.?
Doubtless, his position may be very embar-
rassing and very uncomfortable, but his duty
is, as duty generally is, plain enough. If the
colony really desire something forbidden by
Imperial law, the colony must apply to the
Imperial Parliament for a change in that law.
When that change is made, but not before,
the Governor is free to act. Thus, in such a
conflict as I have supposed, he simply trans-
fers the difficulty to his principal, and then
the case comes within that collision of Legis-
latures of which I have already made men-
tion. But such cases are of the rarest. The
people of a free country are seldom fools ;
and if the Governor is firm, they soon see
that the law must be obeyed ; if they have a
real grievance they proceed to agitate for
its redress by the proper and constitutional
means; if they have not such a grievance,


they return to their usual business, and are
soon glad that they have been saved from
themselves and from their leaders. Thus,
both in their legislation and in the adminis-
tration of their own affairs the inhabitants of
a constitutional colony have all the rights and
all the powers that their countrymen at home
possess in relation to purely domestic matters.
The sole condition of this power is that they
shall obey the laws which they have them-
selves made, or to which, as parts of a great
complex community, they are necessarily sub-
ject. With this one light and not unreason-
able limitation, the colonists, like other men,
have set before them the good and the evil.
They are free to take the one and to leave
the other; and when they have made their
choice, they must abide its consequences.
Such is a brief description of the leading
features of our political system. The same
general principles of government which have
been matured in England have been trans-
mitted to us, with only such adaptation as
the necessity of the case requires, for the
regulation of our domestic affairs. The same
principles by which the several parts of the
empire are governed are applied, so far as
may be, to the government of the whole.
These principles are, I believe, the maturest
product of political wisdom that the world
has yet seen ; in no other country have
liberty and good government been so suc-
cessfully combined. What further develop-
ments of these principles the course ?of
time may bring with it, no human
being can predict. But I think we may


say, if we can at all judge of the future by the
past, that these changes to come will be no
arbitrary alterations, but such developments
as are essential to life and as tend to
? greater magnitude and to higher organisation.
It is, unfortunately, the fashion of some
among us to decry, although for different
reasons, these noble institutions ; to declare
that the Constitution has broken down ; to
go to Norway for a Parliament, and to Franc�
for the means of superseding a Parliament;
to bid, like Lord Byron, their native land
good night; to trust themselves to the frail
bark and the wide, wide sea of communistic
speculation,
? Nor care what land they bear me to,
So not again to mine.?
As to those who profess to revere our
national institutions, but who declare that
the Constitution in this country has broken
down, it is difficult to know whether
one ought to. laugh or to be angry.
It is at least quite certain that the
disgrace of the failure?if failure it be?must
rest, not with the institutions themselves,
but with the men who have worked them.
Why should Englishmen in Australia work
their ancestral Constitution with less success
than Englishmen in England have done, and
are still doing? I, for one, have an un-
bounded belief in English institutions and in
Englishmen, and although we may some-
times stray from the right path, I do not
fear that, sooner or later, we shall be-
come conscious of our error, and return
to the ways of truth and soberness.


For those ?and I think that, after all, they
are not many?who really dislike our
national institutions, and are anxious to re-
place them with others of their own inven-
tion, I of course pretend no sympathy. There
is no common ground between us. They
rely upon general principles which they
formulate from their own philosophy or from
some supposed view of human nature. With-
out even discussing these views, it is enough
for me that they are inconsistent with
the traditional usages and history of our
country. Englishliberty has never rested upon
any considerations of expediency, or any
speculation about the rights of man or the
brotherhood of nations. Our liberty has
always been a practical matter, and has
always been maintained, not by dreamers,
but by practical men. It has, as I have
already had occasion to observe, been always
treated as an entailed estate, which has de-
scended to us from our ancestors, and which
it is our duty to transmit unimpaired to oui
posterity. It is not liberty in the abstract
with which we have to do, but thai
very concrete form of orderly freedon
which has come down to us through 50 gene-
rations and 1,400 years. Nor is it of small im-
portance that we should accustom ourselves
to think, as our ancestors have always
thought, of this English liberty in the cha-
racter of an entailed inheritance. ?Always
acting,? says Edmund Burke, ?as if in the
presence of canonised forefathers, the spirit
of freedom, leading in itself to misrule and
excess, is tempered with an awful gravity.


This idea of a liberal descent inspires us with
a sense of habitual native dignity, which pre-
vents that upstart insolence almost inevitably
adhering to and disgracing those who are
the first acquirers of any distinction. By this
means our liberty becomes a noble freedom.
It carries an imposing and majestic aspect.
It has a pedigree and illustrious ancestors.
It has its bearings and its ensigns armorial.
It has its gallery of portraits, its monumental
inscriptions, its records, evidences, and titles.
We procure reverence to our civil institutions
on the principle upon which nature teaches
us to revere individual men on account of
their age, and on account of those from whom
they are descended. All your sophisters
cannot produce anything better adapted to
preserve a rational and manly freedom than
the course that we have pursued who have
chosen our nature rather than our specula-
tions, our breasts rather than our in-
ventions, for the great conservatories and
magazines of our rights and privileges. ?
We have thus before us the picture of an
ancient empire on which literally the sun
never sets, containing numerous dependen-
cies of every race and colour and degree.
With many of these we are not now con-
cerned. They are, so to speak, the natural-
ised members of the state. They have ob-
tained this position at the sacrifice, more or
less great, of political independence. They
may say with the centurion of old, ??with a
great sum obtained I this freedom.? But
we colonists are entitled to sympathise
with the Apostle?s boast, ?butl was free-


born.? How long, then, is this assemblage
of free-born Englishmen united on the prin-
ciples I have thus described to continue ?
How long will the Empire endure, and the
colonies remain united with the mother
country ? Without hesitation I answer,
? With God?s blessing, for ever.? I know
well that very different views have been put
forward by eminent writers, and that very
different language has been used by public
men. But without now entering into the
controversy, I may say that that fashion has
for some years passed away. The natural
good sense of the people, both at home and
in all the colonies was wiser than the
paradoxes of a very shallow and very mis-
taken philosophy. That system seems to
have assumed that perfect political maturity
could not be obtained without ultimate poli-
tical independence. This proposition further
assumed that a constitutional colony was
essentially distinct from England. Neither
of these assumptions can, in my opinion, be
maintained. We are, it is true, distinct from
the island called England, and from the
local concerns of that island. But of that
England, which denotes the political relations
of Englishmen in whatever part of the world
they may be, we claim to be part quite as
much as is the old island itself in the North
Sea. If this be true, it is idle to talk of
political maturity and ultimate indepen-
dence. There is nothing, absolutely nothing,
in the colonial relation to imply as a natural
event separation.' Separation may of course
take place, but it is the result of some ex-


ternal force, of some quarrel which might
be avoided, and not the natural out-
come of the organisation itself. If the
colonial policy of England a hundred
years ago had been what it now is?if there
had been no Navigation Laws, if the com-
merce of the colonies had been left free, and
had not been sacrificed to the imaginary in-
terests of English merchants and manufac-
turers?Queen Victoria might at this hour
have been undisputed sovereign from the
St. Lawrence to the Gulf of Mexico, and
from the Atlantic to San Francisco.
That great and most unhappy schism was not
due to any inherent defect in the colonial re-
lation such as I have described it, but was
the natural result of that vicious political
economy (very different indeed from that true
economy which forms the best cement of
nations) of which Napoleon rightly said that if
it found a nation of granite, it would scatter
it into powder. I cannot now delay you
with an account of the causes which led to
the War of Independence, although there are
few subjects which furnish for a colonist
more profitable meditation. I will merely
quote to you the words of Mr. Huskisson, the
statesman who in the last generation was the
forerunner of all those great colonial and
financial reforms which we have been ac-
complishing, He said in Parliament: ?? It
is generally believed that the attempt to tax
our American colonies without their consent
was the sole cause of the separation of those
colonies from the mother country. But if
the whole history of the period between the


inuccu is now poaaib'
yet * ? " taken tr ~'
year 1763 and the year 1773 be examined, it
will, I think, be abundantly evident that, how-
ever the attempt at taxation may have contri-
buted somewhat to hasten the explosion, the
train had been long laid in the severe and
exasperating efforts of this country to enforce
with inopportune and increasing vigour the
strictest and most annoying regulations of
our colonial and navigation code. Every
petty adventure in which the colonists
embarked was viewed by the merchants of
this country and the Board of Trade of that
day as an encroachment on the commercial
monopoly of Great Britain. The professional
subtlety of lawyers and the practical in-
genuity of Custom-house officers were con-
stantly at work in ministering to the jealous
but mistaken views of our seaports. Blind
to the consequences elsewhere, they per-
severed in their attempts to put down the
spirit of commercial enterprise in the people
of New England, until those attempts roused
a very different spirit; that spirit which
ventured to look for political independence
from the issue of a successful rebellion.?
No such calamity as that of the Ameri-
can colonies is again likely to occur.
None such indeed is now possible. And
yet it is constantly taken for granted that
a disruption of the empire is but a ques-
tion of time. I maintain that this as-
sumption is merely gratuitous, and is not
supported 6y' any proof. On the other
side, I shall produce to you a witness well de-
serving of attention, the statesman by whom
constitutional government was first practically


administered in its full extent in a British
colony, a man generally admitted to have
been one of the ablest of England?s many
able viceroys, the late Lord Elgin.
He thus writes from Canada, where he was
Governor-General, to Earl Grey, the Colonial
Secretary ;?? I am prepared to contend that
with responsible government, fairly worked
out with free trade, there is no reason why
the colonial relation should not be inde-
finitely maintained.? To the same corres-
pondent he writes on another occasion:?
? We have on this continent two great em-
pires in presence, or rather, I should say,
two great Imperial systems. In many respects
there is much similarity between them. In so
far as powers of self-government are concerned,
it is certain that our colonists in America
have no reason to envy the citizens of any state
in the Union. The forms differ ; but it may be
shown that practically the inhabitants of
Canada have a greater power in controlling
their own destiny than those of Michigan or
New York, who must tolerate a tariff imposed
by twenty other states, and pay the expenses
of war undertaken for objects which they pro-
fess to abhor. And yet there is a difference
between the two cases ; a difference, in my
humble judgment, of sentiment rather than
substance, which renders the one a
system of life and strength, and the
other a system of death and decay. No
matter how raw and rude a territory may be
when it is admitted as a state into the Union
of the United States, it is at once, by the
popular belief, invested with all the dignity


of manhood, and introduced into a system
which, despite the combativeness of certain
ardent spirits from the South, every American
believes and maintains to be immortal.
But how does the case stand with us?
No matter how great the advance of
a British colony in wealth and civilisation,
no matter how absolute the powers of self-
government conceded to it, it is still taught
to believe that it is in a condition of pupilage,
from which it must pass before it can attain
maturity. For one, I have never been able
to comprehend why, elastic as our constitu-
tional system is, we should not be able, now
more especially when we have ceased to control
the trade of our colonies, to render the links
which bind them to the British Crown at least
as lasting as those which unite the compo-
nent parts of the union. . . . One thing
is, however, indispensable to the success of
this or any other system of colonial govern-
ment. You must renounce the habit of
telling the" colonies that the colonial is a
provisional existence. You must allow them
to believe that, without severing the bonds
which unite them to Great Britain, they may
attain the degree of perfection and of social
and political development, to which organised
communities of free men have a right to
aspire.?
I have thus endeavoured to show that we
colonists, although we move in a smaller
orbit than England, yet gravitate with it to a
common centre, and form equally with it a
part of the great English nation. I have
contended that except our own will there is


nothing to make us cease to be a part of that
nation. I will only add that it is our duty
to conduct ourselves as becomes members of
that nation. Our mission is to spread the
British language, the British religion, the
British laws, the British institutions, over
this remote portion of the globe. We
are not to shrink from our task from
any difficulties or discomforts incident
to a new society, much less are we to mar
this great design by senseless quarrels among
ourselves. We are not, on the one side, to
abandon our posts in disgust, because some
of our companions are wayward and even
perverse. Nor are we on the other hand,
when we are entrusted with great powers of
self-government, to abuse those powers for
the advantage of one class and for the detri-
ment of another. We have been given
English institutions ; but the gift is worth-
less unless we take care to use it in
the spirit in which it has been bestowed.
English institutions must be worked by
Englishmen in the English way. That
way implies mutual respect, mutual forbear-
ance, a readiness to concede what is not ma-
terial, tenacity in holding fast that which is
good; in one word, an honest and loyal desire
to promote the public benefit, and to secure
to every man his just rights, and neither less
nor more than those rights. Such is the
course that our fathers have pursued ; it is
thus that England has grown to greatness ;
such, if we wish to obtain the like results, is
the course that we too must follow. Nor can
I more fitly conclude these remarks than by


reminding you of the wise yet sweet precepts
of our patriot and philosophic poet:?
Love thou thy land, with love tar-hrought
From out the storied Past, and used
Within the Present, hut transfused
Thro? future time by power of thought.
True love turn?d round on fixed poles,
Love, that endures not sordid ends,
For English natures, freemen, friends,
Thy brothers and immortal souls.
But pamper not a hasty time,
Nor feed with crude imaginings
The herd, wild hearts and feeble wings,
That every sophister can lime.
Deliver not the tasks of might
To weakness, neither hide the ray
From those, not blind, who wait for day,
Tho? sitting girt with doubtful light.
Make knowledge circle with the winds;
But let her herald, Reverence, fly
Before her to whatever sky
Bear seed of men and growth of minds.
Watch what main-currents draw the years;
Cut Prejudice against the grain ;
But gentle words are always gain:
Regard the weakness of thy peers:
Nor toil for title, place, or touch
Of pension, neither count on praise :
It grows to guerdon after-days;
Nor deal in watchwords overmuch:
Not clinging to some ancient saw;
Not master?d by some modern term;
Not swift nor slow to change, but firm :
And in its season bring the law.


CONTENTS.
Introduction 1
Colonists are the Queen?s liegemen .. .. 3
Colonial liberty is English liberty adapted to
altered circumstances 5
Action of Imperial and Colonial Parliaments,
how reconciled 5
Illustrations of their practical operation .. .. 7
Supremacy of Imperial law, how enforced .. 8
Constitutional usage of Imperial Parliament as to
Colonial questions .. .. .. .. 10
Influence of the Crown upon the two Legislatures 13
Remonstrance of Imperial Government against
Colonial legislation 15
How Responsible Government in each of the two
countries is practicable .. .. .. .. 17
Duty of a Governor who receives illegal advice .. 20
Theory that Victorian Constitution has broken
down 21
Theory that Victorian Constitution is radically
bad 22
The Colonial relation permanent 24
Lord Elgin?s opinion thereon 27
Conclusion 29
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


N
I!
IILi ,i III i Mi1I . Ir , r 7xrTOTt^


??r?
