

325.315
MUR fj) 2
. 'ioz/i
NATIVE LABOUR IN PAPUA
SIR J. HUBERT MURRAY, K.C.M.G.
Lieutenant-Governor of Papua
sth December, 1928
Published by
THE ANTI-SLAVERY AND ABORIGINES PROTECTION SOCIETY
DENISON HOUSE, VAUXHALL BRIDGE ROAD, LONDON, S.W.I
January, 1929


NATIVE LABOUR IN PAPUA
By Sir J. Hubert Murray, K.C.M.G., Lieutenant-Governor of Papua.
LABOUR is a burning question all through the Pacific ; it has burnt
fiercely enough in Papua in days gone by, and doubtless will burn
fiercely again, though at present the fire has been dimmed into a pleasant
glow. The question is not who is to be the labourer. To the European it is
obvious that it is the native who is to do the work, and the white man who is
to do the thinking ; and the development of tropical countries has depended
largely upon the success of the attempts which have been made to bring the
native to realise this ; to realise, that is, not only that he is to do the work—
this is in most cases beyond doubt —but also that he must work, not for
himself, but for an European employer.
It is true that of recent years the example and success of West
Africa have opened the eyes of Governments to the possibility of develop-
ment by plantations owned and worked by natives ; but the subject with
which I propose to deal is that of the native who hires out his labour to
an European—the question of native plantations is quite different and
involves different considerations.
It has been said that in our relations with what we call the inferior
races" we move in an atmosphere vitiated by the insincere use of high-
sounding words ” ; and especially in so severely practical an affair as
native labour we must be careful to get rid of all cant and sentimentality.
It is the fashion nowadays to boast of one’s knowledge of " native psy-
chology ”, and there is many a man in Papua (and many more elsewhere),
who is really honestly convinced that he, and he alone, is the man who knows
Papuans and who understands how to treat them. Such men are a con-
stant source of danger. In my opinion the first thing we should realise
is that few white men really know much about natives, and the second is
that the natives know even less about us than we do about them. Both
parties should therefore be always learning and trying to understand
each other better. And I think myself that they are always learning,
and that, e.g., in Papua, our knowledge of the native, and the native’s
knowledge of us, is less obscured by priggishness, formalism and pedantry
on our part, and ignorance, superstition and distrust on his, than was the
case twenty years ago.
No Imported or Forced Labour.
The labour problem in every country is conditioned by local circum-
stances and restrictions. There are two principal restrictions in Papua —
one is that under present conditions imported labour is impossible, and


the other is that forced labour will not be allowed ; and it is hardly
necessary to add that flogging and all forms of corporal punishment are
absolutely forbidden. And I think that if a vote were taken of European
residents each one of these restrictions would be endorsed by a large
majority—most certainly there would be but a small minority in favour
of corporal punishment.
I have said that imported labour is impossible, because I do not think
that any Australian Government would at present permit anything of the
kind, but I have added" under present conditions ” because, if petroleum
were discovered in payable quantities, and sufficient labour were not
available, it is conceivable that Asiatic labour might be admitted.
The importation of indentured labour has now practically ceased
throughout the Empire, and it has never been allowed in Papua. I have
heard bitter criticism of this policy which forbids the importation of
labour. As the question is settled it is perhaps idle to express any opinion
about it, but I should like to say that I agree entirely with the policy which
forbids the importation of labour, both for the sake of Australia and for
the sake of Papua. For the sake of Australia because imported labour
eventually means an Asiatic population as in Fiji and elsewhere in the
Pacific, and because an Asiatic Papua would surely mean an additional
danger to the Commonwealth ; and for the sake of Papua because I think
it would take away from the Papuan all possibility of advancement and
all incentives to ambition—these would be the prerogative of the Asiatic.
The Papuan could not hope to preserve his old culture, and he would
receive nothing in its place, for he could never face the competition of
the industrialised alien.
On the other hand forced labour may be defended. But anything
of the kind would, in practice, require such an extraordinary number of
safeguards that it would be unworkable. It would be a most excellent
thing if every native in Papua went to work for a good employer for a period
of twelve months, but he must go willingly ; directly you begin to force him
you meet with so many practical difficulties that it is better, even in the
interest of the employer, to give it up and to rely upon voluntary labour
altogether.
In any case forced labour would never be approved in Australia.
You may impose a tax of £i a head on every male native between certain
ages, with a remission of the tax to indentured labourers, and every one will
approve. But the administrator who imposed a fine of £i on every male
native between -those ages who was not working under indenture would
probably be dismissed. In the result both policies would be exactly the
same, and the natives could never be got to see the difference, for under
both if he did not go to work he would have to pay £i, and if he did go to
work he would not have to pay anything. But the one policy would be
defended and praised as an “ encouragement to native industry,” and
the other would be held up to execration as slavery.


The result of all this is that in Papua we have to rely entirely upon
indigenous labour, and it must be altogether voluntary.
Indentured v. Free Labour.
Now there are two kinds of labour recognised in the tropics ; one is
free labour and the other is the system of indenture. With free labour
master and man are subject to no statutory requirements or conditions ;
under the system of indenture almost all the relations between them are
or may be limited and conditioned by statute or by regulation —the length
of the term of service, the wages paid, the rations supplied, the hours of
labour, the care of the sick, the return of the labourer to his home, and
a hundred and one other matters that are likely to arise. And the breach
of these conditions is punished in the case of the employer usually by
fine, and in the case of the labourer usually by imprisonment.
Indentured labour is at best a necessary evil ; that is to say it is an
evil everywhere, and it is necessary in such places as Papua, not only in the
interests of the employer, but also for the protection of the native.
Still the indenture system with its pursuit of deserters and its imprison-
ment of those who break their contract, is really rather like slavery, and can-
not, I think, be accepted as a final settlement of the labour problem. But
its abolition would be ruinous to both employer and employed in Papua,
and our task therefore is to make it work as harmoniously as possible ;
and in this I think we may say that we have succeeded.
Labour in Papua must be voluntary m the fullest sense of the word.
It is not sufficient for the native to agree to go to work in the course of
conversation in his village or on the beach. Much bluff and “hot air”
may pass between the native and the recruiter, pledges and even presents
may be interchanged, but it is all of no avail. Up to the time that the
contract is signed before the Magistrate the native may change his mind
at any moment, and the recruiter must take him home again, all payments
and all promises to the contrary notwithstanding. This is often very
hard on the employer but it is a necessary corollary to the principle that
no contract can be considered except that which is made before the
Magistrate. And the Magistrate must stand quite neutral. The slightest
word or hint from him might be sufficient to induce a doubtful native to
“ sign on ”or engage, but that word or hint can not be given. Complaints
used to be frequent from exasperated recruiters, maddened at this sphinx-
like attitude of the Magistrate, and furious at having to return a native
who had repeatedly promised to engage, but who had refused at the last
moment. But it was obvious that we must have one thing or the other —
labour must be either free or compulsory, and could not be half and half—
and latterly, since recruiting has been carried out less by professional
recruiters and more by employers themselves, complaints have practically
ceased. Probably employers realise that the loss of an unwilling labourer
is really a gain ; for a discontented labourer can cause much trouble.


Papua Native Labour Policy.
Such are the general principles of our native labour policy in Papua.
Lovers of simplicity, practical men of the rough and ready school, used to
become impatient at its rather complicated provisions, which are in fact
much the same as those in force in other countries where indentured
labour exists ; and they used to demand, “ with no uncertain voice ” (as
they expressed it), that they and their labourers should be allowed to settle
their agreement without Government interference. But of course it has
always been generally recognised that the Native Labour legislation pro-
tects both parties to the contract. The native has assured to him food,
lodging, medical attention and wages, and the employer has his remedy
against an idle native and a native who deserts from his employment and
who otherwise breaks his contract. Thus many natives refuse to work
otherwise than under indenture, and many employers refuse to employ
“ free labour ” —that is, labour that is not bound under the N.L.O.
For the great “ pull ” of the employer is that the Native Labour
Ordinance gives him a criminal remedy for a civil injury—for what is really
a breach of contract. Almost any breach of the contract of service by
either party is punishable with fine or imprisonment, for the N.L.O. is really
a relic of the days when a breach of an agreement to go to work was really
looked upon as a crime. Those days are not so very far distant, for, when
I first went to the Bar, the N.S.W. Masters and Servants Act imposed
imprisonment in such cases, with a provision (exactly like our N.L.0.)
that a woman should not be imprisoned ; but times have changed since
then, and there would probably be some difficulty in getting the Governor-
General’s assent to the N.L.O. if it had to be passed again, and an attempt
to re-enact the old New South Wales Masters and Servants Act would
surely cause a revolution.
Provision was made under the N.L.O. that a native might work for
three months without indenture, and a great many do work in this way as
casual labourers,” for that was the name given to them to distinguish
them from indentured labourers or “ signed-on boys,” as they are usually
called. These casual labourers are, as a rule, quite satisfactory, but of
course the employer has no hold on them, for they can leave him when they
like, just as he can dismiss them at will; consequently it is risky to
run a plantation with nothing but casual labourers, the whole of whom
may be stampeded at any moment by a sudden longing for home, or by
fear of sorcery, or by a desire to go to a dance, and who may leave the
whole plantation entirely without labour, perhaps at a critical moment
when every man is badly wanted.
Recent Legislation.
Still in conjunction with signed-on labour the casual labourers were
quite a success, and the principle was further extended by an amending
Ordinance which was passed last year. The former Ordinance imposed


a limitation of time, but not of place—that is, it permitted a native to work
anywhere in the Territory without indenture, but only for three months ;
the amending Ordinance imposes a limitation of place but not of time —
it allows a native to work without indenture for as long as he likes, but only
within a certain distance of his home. The distance in the case of a man
is twenty miles, in the case of a woman, four miles.
The provisions are cumulative ; that is to say he can still work for
three months anywhere in the Territory, and of course he can still" sign-on
if he wishes to in any case.
The object of the limitation of place is to ensure that the native may
be able to return home at any time, if the conditions of service do not
suit him, for both parties have the right to terminate the service at
wilL
All systems of indenture are much the same throughout the Empire,
for they all aim at the same object and endeavour to reach it in much the
same way, but there are nevertheless important points in which some
systems differ from others. One of these is the indenture of women.
The indenture of women is not allowed in Papua, except as house servants,
nor, I believe, in any of the British Possessions in the Pacific.
Pretty pictures are drawn of happy family groups living together on
the plantation, father and mother indentured as labourers, and surrounded
by a thriving family of boys and girls, the children going to the plantation
school, and all, in case of sickness, receiving attention at the plantation
hospital. It may be admitted that both men and women would be well
treated on the plantation, and that they would enjoy advantages which they
could not hope for in their village, though nothing is said of their fate when
they become too old to work ; but the price they would pay would be a
heavy one, and would be no less than a complete change of status. For
the result would be that they would cease to be peasant proprietors, as they
are now, and would become a race of labourers, men and women divorced
from village life, and dependent on the plantation for their very existence.
Such a prospect has but little attraction for those who sympathise with the
theory of the sacred trust.
There are two methods of developing the resources of a country like
Papua ; they may be developed either by the native working entirely
in the service of the white man, or by the native working also for himself;
and the Papuan Government has chosen the latter. We think that if the
Papuan is to continue till the end of time as the servant of the white man,
hewing wood and carrying water at a daily wage, and is debarred from all
participation in such wealth as his country may produce, we shall have
failed in our duty, and shall have given colour to the old familiar fallacies
that a democracy cannot govern an Empire, and that colonies cannot
colonise, and the rest.


Native Taxation.
As the Chairman has referred to taxation, I may as well deal with
that. A tax is imposed on all males between certain ages, and the ages are
eighteen and thirty-six. It is not imposed on all, throughout the country,
but only in those villages that can afford it. The tax is paid into a special
fund, and this special fund can be applied only for purposes which are
for the direct benefit of the native, such as schools, hospitals, etc. This
is explained to the natives. You must remember that generally speaking,
there is no such thing as Chiefs, no native administration, no courts, no
machinery of government —and this makes our task extremely difficult.
Sir William McGregor commenced by appointing village constables in
place of the tribal chiefs who did not exist. They were really the servants
of the Government, in no sense representatives of the natives, although
many of them gave great assistance with regard to native matters. So
there was still a gap left, and we have tried to fill that gap by appointing
Village Councils : these are composed of men who are selected by the
natives of the village. The selections are generally quite good, and we
can accept them without any question. The Councillors are appointed
not in any way as servants of the Government, but as representatives of
the natives, and it is their duty to represent to us anything that they
think is for the benefit of the native villages, and to explain to the natives
the policy of the Government generally. The natives think we are a sort
of beneficent but very eccentric wild beast. They talk of the Government
as being “ wild.” The Councillors explain to them that we are not really
all mad, and that when we get them to build a road or to do any other
work it is really for their own advantage ; and so with regard to the
native tax, the Councillors explain that we do not put the tax in our
pockets, but that we really do spend it on schools and all the rest of it. The
result is that the villagers do not resent the tax. In fact villages which
have been exempted from the tax not infrequently regard the exemption
as being in the nature of a slight and insist on paying. Whether this is
due to the fact that the Papuans are all mad, or whether they have reached
a point of civic development to which none of us has attained, I do not
know ; but it is a fact that exemption has not infrequently been resented.
The tax is not imposed on the fathers of four children, and the wife in that
case receives a reward in the shape of a bonus, and the name “ bonus ” is
often given to the fourth child. There used at one time to be a tendency
in the native villages to regard a large family as a disgrace, and the object
of distributing these rewards is to counteract this tendency. Apparently
it is having this effect ; the distribution is celebrated by a village feast,
and the whole family, clad in their best and newest Rami, flock together
“ to see Mother get the bonus.”


Development of Village Life.
We think that the Papuan, in addition to working for a white employer
should be encouraged and assisted to develop his country for himself ;
this development can only come through the village life, and if the village
life fails all prospect of this development fails too. Now the village life
cannot ever fail so long as the women stay in the villages ; the men may
drift away for a time, but they will come back if the women remain—but
if the women go too, if they “ sign-on ” to distant plantations as well as
the men, neither men nor women will come back, and the village will come
to an end. And with the village will disappear all prospect of assisting
the native to strike out for himself as an economic producer —and he
becomes a landless proletarian without hope and without prospect beyond
his daily wage on the plantation.
It is the necessity of protecting village life that has made us refuse
the indenture of women on plantations, and it is the same motive that
has led us to discourage child labour, and to require that a native labourer
shall not (except with the consent of the Commissioner of Native Affairs)
remain away from his village under successive contracts for more than
four years. Such regulations seem irritating at first, but since they have
been recognised as part of a regular policy residents have ceased to object
to them and I have no doubt that by many they are cordially approved.
I may conclude my paper by bearing witness to the ready assistance
given by the great majority of employers in insisting upon the good
treatment of their native labourers.
8 A T, ‘
*0 f
Mt ./■
Headley Brothers, Ashford. Kent, and 18 Devonshire St. E.C.2.
3 1508
