

NATIONALISATION
OF THE
TOBACCO INDUSTRY.
AN ADDRESS
Compiled and Delivered to the Trade
by
GEO. A. CARTER.
CIGAR MANUFACTURER.
ISSUED BY THE CIGAR MAKERS’
UNION OF AUSTRALIA.
Copies may be had on application to the
Secretary Cigar Makers’ Union,
Trades Hall, Melbourne.
FEBRUARY, 1904.
Price One Penny.


NATIONALISATION
of the
TOBACCO INDUSTRY.
It is said that competition lowers prices to the con-
sumer, and if that were true, which I don’t admit, it can
only be so as compared with private monopoly. Against
State monopoly competition has no chance.
A manufacturer does not manufacture for the benefit
of consumers or workmen. His object is to make profit
for himself, and, if possible, to monopolise the whole
trade to himself. The competing manufacturers do not
confine themselves to merely undercutting each other, but
adulteration, misrepresentation, and all the other evil de-
vices of the trade are resorted to, first by one and then
another, until it becomes common to' the industry, and
accepted as an essential to its existence. John Bright
not only admitted that adulteration was a form of com-
petition, but defended its practices. That the pocket of
the consumer was filched by the imposition, and his health
injured by its practice, was not to be considered.
But will the thinking man, knowing that to be the
case, be satisfied with such a state of things, when the
advantages of a Government monopoly are made mani-
fest ? If the Government made a monopoly of the to-
bacco industry, there would be no wasteful competition,
and no need for adulteration nor misrepresentation, no


prodigious expenses for advertising, no travellers’ ex-
penses, nor the many other expenses that are part of the
clumsy system of competition. It is plain to the ordinary
thinker that, if the large manufacturer can successfully
compete against his smaller rivals, and the combines or
trusts can wipe out all competitors to the advantage of
the consumer, how much more must it be to the advan-
tage of the general community that the Government
should own that monopoly, and so put the profits of such
to the general use. The Government would have no ob-
ject in deceiving the public in the article they put on the
market, whereas in the case of individual monopoly, the
more they deceived by adulteration or misrepresentation
the greater the profits would be.
The question, then, is this : “Is the concentration of
the tobacco industry more economic, more efficient, and
in accord with industrial progress, and will it materially
benefit the consumer?” The fact that it has been tried
in this, as well as other industries, and has not been dis-
carded, is a proof that it is an advantage, at least to the
capitalist. By the aggregation of capital, the most up to
date machinery can be employed, and the cost of produc-
tion lessened, first by the division of labour, and then in
the same proportion as the division of labour is multiplied
the labour itself is simplified. Long years of apprentice-
ship to attain special skill is no longer needed, and those
that have attained proficiency in their trade are but very
seldom in demand.
THE COMBINE AT WORK.
I have nothing to say against the combines or trusts.
They are a natural product of industrial evolution, and
have come to stav. When the individual is driven


out of the market by the combine it is because the
latter does its work cheaper or better, or perhaps both.
Therefore the consumer is not interested in sustaining
small capitalists. This outcry against concentrated capi-
tal is but the cry of the would-be exploiter, who is
being forced back into the ranks of labour by the com-
bines. Under nothing short of a return to the handi-
craft stage of production could the workers be indepen-
dent of the owning class. The smashing-up of com-
bines, and the going back to competition, would not
destroy the many improved machines and tools of trade.
The individual capitalist would still have the use of
a very large portion of these improvements, although
not up to the standard of the combines, yet high enough
to preclude the worker as an individual ever owning the
necessary tools or machinery of his trade. The only
difference would be that under the decentralization of
capital the number of labour exploiters would be larger.
A more absurd and wasteful system than the competitive
could not be devised. It is a system that takes scares of
firms to do the work of one. It may seem hard that
the small man has got to be displaced by the combines,
but it is no worse for him than it is for the workman who
is placed by machinery. We can sympathise with
both, but the displacement is inevitable. It is the ne-
cessary result of economic evolution, and if the people
are wise they will push this monopoly one step further,
and make it their own. Already the system of produc-
tion is socialised; why not socialise the distribution ?
Mr. Hyndman well puts it, “ The Socialised system of
production revolts against the individualised system of
exchange. The interest of the proprietary classes
depends upon maintaining the present condition, but not
so with the working class. It is, therefore, necessary'
for your own emancipation that the cause of economic
slavery should be abolished; i.e., the private owner-
ship of the means of production and distribution should
be abolished. In its place there should be ownership of
industry by the people for the people.


SOCIALISED OWNERSHIP.
I know of no other solution of this problem than that
offered by the Socialists. They point out that the con-
centration of capital into the hands of a few enable these
few to reap all the benefits. Therefore, if the people
wish to enjoy the benefits accruing to these great com-
binations, “ the trust,” they must own them. As it is
generally acknowledged that production and distribution
on a large scale are more economic, then why not ex-
tend it to the fullest limit, and so preserve society from
the two extremes —poverty on the one side, opulence
on the other.
When these combinations or trusts are socialised, then
the evils which arise from private ownership will have
disappeared, leaving only the benefits that must result
from collectivism. We are fast drifting into that con-
dition of affairs when the manufacturers will combine
to keep up prices, and such a combine, although it
would raise the price of cigars and tobacco and cigarettes
to the consumer, it would not raise the wages of the
workers—in fact it would more likely reduce their wages,
for such a combine, when it had agreed on the lowest
price they would sell at, would agree upon the highest
wages they would pay.
It is said by the employers and press alike that you
might as well try to resist the force of gravity as try to
keep up wages in a falling market. But it is quite pos-
sible to stop the market from falling. Competition and
over-production is what causes the market to fall. If
you stop over-production and competition, you stop the
fall of the market. You accomplish that by forming
a monopoly, such as is already being formed in the to-
bacco trade of Australia, but that will not keep up wages,
it will only stop the fall of prices. The only remedy
the workers and the consumers have is the nationalisa-
tion of the industry, for that, and that alone, will re-
gulate the prices to the consumer, giving him a better
article for less money, and a living wage to the worker


and a greater revenue than at present to the country.
At present the benefits which should go to the worker, the
consumer, and the country go into the pockets of a few
men (mostly foreigners).
DOES NATIONALISATION PAY?
It has been put forward as an argument by the op-
ponents of nationalisation, that the -expense of starting
such a monopoly as the tobacco industry was so great
that it could not possibly pay the interest on the money
that would have to be borrowed, and also- give an equal
revenue, as is now collected through the customs on
tobaccoes of all kinds. Let the Treasurer of the German
Empire answer, and if they show how the revenue of
Germany can be increased seven or eight fold, it is fair
to assume that we can secure equally good results here
in Australia. Germany manufactures nine-tenths of all
she consumes, besides doing a very large export trade
in cigars. Australia manufactures only half the tobacco
consumed within her borders, while her export of cigars
is insignificant. It is, therefore, reasonable to suppose
that the Commonwealth could buy out an industry only
partly established at a much lower proportionate cost
than Germany could buy out an industry that is wholly
established, and with equal, if not greater, advantage
to the consuming public.
The following was translated from a well-known French
work: —“ Traite de la Science, dis Finance,” 1892, by
Mr. F. H. Bruford, and laid before the select committee
upon state monopoly in manufacture of tobacco as ap-
pointed by the Victorian Legislative Assembly, iSg6 :
In the discussion in the German Parliament in rßy7 and
1878 upon the tobacco tax, the Vice-President, Mde.
Stauffenberg, said: —“We smokers know that we smoke,
but we are far from knowing what we smoke. The em-
ployment of substitutes for tobacco is now practised on
such a large scale that one could devote a whole botanical
lesson to the description of the vegetables which elbow


one another in our tobacco and cigars. What, then,
will our tobacco be like under a surtax of 55 and 75
francs? The duties in France are much higher than
those of which this orator spoke in the Reichstag, and
the product is pure. This is a great argument in
favour of the monopoly. The official bulletin of statis-
tics of the Minister of Finance (March, 1877) shows
the diminution in the sale of Havana cigars, and adds
that this is in reality but a substitution; for the produce
made by foreigners are substituted in part, with profit
at the same time to the Treasury and to national labour.
Cigars made in France from the tobaccoes of the renown-
ed crops of Havana bought at the place of production by
the agents of the State, and other cigars of high quality,
also of French make, have helped to make up the
deficit. When the question is so simple a matter as
tobacco, the manufacture of which demands little but
care and fidelity, a monopoly is not a bad thing, especi-
ally ■when it brings in about per year to
the State.”
WHEN BISMARCK WANTED CASH.
The Chancellor of the German Empire (M. de Bis-
marck) has made great efforts in latter years to intro-
duce the monopoly into Germany, to transform a duty
which produces only _£i,ooo,ooo to to an-
other, which, according to calculation of the German
Treasury, will bring in about It is true it
will be necessary to pay, according to the same calcula-
tion, to the manufacturers, and the present
dealers. There would also be considerable expense in
establishing the system, nevertheless the manufacturer,
after mating a deduction for the interest on these sums,
would produce nearly per year. The estab-
lishment of the monopoly would give to the Empire great
financial facilities.
When the monopoly was introduced in France, the


circumstances were more favourable. The manufacture
or sale of tobacco was not represented by the immense
interests that have been created in Germany. In the
United States and Russia the tax upon tobacco is levied
by means of duties on manufacture, and license to sell,
with liberty to cultivate.
From the fiscal point of view all these systems are
bad, too complicated and insufficient to furnish important
revenues. We have no choice, but between two> general
systems, such as the prohibition of tobaccoi culture in
the country and the establishment of very high import
duties as in England,* or the monopoly of the manufac-
ture under the direct administration of the State, as in
France, Austria, Hungary, or Italy, or under the farming-
out system as in Spain or Turkey. The monopoly
exercised directly by the State is preferable when the
country has a good administrative organisation. The
countries of the Continent which have had the courage
to establish a monopoly of tobacco draw large revenues,
and have no wish to renounce the system.
[*England’s revenue from tobacco for the year ending March
31st, 1902, was
GENESIS AND GROWTH.
NATIONALISED INDUSTRY IN FRANCE.
The origin of the tobacco monopoly in France is
traced to 1674, in which epoch the first plantation was
established. This state of things lasted till 1791, with
one interruption of a few months in 1719 and r 720, dur-
ing which the culture of tobacco was prohibited through
France, and the exclusive sale converted into import
duties. Before the revolution the planters had the
special privilege to conduct the sale of the crops, the
manufacture and sale of tobacco. Further, three pro-
vinces only were permitted in each epoch to apply them-
selves to the culture of tobacco. They were the French
—Comte, Flanders, and Alsace. As to manufacture,
this was authorised in Paris, Dieppe, Morlaix, Touniens,


Le Havre, Toulouse and Valenciennes, by the law of
March 20th and 27th, 1791. The National Assembly
gave full liberty for the growth, manufacture, and sale
of tobacco. This resulted in a considerable loss of
revenue, and it was therefore the more necessary to re-
vert to import duties on the article, so much so that
this, in contradistinction to all the others, was voluntarily
approved and at once agreed to.
The law of 22 Brumaire, year 7, re-established a tax
on the manufacture of tobacco, and some years after
this first article of the decree of June 16th, 1808, gave
all particulars of declaration required to be made by those
who wished to cultivate tobacco. At length the decree
of November 29th, 1810, completed by that of January
12th, rßn, re-established in its entirety the monopoly
of manufacture and sale.
It is related that Napoleon 1., having encountered at
a ball a lady covered in diamonds, asked who was
the lady of whom the husband was rich enough for such
profusion. He was informed that the lady’s husband
was a manufacturer of tobacco. Some months after ap-
peared the decree which gave to the state the monopoly
of the manufacture and sale of tobacco.
The laws of December 24th, 1814, April 28th, 1816,
April 28th, 1819, June 17th, 1824, April 19th, 1829,
February 12th, 1835, April 23rd, 1840, etc., have made
firm the system established by the decree of 1810 —by a
provisional title, it is true —but this provision is practic-
ally settled, and the system, which after the law of 1852
should have ceased to have effect on January Ist, r 863,
still exists, and is not near its end. It has been
successfully renewed by the law May 23rd, 1862, and by
the law December 21st, 1872.
The growth, manufacture, and sale of tobacco have
been at all times placed under the supervision of the
Minister of Finance, who has delegated that portion of
his duties, first to an administration of indirect taxes,
and afterwards to a general Director of tobacco, since


abolished. Since 1851 all that concerned the manage-
ment of the tobacco monopoly appertains exclusively
to the administration of indirect taxes. The tobacco
planters are at liberty to dispose of their crop to the
State factories, or to export it, but they are bound to
let the agents of the administration know the actual pro-
duct of the harvest. Besides the twenty cigar,
cigarette, and tobacco factories, there are twenty-seven
culture storehouses, and four transit storehouses. The
superior technical person who is placed at the head of
each factory obtains his recruits from the scholars at the
Polytechnic School, who, with the title of apprentice en-
gineers, pass two years in the school, founded in 1824.
Attached to the factory of Gros-Caillon, the management
comprises a director, an engineer, and an under en-
gineer, not included in the list of superior officers. Im-
mediately below them come the storekeeper and the
chief clerk. The storekeeper is responsible for the
goods of the establishment. The chief clerk is under
the immediate orders of the director. The capital in-
vested in the buildings, machinery, etc., is
and the Government generally realises a profit of between
and per year.
NATIONALISED INDUSTRY IN ITALY AND
AUSTRIA.
In Italy the monopoly was for a long time farmed out
to a company, which paid dues to the State proportionate
to the quantity sold, and also gave a portion to the
charities. In 1868, the first year of this system, the
State received ,£2,740,000, of which ,£2,675,760 was from
the dues, and the value of the part given to
charities. In 1876 the State received ,£3,480,000, of
which 160,000 was from dues, ,£'200,000 to charities,
and ,£BO,OOO for over taxes. Since 1883 the State has
exercised a direct monopoly, and draws £7,360,000 per
year. —Budget of 1889-90.


The monopoly of tobacco has existed in Austria since
1870, first under the farming-out system; now (1892) it
is managed directly by the State, and it was introduced
in Hungary in . 1851. The Austro-Hungarian monarchy
is of all countries that in which the growth and manu-
facture of tobacco have attained the largest totals. The
business of the monopoly comprises the native culture,
which is carried on under the authority of a permit, the
sale of indigenous and foreign leaf, and the sale of
the finished product. It is much like the French sys-
tem, excepting that, in Hungary at any rate, the regie
interferes directly in the cultivation to improve it. There
is one regie for Austria, and another for Hungary. In
1851 the gross receipts of the monopoly for the whole
Empire were ,£3,000,000, of which only ,£1,600,000 was
net revenue. In 1874 the united gross total
Austrian and Hungarian monopolies was ,£8,600,000,
of which ,£4.800,000 was net revenue. The
expenses had increased 130 per cent. since
1851, whilst the net product had more than trebled.
In the Budget of 1889 the gross proceeds of the mono-
poly were estimated at £8,150,000 in Austria. The
charge of collection w r as estimated at ,£2,990,780. In
1889 the proceeds of the monopoly in Austria were
set down at £4,600,000.
NATIONALISATION THE TRUE PROTECTION.
The population of the Commonwealth in 1901 was
£3,782,943, the imports manufactured and unmanu-
factured tobacco was 11,226,0191 b. The imports of
cigars and cigarettes was 1,026,2411 b., and the exports
of the Commonwealth in the same year were: —Manufac-
tured and unmanufactured tobacco, 2,292,6801 b. and
272,3711 b. of cigars and cigarettes.
New South Wales in the same year cultivated
220,7521 b. of tobacco, Queensland 654,9761 b., and Vic-
toria 38,6401 b. No account is given of the other States.


However, according to those figures that are available,
the consumption of tobacco in the Commonwealth in
that year was r0,70r,5771b., or an average of forty-five
ounces per head of the population, less the refuse that
is caused in manufacturing, is more than balanced by the
amount of tobacco that is unaccounted for.
The “Tobacco Trade Review” of October, 1902, pub-
lished a report by the United States Consul of Lyons, to
his Government. He said: —“The State factories of
France use 59,026,3251 b. of domestic tobacco and
33, 0 75, 00 °1b. of imported leaf. Of the imported to-
bacco 28,665,0001 b. comes from the new world, mostly
from the United States, and the largest quantity of
this (called ‘ Barley’) is from Kentucky.” He goes on
to say: —“ The director of the works in Lyons gave me
particulars about the business here, and in other parts of
France. There are twenty factories in France, three
in Paris, and the others in the large cities. In tSpg
they employed r7,i84 hands. Besides these there are
7tq persons employed as directors, overseers, foremen,
etc. The capital invested in the buildings, machinery,
etc., is i0,385,2i6d01., and the Government realises a
profit of between sixty and eighty million dollars per
year. France takes into her factories 92,101,3751 b.
Allowing twenty-five per cent, for refuse—‘ that is, stems
and dust ’ —her actual consumption of home manufac-
tured tobacco would be 69,075,9941 b., or 2802. per head
of her population (‘ Census tpor, 38,595,500 ’) plus the
imported cigars, cigarettes, snuff, and tobacco. If you
follow these figures you will see that at the ratio of
France giving employment to 17,898 hands, the Com-
monwealth would give employment (according to its t9oi
population) to 2717 persons, and more according to its
present population.”
FACTS ABOUT CIGARS AND CIGARETTES.
I have before me some American tobacco journals, and
from their quotations I have calculated what the Gov


ernment could produce certain qualities and quantities
of cigars at (not speculating on what the Government
might get tobacco at, but what it actually cost accord-
ing to the present market). Upon these figures and
allowing the wages as determined by the Wages Board
of Victoria, I find that a far superior quality of cigar
could be produced to those that are now retailed at the
following prices: ijd., 2d., 3d., 46., 6d., pd., rs. each.
In round numbers, there are about 60 million cigars
per year consumed in the Commonwealth. I divide
them off as follows: —One million cigars (retail price,
ts. each) would cost to produce; two million
(retail price, pd.) would cost £30,000; ten million (retail
price, 6d.) would cost £100,000; ten million (retail
price 4d.) £80,000; fifteen million (retail price, 3d.)
£90,000; ten million (retail price, 2d.) £60,000, and
ten million (retail price, ijd.) £40,000, or a total for the
sixty million, £420,000. The average weight of the
sixty million cigars would be 12 Jib. per 1000, total
750,0001 b.
There are about 340,000,000 cigarettes consumed per
year in the Commonwealth, and I find that the average
cigarette retailed at 3d. per packet (of 10) caij be pro-
duced “ machine-made ” at 4s. 3d. per 1000, and hand-
made ss. Bd. per 1000. Out of the 340,000,000 that
are consumed in the Commonwealth, there are about
40,000,000 that are sold for 6d. per packet, and they
would cost to produce 12s. per 1000. lam allowing
in these calculations for the wages as at present paid
in Victoria, and allowing an average of 2|lb. of tobacco
per 1000. Total for the 340,000,000, 935,0001 b. Tak-
ing the medium of the cost of the 3d. packet at ss.
ojd. per 1000, the total cost would be for 300,000,000
£75,620, and for the 40,000,000 at 12s. per 1000,
£24,000, the retail price would realise ,£375,000 for the
3d. packet, and £IOO,OOO for the 6d. packet.


TOBACCO AND PROFITS.
I have made careful inquiries regarding the cost of
manufacturing tobacco, and I find that 6d. per lb. would
cover all costs, allowing that tobacco and the neces-
sary sweetings only is used (sweetings cost less per
lb. than tobacco). I find that the average cost of
material to be 6Jd. per lb., total cost of production, is.
ojd. per lb., by deducting the weight of cigars and
cigarettes from the total consumption we have left
9,0r6,5771b. for tobaccoes at is. ojd. per lb. to produce
the total cost would be ,£469,613.
It is not necessary for me to go into the details of the
present system of retailing, for the consumer can, if he
so wishes, by weighing the plugs, easily discover to
what extent in weight he is being cheated. I would sug-
gest that quantities (of different qualities) be put up in
one, two, and four ounce plugs, and retailed at 3d., qd.,
and 6d. per ounce for plugs, and 6d. and Bd. per. ounce
for cut tobaccoes.
I have divided the qualities as follows : —1,500,0001 b.
at 4s. per lb., ,£300,000; 5,000,0001 b. at ss. qd. per
lb-, 2,000,000 at Bs. per lb., £BOO,OOO.
Cut tobaccoes—3oo,ooolb.. at 10s. Bd. per lb., ,£114,974,
or a total retail feturn for plug and cut tobaccoes
,£2,668,307, and from cigarettes, £475,000, and from
cigars £875,500, the total cost of 60,000,000 cigars as
itemised would be £420,000. The total cost of
340,000,000 cigarettes as per itemised, ,£99,625, and
the total cost of tobacco as per itemised, £469,613.
Allowing that the land, and buildings, and machinery
(in Victoria) which were valued in 1895 at ,£125,080, has
increased in value by one-half and in like proportion, the
rest of Australia (at the present time Melbourne pro-
duces two-fifths, Sydney two-fifths, and the rest of Aus-
tralia one-fifth), it will be seen that the total cost of
resumption would be £469,050, and allowing £131,000
for extra buildings, land, and machinery, owing to the
larger output by the monopoly, because of the decrease


in the imported article, making a total of
4 per cent, on that amount is ,£24,000 —and this, added
to the previous cost of production, would bring the
total expenditure to £'t,013,238 —and the income would
be ,£4,018,307 —less the cost of distributing and per-
centage for retailers.
[ln calculating the cost of production, I have not been un-
mindful of the waste, and have allowed for waste 25 per cent,
over the weight of the manufactured article. I have in my
calculation had all the tobacco stripped in the Government
factories, for two reasons—one to give employment to more
people, and the, other that tobacco improves in quality while
the stem is in the leaf, up to a certain age.]
TO THE CIGAR-MAKERS.
In conclusion, I want to say a word to the cigar-
makers. You have a union and I have to acknowledge
that you have by your union compelled your employers
to give you some consideration, and further, I admit
that you, by your combination with other unions, have
compelled the Government to create such factory laws
that did for a time give equal pay for equal work through-
out the trade of Victoria, and regulated the number of
apprentices, and by such means lessened the evils of
sweating. But that did not stop the Adelaide machine-
made cigars nor the prison-made cigars of Germany being
poured into Melbourne and Sydney, and other places,
nor does it stop the, combination of capital; neither
does it stop competition, and although the trust may
stop competition internally, it cannot stop competition
from abroad.
Further, no Government will make such a tariff as
will stop foreign competition in this particular line, be-
cause tobacco is one of the principal revenue-getters of
this and every other white country.
Let the cigar-makers remember the last three years,
during which time the Factories Act has been in ope-
ration, and I think that vou will agree with me that you


have been very little, if any, better off during that period
than you were any three years prior to it. I have al-
readv admitted the Factories Act has done some good,
and 1 further admit that you may have been worse off
than you have been had there been no Factories Act.
but Factories Acts alone will not stop competition. This
never-ending rapacity of employers, this ceaseless crav-
ing to capture the other fellow’s customers. It ends,
as we see in the tobacco trade to-day, in the formation
of trusts, and whether your troubles will be increased or
lessened time alone can tell. My own opinion is that
thev will be increased. With their large capital the
combines can keep large stocks, and so never need to
be apparently busy; but at the least falling-off of trade
down will come your wages. Certainly the Factories
Act may prevent your employers from cutting down your
wages while vou are in work, but there is nothing in
the act that compels the employer to give you employ-
ment. Whether you are in work or out, you must have
food and shelter for your wife and children and yourself.
Your employers know this, and they know, also, that
they can play the out-of-works against the in-works, and
so cause dissatisfaction within your own ranks, to you:
detriment, and their personal gain.
HOW MUCH WE PAY FOR NOTHING.
The enormous cost that is attached to competition, for
which the public and the work-people have to pay all
the time,* is well illustrated in an excellent pamphlet by
Mr. Washington, an inventor, and a thoroughly practical
man of business. He spoke as follows:—“Taking soap
as an example, it requires a purchaser of this commodity
to expend a shilling in obtaining sixpennyworth of it, the
additional sixpence being requisite to cover the cost
of advertising, travelling, etc. It requires him to ex-
pend one shilling and a penny-halfpenny to obtain two


pennyworth of pills for the same reason. For a sewing-
machine he must, if spending on it, part with £4 of
this amount on account of unnecessary cost, and so on
in the case of all advertised articles. In the price of
less advertised commodities there is, in like manner, in-
cluded as unnecessary, a long string of middlemen’s pro-
fits and expenses; it may be necessary to treat of this
later, but, for the present, suffice it to say that in the
price of goods sold by retail, the margin of unnecessary
cost ranges from threepence to tenpence in the shilling,
and taking an average of one thing with another, it may
be safely stated that one-half of the price paid is rendered
necessary simply through the foolish and inconvenient
manner in which the business is carried on.”
This particularly applies to the cigar, tobacco, and
cigarette industries, and will not be lessened very materi-
ally, even supposing that the anticipated combine is con-
sumated. There will always be the imported article to
fight, but all this expense would be saved if the Govern-
ment had absolute control of the industries in question.
This much lam sure of. It is experimentally safe.
Whether we gained more or less, whether the success
was as high as I believe, or very much lower, at least
failure and reaction are inconceivable.
“ Tocsin ” Print
