

National
Efficiency
A Series of Lectures
delivered by
Professor R. F. Irvine
(University of Sydney),
Meredith Atkinson, Esq.
(University of Sydney),
Prof. W. Harrison Moore
(University of Melbourne),
Prof. W. A. Osborne
(University of Melbourne),
At the VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
INSTITUTE, in August-September.
1915. under the auspices of
The Hon. f. Hagelthorn, M.L.C.,
Minister of Public Works. Victoria.




INTRODUCTION.
The arrangement of the Series of Lectures contained in this
publication, and the distribution of the Lectures to the Public,
are really, so far as Victoria is concerned, the first steps in a cam-
paign which is being entered on by the Governments of New
South Wales and Victoria, with the object of securing greater
national efficiency.
Whilst it must be admitted that it is to the greater efficiency
and productivity of each individual of the community
that the country owes its greater prosperity, there is
no intention whatever to disregard the immense values in-
herent in the higher branches of learning and culture. Art,
philosophy and science have always played an important part in
a country’s real welfare, and I feel sure they will continue to
do so. Just at the present, however, in the early stages of
the campaign, I think it advisable to devote most of our intention
to the better organisation and equipment of our working people,
and our leaders of industry, in order to maintain and increase
the material wealth and general prosperity of the country. Higher
education and culture will not be belittled. Rather, this plan of
ours will lead in time, and in a natural way, to a healthy desire
for the best scholarly influence in the development of the higher
instincts and impulses of the people towards art, literature and
progressive education.
Our immediate duty lies straight before us in the direction
of enabling our workers to make progress, and to earn the highest
wages under the most healthy and most pleasant conditions pos-
sible.
We have a strong desire that our Australian men and women
shall take their places, and foremost places, too, in carrying on
some of the world’s most important work, and that they shall be
content with nothing less. It is gratifying to us to see “Made
in Australia” stamped on articles we use in our daily life, but it
would be much more gratifying to know that other countries
would also appreciate that hall mark of our progress. But we
will never attain that result until we increase our efficiency as
individuals, and as a nation.
To carry out any effective work in the direction indicated
requires a complete and real co-ordination, and, indeed, the fur-
ther development of all parts of our educational system, until
it satisfies conclusively the industrial and other needs of our
people. And in the forefront must be a better organisation and
development of our methods of production, both in regard to
the primary and secondary products.


National efficiency, as I take it, connotes that our people
shall lead healthy, happy, human lives; that they shall work
efficiently, and have pleasure in their work; that they shall hve
in comfortable and pleasant conditions; that they shall enjoy
their leisure in the best and highest sense; and, above all, that
our people shall be men and women of the highest rank as
human beings.
The securing of a people’s greater national efficiency is
a national movement. It is not a movement for one party, 01
one section of the people. It is a movement which stands far
above any party feelings, and we will not be really successful
until we have the combined efforts of a whole people.
Our agricultural development, and the development of our
primary and secondary products, must proceed apace. The uni-
versity professor, the captain of industry, the man of commerce,
the labor leader, the employer and the employe all must join
hands in the one cause, if we are to secure a really efficient and
really happy Commonwealth.
The thanks and appreciation of the Government, I am sure,
are due to the Universities of Sydney and Melbourne for then-
active co-operation with us in this movement, for never in our his-
tory have we more urgently needed the help and guidance of our
Universities to assist us to secure a greater measure of national
efficiency. We are also grateful to the gentlemen associated with
the Universities, who delivered the lectures. The action of
the Council of the Victorian Railways Institute in granting the
use of the Concert Hall is also appreciated.
In conclusion, may 1 say that this publication is issued in
the hope that this campaign to secure greater national efficiency
will mark the beginning of a new industrial era, and the initiation
of a new epoch in our national life.
F. HAGELTHORN,
Minister of Public Works.
Public Works Department,
Melbourne, 15th September, 1915*


CONTENTS.
Introduction
• Page.
‘•National Organisation and National Efficiency”—Pro-
fessor R. F. Irvine Professor of Economics, Univer-
sity of Sydney 4
‘‘Democracy and Efficiency”—Meredith Atkinson, Esq.,
University of Sydney 21
“National Efficiency and Government” —Professor W.
Harrison Moore, University of Melbourne 35
“Science and National Efficiency”— Professor W. A.
Osborne, University of Melbourne 4°


FIRST LECTURE.
Delivered on 23rd August. 1915.
National Organisation and National Efficiency.
Professor R. F. Irvine (Professor of Economics, University of
Sydney).
In accepting the invitation to address you on the subject
of “National Organisation and Efficiency,” I feel that I am guilty
of some hardihood. Some of you may even think me guilty of
effrontery. You have given me, or I have given myself, the most
difficult subject that the statesman and the scientific man of to-day
have to grapple with. Also, this is an audience probably the
most critical and certainly the most exacting, from the point of
view of the practical, that could be brought together in Australia.
If I were younger, there would be no need to apologise for
my hardihood. As things are, however, I have lost both the blush
and the confidence of youth. I speak to you merely as one
citizen to other citizens. Although I have thought about this
subject for many years, and have had considerable experience
in practically handling many of the questions arising out of it, I
make no claim to superior knowledge and wisdom. On many
points I shall speak with the emphasis of strong conviction, on
others with great diffidence; and it may be that my conclusions
may be of little immediate practical value. At the same time,
however, I may fail to rise to the height of the great argument,
it is worth your while and mine to meet together, if only to
start the ball of discussion rolling.
The occasion has a gravity which compels frankness and
a following of the thought wherever it leads. We are going
through a crisis just now that calls for the efficicent use of all
our resources of men and material; and Australia, like other parts
of the Empire, is being compelled to think seriously of problems
which in the days of peace we were too indolent to attack or
considered to be of merely academic interest. Liberty, the
preservation of honour among nations, the very flower and fruit
of civilisation itself, are to-day dependent as much upon our
capacity for national organisation as upon our willingness to
sacrifice our lives for a great cause. The emergency calls for
special organisation. But although I shall have this emergency
in my thoughts, I intend, in this address, to deal with my
subject in a more general way.


What is to be understood by the phrase “National Organisa-
tion and Efficiency?” There will be many answers. Men of
academic temper (who are often found in other places than uni
versities) wilf ridicule the whole thing. Not because they really
understand anything about it, but because it sounds commercial
and bourgeois. I have usually found that such men are as
keen as others on getting good service and quite as ready to
curse incompetence when it affects their own interests or com-
fort They spend, in fact, a good deal of their energy m reviling
a world which does not suit them, and which you would imagine
they wanted to make over again. Almost in the same breath,
however, you will find them thanking God that thi S> nice messy
world of ours has been proof against the reformer s zeal.
The average business man thinks “National Efficiency is
identical with more business, higher profits, and a labour force
that works according to his standards and refrains from striking
and making things otherwise uncomfortable. When you speak
to him of the need of industrial efficiency, he quite agrees as
to its importance, but is generally inclined to lay deficiencies
at the door of the workers or the general labour polic> of the
country. The working man, on the other hand, knowing what is
commonly in the mind of the employer, scents danger in any
talk of efficiency. It seems to suggest merely a new device
for over-driving, speeding up, and getting unpaid work out of
human muscle.
When any or all of these are masquerading as the General
Public,” “National Efficiency” is discovered to be aching in
which all government services are woefully lacking. They point
to telephones that are described as mere wire entanglements to
make communication difficult; to land laws which make it diffi-
cult for people in an almost empty continent to get farms, and
so on through a long list.
One could multiply points of view indefinitely, but enough
has been said to show that few people have considered the
problem except as a matter affecting their special
There was a theory, once much affected by British people, that
if you let men alone to follow their own interests, they would
automatically serve best the interests of society as a whole. This
theory denied both the wisdom and the practicableness of organi-
sation, and put spontaneous evolution or, in plain English, mud-
dling, on a pedestal for general admiration. Intelligent men have
given up the theory; but its baneful effect lingers in our practice
and in popular thought, and gives us a bias against thinking
out problems and planning for to-day and to-morrow In peace
therefore, British people remain unorganised, largely because of
this persistent idea that if each individual butts in and pushes
along in his own way, the final result will be the highest efficiency
in every direction. When we find ourselves m the thick of the
most terrible war of history, we are soon forced to admit that


this happy-go-lucky, fortuitous individualism cannot win victories,
without subordinating itself to intelligent, purposeful organisation.
This war will have been fought in vain for us if, in the end,
we fail to learn and to apply the same lesson in peace.
What then must be understood by “National Efficiency?” A
working definition suitable for my purpose 's that it is the most
efficient adaptation of means to procu. e the highest zvel-
fare and civilisation of a people and to ensure its sur-
vival against internal diseases and the attacks of other
nations. The end for which the means are used is
not definable except in terms which imply an aspiration.
It is a goal that always recedes; it defines itself only for a moment
and then transforms itself into the misty vision of greater things
yet to be. Yet at any one moment it may be possible to separate
out the guiding ideals of a community, so far as it has any, apart
from the interests of individuals and classes. What does Australia
stand for? For what corporate end is it striving? What kind
of society are we aiming to create? And is this society one
that we or the wise observer can justly be proud of, and one
that is worthy to survive? Until we can give some rational
answer to such questions, we have no way of determining what
is the most efficient adaptation of the means at our disposal, and
our social development will be a mere drifting, the resultant
of the haphazard motives and strivings of individuals, each fol-
lowing his own gain.
I cannot here attempt to give specifications for the Ideal
Commonwealth. The attempt would be unprofitable. The perfect
society, indeed, can never come into being. “The mortal defect
of Utopias,” it has been said, “is that they are too static. The
kingdom of heaven on earth is always a permanent, unchanging,
perfect, unutterably stupid place, to which our present society,
with all its imperfections, is immeasurably superior. Utopias
break down because they represent attainment, fulfilment. But
society does not strive towards fulfilment, but only towards
striving. It seeks not a goal, but a higher starting point from
which to seek a goal.” 1 As I said a little while ago, the goal
to which a dynamic democracy advances is never fixed. Progress
is like a man climbing a steep mountain. He does not see the
top-most pinnacle, which lies behind the horizon, or is shrouded
in vapours. He fixes his eye on some near landmark, takes a
deep breath, and pushes on to reach this visible goal. If faith
and hope fail him, he will rest there, and dream no more of
dim and distant horizons. And yet, if there be any fineness of
spirit in him, he will know that the abandonment of striving means
the end of personal development and progress. So it is with
societies. They can work practically only for proximate and
attainable ends, but they are eternally under the temptation to
I Weyl, The New Democracy, p. 354.


rest satisfied with the attainment of these ends. Only those push
on who retain the impulse of creativeness, who never cease to
dream of better things to be.
To-day our thoughts are centred on the things and the capa-
cities and qualities of soul that make for the survival of a
society. A world conflict tries civilisations as by fire, reveals
weaknesses, and unmasks the corrupting factors in national life.
Let us look at the problem from this point of view.
It is evident that, if a nation is to survive, its whole life,
political, economic, social, must be so ordered that it does
not readily succumb to internal diseases, or fall a victim to the
aggression of other societies. It must be so ordered that every
individual comprising it feels that it is worth fighting for. If
any large part of the population of a society has little to lose
by its dissolution, its power of survival will be small. If, on
the other hand, it is so organised that men everywhere feel they
are realising a maximum of happiness, they will feel that it
is worth fighting and dying for. But this belief, necessary as
it is, may have no secure basis. A whole people may live in
a fool's paradise, may be puffed up with vain conceit when, in
reality, it has no solid basis of organisation and achievement.
Its resources may be undeveloped, its people devoid of foresight
and the power to organise themselves and their resources in
an efficient manner for all emergencies that are likely to occur.
Survival implies purposeful organisation in every part of the
national life.
Organisation in politics alone may lead simply to the political
boss and the party machine; in business, to the trust. Such sec-
tional organisation may be useful, but it does not necessarily
make for an efficient national organisation or for the larger social
ends. In societies where sectional interests predominate and
where conflicts are acute, there is little unity of purpose and a
vast deal of energy is wasted on futile activities. In the present
crisis the feverish appeal to voluntary and unco-ordinated action
will, in my opinion, lead to a misdirection of our fighting and
economic power. What we do, should be the result of well-
considered planning and national organisation; and we shall
have to see to it that the very best organising capacity we can
produce is utilised for the task before us.
But even organisation and the belief in one’s society are
insufficient to ensure survival, unless they are accompanied by
certain qualities of character. Organisation, without the continual
formation of new and nobler idealisms, may tend to wealth or
power, but not to progress. Unless it results in a higher freedom
and a finer realisation of justice and social service, it may reveal
itself only as an engine for the destruction of civilisation. So,
too, the increase of comfort and happiness, without a robust
sense of responsibility, may lead merely to selfishness and the
egoism of self-indulgence. A society, to survive, must give proof
that it is worthy to survive.


11.
Private Enterprise and Efficiency.
Without further attempting to define the ends for which a
great society should strive, let us next inquire how they may be
achieved.
They cannot be achieved, we may say at once, by leaving
things to go their own way. For achievement there must be or-
ganisation of a far-reaching kind. How is this organisation to
be provided?
A good deal, it must be admitted, is now provided by the
more or less free play of self-interest. In making his profit, the
business man must, in some sort, serve the community; but it by
no means follows that he serves it efficiently or honestly or that
he has any particular interest in the question of what is best tor
it There is little of ethical quality in this kindl of service, if
the people are ignorant, or indifferent, they will be made to take
short weight or short measure and the lowest quality that can
be palmed off on them. So if they happen to be a people who
have no national interests outside of business, they will develop
an appetite for the grosser kinds of vice and pleasure, and busi-
ness men and capitalists will always be found to provide drink-
ing saloons, gambling hells, dancing saloons, picture shows, which
appeal to depraved tastes. Whether there is competition or com-
bination, these things will go on.
It is generally assumed that if there is competition the
service will be rendered efficiently. Nothing could be further from
the truth. There may be, and generally is, much more of over-
lapping, waste, and muddling in competitive than in monopoly
businesses.
Combination is equally non-moral, but it furnishes a power-
ful motive for enliminating waste and needless duplication ot
plant, and the range of its profits depends upon its efficiency.
If it cheats or abuses the public, the blame can be sheeted home.
Consequently, where the supply of common services (meat, bread,
milk, fish, etc.) has got into the hands of a few powerful com-
panies, or even monopolies, it is much more likely to be efficient
than if it were left to a multitude of small competitors who
have neither the capital nor the organising capacity for true
efficiency. I am satisfied that in countries like the Jmted States,
where combination (which is only co-operation of a particular
kind) has proceeded furthest, there is a great dea more efficiency
than in countries like Australia, where the supply and distribu-
tion of many of the necessaries are in the hands of small men.
Also, and this is not commonly known, the supply is not only like y
to be more efficient, it is likely to be cheaper, notwithstanding that
the large company may be in a position to control prices. y
skilful organising, by using the best equipment, and by eliminating


the usual competitive wastes, it may secure greater profits than
were possible under competition and yet serve the public more
cheaply and efficiently.
Combination is superior to competition because it implies
co-operation, and competition is best defined as social anarchy-
But although combination denotes a higher degree of organisa-
tion it is, as I have said, equally non-moral and unscrupulous.
Society, therefore, is obliged to take measures to restrict its
cupidity. Here we find various and interesting tendencies, in
some countries combination or organisation has the support ot
the law, but it gets this support only on condition that it serves
the community well and as cheaply as may be. In the United
States the law has tried to dam back the movement towards
combination. In this it has utterly failed, and it is g±a u y
being forced to adopt the saner method of regulation and in-
sistence upon complete publicity. It is possible in this way to
get a high degree of organisation in the great staple industries,
whilst at the same time protecting society from exploitation.
In Australia there are mixed tendencies. _ There is a natural
distrust of monopolies and little comprehension of the tact mat
combination makes possible a higher grade of organisation borne,
therefore, would break up combinations, others would nation-
alise them, and still others would regulate their operations, ihe
most general tendency is perhaps towards nationalisation or
municipalisation. Throughout Australasia, transportation has
becomes a public function, and this has given us a bias for tur-
ther experimenting in the same direction.
But before 1 discuss the part the State plays in organisation,
I must refer to one other form of private organisation, viz., or-
ganised labour. I believe that Trade Unionism is a vital factor in
the evolution of what has been called the “socialised democracy.
By that expression is meant a democracy which aims at such a
“production, distribution and consumption of wealth as will give
the highest excess of economic pleasure over economic pain
to the largest number of people for the longest possible time. _ in
the past, democracies, like other forms of political organisation,
have been tainted by purely individualistic conceptions of wealth,
which made for an efficient profit economy, but gave freedom
and a high standard of living only to the industrially strong, lo
organised labour we are indebted for a far nobler conception
of what the economic aims of a society should be.
But whilst I admit this, I am constrained also to say that
organised labour has so far confined itself to purely protective
action. It has aimed to secure a better distribution of wealth,
but it has done little, except indirectly, to ensure an ampler pro-
duction of wealth. In abstaining from this responsibility, it was
no doubt actuated by the fear that other classes would reap
the benefit of increased production. The fear is sufficiently
well-grounded, but is no justification for refusing to co-operate


in efforts to increase efficiency. It is true we have not yet devised
the economic organisation that will automatically serve ail
classes according to some principle of justice that will be gener-
ally acceptable. But that, too, is a problem which working men
must assist in solving. In the meantime, “go easy” and “make
work” principles will postpone indefinitely a more rational or-
ganisation of society.
Our review of private enterprise has led to the conclusion
that a high degree of efficiency may be obtained if it is permitted
to organise in the least wasteful way. The stimulus to such
organisation is the expectation of great economies and a corres-
ponding increase in profits. The State, in its efforts to prevent
exploitation, should be careful not to repress these motives too
suddenly or too severely. The logical outcome of the legislative
control of wages and combinations would appear to be the con-
trol of prices. But the last is a business in which the State has
had little experience. Fixing prices too low, owing to failure
to grasp abnormal conditions, may result in a seriously dimin-
ished supply and extremely high prices in the future. It is
a basic truth that, on the whole, neither working men nor busi-
ness men can or will work efficiently without adequate stimulus
in the shape of reward. I believe, therefore, that in dealing
with enterprise it is wise to err on the side of permitting a high
stimulus, in order that the maximum energy may be called forth.
But no matter how great the stimulus we allow, actual ex-
perience has shown that private enterprise may continue to be
inefficient and may fail to result in the highest social welfare.
It would pay it immediately to be more efficient; it will pay it
and society in the future to co-operate for the maximum social
welfare. Australia is somewhat remote from the great industrial
centres of the world, and it is consequently slow to be impressed
with the improved methods that are always being introduced.
Business men here are, I believe, as conservative as civil ser-
vants. Although they travel a good deal, my impression is that
too often they carry with them exceedingly self-satisfied, un-
trained, and unobservant minds. They select a machine here
and there, but can it be said of many of our industries that
they are well equipped or that their business organisation is such
as to ensure efficiency? An illustration came recently under my
notice of the timidity we show in adopting improvements. As
is well-known, electric traction in cities for road and street work
is rapidly displacing petrol-driven vehicles, both in Europe and
America. The displacement has taken place because electric
traction is less troublesome and more economical. In cities like
Melbourne and Sydney, where the price of electricity is very
low and the cost of petrol very high, the introduction of electric
traction is demonstrably still more economical than it has proved
to be in America and Europe. Yet our business men still hold
off without being able to give an adequate reason. The electric
handling of heavy goods on wharves, in stores, factories, and


on railway stations is now becoming universal abroad, but we still
persist with the laboriously slow and very expensive hand-barrow.
In this respect privately conducted industries are no more ad-
venturous than public enterprises. So far as Sydney is concerned,
am satisfied that the charges for handling goods are unneces-
sanly high because of the continuance of a primitive equipment
which paid at one time when the market was small, but no longer
pays now that the market has reached its present proportions.
But even if a specific business is highly efficient, there is no
guarantee that the whole industry to which it belongs will operate
efficiently. At various stages there is room for waste and incom-
petence. This is particularly true in Australia, where the inte-
gration of industries has not proceeded far. There is a general
absence of the co-operative spirit as well as of profit-inspired
organisation. I attribute this partly to lack of enterprise, partly
to ignorance, and partly to the general apathy of the public
which tolerates so easily a high inefficiency and high cost of
service. There are few consumers’ leagues in Australia, no orga-
nisations to insist upon promptness, good quality, civility, and
the like. That is why the producer, whether public or private,
is commonly so indifferent as to the convenience and comfort of
his clients. The service may, in some respects, be efficient, but
it is less considerate of the feelings of the public than elsewhere.
Not only may private enterprise be inefficient in every sense,
but it may use the natural resources of the nation in an extremely
wasteful way. In new countries, particularly, is this likely to
be the case. It has cut down or burned forests, exhausted mines,
without any regard to the future, and, at various periods, it has
ruined the working population “soul and body.” In America,
where the people are characterised by a tremendous energy of
■exploitation, these results, patent to every observer, are giving
much anxiety to the statesmen of to-day. But this untrammelled
energy has not only left a “scarred and wasted continent,” as a
“barrier of future progress,” it has left behind it a “brick-and-
mortar substitute for a city; an unregulated and anarchic in-
a city slum; and an appalling and shameless political
■corruption. Americans, with the same energy and organising
capacity that they displayed in exploitation, are now successfully
taking in hand the solution of the problems exploitation gave rise
to. We, in Australia, are less energetic, less rapid in our pro-
gress, but many of the same results appear in our unplanned,
inconvenient, and, from the point of view of Art, our ignoble
cities, with their actual and incipient slums. Our continent is
still so empty that the “scarring and wasting” of it are not so
.evident, but they are there, and will exact a penalty in the future.


111.
Public Administration and State Enterprise
in Relation to Effiency.
As we cannot secure efficiency and social progress by relying
solely on the voluntary and haphazard efforts of private enter-
prise it is important to inquire how public administration affects
our problem and whether State enterprise itself results in higher
efficiency. The inquiry involves a consideration of the whole ques-
tion of public services in relation to national efficiency it also
involves the question of how far political policy may affect the
efficiency of services.
I can only touch on these things. Take the latter point first.
I presume it will be generally admitted that political interference,
even when interference of some kind is urgently demanded, is
on the whole dangerous to efficiency. It may not be so generally
admitted that the drafting of legislation is responsible for much
inefficient and uneconomical management. It would not be diffi-
cult to point to cases where the law has led to the creation of
cumbersome, expensive, and wholly unnecessary administrative
machinery. The legislature did not intend this, but was misled
either by official drafting (which has a natural tendency to red-
tape) or by its own ignorance of the complicated procedure that
would be involved. The only remedy I can see is for Parlia-
ment to appoint an Administrative Committee with the special
object of simplifying the procedure and machinery which every
new act entails. Whether it can get among its members the ex-
pert knowledge for this is another matter.
The policy laid down for a State enterprise is often of a
confused character. It halts and wobbles between ordinary com-
mercial principles and the quite other principles which ought
conceivably to apply to an enterprise run by the State. Let me
illustrate this. It is the accepted business principle that some
rebate should be allowed to the large buyer. The reason for this
from the seller’s point of view is that a single large sale mvo ves
so much less trouble than a number of small sales, but oug
this principle to be applied to State transportation? Ought the
State to give rebates to the big squatter, who can fill up a goods
train with sheep or cattle, and to charge the maximum rate to a
small farmer who can only fill one truck. The question is
least arguable from the point of view of national policy. At
any rate, it illustrates the point 1 wish to make—that the applica-
tion of commercial principles to State business is not the simpl
thing it seems.
A State running an enterprise looks to its official? for expert
and up-to-date knowledge as to equipment and for efficiency and
economy in running. Although the State itself may be responsible,
bv unwise interference or by niggardliness, for a large amount
of inefficiency, the immediate problem is to ascertain wha
respects officials are likely to fail in realising the highest efficiency..


To begin with, let me say that in the public services of Aus-
tralia you will find many men of quite exceptional ability, who,
in the professions or in business, would easily take a place in the
first rank. I have no sympathy at all with the arrogant claim
of the down-town business man that the civil servant is less -able
and less zealous than himself, and I am amused, when I hear city
men talking of the need of applying “business principles” in
public administration, and in the operation of public enterprises.
In nine cases out of ten they are speaking in complete ignorance
of the conditions under which the civil servant has necessarily
to work and of the wide differences between much public and
private business. Also, I know that among “down-town” business
men there is a large annual crop of failures. It has, indeed,
been calculated that about go per cent, of the new enterprises
started every year fail owing mainly to bad management.
But whilst I gladly acknowledge that the civil services of
these States contain many able men and that, as a whole, the
services are characterised by honesty, zeal, and loyalty, I am
compelled also to admit that results fall far short of a reason-
ably high standard of efficiency. Why is this? For years I have
been seeking an answer and a remedy.
There is to-day an expert from abroad in Australia who has
spent many years studying the relative efficiencies of public and
private enterprises. His conclusions, I understand, are adverse
to the former. Government officials he finds to be intensely con-
servative. They are the last to adopt improvements in equipment
and business methods. They are either too self-satisfied or too
timorous to try experiments. They feel impelled to take the
known and safe course, and nothing happens to them if this
course proves, in the end, to have been extravagant and ineffi-
cient. In competitive enterprises the penalty of obsolete equip-
ment and business methods is extinction; in businesses which are
highly integrated, it is a loss of possible profits, and there aie
usually keen minds on the watch for this. Civil servants, on the
other hand, have a happy knack of surviving the most surprising
failures. Responsibility is so divided that it is difficult to sheet
home the blame of failure, and, in any case, it is almost im-
possible for an outside critic to get all the facts.
It is probably true, also, that civil servants tend to lose sight
of the ends which the State ought to be aiming at. Partly be-
cause they have to protect the State against the wrong-doing of
individuals, and partly because of their isolation, they tend to
adopt a hostile attitude to the public and to regard their busi-
ness as an end in itself and not as a rendering of the best pos-
sible service to the community. This is why the civil servant so
often becomes immersed in mere minutiae. When he gets down
to this stage of limited vision, he becomes a singularly inventive
creature. He and his fellows have a wonderful knack of manu-
facturing little bits of useless procedure, of check and counter-
check, and so, like coral insects, of building up huge official
ramparts which impede business and lead to over-staffing and


needless expenditure. This accounts for endless delays. Urgent
matters go through many hands before they reach the person
who can make the final decision, and on the way they accumulate
a useless deposit of remarks and initials. Combined with this,
we have normally an utterly foolish and inefficient centralisation
of power and responsibility. The result of having to refer even
trifles to a central authority is that the whole system is slow and
circuitous.
If I were asked to put my finnger on the principal causes of
this inefficiency, I should be inclined to single out, first, the ex-
cessive regard paid to precedent and routine experience. This
leads to the creation of an unprogressive type of practical man
who is extremely punctilious in dotting i’s and crossing t’s in the
customary official manner, and who has come to think that this
kind of knowledge and experience is of supreme importance. So
he gradually begins and continues to do obsolete things in an
obsolete way. The system is such that he loses or fails to acquire
that spirit of adventurousness without which progress is impos-
sible. He has little mental curiosity, little desire to be a path-
finder. Wisdom to him is too often measured by the number
of years he has sat in some official chair. When such a man
reaches a position of responsibility, he is careful to tone down
originality in those below him. He is suspicious of ability, and
frowns upon initiative and ambition. He has a profound con-
viction of the futility of any knowledge not acquired through
his sort of experience. His narrow practical creed excludes the
experience and thinking of other men, excludes the results of
scientific investigation in every sphere of thought and activity.
In such an atmosphere, even the ablest men cease to grow,
and their inventive faculty becomes dormant. Organising capacity
spends itself in vain ; at best it can secure only a routine effici-
ency. and one which does not consider sufficiently the feelings and
comfort of the community.
Illustrations are apt to be invidious, but as the occasion war-
rants frankness, let me illustrate this point by some comments
on a State-owned tramway system. From an electrical and
engineering point of view, it may be considered highly efficient,
but it fails utterly to provide a convenient and comfortable ser-
vice. The cars are so high that a step ladder is needed to get
into them. Thev are so constructed that passengers are con-
tinually disturbed by the entrance and departure of other pas-
sengers and by an obsolete and cumbersome method of fare
collection. Their construction, also, is responsible for a maximum
of noise (largely through the rattling of sliding doors), dust,
and draught. Many people grumble, but nothing comes of their
grumbling. Tramway management is not wholly to blame. Much
must be set down to our own apathy and indolent satisfaction with
a low standard of comfort. In the same way we tolerate obso-
lete building laws, a low-grade civic architecture, dirty streets,
and ear-splitting street noises which do much to impair the health
and nerves of the whole community.


IV.
The Remedy?
What then is to be done? We cannot get efficiency by
trusting to the play of ordinary commercial forces, nor apparently
can we rely on State intervention with its present ideals and or-
ganisation. Yet the problem is obviously national, and can only,
therefore, be solved by a national organisation using every avail-
able power of the State and of private enterprise to secure the
efficiency that is desired.
What we have to aim at is:
(1) A higher degree of efficiency in each business, as
regards equipment, organisation of staffs, and busi-
ness methods.
(2) Such a correlation of the activities of separate businesses
that the whole industry to which they belong may be
run as efficiently and as economically as possible.
(3) A more effective and less wasteful utilisation of the
enormous resources of Australia.
(4) A clearer recognition of the truth that the ultimate rea-
son of all industries, public or private, is to serve
society and promote welfare and civilisation.
(5) A more effectual training of the population to secure
these ends.
Where separate businesses, private or public, are concerned,
much may be done by the application of the principles known
as scientific management, which aims at the reduction of cost
and the economical stimulation of industrial energy. These aims
are frequently misunderstood both by employers and working
men. Scientific management usually involves a new cost in the
shape of a staff of specialists who stand to the general manage-
ment in the same relation that the general staff of an army stands
to the line organisation; but in large businesses experience has
shown that the new cost is paid over and over again by the econo-
mies that result. I fear, however, the average employer in this
country, like the average head of public departments, is generally
certain that he has little to learn—an attitude which can be over-
come only by education and the “proof of the pudding is the
eating” kind of argument. The working man suspects that scien-
tific management is only a new form of exploitation. The
publicist suspects it because its standardisation and reduction of
human actions to system look like a fatal subordination of men
to machinery and red-tape.
All these, however, are misconceptions. Scientific manage-
ment, as it is now developing, does undoubtedly lay stress on
standardisation and system, but it lays still more stress on human
motives and human results. It recognises that men do not work
or think or invent efficiently under the lash of fear or starvation.
Hope, pleasure in work and brotherly co-operation, the sense of


social service, are the feelings and motives the expert appeals
to. To him, overdriving, low wages, lack of interest, the absence
of pleasurable environment, are just as much anathema as they
are to the social philosopher. He knows that they lead to the
making neither of good citizens nor of efficient workers. Hence,
though he was primarily interested at first in the limited effici-
ency of a particular business, the expert soon found himself
confronted with forces operating throughout the whole of society.
His scheme for industrial efficiency was, therefore, forced to
come into line with the far more comprehensive question of social
and national efficiency. His usefulness has been correspondingly
increased; but the new outlook makes enormous demands for
knowledge so varied and so specific that no one man can absorb
or even collect it. This, too, must become the subject of orga-
nisation.
Now these principles can be applied to public administration
and State operation of industry. It is doubly important to apply
them here because the State’s influence for good or evil is so
much greater than that of a private enterprise. In Australia, we
have already taken steps to improve our public services. For
this purpose we have usually instituted some form of civil service
commission and competitive examination. The Inter-state Com-
mission with its investigation of industries might also contribute
to the same end. But I doubt whether these devices have really
touched the basic problem of improved organisation., They do
not bring to bear on the system either trained organising capa-
city or expert knowledge gained from a wider experience than is
furnished by the public service or private businesses in this
country.
The correlation of all the diverse activities of State and
private enterprise is a much more difficult task, and requires a
still more perfect machinery. The State through its laws and its
educational system touches indeed every industry and every acti-
vity of society. It may exert a powerful influence on efficiency,
but, as I have tried to show, this influence may be in the wrong
direction and may, and does, generally suffer from lack of co-
ordination. Its departments do not freely and economically
co-operate; and it has as yet no conception of a General Staff,
or of a thorough and systematic application of new knowledge
and experience.
The method usually adopted in Australia of improving indus-
trial or social conditions is to appoint Royal Commissions of
Inquiry. These often bring to light extremely valuable facts, but
they do not always lead to wise or effective action. Investigation
of bad conditions will not secure rational improvement, unless
the inquirers have the expert knowledge necessary to form an
adequate standard of efficiency. Thus, a lawyer may evoke the
last ounce of evidence as to the condition of an industry, but it
does not necessarily follow that his recommendations will be


of much value in improving its organisation. One cannot too
strongly insist that this is a matter for the expert, and by expert
I do not mean a person whose sole qualification is experience of
some particular business.
Hence it seems to me absolutely necessary, particularly in
Australia which is to a large extent isolated from the progress of
the rest of the world, to have some organised means of ascertain-
ing how other and more populous communities are dealing with
problems similar to ours. Having established an Intelligence
Department, it seems equally necessary to secure or train a body
of experts who can act as the National General Staff foi the
utilisation of accumulated knowledge and experience. In brief.
I would create in each State what may be called a bureau of
National Efficiency, and a General Staff acting in conjunction
with it.
The former, that is, the systematic collection of relevant data,
is surely of the utmost importance to any progressive society. Ihe
reason why Germany was, and is, of all nations the best organised
for peace and war, is that she despised no information that could
promote her economic and military power. Her political ideals,
her ethical standards, it is true, have been so perverted that the
perfection of her organisation has become a weapon for destroy-
ing human liberty. Yet there can be no question of the com-
pleteness of her organisation or any of the fact that it is based
upon knowledge and the efficient use of that knowledge.
What do I mean by such a Bureau, and how does it differ
from a library? I mean by it an institution in which is collected
and filed up-to-date information bearing upon every part of the
problem of national organisation and efficiency in the sense in
which I have defined them. All the thinking and experimenting
in this and other countries; all devices for improving equipment,
organisation, and methods; all the social and economic legislation
of other countries, will here find a place and be available to all.
But these records can, and must, be made to talk in a way un-
known to those mausoleums of dead knowledge the public
libraries. Each member of the expert staff will have a definite
field; and by the publication of bulletins, by organised news-
paper contributions, by feeding ministries with regular summaries
of progress, they will educate the whole community, not only
as to what it ought to aim at, but as to how it can accomplish its
aims best.
The Bureau will assemble information under hundreds of
headings, but it will mainly confine itself to material which has
a value for social progress. At the same time, it will be forced
to intrude into regions which are usually considered the preserve
of the professional man. It will do so because the professional
man is as much in need of its systematic collection of data as the
publicist and social reformer. Consider, for example, a subject
like roads and streets. It is generally presumed that engineers
in Australia are in possession of the latest information about


road-making. This may or may not be so—probably it is not
because few shires or municipal engineers can afford the luxury
of a variety of engineering journals, and many have no ambition
o know more than a minimum. However this may be, the con-
*l°"° r °K ad f and StrCetS in many parts of Australia is so dis-
where U \Vhp d n !u gg6St the , S rossest incompetence some-
where. Where. On the part of the engineers or of the local
government bodies who employ them, or of some one else? It
would be the duty of the General Staff to make the public alive
o these deficiencies, to hold up to them the best that is being
f. s ? th f tbe y ma y be m a position to insist on higher
standards of efficiency. The Bureau will then have a section
dealing with road-making in all its aspects, and it will supply
information to all who want it. 1 p J
If it is a question of town planning, the Bureau will have
i™ 01 ? 16 , 5 ’ n ! w methods; it will have complete
details as to improved housing schemes and general city im-
proyement and beautification. It will hold from time to time
exhibitions showing what are the actual conditions in our own
cities m comparison with the best that is being achieved.
„ t?°’ from ds department of business organisation and method,
e Bureau will be able to throw a flood of light on such a matter
as organisation for war—a subject in regard to which military
men as such are not always well-informed. There is a widely
prevalent belief in Australia to-day that the existing management
of the forces under training leaves much to be desired. We can-
not wait f or the Bureau and its experts. It is our plain duty to
select the ablest men we can lay our hands on and put them in
charge of the business side of military organisation.
• u ® ut , th l ere is , no limit to the illustrations that might be fur-
nished of the value of such an institution. I have said enough
I hope, to open up fresh vistas, even for the least imaginative'
Jhere is no time to refer to its utility for scientific research for
the press in its capacity of public educator, and for societies that
are interested in social progress.
... The j deal Place for the Bureau is midway between the univer-
sities and the State departments. Its functions are primarily
educational but its usefulness would go if it became academic
m spirit and so got isolated from the active striving of the com-
nmmty. But it is equally important that it should be saved from
officialism, and that it should retain its scientific interest inde-
pendence. and initiative. ’
2. The proposal to create, in connection with the Bureau,
a national General Staff for promoting efficiency throughout the
whole administrative and industrial fields, will require more con-
sideration Many difficulties present themselves. How and by
whom shall the general staff be constituted ? What types of men
should be selected. Are they to be State officials or to be inde-
pendent advisers of the State? What precisely will be their
relation to existing departments of State?


It is quite evident that the selection of any but the best men
will lead merely to more expenditure. It is evident, also, that
men who have no better qualification than business or official
experience will be of little use. What is wanted is a brand of
men that this community has hitherto had no machinery for
producing; the trained and experienced efficiency expert, who
has sufficient intellectual equipment to enable him to take the
social point of view; that is, to regard businesses and industries
not merely as profit-making mechanisms, but as a co-operation
of forces which may or may not increase welfare. If men of
this type cannot be got, it would be better to rely solely upon the
educational value of the Bureau. If they can, we must endeavour
to secure their independence, initiative, and continued immunity
from the diseases of officialism. Their functions must, I take
it be advisory and investigatory; but in such a way that the
results of their investigations and their advice shall be made
public without delay. If publicity is not secured their reports
and advice will be liable to pigeon-holing for political reasons,
or out of mere inertia.
It may be thought that in its various departments the State
has already a machinery that will serve the purpose, and that
the institution of a General Staff will lead to friction and stiffen
resistance to reforms. My experience is that State
do not co-operate efficiently. On the contrary, they often put
difficulties in each other’s way. Their resistance to the General
Staff will no doubt be powerful and insidious; it must be over-
come; it can only be overcome by full publicity of facts and
recommendations.
Where private businesses are concerned, the functions of the
Staff would be to inquire from time to time into the actual work-
ing of the great staple industries, to report on organisation and
methods, and to furnish information likely to increase their effici-
ency Here also, there will be resistance of a different kind.
Vested interests of all kinds will put on their armour and bring
pressure to bear on ministries. But in spite of this, hints will
be voluntarily adopted, when they lead to increased gams, and
the public, when adequately informed, may be expected to take
a hand in securing changes that will lead to greater social
■efficiency.
Through the Bureau the General Staff will receive up-to-date
information as to important changes in organisation elsewhere,
and from time to time some of its members will be required to
go abroad to investigate new methods and to report for the
benefit of the community. No doubt commercial and industrial
businesses will still find it necessary to send their own agents
abroad; but there is little doubt in my mind that in the way sug-
gested the State can detect and save much waste and hasten the
adoption of more efficient methods all round. If properly man-
aged the Bureau would be the national storehouse of informa-
tion useful to men in every department of industry, as well as


to the scientific men who are studying the social results of eco-
nomic activity. The General Staff, particularly if co-operating
with Schools of Economics and Commerce in our universities
with Chambers of Commerce, and Chambers of Manufactures,’
would soon be the advisers of the whole community. It should!
of course, co-operate with all voluntary agencies for improvement!
I have now reviewed the situation as I see it, and suggested
a plan of improvement: at too great length, I fear, for one even-
ing s stock of patience. Let me say, in conclusion, that demo-
cracy, if it is to prove itself worthy of survival, must discover
more and more efficient ways of combining freedom with com-
pleter organisation of all its thinking and activities. If freedom
goes, or if our conception of freedom becomes fixed and inelastic
then no organisation will serve us. On the other hand, there can
be no real freedom without a deep sense of social responsibility
and this means subordination of the individual will to the needs
of society as a whole; in other words, it means organisation But
these words “freedom” and “the needs of society” require con-
tinual reinterpretation. Trying to fix them once for all will be
fatal to progress. Hence organisation must never be so rigid as
to impede fiee play of human intelligence in its search for
a more beautiful and harmonious life. The old individualism
which stood out against all organisation is quite discredited; but
there will always be a conflict between badly adjusted ideals of
liberty and authority. As a recent writer says: “System, plan,
purpose, efficiency, ideals, general well-being, 'will be accepted
as a matter of course (in the future). The fight will be over
questions of method-how far shall individual wills be merged
in a collective will, and individual action controlled by collective
authority? How far, on the contrary, shall we get good team-
work through voluntary concentration of the free choices of en-
lightened men upon objects of common desire?” Social control
if it is not to defeat its purpose, must be moral and plastic, so
that the more highly socialised the individual becomes, the ampler
will be the real freedom that he enjoys.


SECOND LECTURE.
Delivered on 26th August, 1915,
Democracy and Efficiency.
By MEREDITH ATKINSON, Esq. (Sydney University).
It seems reckless that I should come here after only 18
months’ residence in Australia and lecture on the subject of demo-
cracy to such a ‘democratic community as Australians. I hope
that throughout you will remember that I speak always as a
friend, and, if I may say so, I hope as one of yourselves.
There are few words in the common parlance of to-day more
abused and strained in meaning than the word Democracy. It
is used vaguely to signify progress and advancement in thought
and action in the body politic. It has become the fashion to bow
down and worship before the god of Democracy. Not many
men in Australia would fail to feel insulted if it were said of
them that they are not democrats. And yet it is very questionable
whether democracy deserves the extravanganza of adulation
poured upon it by its devotees. Democracy is essentially a form
and method of government. Abraham Lincoln defined it as
“government of the people by the people for the people. jl his
definition is a severe commentary upon the failure of quite a
number of so-called modern democracies. The Republic of
jTfjmcg and that of America are each typical of the failure of
democracy to fulfil the objective of Lincoln’s definition. It is
generally claimed for democratic government that it is more
free from sinister influences than any other kind of rule. Once
political power is transferred to the whole community, privilege
and oppression should flee away. The people secure by their
own will the benefits and advantages of a juster social system
than that of previous history. Undoubtedly, there is much truth
in this assumption. It must be said that, on the whole, all the
peoples of to-day who enjoy, in a lesser 01 greater degree, a
democratic form of government, are socially much better off
than they would have been under the selfish monarchies of the
18th Century. Nevertheless, it is just as clear that democracy has
not achieved anvthing like the success that its advocates claim
for it, and a very considerable advance upon its present record
is to be looked for before it can be said to have justified entirely
the high hopes of its founders.


The Limitations of Democracy.
It needs no more than a casual reference to the failure of
the American Republic to achieve the ideals of democracy to
show how fatal is the assumption that democratic institutions
necessarily produce democratic results. The wholesale corruption
that runs rampant through municipal and State administration in
the United States gives the cynic his opportunity to condemn,
root and branch, all forms of popular government. America
achieved quite early the mere mechanics of democracy—an equit-
able and widespead franchise, excepting the women of the State,
equal electoral districts, and all other features of a constitution
designed to secure the enactment of the people’s will. In spite of
all these mechanical devices, it has become painfully evident that
the American Republic is no Republic at all. What are the causes
of its failure ? Doubtless, the most powerful influence operating
against the welfare of the American people is that of the typical
capitalistic combination known as “the Trust.” • But the causes
of failure are in general not confined to America, but are in-
herent in the nature of democracy itself. More than ever before,
it is essential to analyse and understand the limitations of demo-
cracy, in order that we may solve its problem, believing as we
do that potentially it is easily the best form of government yet
devised. The most fundamental of all democracy’s difficulties is
psychological. Such vague phrases as the “popular will,” “vox
populi, vox Dei,” imply something magic in the mind of the
people, which will ensure that their expressed will is certain to
be right. Demagogues are constantly flattering the people into
this belief in their own infallibility. Nothing could be more
sadly misleading. It is true that a number of individuals are
more likely to come to a right conclusion after discussion than
one individual. But to think that the mass of the people can
determine all great and complex questions on their own know-
ledge and initiative is a fatal illusion. The psychology of the
mass is dangerously prone to be perverted by wrong emotions.
History is full of the terrible effects of popular passion induced
by such things as the clamour of Jingoism for war. In many great
national crises the popular will has proved to be the most dan-
gerous enemy of real progress. In short, there is nothing magi-
cally effective in the will of the people. It has not established
its claim that it is capable of settling all great problems. What
seems to me to be the soundest organ in the body of democracy
is not its brain, but its heart. The people’s heart is substantially
sound. Therein lies at once the hope and the danger of demo-
cracy. If only we could make its head as sound as its heart,
nothing would be impossible to it. But the intelligence of Demos
is sadly wanting. It is, in my opinion, both impossible and unde-
sirable to expect that the collective intelligence will ever rise to
such a height that every citizen will be capable of settling the
details of the great problems which are now the subject of deli-
berations in Parliament. I will say more of this anon. But let


us at once admit frankly that the complex questions of politics,
which are becoming more difficult to answer every day, and tax
the powers of the most brilliant minds, can never be left to the
will of the people. It is only on the simplest and most direct
questions of national policy that democracy can give a useful
answer. This is not to say that democracy is not capable of a
very great increase in its collective intelligence. The world has
never yet seen a highly educated democracy, and it would be
rash to limit its potentialities until that great experiment has
been tried. But let us not look to the confused and vague con-
sciousness of the average voter for a clear decision of the issues
of State.
Then, again, the popular leader himself constitutes a great
danger. He seldom looks beyond the next general election. He
is always throwing sops to Cerberus. He becomes a master of
that dark and devious game known as parliamentary tactics. With
great skill he uses the popular press to advertise his greatness.
The atmosphere of parliamentary institutions fosters intrigue,
and there is almost as much danger of corruption in popular
government as in that of a monarchy. This movement is
enormously assisted by the fact that there are more individual
ends to be gained under democracy than under aristocracy. Place-
seeking develops huge proportions. The political leader has
many mouths to feed, and they grow more clamorous with
feeding.
In yet another way the popular leader is a danger. If he
is a man of dazzling personality, the people, almost inevitably,
elect him as their Dictator. He can then do no wrong. Pie may
or may not be a statesman; the people can seldom rightly judge on
that score. He may merely be brilliant in the success with which
he intoxicates the popular mind, or manages the various con-
flicting interests and runs the complex machinery of government.
He may not be at all far-seeing or courageous. It is, in fact,
seldom that democracy will allow its leaders to travel much be-
yond what is in its own mind. The autocrat is under no such
disability. With a stroke of the pen he can emancipate fifty mil-
lion serfs or abolish the drink traffic, or institute a complete sys-
tem of education. I am not arguing in favour of autocracy, for
I believe that democracy, with all its faults, is immensely superior,
in the long run, to the most benevolent autocracy in history. It
is better to make mistakes as free men than to have efficiency im-
posed upon us by an exterior will. But if we are to make demo-
cracy efficient, we must frankly recognise its fundamental faults.
The Decline of Representative Government.
Government by the people was first introduced in England.
It took the form now famous as representative government. The
mass of the people elected delegates on a fairly clear general un-
derstanding that they would carry out a certain broad policy.
Otherwise, they left them free from detailed orders. This system


had obvious advantages. It enabled a comparatively small body of
men to deliberate effectively upon national problems, and to pass
their findings into legislation. Insensibly, the idea grew up that
the people should give definite instructions to their delegates upon
all matters requiring legislation. This is an American idea, and
is due partly to the flattery of the people by ambitious politicians,
partly to the people’s suspicion of its leaders, partly to the spread
of education amongst the people, encouraging them in the belief
that they can decide all questions for themselves. Hence the
Caucus, the Referendum, and the Initiative. That all these de-
vices have their utility is undeniable. But I hold most strongly
that they threaten in the most fatal way to stultify true demo-
cracy, especially in an age when the people are woefully ignorant
elements of gieat national problems. In Australia, especi-
ally, it is tending to have a most disquieting effect. In more than
one Australian Government the Cabinet is learning to adopt ways
and means to get round the Caucus. The method which the
people adopted with the idea of overcoming the danger of vest-
ing too much power in its elected representatives, is being de-
feated by the old device of parliamentary tactics. This is largely
the result of an extremely advanced party organisation. Political
power has been gained only by the skilful marshalling of party
forces. Popular government inevitably leads to government by
parties, which, in turn, induces the imposition of what is known
as party loyalty. This system paralyses initiative and penalises
independence. It is the corollary of successful organisation for
political power. If something is not done to loosen the crippling
bonds of party, the Australian democracy will become a devitalised
machine incapable of pi ogress.
Democracy and Progress.
from the foregoing considerations, it is clear that demo-
cratic institutions arc not essentially progessive. In fact, no form
of government carries within itself the guarantee of social pro-
gress. Many despotisms have done more for the people than
their own institutions. Democracy, moreover, possesses peculiar
defects of its own, which have yet to be overcome. What arouses
one’s enthusiasm for democracy is not mat it is essentially efficient,
but that it is socially just. It is not that the people are wise,
but that they are benevolent, that makes us pin our faith to demo-
cracy. If only we can make them wise as well as benevolent, we
shall secure both happiness and efficiency. An autocracy can only
secure efficiency. True human happiness is inconsistent with an
efficiency whose price is the negation of liberty. Nothing is
easier than discipline from above. The success of Germany is
due to the submission of the individual to the efficient State
Prussia is the embodiment of Hilaire Belloc’s “servile state.”
The same may be said about the efficiency of the Trust. This
type of organisation brings very desirable results, but so far
it has always been accompanied by effects so pernicious that no


free people could willingly adopt it. The cardinal problem of
democracy consists in devising means to apply discipline from
within. The free man loves freedom more than he loves efficiency.
If we wish him to become efficient, we must persuade him, for we
should defeat our ends by compelling him. We must show him
that to be efficient is to be happier, and brings him material
advantages. Having converted him to that idea, we must then
introduce methods whereby democracy as a whole can be made
efficient.
The Nature of Australian Democracy.
After the somewhat severe strictures I have passed upon
popular government, it is refreshing to be able to find many good
things to say for Australian democracy, though some of my com-
ments will also be critical. The democracy of Australia is, as
such, the most advanced that the world has seen. It has an
almost ideal franchise, and though its electoral system is defec-
tive in parts, it enables the people’s will to secure fair expression.
There is in Australia also a very active public opinion supported
by a press much less corrupt and partial than that of other
countries. The intense interest of the public in political affairs
is due in part to a good educational system and partly to the
smallness of the population and the consequent parochial interest
in its business. In the Commonwealth, democracy has been
carried to its logical conclusion. The success of the Labour
movement is, therefore, quite natural, for a generation ago its
platform was more consistent with the rising ideal of social jus-
tice. Directly or indirectly the Labour movement has been re-
sponsible for a large part of the mass of social legislation passed
in Australia in the last thirty years. Here, more than anywhere
in the world, the conception of social welfare is paramount.
Though the quality of Australian life and labour is much exag-
gerated, it is true to say that the average man has a much better
chance in this country of living a full and happy existence than
in any other part of the world. It would be idle to deny, how-
ever, that Australia has been largely favoured by a combination
of circumstances which go far to account for the sweeping vic-
tories of democracy. In the first place, Australia was a virgin
country, very little spoiled in the earlier half of its history. It
had inherited no feudal landlordism, with its traditions of servility
and homage to outworn institutions. It escaped the worst afflic-
tion of an old industrial system, and soon abolished the more
unseemly features of modem industrialism. The democratic
franchise was gained in time to place the impress of the people’s
will upon all Australia’s youthful institutions. Australia has
been thus saved from the worst effects of an exploitation com-
monly found in other countries, and characterising the early pro-
gress of almost every new colony.
The aggregate achievements of organised labour and their
effect upon the standard of social welfare are very noteworthy.
They, include a striking series of Factories Acts, which have pro


duced more desirable working conditions than those of any other
country, and a higher rate of real wages than that obtaining in
any other part of the Empire, except New Zealand. Undoubtedly
the most important activities of Trade Unionism have been in
the sphere of the Wages Board system, and of the conquest of
political power. In these directions, Trade Unionism has spent
almost its entire force in the last twenty-five years. It seems
now to have reached the stage beyond which further intensification
and amalgamation of forces must be very limited. The Industrial
Arbitration system has already produced a race of Union Sec-
retaries, who are little more than expert advocates of the case
for their members before Boards or Courts. These men have
been driven to become officials instead of leaders. Their life of
specialised routine unfits them for the spacious vision and keen
study absolutely essential to right leadership. Nor is there much
consolation to be found when we look for leaders in the sphere
of politics. The very success and high organisation that has
brought sweeping victories to Labour at the polls has proved
alien to the production of the best type of leader. Suspicious of
their elected representatives and jealous of their own power, the
rank and file have not freely endowed their leaders with authority.
Many of the most able men in Australia refrain from entering
politics through reluctance to work under the instructions of the
unenlightened and hyper-critical mass. Any beneficent change is
impossible without the education of democracy on matters of
deep public concern. Only from an educated people can arise
brilliant leaders, backed by the intelligent trust of a nation which
understands its own problems.
State Action in Australia,
The large extension of State action in the Commonwealth
is often urged as a proof of the existence of great knowledge and
high ideals. Admittedly, this enlargement of the influence of the
State in augmenting Australia’s natural advantages and raising
the standard of social welfare has had results which are admir-
able. But, like much Australian effort, these collective activities
are nothing new in themselves, but represent only an extension
of an old type of social reform. Australia has failed to avoid
the pitfalls of State action. In the last ten years especially, the
workers have learned to lean upon the State to a degree sub-
versive of the finer spirit of positive idealism which characterised
the earlier Labour movement. The Australian worker has be-
come content to shout orders to his parliamentary employees,
and to sit and wait for pleasing results. It is always easier to
demand a State bakery than to establish one on principles of
self-help. And yet, there is no room for doubt as to which form
is a better proof of the social spirit and a finer training in civic
duties.
It is not sufficiently recognised that it is as much a function
of the State to cultivate the moral initiative of its citizens and
to provide them with the means of attaining self-efficiency, as to


undertake the control of certain large businesses. This demands
of the democratic State a far greater and deeper efficiency than
is required of the autocrat. To develop in a people the ability
of independent thought and action, which shall yet flow into co-
operative channels, is the supreme problem of democratic govern-
ment. There is no evidence that State departments in Australia
are extraordinarily efficient. There is still less evidence of any
tendency on the part of the Governments to educate the people
in the ways of doing things for themselves and of acquiring ideas
about individual and co-operative efficiency. Only the State can
secure that conscious outflow of organised energy from the body
of its citizens which will secure the highest rate of production
of wealth as well as the fairest distribution.
Distribution and Production in Australia.
We have seen that Australia stands pre-eminently for a high
conception of social welfare. As is natural in a young democracy,
it has concentrated first on a fairer distribution of wealth. It
has been blind to the relation of production to distribution. The
worker has conceived himself to be interested only in securing
more wages at the expense of profits. He does not see how severe
are his limitations in this respect. Putting aside the increasing
cost of living, it is still impossible for Labour to increase very
materially its own share of wealth merely at the expense of
profits. In no country in the world is sufficient wealth produced
to provide everybody with an adequate subsistence. Both in
England and Australia the national income amounts to only
about £4 per week per family. This leaves nothing for the
payment of higher grades of work. Greater produc-
tion is essential to maintain the rising standard of
comfort. An increase in production can only be secured
by increased efficiency in the factors of production.
These factors are land, capital, labour, and business
ability. The last three of these are capable of almost indefinite
improvement. A previous lecture has suggested some ways of
improving the efficiency of businesses and State departments.
The most difficult of all to convince of the need for higher effici-
ency is the representative of the factor called Labour. The
typical worker will tell you that he does not see the logic of in-
creasing the output for the sake of his employer. It is astounding
how widespread is the fallacy that increased output is detrimental
to the working class. The bigger the pool of national wealth the
greater the chance of the worker to secure a larger share. If we
lower the national income, every factor tends to get a smaller
share. It then becomes a fight of greater intensity between
Labour and Capital. I admit that the fight still goes on with
greater production. But surely it is most logical for the worker
first to take steps to ensure a proper distribution, and then to
increase production as much as possible. The idea that there is
a fixed amount of employment at any particular time, and that a


man should, therefore, not work too fast lest he do his mate out
of a job, is both pathetic and pernicious. A man cannot work
slowly without making his product dearer. If he makes it dearer,
and other workers do the same, his real wages will decline, for
he will have to pay more for all the goods in his market. The
workers are vastly interested in a greater output, both as pro-
ducers and as consumers, for, the more they produce, the more
they stand to receive and the less they have to pay for the goods
they buy.
Unfortunately, the extreme ideas of democracy have en-
couraged this fallacy. There is a strong tendency in Australia to
advocate a dead level of remuneration. The possession and power
of the vote have led the average citizen to believe, not merely
that he has as many rights as other people, but that he is entitled
to equal remuneration with other people. Democracy is very re-
luctant to pay high salaries to men of ability. Socialists always
promise us that in the socialist State the recognition of ability
will be a natural and supreme condition. Experience sadly belies
this statement. The worker is very slow to award high salaries to
the best types of efficiency. Hence Australia is falling more and
more into the hands of the amateur. There is a wide-spread
notion that in the sphere of business and of politics it is easy
to do things, and Australians point with pride to their achieve-
ments. But the so-called success of the amateur is due not to
extraordinary abillity, but to the fact that Australia is rich enough
to smother their mistakes in her abundance. An old farmer once
said to me, “This country is rottenly governed; but it is too good
to spoil.” Australia is not rottenly governed; but there is much
in the latter part of the old man's statement. It would pay. this
country a thousand-fold to offer to the best organising brains
in Australia a big inducement to devote their faculties to the
administration of every department. Will democracy do this?
I am told that it was once suggested to a prominent Australian
politician that a certain man with a genius for organisation should
be placed at the head of a new and important Government ven-
ture, at a very high salary. The politician's only remark was,
“But that is more than I get myself;” to which the retort came
quickly, “Yes; but we could find twenty men to take your place,
but not more than one like this man.” The best energies of the
best men will never be secured for Australia while this base con-
ception of the payment of ability persists.
Democracy and Idealism.
We have admitted that Australia has achieved a certain
amount of success in increasing material welfare. Even this,
however, is too often exaggerated. There have been many legis-
lative interferences with the Wage System, but their effects have
been largely qualified by extra efforts of the employers. In
matters of social welfare I believe that Australia has come to a
sort of deadlock. I find no ferment of new ideas either in poll


tics or in the Labour movement. We are discovering how easy
it is to exhaust practical expedients even when the power is
entirely in our hands. Nothing but close study of economics
and sociology will give Australia the new ideas she so badly
needs. Can we point to any State in which there is a movement
exhibiting great economic knowledge and deep political vision.
There is not visible anywhere in Australia the idealism which
one finds in less fortunate countries. Relieved of the spur of desti-
tution, it seems that Australia is dropping into a slough of easy
contentment. The nation has become intoxicated with its mate-
rial success, which must be admitted to be at least partly due
to the country’s natural advantages, and in the social sphere it
is more a matter of heart than of head. Nothing is more fatal
to the progress of a people than self-complacency. Nowhere
have I seen a people more impatient of criticism and more fond
of adulation. But it is surely not so much a matter of what
Australia has done as of what she might have done, and may
still do. The surface of her magnificent resources is but hardly
scratched. Her people possess a boldness and independence of
spirit which will enable them to face all difficulties. One is only
anxious that they shall understand the defects natural to any
democracy and the special problems that confront them.
The Requisites of Efficiency
What then are the requisites of efficiency under democratic
government? They are, I think, (i) a high conception of civic
duty; (2) an understanding of all national problems, by educa-
tion in citizenship; (3) a high and increasing technical skill; (4)
the effective organisation of the State, so as to promote and en-
courage efficiency in individuals, businesses, and all forms of
administration.
My colleague has discussed all these elements except those
which may be summed up under “The Education of Democracy.”
It is my pleasing task to conclude with a description of a move-
ment which is attempting, successfully, I think, the creation of
a highly enlightened democracy in Australia.- I refer to the
Workers’ Educational Association and its system of University
Tutorial Classes. The movement originated in England some
twelve years ago through co-operation between a few Labour
men and leaders of thought at Oxford University. The move-
ment now covers the whole of the United Kingdom, is spreading
rapidly in Australia and New Zealand, and has made a beginning
in Canada and South Africa. I have just received a request from
the American Federation of Labour, with a view to introducing
the movement into the United States. The Association itself is
composed of many thousands of organisations, such as Trade
Unions, Friendly Societies, Literary Clubs, Universities, and
other educational institutions, and its policy is dictated by their
representatives on thoroughly democratic lines. All attempts in
the past made by the Universities to reach the people have failed.


because they did not actively interest the people in running the
system for themselves. We have avoided that error. The
W.E.A. organises the demand amongst the people. The Uni-
versity does not tell them what it thinks they ought to study, but
gives them instruction in the studies they select. My particular
function is to select and train special tutors for this work. We
conduct great numbers of courses of public lectures, and always
get at the right sort of audience. We undertake educational con-
ferences on all great public questions. No limit is set to our
activities. But our supreme activity is what is known as the
Tutorial Class.
Let me give you an idea of a class; —The old notion of a
teacher telling people things, to be simply accepted and believed,
must go. A class is a group of people who may differ funda-
mentally in politics, religion, or theories of social organisation,
but who are anxious to get facts, mental training, and a clear
exposition of varying views. The teacher assumes importance
only because he is skilled in imparting knowledge, and has had
special opportunities of acquainting himself with all the aspects
of the matter under study. Just as in his capacity as teacher, he
must be able to sympathise with all points of view, so must the
student not expect him to become the biased advocate of any
school or system. The spirit of the class must be comradeship
in the pursuit of truth and the attempt to extend the bounds
of knowledge. There are some people who believe that the
economic doctrine of one school or person is absolute truth. A
teacher who, though he passes no adverse judgment, does not
press the doctrine in question, is regarded by them as wrong in
essentials. Such people have a real place in a tutorial class if
they have the spirit of comradeship, and if they earnestly at-
tempt to use new opportunities for seeing the problems under
study from their own standpoint, but steadily and in all their
breadth.
A successful teacher affirmed his nervousness before meeting
thirty students; he was asked, “What right have you to be
nervous? You are only one thirty-first of the class.” That is
true, and represents the spirit of the tutorial classes. It is a
mutual relation, none before and none after. As one student
said, the teacher addressed the class for one hour, and the class
addressed the teacher the second hour.
No class should consist of more than thirty students. The
classes last for three years, and comprise twenty-four two-hour
lessons each winter, with twelve fortnightly essays. Each stu-
dent pledges himself to attend unless illness, employment, or, if
he be an official, meetings of his Trade Union, intervene. No
one under 18 would be admitted, but there is no other age limit.
The subjects asked for have so far been mainly Industrial His-
tory and Economics, but Literature, History, Natural Science,
Philosophy and Psychology have also had a place.


At first the essays trouble some students, but when they
realise the teacher as a friend, not a critic, helping them on
from where they are, the trouble passes. Some of the most cap-
able students are bothered by spelling, grammar, and punctuation;
but these difficulties are soon adjusted. At a joint committee
meeting these matters were under discussion, but the tables were
turned when a workman member said that the students of one
class complained that they could not read the tutor’s writing.
The essays must all be kept, as the progress and work of
the class is best tested by them. It is clearly not wise to set
adults down to elaborate examination papers; it is much better
to decide upon their qualifications by a perusal of their essays
and by conversation with them.
The organisation of the class is a most important matter.
The students must appoint a secretary, who shall keep a correct
attendance roll. Any student who, for any reason, is unable to
attend a meeting of the class must state that reason in writing
to the secretary, who will file the same for future tabulation.
They shall appoint their own librarian, who will make a note of
all the books advised by the tutor, and forard the same to the
secretary of the Association or of his branch. He shall keep a
record of all the books supplied to the class, and in whose posses-
sion they are, and shall make arrangements, where possible or
necessary, for groups of students to meet together to read and
discuss any certain book.
Here we have Democracy considering its own problems. The
class, which consists of all grades of people engaged in all kinds
of avocations, is brought into touch with a University man who,
to them, is a small encyclopedia in social questions. The ordinary
academic outlook becomes transformed, and there is no doubt
that this movement is doing the Universities as much good as
the people. It has secured the services of the best types of Uni-
versity men in the enlightenment of the people. And when one
follows the movement, it is astonishing to find what a tremendous
amount of genius is running to waste among the people, and the
people must be reached to bring out this latent genius, for it
is the mass of the people who most desire enlightenment in these
days.
There is no doubt that without a system like this, Democracy
will never become really efficient, or solve its own problems.
Nobdy can save the people, but the people themselves. We must
not look solely to the politician, however clever or expert, or
to legislation. We must look to the minds of the people. I
think this movement will continue to progress, as it has pro-
gressed in two years in New South Wales, where the Government
is subsidising the work. In fact, there are only two States in
Australia which have to come in, and help the movement, and
then we will be able to press forward; and we shall soon have a
system of tutorial classes established in every large city in the


Commonwealth, and in these classes inquiring minds will be
able to find means of enlightenment in the great questions of
democracy. There are thousands in Australia only waiting to
be picked up and made efficient members of the community.
I think the whole of what I have said comes to this. De-
mocracy has a number of certain admitted faults, but not one
is hopeless of solution, and every one of them depends on the
increased individual efficiency of those who make up a demo-
cratic country. The future is in the hands of that country which
develops its own resources best by efficient means, and it is in
the hands of those who develop democracy efficiently. Here in
Australia we have a country whose material progress is more
absolutely assured than in any other country in the world, a
country whose hopefulness of outlook is the brightest of all,
and it only remains to make of Australia what her magnificent
resources demand that we should make of her. Once we realise
how tremendously capable Australia can be made of producing
the ideal Commonwealth, we shall not rest until we have covered
Australia with every means to make her people efficient in every
imaginable way under the name of a modern democracy.
At the conclusion of the lecture, several questions were put
to the lecturer.
The first question was:—(a) Is it not a fact that efficiency
so far as the worker is concerned is a new machine, and as it
has always been found when a new machine is introduced that
it is labour-displacing, will not methods for increasing efficiency
prove labour-displacing? (b) In preaching the doctrine of in-
creased efficiency, is not the worker’s fear of unemployment over-
looked, for it is not so much from the fact that he wants to
turn out as little as possible that the worker “goes slow,” but
that he sees unemployment staring him in the face if he pro-
duces more?
Mr. Atkinson.
I will answer the first part of the question—as to whether
it is not a fact that increased efficiency is only another type
of machinery displacing rather than saving labour? If I admit it
is so, then I admit a well worn fallacy that the introduction of
new machinery displaces labour. The introduction of
machinery has the immediate effect of cheapening produc-
tion, and if the article cheapened is one In constant demand, an
increased demand sets in for that article, and to keep up with
that demand more machinery and labour is required. Therefore
the introduction of machiney in this case increased production,
and the amount of labour needed to obtain that production. Al-
though machinery more frequently and generally increases the
demand for labour, there is one thing that does hit the worker,
and that is the temporary dislocation caused by the introduction
of new machinery. For example, owing to more efficient methods


of working, and the introduction of machinery on the coalfields
of North of England, many charcoal burners lost their trade,
and all the charcoal burner sees is that the hewer has got his job.
Certainly more coal hewers are required, owing to the extra
efficiency obtained, and the increased production, but the char-
coal burner does not see it that way. Therefore, it must be
admitted that in many instances the introduction of new ma-
chinery has a bad effect, until it results in the cheapening of
the product over the whole field of industry. From the time of
displacement to the time until things settle down, and more labour
is drawn in, the man displaced might well starve. That is where
the worker is hit hardest.
Mostly everybody thought that, with the introduction of the
railway engine, the poor old horse would not be wanted any
longer, yet horses are wanted more now than ever before.
I do not want to claim that the introduction of machinery is
always good for the worker. It is in this superior economic con-
trol that labour stands to lose most, and it is one of the functions
of democracy to readjust the forms of control, so that no part
of its population will suffer.
Democracy is the only one who can solve it, being the only
one interested in the welfare of the whole people. One cannot
settle any of these problems in one sentence, because it is all
a case of wheels within wheels, and there is constant interlocking.
The second part of the question comes to this. Why is the
workman’s fear of unemployment so much avoided in the advo-
cacy of increased efficiency? I did not avoid it. The problem
of unemployment has certainly a strong bearing upon efficiency.
It is another fallacy that increased output means increased unem-
ployment. I want to have nothing to do with an increased pro-
duction which is not accompanied by an increased dis-
tribution. The more we produce the more we want to produce,
because human wants are capable of indefinite expansion. That
is the case with all humanity. Human progress can be defined
as an extension of human wants. If we increase production and
distribute fairly, the worker will live on a higher plane, and be
led to produce more and more of the things he wants to consume.
In a world where a man gets the largest share of what he wants,
he will increase his wants, and that will lead to increased em-
ployment. The lowering of production is the cause of increased
unemployment, and it leads also to a diminution in capital. Em-
ployers cannot be found to exploit the natural resources of a
country without capital, and it is plain that capital is not in-
creased by a diminished production.
Question: Before any endeavour is made to secure greater
efficiency, ought not unemployment and its causes to be eliminated ?
Mr. Atkinson.
The question submitted is whether it is not incumbent on
society to get rid of unemployment before it can hope to secure


greater efficiency. Certainly the society which does not get rid
of the defd weight of unemployment stands condemned of imper-
fection No Sdety can be considered to be efficient which does
. sn organise its labor supply and demand so as to get rid ot
unemployment. Although a society
rid of unemployment it does not inevitably follow that that society
has solved the whole problem of efficiency. Conceive a State m
which the whole of the unemployed are kept e ™ pl % edf °
other reason than that they shall be employed by the State. You
might stUl have such a low rate of efficiency that it will drive
that State to bankruptcy. Such a false kind of distribution might
be secured that it will reduce rather than raise the efficiency of
the nation. If you reduce unemployment to the minimum, an
increase efficiency to the maximum, you will be better off t ian
bv making the State simply efficient. The organisation of produc-
and distribution of wealth is part of the scheme of in-
creased efficiency. We have to-day a spectacle of the waste and
mfsuse of the world’s wealth to such an extent that it ought to
stagger humanity. "When the war is over, we will see more
defdv the necessity for increased production, because every one
will have to make 7 two blades of grass grow where one grew
before, if our nation is to become efficient.
In concluding, I hope it will not be thought that there are no
other eluents filtering into these probto ’
have touched on. There are many, but I cannot touch on tnem
all.


THIRD LECTURE.
Delivered on 6th September, 1915.
National Efficiency and Government.
Professor W. Harrison Moore (University of Melbourne).
Jn coming before you at the request of the Minister of Public
Works, I need not say that neither I nor my colleagues are posing
before you as what are known in America as “efficiency en-
gineers,” with a system for remedying every defect and ensuring
a perfect running machine. But most things may be approached
from various points of view: different observers have different
angles; and when at a time like the present we are engaged in
national stocktaking, when we are driven to look in upon our-
selves, there may be something to be learnt from a collection of
these standpoints. And you will not be surprised if our opinions
lead us to the importance of education and training : to the shoe-
maker’s philosophy, “there is nothing like leather ”
So far as concerns the subject of efficiency in production and
economic organisation, Professor Irvine and Mr. Meredith At-
kinson bring to it a fulness of knowledge from study and obser-
vation, with which I cannot compete. What I have to say on
the matter, therefore, will only be in the way of a brief
footnote to their addresses; and it is no more than this—we
have been able in Australia to attain a high degree of comfort in
a form of society unusual in new countries. The proportion of
our people who are facing the hardships of the pioneer’s and the
discomforts of the settler’s life is singularly small; the proportion
of us who are enjoying the amenities of a highly developed city
life is relatively large, and tends to increase. The recent report
of the Interstate Commission calls our attention to the fact that
in a very few years the increase in the number of persons engaged
in our urban industries and employments over the number of per-
sons engaged in our primary industries was as 6to i. One of
the most important of the conditions which made this possible
was that we were producers of commodities for which there was
an unlimited demand amongst wealthy competitors over seas, and
that among these customers there was an annual accumulation
of surplus wealth which sought investment with us. To a very
large extent, the present war has altered these conditions. For
our primary products there will, of course, be a demand, but it
is hardly possible that the enormously diminished wealth of (fur
customers should not affect the price we get for them, and it
is certain that we have to endeavour to find new markets. The


older nations will no longer be able to lend us their annual millions,
which it must be remembered, though spent in reproductive works,
filter through and add to the prosperity of every occupation,
thev may even be calling for repayment. Even the machmer)
of credit upon which production and the profitable transportation
of our produce to distant markets so much depends may work
with some friction after the shock of the war And
our burdens will be increased, necessarily increased by
war loans and war taxation. It is significant that m
the first article which appeared in the Round 1 able
on the financial effects of the war, the writer laid especial stress
on the alteration of conditions for the new countries, and that
his conclusion was; —“There is only one way by which the wealth
of the world will be quickly replaced after the war, and that is
by work It will be absolutely necessary that the productive
capacity of the individual should increase very much compared
to P his capacity during the last years, during which it -has un-
doubtedly been on the decline. The country whose workers show
the greatest capacity for productiveness will be the country that
will most rapidly recuperate.”
It would, I feel assured, be an entire mistake to suppose
that the term “workers” is here used m any narrow sense—it is (
a call to each and every one of us in whatever capacity we work
Mr. Lemmon, M.L.A., last Monday laid stress, very rightly in m>
opinion, upon the importance of technical instruction. But t
need does not stop there, or in what is so often passed by the
name of commercial education. Some years ago I called atten
tion to a growing sense of the importance of education for the
higher functions Ind activities of business life, as evidenced by
the provision in England, America, and Europe of facilities for
commercial and technical education up to the highest standards
of University work. I will only add that the importance of such
provision seems now even greater. Experience is a useful guide
in the conditions in which it has been obtained, in the face o
what may be considerable changes in our economic conditions
some broader and more systematic study seems necessary if
we are to make the necessary adjustments. Mr. Atkinson has
referred to the policy of sending business men and manufactur s
abroad and I might supplement that by urging that we should
make it possible for men to get a liberal and at the same time
professional training here in commerce and industry as we make
provision for law, medicine, and engineering. I would add that
this is something very different from shorthand, typewriting and
book-keeping, which seem to limit the vision of a good man) peop
in dealing with these matters; it is not the training of people to
be clerks? but the training of them to be managers and pioneers
of enterprise of which I am speaking.
The only other matter I would refer to under this head
isthe fear entertained by some industrial workers that efficiency
means the sacrifice of the worker to the product and the dissatis-
faction of others with “efficiency as an ideal of life. As to the


first, they do well to be vigilant, but with their trade union or-
ganisation and their political power, they have very effective means
of self-protection; certainly a cult of inefficiency will not benefit
their condition. As to the second, one may agree that efficiency
is not an all-sufficient ideal. But surely the real danger is not
the principle of efficiency, but a materialistic conception of life,
which is quite compatible with great inefficiency. It is a mistake
to assume that every gain in efficiency is paid for by some loss
in the spiritual, moral, or intellectual life.
Turning now to the State and the Government in relation to
efficiency, there appear two distinct matters for consideration—
first, the function of the State as promoting or compelling the
efficiency of its citizens; secondly, the efficiency of Government
itself in its own undertakings.
As to the first matter, we shall find that with some the ques-
tion will be what has the State to do with efficiency? They would
say that the purposes of the State are the maintenance of justice
and liberty among the citizens. Their standpoint is that of the
duty of the State through its Government towards the citizen,
his rights against it. They protest that the State as guardian of
efficiency attacks and consumes the liberty of the individual,
and treats him merely as an instrument for attaining some end;
that justice is sacrificed to the same necessity; that in place of
the rights of the citizen, the liberty of the subject, we have the
dominance of duty, a duty which is embodied in discipline, and
that the independent spirit of self-government withers before a
trustful and submissive reliance on the expert.
The contrasted views are often put in the form—does the
State exist for the individual or the individual for the State?
Put in this form, the question is about as answerable as the
mediaeval conundrum concerning the number of angels that could
dance on the point of a needle, or the more familiar problem as
to whether the hen or the egg came first. But, roughly, people’s
assumption of the relations of the State and the individual to
each other as end and means does affect their attitude towards a
great many subjects, from compulsory military service down-
wards. Liberalism has looked askance upon efficiency as resting
upon duty, discipline, obedience, and as derogating from the
dignity of humanity and citizenship by treating man as a subor-
dinate instrument to be used for the production of results. Some
of the most ardent of modern reformers stand outside all existing
party divisions in passionate protest, alike against the present
order and against socialistic tendencies towards what they regard
as the servile state of soulless efficiency.
Toryism, on the other hand, has more definitely rested on
national solidarity, and socialism in this as in other respects
has important points of contact with Toryism. It is significant
that when, during and after the South African War, the cry
of “efficiency” was raised in the land as the lesson to be drawn


“d L* wa^dTiK
instead of the^skion/^i^raVwnters
Sd n ency OT orf h at they have not £
efficiency, but they fear thaas P f Government and
tec rsfsXsxs war- ,
Here le. me neliee tl.at the State if it woeetns iltelf mth
efficiency at all is tempted to take -y broad^vtews. * .P«
doicg <»-»7»-c‘^ S a cte°" C rits cdizens! £ is the seat o£
tendencies' which directly affect their effidenc^
social justice, -p. HifFprenre in oomt of view* how
conduce to social efficiency The chfference mpo as
ever, will api«ar when you a maternity
tonm e -°in education, as to the prominence of training
for a living as be strong claims
on e the ground la o£ personal liberty and hapPi-ssi in respects
£ S 3
will insist that the only justffii-ation for t and child,
interest in the health and well-tong of the mother and
th T e he P Xre C n°ce rS^e to ouf ve'ry poimedly in
effects t J during the present war on the sub-
f4t no d S up r ervlion Sver the expenditure of
allowances “ s °>^ rs ' only make two observations. The
, H thfstate is going to play Providence to its citizens
first is that if the state g g knpS - unemployment and
and ensure them against accident, sic ’ P mistakes of
<ea «


which is the very life-blood of democracy. These measures
may involve a very considerable use of the State’s powers
of compulsion, and the general acceptance of control in
many matters in which the traditions of individual liberty are
strong; it remains to be seen whether democracy is willing to
make a voluntary submission to such a discipline, which is a
very different thing from calling for the provision of eleemosynary
benefits by taxation designed to fall upon a relatively small number
of persons. Such measures of prevention also demand a much
greater degree of intelligence and imagination, of foresight, both
in policy and administration; it is an easier and more effortless
thing, something lying nearer to the emotions, to maintain a
hospital for the sick or to pay invalid pensions or a maternity
bonus, than to devise and enforce the measures of economics
and hygiene by which sickness may be minimised, or to see to
it that every mother has the instruction upon which so much of
the well-being of the future may depend.
The other observation I want to make is this. One of the
things which this war has revealed is the enormous number of
factors that enter into a nation’s safety; that its power to maintain
itself against external dangers depends not merely upon numbers
of brave men, adequately trained and armed, and intelligently
directed, but upon the intelligent and effective co-operation of
every class in the community, however far their ordinary voca-
tions may be from military employment. It has revealed in a
much higher degree than ever before the dependence of a nation’s
safety upon the general efficiency of its citizens in their several
callings. We have in the past spoken rather vaguely of “the
resources of the country.” We are now learning how really the
capacity and character of its citizens are the most vital part of
those resources.
No Government responsible for the safety of a country can
prudently be indifferent to the condition of these resources, and
in a democratic community—a non-deferential people—the neces-
sary qualities can exist only if there is such a conviction of com-
mon welfare as will lead the people to co-operate for a common
purpose; a conviction that the national interest is their interest.
The character and disposition of such citizenship is perhaps not
fostered by our traditional and historical attitude of jealousy to-
wards the State as Government; neither is it adequately developed
from a habit of regarding the Government as the provider of
sectional benefits. The tendency to make every form of public
service a paid service, involves some loss of the sense of public
duty, and it is considerations of this kind that lead many people
to believe in the moral value of universal military service, while
others like Mr. Wells, though dubious of military service, insist
that without some form of universal personal service we shall
not develop a true citizenship; they do not believe with Green
and the reformers of 1867 that the vote, even the compulsory
vote, is sufficient to turn “the instinctive loyalty of the ordinary


o-nod subject into intelligent citizenship, and thence at a higher
fevel into patriotic enthusiasm” At any rate, I do believe hat
it is possible to make a much greater use than we do of the volun-
services of our citizens; that in many cases we should get
much better service by calling upon competent people to do work
for nothing than engaging incompetent people for meagre rewards.
There are*large numbers of people amongst us whose sense of
citizenship perUhes by never being
the taxpayer and I can answer for more than one case in wmcn
the calf for personal service during the last year has aroused a
"us sens P e of citizenship and interest in public affairs in men
who hitherto had held somewhat cynically aloof.
Coming to “efficiency” in the work actually undertaken b>
Government itself, the subject has its own difficulties and prob-
Perns r“at the attainment of it is .Mess; d.redandmore
nlpx matter than is commonly assumed. We desire public saieiy
and order but we also desire liberty and justice and we have
not ve a quantitative science of politics which will give us the
iudicious mixture. The recent Civil Service Commission. a nswe t'
“g the caU for “business methods” in Government, emphasises he
differences between Government and business in respect to the
nbieets for whkh they are undertaken and the criteria of their
success—few of the services of Government lend themselves to
the balance-sheet test of business. Again 't isi pointed out tl
thev differ in the conditions under which they are carried on
as in the subjection of Government services to Parliamentary and
control in their direction, on the one hand, and the
limited choice which the responsible administrators have of t
instruments by which public affairs are carried on on the other.
Everf where the service is one that corresponds with the under-
takings of private enterprise, the work in the hands 9 f a
mental Authority has a peculiar complexity. Mr. Sidney Webb
has pointed out that when the public undertakes any function,
an S even 1 higher degree of administrative science is required than
ffithe case of business enterprise. “A water company, whose only
object is to the shareholders’ profit, can achieve its purpose with
a meaner intelligence and a lower degree of knowledge than the
municipal water supply, which has far
buying in the cheapest and selling in the dearest market , has to
consider in effect all that can be learnt with regard to the effect
upon the public health of different degrees and different methods
of purification, all that can be discovered with regard to the
social results of different expedients for distribution and differe
wavs of charging the costs, all that is involved m the calculation
of riie of the supply for the future generations who
will dwell in the city.” (The New Statesman, 1913, P•
And if it is said that, though the factors may be specia
there can be no difference of opinion that method should te
adjusted to result sought—which, I suppose, is what is meant
bv “business methods”—it must still be pointed out that in
popular government work is done under very special conditions,


which look to satisfying frequent calls for explanations and justi-
fications. The Commission which I have just quoted also says:
“Much of what is commonly described as red-tape is due to
the exigencies of Parliamentary Government. Much of the
delay and expense of public departments should in truth be re-
garded as part of the price paid for the advantages of public
discussion and criticism of public affairs.” The necessity for
constantly being ready to give an account of what has been done,
and why, explains in part that timidity of the official mind to
which Professor Irvine referred, its tendency to routine, and to
base its action on the safe ground of some well-worn rule of
practice. “Ask the persons who have been most successful in what
are called private affairs,” says Sir Arthur Helps, “whether they
would have been equally successful had they been obliged to
work under the harrow of perpetual supervision and criticism.”
It is not only the individual trader who enjoys this freedom; it
is the common mark of the trading and financial corporation that
its articles of association give to the directors the fullest control
over the affairs of the company, that shareholders expect and
receive very little, and that very general, information as to the
company’s business, and that the directors in their turn leave a
very wide discretion to the manager and realise the importance
of not unduly fettering him by requiring him to be ready with
detailed reasons for every act. To quote again Sir Arthur Helps;
“One of the most important laws of both public and private busi-
ness is that you should give a large amount of trust and confidence
to your agents if you wish them to act for you with any of the
vigour, promptitude, and comparative fearlessness with which you
would act for yourself.” ( Thoughts on Government, p. 38.)
A very little knowledge of the history of our institutions is
sufficient to tell us that we have not approached the organisation of
government from the standpoint of efficiency. In her insular se-
curity, England was free to develop her liberties; our whole consti-
tutional and political history has been that of so shaping our insti-
titions as to secure the legal rights of the citizens, and self-govern-
ment, to secure a representative legislative, to vest in it alone
the powers of legislation and taxation, to limit executive dis-
cretion, and to secure the responsibility of the executive first to
the courts and then to the legislature. Neither Parliament nor the
Cabinet rests on the notion that they are the most direct and
economical means of wise and effective government. Much dis-
cussion goes on as to whether a member of Parliament is, pro-
perly speaking, a representative or a delegate, but neither view
treats him as selected for wisdom and ability. Popular election,
in fact, is a very discredited means of choosing skill and ability;
but it is or may be a very good means of securing what has been
called “samples” of public opinion—a body of men so represen-
tative in character that what they think and decide, it may be
reasonable to presume, is in accord with the'sentiments of the
community, and would be in accord with their opinion if they
had the means, the leisure and the interest to inform themselves.


On only a limited number of subjects is there a real ana wide-
spread public opinion; where it exists it may have a morai \aiue
and has great value as a driving force. In the greater nunmeiO.
political matters a public opinion compounded of knowledge,
reason and feeling, forms itself m the legislature and is the has s
of its representative action. It is worthy of note that the natur
of public opinion is beginning to receive very serious
attention from students of institutions—-witness the works
of Mr. Graham Wallas and President Lowell of Harvard,
I suggest that this meaning of our institutions is one
that it is important to grasp for various reasons. In the
first place, because politicians are very apt not to _ realise
it and to think it is their business to guess at public opinion and
act accordingly; secondly, because legislatures are often very un-
fairly treated as being from their position pretenders to a wisdom
and ability that they have not got. They would be less represent
five than they are if they did not contain some persons distinguished
by lack of sense, as well as some of outstanding ability, so for
the sake of true representative institutions, let us learn with
St Paul to suffer fools gladly. In the third place, the char-
acter of a representative chamber puts obvious limitations upon
its capacity to handle complex and intricate matters without guid-
ance It is becoming ever clearer that it is difficult for the
representative legislature itself to deal directly and effective 7
with all the matters really requiring attention difficulty
is met in part by the predominance of the Cabinet, m part by
the very modern practice of delegating large powers of action to
the executive.
Two suggestions for the improvement of our legislative work
without any fundamental alterations have m i de ' *^ nt
aooear worthy of some attention. It is felt that the present
system neglects matters which do not either come w.thm
the speciaf purview of the administrative departments, or
within the arena of party, and a proposal has been ma
that there should be a legislative committee of the House com-
posed of private members to which the examination of all bills
other than Government Bills should be referred, and which
should have assigned to it a certain amount of the time o ie
House. Another method which is declared to have worked most
satisfactorily and to have improved the quality of legislation
wherever i/has been adopted in America, is that of the open
hearing in committee. From the point of view of «
legislators and rendering them less dependent on the newspaper
oress Professor Irvine’s Research Bureau may be commende
S the name of an Efficiency Bureau it «
in America a part in state and municipal affairs, and appears
on "ay to' recognition as a definite appendage to popu ar
government A* most important and much neglected
matter is the following through of legislation unto its results
the collation of materia! by which we may judge of its success


or failure, and the presentation of candid reports on the sub-
ject. In the end, no doubt, there will remain much room for
differences of opinion, and not everything can be said in statistics
and graphs. But a great deal may be put beyond doubt, - and
controversy narrowed down to a few points. We are at present
making a number of economic experiments of the most interest-
ing nature by way of “emergency legislation”; but is any pro-
vision being made for tracing out their effects? Unless we adopt
means for taking pur observations on results it is an abuse of
terms to talk about “experiments.” l
If popular control and Parliamentary action look to ends
other than the effectiveness of governmental service, the system
which puts a political Minister at the head of our departments of
government is a part really of our system of self-protection against
abuses of power rather than part of a scheme for the organisation
of administration with a view to the most effective perfomance
of its functions. Bagehot fifty years ago pointed out, on the
authority of a very able Minister of State (Sir G. Cornewall
Lewis) that a condition of successful administration under the
Cabinet system was that the Minister should not attempt himself to
run his department; the actual work of administration must be
left to the permanent staff, and his position was to let in the
fresh air from without. This limitation upon the function of
the Minister is too frequently neglected; the Minister is regarded
as the administrator, and the staff of the office merely as clerks.
The result is an overworked Minister called upon to deal in detail
with matters of which he can have little knowledge, and a Min-
ister who, instead of letting in the light of outside criticism upon
the office, so far identifies himself with its every act that every
criticism upon it or even request for information is apt to be
regarded as an attack upon him. The Minister who runs his
own department may make chaos there, or he may in his con-
scientiousness desire to see and understand everything, hold up
business and cause most vexatious delays; but he is most likely
to yield himself completely to office routine and regulation as the
only way of getting through the multitude of matters to be at-
tended to. Thus in casting upon the Minister burdens which
do not belong to him we really lose much of the advantage which
should come from the oversight by an external head.
For the greater part of efficiency in government, we must. I
think, depend upon the capacity of our permanent public service
The English Civil Service Commission, to which I have already
referred, warns us that it is no longer possible to regard the
public administration of the country as a body of clerks, and
that it is essential to recognise that upon their capacity depends
in an increasing degree the ability of government to meet the
I The Hon. the Minister stated that the Government of Vic-
toria had already taken measures for the investigation referred
to in the lecturer’s illustration.


demands now made upon it. Grasp of principle, combined with
the masterv of detail, judgment and strength of will—the qualities
and execution-these are great demands
to make upon men, and yet somehow or other, if government
is to be equal to the task imposed upon it to-day, these qualities
have to be q found and put to the work of government And more
than that is wanted—our “will-organisation is not sufficient with
out a “thought-organisation”; and with the hustle of modern
politics thought in political affairs tends to become a mere by-
product of the day's work, and characterised by the short views
a« inevitable in such conditions. To quote again Sir
Arthur Helps (himself a man of long experience in admimstra
who P has a chapter on “Foresight” in his Thoughts on
Government: “Let every man engaged in the ffigtest nt TTine
of statesmanship be oppressed by the severe nf an .^ Ur^ e n
of office which already prevents so many of the greatest men
?rom being abe to give due foresight to the affairs of the‘future.
WeU be ft so; only remember, that if the miller and his men
are always employed in grinding for the necessities of the day
and there is no one left a little outside to watch the course o
the stream it may fail some day when it is most wanted, or
it may come down in one tumultuous overflow, sweeping away
the mill,The miller and his men, broadening, as it goes, into
one vast torrent of destruction.’
More than ever, imagination and foresight are demanded
in public affairs, yoked to knowledge and to capacity f ° rp ! an ™” g
ahead Public administration, so far from being anybody s bus
ness is as much dependent as anything else upon the choice of
fit nersonsTt is a singular thing that the very able busl-
ess men who introduced the Victorian Public Service Act
should have supposed that the business of government and ad-
ministration was so far different from the business of commerce
that it could be efficiently conducted by a service which ran itself
bv fixed rules It is not surprising, on the other hand, that the pnn-
dpal meaffing of “business methods” as. applied to government is,
in the opinion of the English Civil Service Commission, the differ-
entiation of duties, the finding men for the higher class of duty,
and the setting them to it as speedily as possible, recognising too,
that these higher duties form an important part of the states-
manship of the country. The method of selection employed in
the first instance is by an examination of candidates at the age
of 22 or 23, for which the men who present themselves represent
the best and most highly educated ability that the Engln sh
sities produce. The men selected are (or should be for pnn
dole is not always carried out) at once put to work which makes
demands upon their intellectual capacity, and are m training or
the higher posts of the service. It is found that, apart from te
securities such a system gives for selecting abih y jTTests£Sd
tape of an education which should ensure wide interests and
comprehension, their education is a prophylactic against the virus


of routine —that such men, though not immune, are attacked less
severely by the disease of systems and regulations. How far our
Australian public service systems go in the way of attracting
ability to the service and in selecting and encouraging it, I
leave you to judge. Here, as elsewhere, in our political system,
our thought has been to ensure ourselves against abuses and to
do justice to claims, in these cases the rights that have been
conceded to public servants by our statutes. Both of these things
are good in themselves, even as conditions of efficiency, but we
can hardly build successful management and far-seeing statesman-
ship upon them alone. As far as education is concerned, the
system which bases admission on an examination suitable for
ordinary boys of 15 or 16, ignores the existence of any education
beyond the higher elementary or earlier secondary, while an ex-
amination which looks merely to fitness for the simplest kind
of clerical duties is utterly unsuited as a test of ability for the
higher and more responsible duties which have got to be per-
formed by some one. Even when unusual ability does enter
by such a gate, long years of routine duty create the strongest
probability that intellectual interests and qualities of character
will find their outlet not in the public work, but outside the service.
One of the rules of efficiency is that if you have men fit for the
higher sorts of work, you should lose no time in putting them to
it, lest their interests wane, and. so far as you are concerned,
their ability is lost.
It may be said that Australia is unsuited for such a scheme;
that the recognition of two distinct branches of the service—a
higher and lower —is undemocratic. It may be so, and if it is,
then democratic government has some very serious limitations on
the side of efficiency, and must be content to see its undertakings
suffer by comparison with those who do not adopt such self-
denying ordinances. The true way surely is that pointed out
by the English Commission in dealing with a similar objection
to the English system: “We cannot too earnestly repeat that it
is not by lowering the educational standard of the highest ranks
of the civil service, but only by enabling the clever sons of poor
parents to benefit by University training, and thereby enter the
civil service, that the interests of democracy and the public ser-
vice can and ought to be reconciled.”


FOURTH LECTURE.
Delivered on 6th September, 1915.
National Efficiency and Science.
Professor W. A. Osborne, University of Melbourne.
If we seek for the greatest intellectual achievement of
modern times we shall surely find this in the enormous expansion
of science and its application to human needs. There are those
who consistently praise the past and disparage the present, for-
ever pointing to the masterpieces of our ancestors and bemoaning
our degeneracy. The proper answer to such folk is to take them
into the power-house, the engine-room, the hangar, the hospital,
and the wireless station. In all matters save science we must
admit inferiority to former periods of history. In poetry,
drama, painting, sculpture, music, architecture, in promulgating
laws, and constructing systems of government, in philosophy and
in religion, we are eclipsed by the past. Science is the one great
success we can place against all this, and upon which we can
depend for the good will of future ages. One can picture an
historian of the future attempting to reconstruct this present age,
and, having studied with admiration the gigantic growth of
science, which reached its acme perhaps in the year iB6O, coming
to the conclusion that this great manifestation of activity was
participated in by all classes, and was fostered by the wealthy
and by those who were in administrative authority. Yet we
know that this is far from the truth. Despite her triumphs and
all she has yielded to man, science does not occupy any prominent
place in the public regard. In most quarters there is ignorance
or indifference, and in some actual hostility. The causes for
this neglect are complex, but I will attempt to give those that
have been especially active. The first I must treat delicately, as
I have no desire to give offence to anyone. But the fact re-
mains that science has had the misfortune more than once to
come into acute conflict with religion. So deeply rooted has reli-
gious dogma become, and so sensitive have the people shown
themselves to anything that looks like a challenge to established
belief, that science lost ground amongst the bulk of the people
and their spiritual leaders, whilst religion lost ground amongst
the few who carried on scientific investigation. As a second
cause, I would mention the fact that the education which British
statesmen have received has unfitted them for any proper appre-
ciation of scientific aims, methods, and initiative. The tradition
is strong in Britain that a legal or belletristic training is the best
for all government positions, and the manner in which that
training is given is often such as to beget a decided hostility to-
wards science and all her works. There was an illustrious


statesman in the first half of the nineteenth century who occupied
the honoured position of adviser to the young Queen Victoria.
There was a humble contemporary of his, named Michael Faraday,
the son of a blacksmith, who displayed a true genius for
experiment. The great statesman, speaking of young Faraday,
remarked that it was a “pity so clever a man should spend his
time fooling with a magnet.” Let me tell you what that parti-
cular fooling consisted in. If an electric current passes along
a wire which is placed close to a compass needle, the needle will
be deflected. That, by the way, is the basis of the electric tele-
graph. Faraday now reversed the process; he, so to say, de-
flected the needle, and looked for an electric current being pro-
duced in the wire. Fie found it, and this auspicious discovery
opened up the whole science that has given us electricity as a ser-
vant and not as a plaything. Faraday not only carried out the
initial experiments, but went far into the theory, and laid down
principles amfl advanced hypotheses which the modern man of
science upon as the work of one who was veritably inspired.
That was Q tiie “fooling with a magnet” which so amused a great
statesman. Ido not know if any city contains a statue or other
memorial to Michael Faraday, this great benefactor of mankind,
but to the statesman we have paid one of the highest honours
possible. His name is borne by a mighty city of a mighty empire
—that in which we live. In Coningsby there is a typical
Beaconsfieldian jibe at a learned man who had written a great
work on barnacles. There was such a learned man at this time
who had written a book on barnacles, and his name was Charles
Darwin. Which of the two has left the greater impress on the
world ? When it was pointed out to Lord Palmerston, another
typical statesman, that Germany was erecting laboratory after
laboratory, and spending enormous sums on education, his com-
ment was that Germany was “a country of damned professors.”
A third reason for the neglect of science is to be found in
that deeply implanted distrust of the expert which is so charac-
teristic of the British mind. As a recent writer in the Hibbert
Journal has pointed out, we have deified the business expert, but
•snubbed all others; we have distrusted the medical expert, and
until this war taught us better we have distrusted the military
expert. English-speaking folk prefer to place their confidence
in the amateur or the ready orator rather than in the silent
worker with actual things. H. M. Stanley, who devoted body
and soul to Africa and African affairs, soon found out, when he
was elected to the House of Commons, that his advice was never
■sought on subjects relating to that great continent. It was Sir
Charles Dilke who was appealed to, and whose judgments were
considered sound and final. Mr. Gladstone could be asked for
a pronouncement on the value of vaccination, and with fitting
solemnity could gratify his inquirer. How often in the military
history of England has the success of .the campaign been im-
perilled and lives and treasure and opportunities lost by the im


position on experienced generals of a strategy e ™ lve A
Dickens would have called a literary gent.? As the man ot
science occupies an exceptional position in the ranksi of experts,
h-s subiect comes in for an exceptional share of pub ic distrust.
This pathetic faith in the amateur, which we find so deep-rooted
would require an address to itself, but I pass on to another reason
for the obscure position of science, and that is to be found ml
attitude of business men. Amongst men of this class one is
constantly reminded that a great gulf separates theory fro
“ac ice “That may be all very well in theory but we prac-
S m.m ” etc etc. Now, there is this much to be said in de-
fend of this position, that when any new movement or project
is beginning, the earlier stages demand abundant common sense
and ke"n practical instincts. Science in its theoretical aspects
fc at fW of little service. But, as the work develops, science
conTs nfore and more Into operation, until a fee comes when
the only advances possible are those which are the omconie f
high theory We find an excellent example of this n* elect:ricai
mgn tneory. , electr icitv. At first it was the Simple ex-
perimenter and the ingenious inventor who made the beginnings
of industrial electricity, but soon a time came when giant minds
?ike Ke /in got to W ok, and lifted the subject up to a totally
net olane We have in our own time a great advance in
teleohony brought about by the profound deductions that have
come from the lonely musings of a crippled mathematical p iysi-
dsT anHot from the business office nor from the workshop.
One may state to-day that no knowledge and certainly no ad
electrical engineering is possible without a good ground-
in* in theory. The ordinary practical man is helpless. We are
witnessing the same change in the study of aerial travel The
earlier discoveries were made by keen-eyed, practical and daring
S&2TK .he unknown y There was much to earn
that the science of the day had not touched. But at the present
ime the dynamics of flight are receiving attention from the de-
spised theorist, and already some important advances have been
made Farmer Hayseed may laugh at the idea of a course of
study in scientific agriculture, and point to his own success on
the land. Without doubt, Farmer Hayseed learned much an
tano-ht us much but at considerable cost. When he has e
taught s ’ r,i v i r gin soil, which he was lucky to
secure"then thT iTofsdencl'S be called in by his despairing
successors who may not be at all eloquent on the benefits of
r.r™e r nS y t e olde S n y cennd “
acknowledge, how much ‘T.SS
made'by °Dr. Lyon Playfair, afterwards Lord Playfair, a dis-
tinguished chemist;
“For many years foreign States, acting upon the facilities
for communication, have expended annually large sums m send


ing highly enlightened men to our country, for the purpose of
culling from our experience, and of importing it into their own
land; and we see the effect of the experience thus readily
acquired, when united with the high development of mental
labour, in the rapid growth of new industries abroad. We still
hold to mere experience as the sheet anchor of this country, for-
getful that the moulds in which it was cast are of antique shape,
and ignorant that new currents have swept away the sand which
formerly held it fast, so that we are in imminent risk of being
drifted ashore. In fact, this is the great question at issue be-
tween England and foreign States. With us there is a wide-
spread jealousy of science, and a supposed antagonism between
it and practice. . . . While we continue to rely upon local
advantages and acquired experience, we allow a vast power to
arise abroad, which is already telling against us with wonderful
effect.”
May I ask you to guess when this was uttered?—Well, it was
in the year 1852.
There is considerable danger attending any classification of
knowledge and effort into theory and practice as things widely
separated; there is also the danger associated wjth the classifi-
cation of the sciences into those that are useful or likely to be
useful, and those which are academic. No one can ever pro-
phesy from what abstruse study something of immense practical
value may arise. I suppose there are few more academic pur-
suits than the study of the shapes of crystals. But a young
French savant found that certain crystals had a facet on the
right hand, whilst others similar in every additional respect had
this facet on the left. He observed that products of fermenta-
tion had right-handed crystals or left-handed crystals, but not
both together. From a study of this phenomenon he was led
to view fermentation as the result of microscopic life, then he
discovered that putrefaction was due to microscopic life, and,
lastly, that infectious diseases were due to microscopic life. The
benefits conferred on medical science and on industry by the
work of this Frenchman are of a magnitude that baffles compu-
tation. His name was Louis Pasteur. One can indeed never
tell from what remote pursuit something highly practical may
arise. Yet in a young country, if funds are not sufficient, I sup-
pose, after all, the sciences which should be first thought of are
those associated with utilitarian needs. But a State which re-
stricts its fostering care to the purely practical and the purely
utilitarian runs a great danger of missing the Kelvins and Pas-
teurs, who may mean so much in the advance of a nation to
wealth and power.
How does science react upon national efficiency? In the
first place, there is industry which more and more is enlisting
the services of the investigator. There is scarcely a manufac-
ture to-day which cannot be benefited by a knowledge of the fun


damental sciences, followed by an application of specialised
science. I know that the example of Germany has been brought
forward in this connection with considerable reiteration, but I
must take the risk of wearying you with one more such reference.
In the unparalleled expansion of German commerce in recent
years, a number of factors were operative, such as the fiscal
system, special banking methods, some finesse with patent laws,
the use of highly skilled agents throughout the world, and a
well-organised system of distribution. Doubtless Germany pro-
duced certain lines of goods, cheap but eminently adaptable,
which secured a good market, though not perhaps of the high
quality of the more rigidly fixed types made in England. But
in all fairness, it must be admitted that in a large number of
manufactures, Germany won by the superior excellence of her
goods. If we wish to give the best quality field-glasses to a
young officer going to the front, we pay gladly a high price for an
instrument bearing the name of Carl Zeiss. The unquestioned
superiority of Zeiss optical glass is not due to any smart practical
man or clever business dealing, but solely and simply to the fact
that the firm called in the aid of a great investigator in physical
science. Not only does Zeiss glass occupy this high position, but
German glass in general. English glass, one must regretfully
admit, is very third class in comparison. Let me now draw
your attention to that branch of science called organic chemistry,
or the chemistry of the carbon compounds. This science has
never been actively pursued in England, partly owing to the
general lack of encouragement of any experimental study, but
also partly, many say chiefly, to the fact that alcohol, which is an
important raw product, and also an indispensable solvent or
vehicle in many processes, could not be obtained duty free. The
Government, in fact, took up the attitude that a man of science
bringing alcohol into his laboratory did so with the intention of
getting drunk. In Germany, both men of science and manu-
facturers were given duty-free spirit without restriction. After
much agitation, England in 1902 passed the Finance Act, which
apparently allowed free spirit to the manufacturer and to the
scientist, but by the administration of the law the manufacturer
was cut out of the benefit. However, the science laboratories
obtained their wish, with the result that organic chemistry, which
was almost dead, began to blossom like the rod of Aaron. We
in Australia are in the position of England before the Finance
Act. When I, for instance, find alcohol necessary in some
chemical process, I have to pay for it at a rate which supposes
that I desire to secure it for the purpose of becoming intoxicated.
The consequence is that in Australia, as formerly in England,
all those departments of chemistry and biochemistry which need
alcohol for teaching or investigation must be cut out or treated
very gingerly. Germany’s great successes in the prosecution of
organic chemistry have brought ample rewards in commence.
She has secured a predominant position in the manufacture of


colours, and, as nearly all textiles must be dyed before being
p aced on the market England’s enormous textile industry -em-
ploying one and a half million operatives, and representing some
T 0 f nnUa value ’ 15 senou sly threatened, as she herself
nec^L e aTv Pr °r U e L rft g b 0n 7 * , rou S hl y a tenth, of the dyes
necessary Let it be remembered that this success of Germany
m synthetic colours has not been due to any fiscal encouragement
or to any other cause than the high quality of the goods and their
cheap and sure production from coal tar products. What has
been said of dyes applies even more pertinently to the manufac-
nr^f° f i Sy hCtlC i dn P and - P erfumes - Here Germany has a
p actical monopo y, due again to her encouragement of organic
chemistry. In the manufacture of fine chemicals every man of
science will admit that Germany is supreme. These beautiful
products aie to him as near perfection as it is ever allowed that
the work of human hands can attain. In the dye and perfume
trades, and (such is the strength, or the weakness, I know not
™ r f edlca 1 I P rof ession) in the drug trade, it does not
suffice merely to make a good product and stick to it. Each
year must see new shades and tints, new perfume-blends or floral
imitations, new hypnotics, headache-cures, or antiseptics. To
xeep the market, the manufactured product must ever be at least
on the move if it is not progressing as it usually is. Now to
obtain this science must not only be employed, but placed in a
position of power. When, an alarmed English Government
toimed a syndicate to manufacture aniline dyes, it refused to
put a trained man of science on the directorate, the reason as-
signed being that he would have the other directors too much in
ms hands. In Germany, the head of a great chemical manu-
factury is generally a trained chemist ; he employs a good lawyer
and a good financier as advisors, and in that way the initiative
which is necessary he is able himself to exercise. I think that this
esson of initiative is the most difficult one to teach and the
last to be comprehended. A business dealing with a scientific
product cannot be static; it must be dynamic and progressive or
go under. We may say much the same of a State It must
not aim merely at high efficiency, but at higher efficiency. Now
ever increasing progress is the breath of science, and anyone who
has gone through the discipline of a course of study and re-
search feels that same spirit should be present in all human
affairs. An education based too much on literature that is to
say, when literature is regarded as fundamental and not decora-
tiye, generally fails to evoke this very necessary quality and
with all due respect to my friends the lawyers, a too great pre-
ponderance of the legal element in government is likely to do
the same. Ido not mean to suggest that each statesman, manu-
facturer, and man of business should go through a long course
of science training; that is obviously inadvisable and impossible
but each should have that elementary knowledge of science
which would make him more sympathetic towards scientific


methods readier to call in the aid of science, and able to judge
approximately when science could do service. In certain depart-
ments where highly expert knowledge of science is necessary, and
where 'continuous improvement of the product ts required we
might well take a leaf from the German book and give the man
of Science some say in the administration. I believe that Britain
had begun to realise in her slow way the need of a change in
her treamient of science in industry before the war came, with its
terrible lessons. There were houses like Burroughs, \\ ellcome and
Co which employed, at good salary, young energetic men of
science and —what business houses are so apt to oveilook gave
them ample opportunities to do research even of a " apparently
academic character. Already some of the universities in the
north of England have made their mark in industrial matters,
will instance* in this connection the widespread adoption by tan-
neries throughout the world of methods suggested and tested m
the leather department of the University of Leeds. But since
the outbreak of war, this tendency has undergone an immense
forward impetus. One of the most hopeful signs is the forma-
tion by the British Government of a strong advisory council o
eminent men of science, whose duty embraces
(i) Proposals for instituting specific researches;
(ii.) Proposals for establishing or developing special. insti-
tutions or departments* of existing institutions for the scientific
ctndv of nroblems affecting particular industries and trades,
establishment and award of research studentships
and TOTcouncil will probably work through subcommittees
strongly reinforced by suitable experts. Then, again the
new aniline dye industry of England will be guided on its
scientific side by a technical committee containing the Lading
organic chemists V of England. It is pleasing to observe aso in
connection with this same industry that a research department
has been founded and put under the charge of a gifted young
chemist —a choice in which the scientific world will at once con-
cur There are other indications—l pick out one almost at
dom—the foundation by the Yorkshire textile managers of
scholarship for the study of the classification of wool.
The part played by science in warfare is too well known to
need mSch elaboration here. This is a war of science against
science, of initiative against initiative, of German chemistry a
engineerin'* against the chemistry and engineering of the Allies.
Fn-Hnd has not by any means done all that she could in
It wayoTenlisting Scientific help, Viscount Bryce in the
House of Lords on July 2nd of this year, made the foil wi g
significant admission; 4
“Every possible effort should be made to utdise the services
of scientific men. They all knew to how grea an extent the
German Government had turned the services of scenufic men
and establishments for investigation and research to


for military purposes. We possessed in this country a body of
scientific men not, indeed, so numerous, but fully equal in com-
petence and fully equal, he need hardly say. in earnestness and
zeal to serve their country. He understood that there had been
during the past month a certain amount of regret amongst scien-
tific men that they had not heard from the Government how they
could help. Any efforts which the Government made to give
them a chance of coming in, and enabling them to turn their
scientific knowledge, whether in chemistry or engineering, to the
common purpose we all had at heart would, he was certain, be
welcomed by them.”
However, about the time when Viscount Bryce was speak-
ing in this manner, Woolwich was in need of a University-
trained man of science to teach chemistry, and the salary offered
was £2 is. 6d. per week! When the laughter of the scientific
world reached the ears of the authorities, this amount was raised
to £l5O per annum! Everyone knows that economic pressure
cannot be brought to bear effectually on Germany so long as
she is self-contained, that is, so long as she can feed and clothe
her citizens and manufacture war material. That science has
been called in to aid her in making munitions of war goes with-
out saying. This is well seen in her preparations for preparing
nitric acid, an indispensable material; for all explosives, both pro-
pulsive and shell, are formed bv the action of nitric acid on some
suitable substance, such as cotton, glycerine, carbolic acid, toluene,
aniline, ammonia, etc. Nitric acid has hitherto been made
directly from naturally occurring nitrates, but these are now cut
off from Germany by the British fleet. Germany’s response has
been to manufacture nitric acid from the constituents of the
atmosphere. There are ten munition metals, and of these Ger-
many can obtain ample amounts of at least five, namely, iron,
manganese, chromium, zinc and lead.* But as regards the
other five, there is hope that she may be feeling the effects of
scarcity. These five are—copper for the band round all shells;
aluminium for her airships and for the explosive ammonal;
nickel, indispensable in armour plate, in modern bullets, and
armour piercing projectiles; antimony for hardening bullets; and
tin for tin plate, anti-friction metals, and solders. There is
some evidence that Germany has mastered the dearth in some of
these by the formation of special alloys, but one cherishes the
hope that there are still some essential metals which she cannot
obtain so long as the British fleet controls the seas. One of
England’s most distinguished chemists pointed out many months
ago that cotton should be declared contraband, as nitrated cotton
was the basis of all propulsive explosives, and no substitute for
it was likely .to be found. To this proposal, the British Govern-
ment has at last acceded, but one of the awkward questions which
must be asked and answered when the war is. over is why this
was not done at once.
♦See “Nature,” July 15th, 1915, p. 538.


Coining now to the help that has been extended to England
in war time by men of science, I will quote you some remarks
made in the House of Commons by Mr. Pease, formerly Minis-
ter of Education in England:—
“Our successes over our enemy in aviation are very largely
due to the investigations made into automatic stability by a young
man, who went through an elementary school, fought his way
up to the Imperial College, and went through a course at the
National Physical Laboratory, and invented and introduced the
B.E. biplane—at any rate, from his investigations the B.E.
biplane was developed. We have hitherto done very little to
encourage these brilliant young men taking up a scientific career.”
The same speaker also informed the House that lyddite
was made at the commencement of the war out of phenol. The
price went up at once from 6d. to 55., and owing to laboratory
experiments, conducted by Professor Green, at Leeds, he was
able to reduce the cost to is., as lyddite can now be made from
benzol. That was entirely attributable to the research work of
one man.” Mention of Leeds reminds me that the superb range-
finder used in the navy was the invention of the professor of
natural philosophy in the university of that city.
What, then, are we to do to ensure that science shall increase
the efficiency of the nation? Our first and chief duty is simply
this, that we must organise scientific education, and not merely
place this within the reach of boys and adolescents, but compel
them to take it up. We must not wait till the war is over, or
till good times come; we must begin at once. In my mind, this
is the one outstanding lesson and warning from this awful con-
test. if we do not set about an improved system of science
education, we shall start on the downhill course. Do not most
thinking men feel to-day that Germany has appealed to the one
method of acquiring power in which by superiority in men and
treasure she may yet be utterly frustrated. Had she not been
drunk with the wine of military glory, she might have won in
peace times and in her own way. She had already insinuated
herself into the heart of our commercial life. However, she
has chosen the sword, and by the sword the challenge must be
met. Let me quote a short extract from the remarks of another
speaker, Mr. King, in the House of Commons, in that historic
debate on May 13th: —
“Everybody who thinks of it, and who studies the question,
must know that Germany’s position in the world to-day is due
not to the real genius of the people so much as to organisation
combined with education, and especiallv scientific education. I
am very pleased that at this time there is an opportunity for an
educational advance. . . It was in the year 1809, only two
years after the peace of Tilsit, that Prussia started the University
of Berlin. Prussia had been robbed of half its territory by the
Peace of Tilsit, which also imposed upon it an enormous indem


nity. It had also to support a huge French army of occupation
until the indemnity was paid. Yet in that very time Stein and
Wilhelm von Humboldt founded the University of Berlin, which
has become for its equipment and influence in scientific matters
by far the greatest university in the world. They also estab-
lished at the. same time, when the taxes were simply overwhelm-
ingly crushing, the elementary school system of Prussia which
remains to the present day. I say that a nation that could so
appreciate in its hour of ruin the value of education is a lesson
to us which we ought to take to heart.”
It is fortunately not too late for us to start on new lines.
Our present system of primary education drops the boy and girl
at the age of fourteen. It is just then that their imagination and
inventive faculties are awakening, and the capacity for receiving
scientific education begins. I emphasise the absolute necessity
of compelling our young people at this most plastic and adaptable
age of adolescence, when there is great capacity for good, and,
unfortunately, as we know, great capacity for evil, to undertake
a course of scientific study. Too much attention has been given
to the secondary school as a “ladder to the University.” It
should so function, but only for the few gifted ones who are fit
to climb. The main purpose of the secondary school should be
to finish the education of the rank and file of the citizens of the
State. Ido not for a moment suggest that science should
monopolise secondary education. Cultural subjects, and parti-
cularly English language and literature, must of necessity be in-
cluded, but the fine dictum of Herbert Spencer should never be
lost sight of, that what occupies the leisure of life should occupy
the leisure of education. It is not enough to erect the school
and equip it. and engage a good teaching staff. The boy or girl
w r ho is offered this discipline of a generous education on the one
hand, and on the other offered the liberty of the picture show
and the many excitements of the evening, will almost invariably
choose the latter. Above the secondary school comes the tech-
nical college, dealing naturally with a much smaller proportion
of the population. To build this up into an institute up to date
in science and up to date in the application of science would not
be a difficult task. Again, there should be here something more
than the purely voluntary admission of students. A complete
course should carry sufficient material advantage to be attractive.
I have heard that a fair fraction of the young men who start
courses in technical schools do not see the thing through. Those
who do persist to the end are surely the salt of the earth, but
they would have got education anyhow, anyway, by hook or by
crook. The young men who do not work through are the men
who must be caught and persuaded, and especially those who
never make any start. And not only must we provide for
scientific instruction in secondary school and technical college
for men, we should make a serious error in not offering suitable
opportunities to young women. At present the cost of the


technical education of girls is about one-seventieth that of the
other sex. Some people seem to think that a young mother
will know by instinct how to rear her baby, and to take charge
of a home; she can no more gain this knowledge by instinct than
she can swim by instinct if she falls into the river. We are
witnessing, I veritably believe, a mighty awakening in England
as to the value of science in all aspects of citizenship—the effects
on production, on defence, on health and on morality. If we
cannot be in the van of this great movement, let us not at least
be found blundering in the rear.
6771.9.15


