

NATIONAL
WAR MEMORIALS
Being the First Brochure of the
Federal Council of the Australian
Institutes of Architects
PRESENTED TO THE ARCHITECTURAL PROFESSION OF AUSTRALIA
By
G. H. GODSBLL, F.I.A., F.R.V.I.A., Pres. Federal Council Australian Inst. of Architects.
KINGSLEY A. HENDERSON, F.R.V.I.A., Senior Victorian Delegate.
B. T. WATERHOUSE, F.I.A., Hon. Secretary and Hon. Treasurer.
Edited by GEORGE SYDNEY 'ONES, F.I.A., A.R.I.B.A.
1923




NATIONAL
WAR MEMORIALS
BEING THE FIRST BROCHURE OF THE FEDERAL
COUNCIL OF THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTES
OF ARCHITECTS
1923




FOREWORD
qp HE Federal Council of the Australian Institutes of
A Architects has decided that the time is opportune
to begin a series of publications, which may be accepted as
the considered opinions and recommendations of the Coun-
cil as a Body on matters of serious national importance, in
so far as Architecture and the kindred arts and sciences are
related thereto.
This brochure, the first of the series, has been called forth
owing to the necessity of issuing a report on the movement
to erect National War Memorials in the States of the
Commonwealth, and the difficulty with which the Com-
mittees in some of the States have been confronted in
arriving at unanimous decisions on the question of site, and
as to what form the Memorial should take, utilitarian or
symbolical. Its objective is to help those who desire
assistance in forming opinions concerning National War
Memorials, their sites and their setting.




Column of the Grand Army, Boulogne
Henry and de la Barre, Architects


The Marine Memorial, New York
H. Van Buren Magonigle, Architect
Attilo Pricirilli, Sculptor


The instinct of all who build with such a purpose in
view is to build for eternity. Such was the instinct of the
Egyptian Kings of 3,500 years ago, though their purpose
was personal and not national; but the instinct was at root
the same —the desire to record their deeds and the spirit
of achievement which give rise to them.
National War Memorials should therefore be built of
the most durable materials, so that they may last the
nation’s life—and longer. The selection of the site should
receive most careful consideration. It should be in or near
a city, but not of it; sufficiently prominent to be distinctive,
but not so prominent as to be aggressive; one is proud of
the achievements of one’s countrymen, but if a National
Memorial be so situated as to be thrust upon the eye at
every turn, the inspiring effect upon the mind is very much
weakened. A public park is suitable as a setting, where
verdure develops restfulness, and where quietude offers
meditation. To conceive a National War Memorial situ-
ated in the centre of busy city traffic is a conception en-
tirely foreign to the modern mind. It is therefore assumed
that it would be the wish of any Memorial Committee that
a National War Memorial should be an enduring monu-
ment, which would be inspiring not only to the present, but
also to future generations.
One of the psychological questions in this matter not
easily answered is as to whether the beneficial mental in-
fluence of a National Memorial can best be assured by its
erection where many thousands of people can obtain a
passing glimpse of it, and an elevating thought or two
raised which will quickly pass away because of the dis-
turbing effect of noise and movement, or whether a greater
beneficial mental influence can be assured by placing such
a Memorial in a comparatively quiet spot where contem-
plation evokes inspiration and sustained elevation of
thought. The concensus of opinion as expressed by those
who have studied the matter from this point of view, is
that:—


The Marine Memorial, New York
H. Van Buren Magonigle, Architect
Attilo Pricirilli, Sculptor


The instinct of all who build with such a purpose in
view is to build for eternity. Such was the instinct of the
Egyptian Kings of 3,500 years ago, though their purpose
was personal and not national; but the instinct was at root
the same —the desire to record their deeds and the spirit
of achievement which give rise to them.
National War Memorials should therefore be built of
the most durable materials, so that they may last the
nation’s life—and longer. The selection of the site should
receive most careful consideration. It should be in or near
a city, but not of it; sufficiently prominent to be distinctive,
but not so prominent as to be aggressive; one is proud of
the achievements of one’s countrymen, but if a National
Memorial be so situated as to be thrust upon the eye at
every turn, the inspiring effect upon the mind is very much
weakened. A public park is suitable as a setting, where
verdure develops restfulness, and where quietude offers
meditation. To conceive a National War Memorial situ-
ated in the centre of busy city traffic is a conception en-
tirely foreign to the modern mind. It is therefore assumed
that it would be the wish of any Memorial Committee that
a National War Memorial should be an enduring monu-
ment, which would be inspiring not only to the present, but
also to future generations.
One of the psychological questions in this matter not
easily answered is as to whether the beneficial mental in-
fluence of a National Memorial can best be assured by its
erection where many thousands of people can obtain a
passing glimpse of it, and an elevating thought or two
raised which will quickly pass away because of the dis-
turbing effect of noise and movement, or whether a greater
beneficial mental influence can be assured by placing such
a Memorial in a comparatively quiet spot where contem-
plation evokes inspiration and sustained elevation of
thought. The concensus of opinion as expressed by those
who have studied the matter from this point of view, is
that:—


Crowded thoroughfares should be avoided.
Works of Art should not be obstructions to traffic
either at the time of erection or prospectively.
A work of Art is not noticed when placed where
crowds continually pass it.
People will go a distance to enjoy a masterpiece. Unless
a Memorial has distinction, so as to command attention
and admiration, it fails of its purpose.
The form a National Memorial should take is of the
utmost importance. The opinion of those who have given
much thought to the subject is that the form which is
most inspiring to the beholder is the symbolic, representing
an idea or association of ideas, rather than the realistic
representing an actual scene or event. A quiet dignity and
beauty of line suggesting restfulness and offering medita-
tion should be the keynote of the design; sculpture, whether
statuary or in high or low relief, should be symbolic only,
and should suggest sorrow at loss, and joy of valour dis-
played by those whose exploits are memorialised, rather
than the welter of war. The awfulness of modern methods
of warfare compared with those of a hundred years back
make the idea of war horrible, and not glorious; any real-
istic representation of War as the reliefs on the pylons of
the Arc de Triomphe in Paris were therefore better omitted
if a National Memorial is to produce the effect desired
on the minds of the nation.
The erection of an utilitarian Memorial in which the
idea of service takes a form, such as a Hall or Club Rooms
for Returned Soldiers, may, on first thoughts, seem appro-
priate; but on reflection it will be clearly recognised that
such a Memorial would serve its purpose for a generation
or two only, and in the course of time would be replaced
by a building more suitable to that future time. Further,
its utilitarian character would not have the consecrated
effect on the mind which would be produced by a monu-
ment of symbolic character. The effective value of the
Memorial as such, and the associations attached to it, would
thus be lost.


Battle Monument, West Point, New York
McKim, Mead, and White, Architects


In a word, a National War Memorial will best express
its purpose in a work of Art. “Art is but the garment of
life; it is the well-doing of what needs doing”*—the doing
of things fittingly and in a seemly manner. “The function
of Art is the setting in order the house of mankind.”! “If
Art is to be a blessing, it must be strong and bold and cap-
able ol exalting our daily aspirations, it must offer per-
sonal comfort and confidence in moments of anxiety and
weakness, it must rejoice with them that do rejoice and
weep with them that weep; it should also fortify the mind
tor its national duties —exciting endeavour to make the
state righteous and gentle —it should embody our highest
hopes, making us emulators in the competition towards
bringing infinite justice and mercy to the world.”! The
Art of previous civilisations did this in their time and
manner, and the duty of the civilisation of to-day and the
people of Australia is clearly to do likewise in accordance
with their ideas of the fit and the seemly, for the aim of
Art is to increase the happiness of mankind.
The setting also is an important consideration. The
inspiring effect of a monument is often lost by an inappro-
priate setting. What is likely to be the permanent back-
ground of a Memorial must be considered in relation to
the site as a whole; and the immediate surroundings, either
of garden or water or pavings, should be designed in
harmony with the whole scheme.
What are the thoughts inspired at the foot of a National
War Memorial? They belong to the finer side of human
nature. Thoughts of the Anzacs—Australia’s immortal
dead —and of kindred whose deeds helped to write “Fame”
across the map of Australia. Mystic thoughts, of youth,
of age, of loss, of gain, and proud thoughts that such loss
* Lethaby; f Cobden Sanderson; t Holman Hunt.


was the gain of national freedom and honour. Thoughts
that are best put into the following words by one of the
poets:
“O may I join the choir invisible
Of those immortal dead who live again
In minds made better by their presence; live
In pulses stirred to generosity
In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
For miserable aims that end with self,
In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
And with their mild persistance urge man’s search
To vaster issues
A modern thinker has said: “There is a power dormant
behind the lowest brain which, once awakened, will light
up the intelligence and refine the face.’T
National War Memorials rightly conceived and rightly
executed help to produce this effect upon the national mind
and bring it nearer to the vision of the good, the true and
the beautiful.
“Tell Englandf ye who pass this monument ,
We died for her, and here we rest content
* George Eliot; fJ. Brierley; $ lines written on a cross at Suvla Bay, Gallipoli.


Prison Ship Martyrs Monument, Brooklyn,
New York
McKim, Mead, and White, Architects


REPORT
ON THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE STATES OF
THE COMMONWEALTH CONCERNING THE
ERECTION OF NATIONAL WAR MEMORIALS.
The Federal Council of Australian Institutes of Archi-
tects desires to report that the present position appears
to be, that, of the six States of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, only in Victoria has a War Memorial scheme been
so far advanced that the likelihood of a satisfactory result
seems assured. In New South Wales the matter is in abey-
ance owing to a difference of opinion amongst Leagues and
Associations representing the Returned Soldiers and others
concerning the form a Memorial should take. In South
Australia a site has been selected, though not in accordance
with the recommendations of the South Australian Institute
of Architects. In Tasmania the question of War Memorials
is being considered by the public, both in the north and in
the south of the island, but nothing final appears to have
been done. In West Australia the movement does not
seem to be alive, and in Queensland the Institute has taken
part in an effort to acquire a square in the city of Brisbane.
Except in Victoria, therefore, the position in Australia
is unsatisfactory.
To further the matter the Federal Council suggests that
the Institute of Architects in each State should urge the
public and the Government of the State to consider the
matter of a Memorial as one of serious importance to present
and future generations, in that it is a fitting means of the
expression of the national ideal of the present generation
of Australians. To ensure co-ordination and unanimity of
action the Federal Council also suggests that each Institute
should seek the co-operation of the Trustees of the Art
Gallery, the Town Planning Association, and the Art So-
cieties of the State. The combined opinion of these bodies,


tactfully exercised, should weigh with any Government
which truly represents and is desirous of carrying into effect
the will of the people.
To assist those who find difficulty in placing the matter
adequately and effectively before committees and other
bodies who are the responsible excutives of movements in
favour of the erection of War Memorials, there is recorded
herein below:
1. The action that has been taken and the manner of
taking it in the States of Victoria and South Australia and
New South Wales towards the erection of National War
Memorials.
2. As to what are the conditions which govern the erection
of War Memorials generally in those and other States.
A. The National War Memorial of Victoria.
A public meeting was held in Melbourne Town
Hall, at which leading citizens were present, and a
Committee was formed to deal with the question of
competitions and designs for a State War Memorial.
A Sites Committee was also chosen, and a site se-
lected near the city. The personel of the Jury of
Award of the Competition was discussed at length
by the Royal Victorian Institute and the Memorial
Committee, with the result that two members of the
Federal Council of the Australian Institutes of Ar-
chitects and one member of the Memorial Committee
were nominated on condition the nomination of the
two members of the Federal Council be approved
by the War Memorial Committee and the nomina-
tion of the member of the War Memorial Committee
be approved by the Federal Council. This has been
done, and Jury of Award agreed to. The award
of the Jury was to be final and binding on the Com-
petitors and Promoters. The principle of the ap-
pointment of experts, who will be in the majority
on any Jury of Award in future competitions and
whose decision will be final and binding on com


petitors and promoters, can now be taken as having
been firmly established in Victoria. The cost of the
Memorial is to be about £250,000, to which sum
the Government and the City Council of Melbourne
have each contributed £50,000 on the express con-
dition that the Memorial should be idealistic in
form.
It should be noted that the opinions expressed and
the arguments used by the President of the Federal
Council, whose assistance in arriving at decisions
was called for by the Minister for Works, were
largely the cause of the satisfactory conditions of
Competition which have been drawn up.
B. The National War Memorial of New South Wales .
The position in New South Wales is that about
£60,000 has been subscribed to a National War
Memorial fund, which sum, however, is tied up in
the hands of Trustees. Owing to the death of one
of the Trustees, it appears that before any funds can
be used for the very purpose for which they were
collected, an act of Parliament will have to be passed.
That difficulty still exists, but the Institute of Archi-
tects has endeavoured to assist the Returned Sailors’
and Soldiers’ League, which is the responsible body
in the matter, by suggesting a suitable form of Me-
morial. A difference of opinion has arisen between
sections of the League, one section desiring a utili-
tarian Memorial and the other section an idealistic
Memorial. It appears that the money was collected
for the specific purpose of erecting a Memorial Hall,
so that part of the fund will have to be expended in
that way. The suggestion of the Institute of Archi-
tects, which it is thought meets with the approval of
a majority of the members of the League, is to utilise
the old Macquarie Barracks, at the head of King
Street, Sydney, which could be converted into a
Hall for soldiers, and to erect an idealistic Memorial


in St. James’ Square adjoining the Barracks, or in
Hyde Park, as part of the improvements after the
City Underground Railway is completed. In this
maimer a building of historical and architectural
value would be preserved, and a civic improvement
in the immediate neighbourhood be effected. In the
meantime, however, the matter is in abeyance.
It should be stated in this report that at the meet-
ing of the Federal Council in February last, the fol-
lowing resolution was passed unanimously, all dele-
gates being present, viz :
“That in the opinion of this Council, State War
Memorials should be of a non-utilitarian char-
acter.”
C. The Government of South Australia has asked
the advice of the South Australian Institute of Archi-
tects as to the site of the proposed National War
Memorial for Adelaide, but they have decided on
quite a different site to the one suggested by the In-
stitute.
(2) The conditions which govern the erection of War
Memorials in some of the States are as follows’. —
A. In Victoria a “War Memorial Advisory Board” was
organised at a Public meeting held in the rooms of the
Royal Victorian Institute, and the Board has received the
moral and financial support of the Government. The Chair-
man of the Committee is Sir Baldwin Spencer, K.C.M.G.,
M.A., F.R.S., the Vice-Chairmen being the Minister of
Public Works; the Minister of Lands, the President of the
Royal Victorian Institute of Architects (ex-officio) and
the Director of the National Gallery, supported by a Gen-
eral Committee of Architects, Sculptors, Artists and others
interested in these matters.
This Committee has issued the following circular:—
The Royal Academy in London recently inaugurated
a popular movement that resulted in the formation of a
Standing Committee of Advice, the function of which Com-
mittee is to influence and direct, as far as possible, the


design of Public Monuments and individual War Me-
morials. Following on the lines laid down by the Royal
Academy Committee, and on the suggestion of the Coun-
cil of the Royal Victorian Institute of Architects, a Public
Committee has been appointed in Melbourne to whom
individuals and the public may apply freely for advice
and help in any work of the kind they may propose to
undertake
It is the hope of the promoters of this movement that
the War Monuments and Memorials shall be given their
highest value as Memorials of the Fallen, and be at the
same time works of Art of no mean merit.
The following suggestions, slightly modified from those
of the Royal Academy Committee in London, are put for-
ward as being suitable for adoption to the local needs in
Victoria:—
1. Designs should be obtained by calling in a competent
expert or by competition, and in the event of a competi-
tion being held, whether open or limited, a professional
expert should be employed as assesor, who should be con-
sulted as to site and the conditions of the competition.
2. The site of the Memorial, especially if in the open,
is of vital importance—“any odd place” will not do, and
competent advice should be taken as to the suitability of
the site before designs are obtained. In large towns, for
instance, a Memorial should not be so placed as to ob-
struct traffic; on the other hand, it should occupy a posi-
tion sufficiently conspicuous to be worthy of its object, and
the value or disadvantage of existing buildings as a back-
ground should be considered in deciding its position.
3. Where the Memorial is to take the form of sculpture
or architecture, the question of material should be deter-
mined by the amount of money available—bronze, marble,
stone, or wood. If there are suitable and durable local
materials, these should be used in preference to others
imported from a distance, and due accord must be taken
of their quality and suitability in the design.


4. The setting of the Memorial, the approaches to it,
and its immediate surroundings should be carefully con-
sidered, and the cost of laying out the site, when necessary,
should be included in the scheme. The effect of a Me-
morial is often entirely destroyed by the want of a careful
laying out of the site and suitable setting.
5. Where Memorials are proposed for the interior of
churches or public buildings, whether in sculpture, archi-
tecture, stained glass, mural paintings, votive pictures,
tapestry, rolls of honour, or wall tablets, careful regard
should be paid to the scale and character of the architec-
ture of the building, and to any adjacent monument.
6. The lettering of all inscriptions should be carefully
studied, and should be legible. A bold Roman type, or
the Italian lettering of the sixteenth century based on the
Roman is generally the type most suitable.
7. In all Memorials, simplicity, scale and proportion
should be,aimed at rather than profusion of detail or ex-
cessive costliness of material. It is the imaginative and
intellectual quality of the work that gives it its final value.
Whatever form of Memorial may be in the minds of
the promoters, whether it be something monumental or
structural, or the provision of the simplest ornament, it
is desirable that the services of an Architect should be
employed. His advice should be sought, not only as to
the form of the Memorial, but as to the artist or craftsman
to be employed.
Many designs have been submitted independently for
the Committee’s approval, but few showed any great artis-
tic merit, while in some cases the advice of the Committee
has been disregarded.
The Committee usually advises a competition based on
conditions drawn up by itself as the best means of obtain-
ing good results.


The Committee was approached by the Lord Mayor
of Melbourne and asked by him to submit a report and
suggestions for a National War Memorial. A report has
been furnished, and a recommendation as to the form that
the Memorial should take.
It is hoped by the Committee that forms of no artistic
value, which unfortunately in some cases have been erected,
will give place to monuments simpler and more dignified,
and more in keeping with the lofty ideals which they are
intended to perpetuate.
In order to bring this about, the Committee states that
it is necessary to employ only the best talent and those
who are specially qualified to do this class of work, which
requires training, imagination and creative power.
B. In New South Wales the question of worthily com-
memorating the services of those who gave their lives for
their country in the Great War was discussed in Parlia-
ment, and it was decided that it would not be advisable to
allow any Memorials of the Great War to be erected in
a public place, such as a road, or a park or public reserve
unless both the design and situation of the monument were
first passed as suitable by competent judges. Parliament
therefore added to the Local Government Act, 1919, a
clause which states that, “Monuments shall not be erected
in public places or public reserves unless and until the
design and situation thereof shall have been approved by
the Minister.”
The Government then appointed a “War Memorials
Advisory Board” to report to the Minister on all applica-
tions and advise him whether proposed Memorials are
such as should be approved or disapproved. The Board,
of which Mr. John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A., is President, con-
sists of representatives of the Institute of Architects of
New South Wales, the National Art Gallery Trust, the
Town Planning Association, the Royal Art Society, the
Society of Artists, the Operative Stonemasons’ Society, and
the Government Architect. The Board judges all matters


put before it upon their artistic design, their proposed sit-
uation, their suitability to their purpose and upon their
appropriateness and dignity as an expression of the depth
of national feeling and sentiment towards war heroes.
Size and cost are factors with which the Board has no
concern, except in so far as the character of a design may
render it necessary to consider whether that particular de-
sign is one which must be carried out on a large scale to
be effective.
It is not a function of the Board to prepare designs;
only to advise upon the suitability of designs placed before
it. The Board, with the approval of the Minister, insti-
tuted a series of competitions in order to secure a number
of suitable designs which would be capable of being car-
ried out at moderate cost.
The designs submitted were as follows:
Monument of a simple nature, such as an Obelisk,
Column, etc.
Piers suitable for a Park Entrance (without gates).
Wall Tablets.
Drinking Fountain.
Small Shelter for a Park.
Garden Seat of a Monumental character.
Flag Staff, with suitable base and surround.
These and other designs have been published in a Bulle-
tin authorised by the Minister and made available to local
Committees, and where Committees so desire, the Board
places them in communication with the authors of the
published designs. Nevertheless, the design and its situa-
tion must be submitted for the approval of the Minister.
C. In South Australia the Institute of Architects has
approached the Government and suggested that a Board
should be appointed, with mandatory powers, to control
all public War Memorials in the State, on the lines of
the New South Wales Board, and offering the Institute’s


services in any way that the Government may consider
for the public welfare. This offer was acknowledged, but
no steps were taken by the Government. The Institute
has, however, been approached by several War Memorial
Committees for advice, which has been freely given.
D. In West Australia the Royal Institute of the Archi-
tects of Western Australia has seized on every opportunity
to advise committees and public bodies in regard to the
erection of War Memorials, but a great deal of work is
done locally without the knowledge of the Institute. The
position generally is unsatisfactory.
E. In Tasmania the Institute of Architects has moved
for the formation of a “War Memorials Advisory Com-
mittee” on much the same lines as that of Victoria, and
the question of War Memorials is being considered both
in the north and the south of the island
Finally it is the desire of the Committee in Victoria
and the Advisory Board in New South Wales, every mem-
ber of which acts in an honorary capacity, to deal with the
subject of War Memorials in such a way as to afford assist-
ance to officials, committees and others who are endeav-
ouring to make the Memorials of the Great War express
in a permanently satisfactory manner feelings of honour,
sacrifice and patriotism.
By order of the Federal Council of
Australian Institutes of Architects.
1923.
