

NATIONAL SONGS,
AND POETICAL PIECES.
DEDICATED
Co tt)r <Qufrn ano l&rr iToiuitryiDomrm
COMPILED AND EDITED,
WITH INTRODUCTIONS AND NOTES,
BY HUGH WILLIAMS.
** A day—ail hour—of virtuous liberty,
Is worth u whole Eternity in bondage !
• • • •
Do thou great Liberty inspire our souls,
And make our lives in thy ]>ossession happy,
Or our deaths glorious in thy just defence.”
ADDION.
LONDON;
PUBLISHED BY H. HETHERINGTON. 126, STRAND.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS IN TOWN AND COCMBV.
186'.'.




DEDICATION.
TO THE QUEEN AND HER COUNTRYWOMEN
OF THE UNITED KINGDOM.
In presuming to dedicate'this small collection to j our
especial notice and patronage, I beg to relieve you from
any hesitation in assuming its censorship, by declaring
that I shall resignedly abide your candid fiat on its
merits. 1 may be allowed to observe that the cause
to which it relates, and the progressive intelligence
of the age, go to dispense with, or rather to discourage,
flattery—a recourse to it, therefore, on the present occa-
sion, however agreeable, would savour of a design to
propitiate your judgment, and afford pretence to impugn
both my motives and your decision, which, like your fair
fame, I would wisli to place above suspicion.
Some satisfaction will, at all events, result from the
publication of these melodies—they will serve to convince
you that the Radicals of the country are not quite the
savages their enemies would have yen believe ; and be an
earnest, that, savage or civilized, they are not only
anxious to contribute to your amusement, but to place
upon the noblest basis your future welfare and happiness.
As one of them, 1 freely confess that 1 principally con-
sulted your interests, in ushering this little work into the
world.
Permit me to hope that, should it meet with your
approbation, 1 may be gratified by hearing some of you
.sing or play, in fitting strains, the lyric productions of
the friends of universal liberty. I venture to think that
a closer acquaintance with them, will materially add,
where it is possible, to the graces of your minds, and the


charms of your persons ; matters which constitute the
chief attractions, the ne : plus ultra of the refinements of
social life, and without which, this fair earth would appear
a cheerless wilderness.
I begin to think that, after all, too partial fate has
reserved for the present race of the lovelier portion of
humanity, the regeneration of our common country;
indeed, in the full assurance of a consummation pregnant
with incalculable blessings, such as we have not yet
enjoyed, or even barely contemplated, believe me,
Your Majesty’s
And my Countrywomens’
Most dutiful and devoted servant,
Sept. 2, 1839. THE EDITOR.
IV


PREFACE.
It is become incumbent on the friends of the Radical
Cause to extirpate from society, particularly from amongst
the industrious classes, drinking and demoralizing songs,
now principally hawked abroad. It has been too long
the fashion to cater for the baser appetites of mankind, in-
citing a propensity for war, revenge, national animosities,
intoxication, and obscenity; no pains should therefore be
spared to promote rational sentiments, and principles of
true freedom and common sense. The charms of poesy
and music, hitherto strangers to the multitude, may serve
to rivet attention; to amuse and instruct, —to bring us
acquainted in the most agreeable shape, and at one and
the same time, with the first principles of Government
and their ultimate object—the greatest happiness of the
greatest number, at the least possible expense :—the one the
means, the other the end. One of the strongest engines of
tyranny will thus become a source of its weakness. It is
with this view, that the present small collection,in a cheap
form, is submitted to the public. Should any of the songs
be deemed too strongly or forcibly put, it may be ob-
served, that those who have witnessed the apathy of some,
and the cowering of others, can best speak as to the
necessity for arousing their moral efforts, by adopting the
strongest terms that language, embracing correct political
views, can supply.
■Sept: 2,lB39.
H. W.


NATIONAL SONGS, &c.
AWAKE! THE TORPOIR OF THIS DREAM.
A IR—“ Hail! Bacchus, hail!”
Awake ! the torpor of this dream,
This icy weight on Feeling’s stream—
This dull cold yielding to your foes
Invites and justifies tneir blows!
Not theirs such coward lethargy—
The prey that will nor fight nor flee,
Their swords will strike or cunning reach—
Wake ! let the past some wisdom teach!
Inactive still the fool reposes—
With the fierce foe the true heart closes;
Be yours the bold—the firm endeavour—
Awaken! or be slaves for ever !
Your silence is your foetnen’s strength—
Come; beard them in their dens at length;
They wield the might of demon-powers—
Prove that a holier might is ours!
Fling hence the toys of other days—
The anxious thirst for worthless praise,
let these ne’er win the hearts again
Whose throbs must burst dishonor’s chain!
Arise! and walk no more in night—
The dawn breaks on us free and bright;
But if ye’d have the brightness stay,
Make profit of its earliest ray.
J. D.


TO SWITZERLAND.
AIR—“ Isle of Beauty."
Land of cloud-capp’cl piny mountains.
Where eternal snow-wreaths shine;
Land of glaciers, lakes, and fountains,
Be a poet’s blessing thine !
Not for these romantic features,
Be that benison bestow’d ;
Servile slaves or savage creatures,
There might fix their foul abode.
Thine a nobler race inherit,
Nobler inmates ’mid them dwell;
Liberty’s unconquer’d spirit.
Forms their purest, holiest spell..
Thine is freedom’s glorious charter,
Wak’ning thoughts and deeds sublime ;
Thine are boons too rich to barter,
Manners of the olden time.
Long be such thy proud possession,
Virtue’s pledge and Honour’s spell;
Still hold fast thy high profession,
Worthy of the band of Tell !
So may all who fondly claim thee,
For their birth-place, while they roam;
With a child’s affection name thee
As their heart’s most cherish’d home !


LIBERTY'S ADDRESS TO THE WELSH.
BY THOMAS JENKINS.
Sons of Cambria!—come, arise.
And no longer be
Serfs enslaved, whom all despise
Who have known of me ;
Will ye longer wear your chains ?
Still disgrace your native plains 1
Will ye always bow so meek,
To th’ imperious nod
Of a haughty race who seek
To rule you by the rod ?
Say—shall ignorance and pride
Still the sons of Wallia guide ?
Long, too long, have knaves and fools
Lived in pomp and state—
Making you—their easy tools.
On their pleasure wait; —
For their luxuries provide,
W r hilst they wallow in their pride.
Loudly boast their minions still—
Ye’ll, like brutes, be led ;
As before, to them ye will
. Give your children’s bread!
Cast the slander back again—
Shew the slaves that ye are men.
Shall the stupid, haughty crew
Still enjoy your gains?
Fresh demands shall they pursue?,
Faster bind your chains ?
Burst your shackles—and be free!—
Sons of Cambria!—follow me !
See, around a thousand hills,
How my sons unite;
Like your purest mountain rills,
Forming for the fight;
Soon a torrent they’ll display,
Which shall sweep all mounds away;—
a 3


Mounds, which long the freeborn mind
Compass’d like a wall
And in thraldom held mankind,
Body —soul, and all!
Join ray ranks, and ever}- mound
Shall be levelled with the ground.
Justice, truth and equal laws,
Claim we as our right!
Welshmen!—join the glorious cause—
Arm ye for the fight!
Murd’rous arms ye need not find—
We bring— intelligence and mind !
leave to despots arms of steel—
Such the arms they wield;
(Madmen !—will they never feel ?)
Bring ye to the field
Hearts determined to be free—
And glorious then the victory!
Carmarthen, April 10, 18.‘>o.
LOUD THE SONG OF TRIUMPH RAISE!
AIR—“ Scots wha ha”
Loud the song of triumph raise,
Hymn the peaceful warrior’s praise,
Hail! to Britain’s noblest days;
Sing aloud —rejoice '•
Boast no more a despot throng,
Sing no more a warlike song,
Sweet as peace—as freedom strong,
Be a nation’s voice.
Tyrants, tremble in your halls,
Down each hateful rampart falls,
Britons rise, your country calls, —
Be ready, sire and son !
Albion, Scotia, Erin see.
Bold, united, firm and free,
Bid the knavish factions flee, —
Our great cause is won!


ON, ON! YE BRAVE CANADIANS!
AiR— “ Le Petit Tambour."
On, on! ye brave Canadians, with Freedom’s flag unfurl’d.
Shout hatred to Usurpers, to the despots of the world;
Long may ye stand, ye gallant band —make ramparts of
your slain,
And drive the hireling scoundrels to their Island Hell
again.
Up, up! ye honest riflemen, bold freemen of the States,
And aid your brothers in the strife their Mother Hag
creates;
Bring over hempen-neckerchiefs for every bully’s neck,
And string or shoot them one and all, from Huron to
Quebec.
The millions of the British Isles are with ve, heart and
soul—
But, oh! their country’s destinies are wrench’d from their
control;
They’d rather that Britannia’s flag should down to dust
be hurl’d,
Than he, as ’tis, protection to the tyrants of the world.
Up!—French and British—both are men—both children
of one sire.
And botli alas ! are buried to their chins in British mire !
Then, on ! ye brave Canadians, despite their martial law.
Nine glorious cheers for Liberty, and three for
PArIKEAU !
S. R. G.
There is no country on the face of the earth where des-
potism prevails with more horrible atrocity than in Canada. We
can well conceive the sort of sympathies entertained by the Me-
boume and Ilussell government, when they permitted that splendid
celony to be devastated by inhuman fiends, whose names shall be
consigned to eternal infamy, as samples of the cannibal spirit of
aristocratic domination. May our beneficent Creator grant that
the British People may yet prove the liberators of the brave,
bleeding, and prostrate Canadians!


MASANIELLO’S CALL TO THE NEAPOLITANS.
A IR—“ The Queen, God bless her."
To my light-toned guitar, ’neath the sweet orange tree,
I sang when my labour was done,
Till the voice of my country call’d loudly on me—
“ Awake from thy slumber, my son!”
There’s a spirit that lies, in the meanest disguise
That will burst into glory and power,
When the time is at hand for that spirit to rise—
And now, brothers, now is the hour!
Not for joys of ambition, or lust of vile gold,
Do I quit my rude home by the sea;
But to win back the “ charter ” of freedom of old,
When our sires were chainless and free :
We have borne with our wrongs, till forbearance is vain.
Till our tyrants have strengthened in power,
But the arm of the peasant shall burst through the chain,
And now, brothers, now is the hour!
While bountiful Nature spreads plenty around,
Shall the fruits of the earth be denied
To the wants of the workman who tilleth the ground,
By the rich, from his labour supplied ? *
To my light-toned guitar, ’neath the sweet orange tree,
No more when the light shadow's low'er,
Will I sing my wild lay till my country is free —
And now, brothers, now is the hour!
One of the most glorious revolutions that history records was
that of Naples, under Masaniello. The people were starving, a tax
had been put upon the fruits, the corn was monopolized, yet not one
thing of all the vast riches the multitade took, did they appropriate
to themselves, but burnt them all in the market place, crying out—
“ Let the king live, but let the government perish!” May vie not
profit by this bright example, or shall the pages of history continue
uafolded to us in vain 1


WAT TYLER, THE ENGLISH PATRIOT.
O for the swords of former time!
O for the men who bore them!
When ARMED FOR RIGHT they stood sublime,
And TYRANTS CROUCHED BEFORE THEM.
We have a heavy obligation to discharge, and deep gratitude to
evince, by rescuing from oblivion the neglected memory of immolated
worth. While the public mind has been diverted from paying just
tribute to merit, the aristocracy have net been wanting in raising
fulsome and obtruding monuments to meritricious fame, at once a
scandal to the age, and a mockery of public virtue. In looking
through the dim vista of ages, one of the most remote, and at the
same time one of the brightest characters in English history, is the
subject of the present article, and of the following song, which I
will introduce by a sketch as brief as my appreciation of the man,
and the moral deducible from his conduct will admit.
Wat Ty£er, whose proper name was Walter, and who was either
a blacksmith or tiler, lived at Deptford, in the reign of Richard the
Second, upwards of 460 years ago. To gratify the cupidity of
government, and the disposition for war and luxury, a poll, or per-
sonal tax, of three groats (a large sum in those days) was imposed
upon every person above the age of fifteen. One of the greedy
collectors, who farmed this tax, having committed an indecent
liberty on Tyler’s daughter, to ascertain her age, in spite of the
father’s assurances, so exasperated him, that he felled the ruffian to
the earth by a blow of a hammer, which caused his death. The
punishment it must be admitted, exceeded the offence, but indigna-
tion at so odious a tax, and at the gross manner by which it was
attempted to be exacted, as well as admiration at the bold outburst
of parental resentment, gave rise to the most formidable insurrec-
tion recorded in the blood-stained annals of our history. Oppres-
sion had not then become so habitual to the people as quite to
prostrate their spirit, or benumb their faculties, Kent, and several
of the contiguous counties rose in arms, and in a few days fifty
thousand men marched on London, headed by Tyler, part of whom
attacked and carried the Tower; after which he approached into the
heart of the City, where he was greeted by a quailing and


treacherous government in the most obsequious and humiliating
terms. Nothing ceuld be more just than the demands which the
historians of the time hare delivered for him. The language of
entreaty he knew would not suit his position or that of his oppo-
nents, for as Southey says—
PETITIONING IS MOST WEAK,
THE PEOPLE OUGHT TO DEMAND JUSTICE.
He required another Magna Charta, as part the second of that
forcibly obtained by the Barons or Aristocracy at Runnymede, 160
years before, and who, as a matter of course, only consulted their
own interests. He demanded that all slaves should be set for ever
free; that all common lands should he open , and enjoyed by the poor
equally with the rich , and all warrens , parks t and chases, made free
end common to all; that commerce in market towns should be free,
without toll or impost; that land should have a fixed rent, instead of
sen ice due by villanage, or located slavery; and that all manorial
rights and the poll-tax should be instantly abolished; with a general
pardon , The government, with apparent candour, immediately
devised a plan, worthy of irresponsible and abused power, for com-
passing bis death. Tyler, with a spirit above suspicion, trusting to
the insidious overtures of the base boy-monarch and his as base
minions, attended apart from his followers to settle these points
with the King and his Court, in Smithfield, and while holding the
conference, was on a preconcerted signal, treacherously murdered
by Walworth, Mayor of London, and a rascally creature of the
Court, whose name time-serving historians have concealed, but
which ought to have been conspicuously handed down to eternal
infamy. These assassins, instead of meeting with their deserts on
the gallow’s, were honoured much in the same way as the Whigs of
the present day have rewarded their instruments in Canada . The
unskilful and inexperienced multitude, paralyzed at the unexpected
loss of their chief, and unprepared for the emergency, were allured
by the accomplice King and his Court to follow him to St. George’s-
helds, where he readilyagreed to give them most ample Charters of
freedom under the great seal, with a pardon for all that was passed,
on condition of their dispersing . The terms being accepted and
about thirty expert clerks set to work to write these Charters, which
consisted of only a few lines, they were sealed and delivered on the
spot to all who demanded them; who thereupon returned home,
and exulting in the success of their expedition, forgot the loss of
their leader, and the lesson which his base sacrifice ought, if they
bad duly reflected, to have taught them. They did not long remain
undeceived, for the sceptered wretch, and an infamous parliament,
in a few days annulled the grant. No sooner were these troubles
appeased, than the government, then principally composed of priests
and lawyers, took the speediest means to fortify itself, and to
punish in utter violation of every principle of honour and justice,
the most active and intelligent in the late insurrection. To this


end orders were issued to raise mercenary vassals in the provinces,
and the nobility promptly appeared in London with a retinue of
forty thousand men under arms. The treasonable abuse of power
against the people by the revocation of the Charter, which was the
very condition of their submission, was therefore not all; profuse
legal murders crowned kinglyperfidy; the remaining leaders of the
insurrection, token all danger had ceased , were shortly afterwards
apprehended, .and capitally punished. The tyrant’s maxim is ever
to divide and conquer:
The people united, in a mass,
There's nothing can resist them —once divided,
And they fall an easy sacrifice.
The chaplain of the insurgents, John Ball, an amiable minister of
religion, was an especial ebject of royal vengeance. Justifiable
treason appeared to the jaundiced eyes of tyranny, aggravated by
moral worth. He had forcibly illustrated what he as Indefatigably
taught. His alleged crimes were therefore considered the more
heinous, and deserving of vindictive and signal example. His
principles, which the invidious and partial institutions of rank had
converted into crimes as endangering their stability, do eternal
honour to the man, to his countiy, and to the age, and will endure
to all time. They compose for the most part what the Radicals of
the present day seek to establish. Ball went about the country and
inculcated on iis audiences, the origin of mankind from one common
stock; their equal right to liberty and the gifts of nature; the
tyranny of artificial distinctions, and the abuses which had arisen
from the degradation of the more considerable part of mankind, and
the aggrandizement of a few insolent rulers. These doctrines,
which even prejudiced historians emphatically observe to be so
agreeable to the people, and so conformable with the ideas of primi-
tive equality, which are engraven on the hearts of all men, were
gratefully received by the multitude, and scattered the sparks of
that sedition which the poll-tax raised into combustion. He was
judicially murdered with barbarous solemnity, and fifteen hundred
of his compatriots in the revolted counties were consigned to the
hands of the hangman by one Judge Tresillian, a murderous official,
of whom posterity should be reminded as having been the vile
instrument for the infliction of these merciless cruelties; and who
has served as the prototype of Jeffries , of Norbury, and withal, of
the Canadian primary and intermediate executioners, whose names
must not be permitted to escape the damning fame which indignant
posterity will award them. Ever since that time, though several
attempts of less magnitude have been been made, the people have
been
—— levelled down as vassals.
Kept at endless labour like brute* —
Degrading every faculty by servitude.
Repressing all the energies of mind, —
all of which might have been averted, had the people thereupon


taken the executive into their own hands, and provided for its
stability upon a just basis.
Southey , the republican bard of his better days, but now the
renegade Laureate, has sung the history of Wat Tyler’s insurrec-
tion in a dramatic poem, that stamps both the poet and the subject
with immortality, of which the few extracts I lay before the reader
bear testimony. But, alas for genius,—where it cannot command, it
is often constrained to court success; his fame will only apply to
the poet, for the man has betrayed his principles by becoming the
slave of circumstances : such are the prostituting effects of artificial
rank and sordid influence, and such they ever will be, until checked
by the free exercise of the more enlightened public mind. Southey,
taking his hints from historical details, makes John Ball say, in the
poem already alluded to—
“ My brethren, these are truth sand nighty owes,
YE ARE ALL EQUAL; "Nature made ye so.
EQUALITY IS YOUR BIRTHRIGHT; when I gaze
On the proud palace, and behold one man
In the blood-purpled robes op royalty,
Feasting at case, and lording over millions ;
Then turn me to the hut of poverty.
And see the wretched labourer worn with toil,
Divide his scanty morsel with his infants,
I sicken, and, indignant at the sight,
Blush for the patience of humanity!”
In another place, the Laureate makes Ball ask his judge on his
trial, on a charge of treason, with respect to which the government
pardon had been granted and withdrawn—
Why sit ye there clad in your furs ?
Why are your cellars stored with choisest wines ?
Your larders hung with dainties—while your-vassal
As’virtuous and as able too by nature,
Tho’ by your selfish tyranny deprived
Of mind’s improvement, shivers in his rags,
AND STARVES AMIDST THE PLENTY HE CREATES ?
It is ever the same—it is the labourer, the creator of all wealth,
who is still made to contribute his all for similar purposes, save
what bis pinching necessities require ; and in these days, to add to
our cups of bitterness, arbitrary taxation is also applied to support
kindred soldiery for our own coercion, and moreover, to pay the
price of the servility and apostacy of poets.
Wat Tyler’s contest was one between an arbitrary government and
the people, and had it succeeded, might have laid the foundation-
stone of popular freedom and coutroul, continuing to the present
time. That of the Barons, and the contemptible tyrant John, was
a busiaess of their own. The much vaunted Magna Charta which
they compelled that knave and bigot to concede, and which, with arms
in their hands , and in those of their slaves , they had the means of
enforcing, either granted or secured freedom and power to but three
orders of the kingdom; the clergy, the barons, and the gentry,


whose enjoyment of them was endangered or merely controlled.
As for the great body of the people, who for the most part were
then, and, in consequence of Tyler’s failure, long after held as
villains, or absolute located slaves, they were not thought of; they
Were neither admitted to enjoy manumission, nor even to participate
in any immunities. It was for this noble and daring object that
Tyler fought and fell, and Ball and his followers were sacrificed.
And yet a monument has been erected to the selfish Barons at
Runnymede, w hile not a stone has been raised to the traduced memory
of Tyler in Smithfield. Let us hope the day is not far distant when
we may assist in the erection of one, not only to the murdered Tyler
and his companions, but to the great army of martyrs to oligarchical
tyranny—amongst them, to Cade, Arciia-iiber, and Ket, with a
suitable memorial of their valour, their misfortunes, and the con-
sequent loss to their country. It would serve besides as a useful
memento for emulation and caution for future ages.
on their grave
Write whv they died, perhaps the time may come
When honest justice shall applaud the deedl
No considerable rising of the people for their common rights has
yet happened since the days of Ket, but Walworth-thrusts against
liberty have been repeated at other and later periods of our history,
and multiplied in the time of the Irish rebellions, the mutiny at
the Nore, at the Peterloo massacre, and at Calthorpe-street;
not to speak of that when an iniquitous government trepanned
Thistlewood and his companions; for which alone, it deserved the
fate of its unfortunate victims. All this, on reflection, is capable
of an easy solution: a rapacious and irresponsible government
must ef necessity exist by exciting terror; that for the public good
by reason, and common sense.
THE SPIRIT OF WAT TYLER.
BY CHARLES COLE.
WITH ADDITIONS BY 11. IV.
“ Taxation burthens ev’ry thing
By art or nature given ;
The sick man’s rushlight, twinkling,
The glorious beam of Heaven.—
Our all of wear and all we eat,
To glut the scheming spoiler;
There wants to make our list complete
But a poll-tax, and a Tyler.”
“ A Tyler,” murmur’d from the grave
A voice, the sound repelling—
“ Peace! would-be Briton! Dastard! Slave!”
And from his earthly dwelling


The shade of Tyler stood confess’d:
His back was gored and riven ;
But not a mark was on his breast
By Walworth’s dagger given.
The same they hail’d immortal steel!
Renowned in civic story!
Satanic badge of servile zeal,
Converting shame to glory!
“ Dost mark the wound,” the spirit said,
’Neath which slaves saw me stagger
From horse to earth ? ’tis well repaid,
For London wears the dagger!
Now to the purpose—l am He,
Who not for fame competed.
But would have seen my country free.
And have her foes defeated :
Mine was a deed the good desired,
The shackled chain was round us;
We rote at once, like men inspired.
And burst the links that bound us !
But what avail’d it ? Soon the youth
Whose kingly craft entrapp’d them,
To trust his honour and his truth,
Again in chains enwrapp’d them.
And still ye cowards ye are bound,
As ’twere a serpent coiling
Its dreadful weary length around
Your limbs, all faint with toiling!
Long, long y e proudly bore the load,
Lit up your laureli’d casement,
But now the burthen brings the goad,
Reward of self abasement!
Mark! 31 an that would be— Peterloo,
Wexford in slaughter sharing—
Merthyr, axd Newtownbarry too,
And think of Cook and Baring!
While locomotives move by steam,
(Earth shudders at the story)
Yon wagon boasts a human team,
And this is England’s glory!
And this is Britain! Worms like these
Upon its surface creeping—
The tyrant of the Portuguese
Had none in viler keeping.


“ God save the Queen !” Your dogs I see
Have superseded donkeys;
Age of progressive industry I
Of course you work your monkeys.
God save the Queen! Still Britons slaves, —
In this, the land of bravery;
Ye slug, “ Britannia rules the waves/
Yet how to basest slavery.
A shadow call’d Heforsi, I see
Exulting e’er the nation;
Though Cade was slain ingloriously,
For seeking reformation!
Muni and his fellow Martyrs brave,
Their mem’ries unrespected;
You scarce can trace Fitzgerald’s grave.
And Emmet lies neglected!
The world contains the graves of men,
All trait of whom hath vanished;
Their spirit must revive again.
Or freedom’s ever banished.
And thou, who said’st, to be complete,
Your list requires a poll-tax;
Dog! that can’st lick a tyrant’s feet,
Out, thou would’st pay a soul-tax.
The spirit passed in bitter wrath,
With eye indignant blazing;
And wailing Walworth track'd his path,
Still on his death-wound gazing.
May kindred spirits still survive,
To rouse for coming glory;
Till not a Briton but will strive
To profit by His story.
For London Wears the dagger .] —Tbe insignia of ike assassin-
exploit of Walworth, forms part of that ancient vestige of barbarous
pageantry, the “ City Armsa species of ornament disgraceful in
its origin, puerile in its assumption of instinctive animal qualities,
and which will shortly be the derision of veriest schoolboys.
This Walworth was afterwards knighted, and had an annuity of a
hundred pounds settled upon him out of the taxes. Thinking of
" Coats of Arms,” we may bestow a thought upon conflicting
absurdities. The progeny of unlawful love is erroneously assumed
to be socially tainted, and yet, the arms and the so-called blood-royal
of England, bear reference to the heraldic badges and pedigree of


the illegitimate William the Conqueror. I repeat, erroneously
assumed, because, as Pope says—
Fame, wealth and honour, what are you to love ?
Thus, in fact, the extreme pinnacle of aristocracy appertains to
circumstances, which the whole class in all countries affects te
despise.
Though Cade was slain in gloriously,"] —Cade, otherwise Mortimer,
was a native of Ireland, of great skill and excellent courage. He
headed a spirited rebellion in Kent, in the oppressive reign of the
imbecile Henry the Sixth, sixty years after that of Tyler. Having
gained a victory near Seven-oaks, over the king’s troops, under Sir
Humphrey Stafford, who was slain in the action, he advanced
towards London, and encamped at Blackheath; where, in reply to a
supplicatory message from the King, he published his complaint
against the numerous abuses in the government, and on behalf of the
community declared that his aim was to punish and remove evil
Ministers, and procure a redress of grievances for the people . The
government being unable to get up resistance to pretensions so reason•
able, the King fled to Kenilworth, and the City of London imme-
diately opened its gates to receive the insurgents. Cade adopted
on his standard the text of John Ball, when he preached to the
people in the times of Tyler; shewing that they were enlightened
men, and, even in that dark age, contemplated the rights of labour
distinct from the monopoly of non-producers, and which Southey
has transfered for the opening of the song commencing the second
act of his Wat Tyler,
“ when Adam delv’d and Eve span,
Who was then the gentleman?”
Cade maintained great order and discipline, and published severe
edicts against plunder and violence; persons and property were
strictly respected . He always led his followers to the field during
the night time. On one occasion, however, becoming elated and
intoxicated with success, the latter gave way to unguarded excesses,
and, as an inevitable consequence, suffered a partial defeat; after
which, treachery was set on foot, and a general pardon was granted,
which, like that in Tyler’s time, when the people were dispersed was
revoked by King and Parliament, on the plea of having been
extorted by violence; the price of a thousand marks was set on
Cade’s head, and he was soon afterwards killed in the Wolds of
Kent, by one Iden , described by our parasitical historians as “ a
Gentleman of Sussex;” his body was taken to London, where it
was beheaded and quartered; his head placed on London-bridge,
and his quarters sent to divers places in the former county, —and
yet this brave man had been fully pardoned.
The next considerable insurrection of the people, imperfectly
recorded in our early history, was that of Arciiamber, in Yorkshire,
about 50 years after that of Cade, in the reign of Henry the Seventh,
for the purpose of resisting infamous extortions and taxes levied by
that sordid despot. It at one time assumed a formidable front, and


a Duke of Northumberland was put to death by the people, but it
was eventually subdued, and its leader according to custom
executed. Krr, a valiant tanner, of Kent, made a similar attempt
in that county, about 50 years later, in the reign of Edward the
Sixth. He complained against enclosures; required the emancipation
of villains or staves; the suppression of the arbitrary power of the gentry
over the people; the election of King's councillors, and the re-establish-
ment of tho ancient constitution of Parliament; or, in other words,
common suffrage. He secured Mous-hold-hill, near Norwich, and
erected his tribunal of justice there, under an old oak tree, thence
called the Oak of Reformation, where he dealt out summary and
just judgment to notorious oppressors. He repulsed the King’s
troops, but was finally overcome, partly fsr want of precaution, but
principally from being opposed by superior numbers. He was
hanged at Norwich Castle, and mine of his comrades suffered a
similar fate on the boughs of the old oak. All these were isolated
struggles of some of the most intelligent portions of the kingdom,
without the means of communication or concert, which the country
now possess, and they failed chiefly for want of union, discipline,
and order. They were all founded on proper motives, and had the
public good alone in view.
The English Radical popular spirit has not since recovered itself,
but from those periods to the present, our history presents a horrible
detail of rapine, bloodshed, and murder; of the licentious spirit of
the aristocracy, and the clutching propensities and arrogance of
monopoly and partial justice ; of the supremacy of the designing
and the opulent, and the constantlyencreasing povertyand degrada-
tion of the people.
Intelligence can alone arouse the popular spirit to healthy action.
When that shall happen, observation and experience will have im-
pressed invaluable moral lessons : that ignorance and pride, artificial
rank, capricious honours, and arbitrary authority are ever selfish; —
jealous of power at all risks; inconsistent with free government and
subversive of national prosperity; that all popular commotions for the
redress of existing grievances, instead of abating the source of mere
misrule, have been invariably met by concessions and artifices, and
followed, when all danger ceased, by breach of faith, wholesale
murder, revenge, and better fortifi ed tyranny; and all simply for
want of depriving tbe aggressors of power, for want of consolidating
that of the oppressed people, and uprooting vicious institutions; to
effect which, should any attempt be ever again made, tbe question
should be one, not of maudlin delicacy as to the amount of present
sacrifices or sufferings, but that of ultimate benefit. Another
abortive attempt might be the severest reflection on the judgment
of intelligent men, and prove a more fatal obstruction than has ever
yet occurred to the progress of real freedom and selid happiness.
N.B. The first part of the sth verse, and the last of the 9tb,
have been added, and the latter part of the last verse substituted
for one in the original.


IS THERE YET SPIRIT IN ENGLAND?
A IR—The Roast Beef of Old England.
Is he fit for this world, or a better beyond,
Who "when Liberty calls, finds no sonl to respond ?
Hare our chains become b aubles of which we grow fond ?
Is there yet spirit in England ?
Has England the will to be free ?
Blind to the lessons of History’s page,
We carry the slave-stain from childhood to age,
And manhood is wasted in impotent rage.
Is there yet spirit in England ?
Has England the will to be free ?
Who dreadeth his foe, is o’ercome ere he fights,—
No dread must be ours when we struggle for rights,
When Liberty nerves us, and Justice incites !
Is there yet spirit in England ?
Has England the will to be free ?
Of oily-tongued statesmen no longer the dupes,
Nor bamboozled by tyrants, nor sabred by troops,—
Oh, hour of high dreaming! oh, day of proud hopes!
Is there yet spirit in England ?
Has England the will to be free?
Let Oppression no longer stalk grim o’er our path—
She hath watch’d by our pillow, hath crouch’d by our
hearth
Augmented our sorrow, and dashed all our mirth; —
Is there yet spirit in England ?
Has England the will to be free ?
Too long have we trusted to patience and prayer,
If arras are not palsied and hearts in despair,
For deeds and not words we will henceforth prepare ;
If there is spirit in England—
If England yet wills to be free!


ROBERT EMMET.
Tie subject of the following lines was the leader of the last
unfortunate Irish struggle for liberty. He was tried at the Sessions’-
house, Dublin, before the late Lord Norbury, Chief Justice, and
found guilty of high treason, on the 18th of September, 1803, and
executed under the sentence of that witty and heartless monster
two days afterwards, in St. Thoraas’s-street, in the 22d year of his
age.—[See below—Extract from Emmet’s Speech on the trial.] —
Admiration for early genius, united te devoted patriotism, induces
me to say a few words more.
Had this noble victim of usurpation proved successful, be would
have been bailed as the saviour of his native land. How long
shall misfortune be suffered to obscure merit, or bondage to stifle
its due appreciation ? Is not the time arrived when some master
genius of the age, some Emancipator of all Ireland shall fulfil
the dying request of one of the bravest of her sons, and the last
sad office pay, by doing justice to his character? Is that generous
but unhappy country to he for ever prevented from taking her place
among/rce nations, and from beholding an appropriate monument
to the virtues and gallant bearing of her political martyrs erected
by the national will, and the farewell injunctions of the immortal
Emmet attended to, by inscribing thereon his first and last epitaph?
then if she is not, can some unshrinking patriot tell when her rege-
neration is to commence ?
UNINSCRIBED TOMB OF EMMET.
(From the Dublin Comet .)
“ Let my tomb remain unimscribed, and my memory in oblivion, until
other times and other men can do justice to my character.”
“ Pray tell me,” I said, to an old man who strayed,
Drooping over the graves which his own hands had made—-
“ Pray tell me the name of the tenant who sleeps
’Neath yonder lone shade where the sad willow weeps ;
Every stone is engraved with the name of the dead,
But yon black slab declares not whose spirit is fled.”
In silence he bowed, then beckoned me nigh,
Till we stood o’er the grave—then he said with a sigh,
“ Yes, they dare not to trace e’en a word on this stone.
To the memory of him who sleeps coldly alone;
He told them—commanded the lines o’er his grave,
Should never be traced by the hands of a slave 1


' “ He bade them to shade e’en his name in the gloom
Till the morning of freedom should shine on his tomb,
‘ When the flag of my country at liberty flies,
Then—then let my name and my monument rise !’
You see they obeyed him—’tis twenty-eight years,
And they still come to moisten his grave with their tears,
“ He was young, like yourself, and aspired to o’erthrow
The tyrants who filled his loved island with woe ;
They crushed his bold spirit—this earth was confined,
Too scant for the range of his luminous mind !”
He paused, and the old man went slowly away,
And I felt, as he left me, an impulse to pray.
Grant Heaven I may see, ere my own days are done,
A monument rise o’er my country’s lost son !
And, oh ! proudest task, be it mine to indite
The long-delayed tribute a freeman must write,
Till then shall its theme in my breast deeply dwell :
So peace to thy slumber, dear shade, fare thee well!
“ I have been charged with that importance in the efforts to
emancipate my country as to be considered the keystone of the
combination of Irishmen, or, as your Lordship expressed it, ‘ the
life and blood of the conspiracy you do mo honour over much;
you have given to the subaltern all the credit of a superior. There
are men engaged in this conspiracy, who are not only superior to
me, but even to your own computation of yourself, my Lord;
befere the splendour of whose genius and virtues I should bow
with respectful deference, and who would think themselves dis-
honoured to be called your friend; who would not disgrace them-
selves by shaking your blood-stained hand.”
(Here he was interrupted,')
“ What, my Lord! shall you tell me on the passage to that scaf-
fold, which that tyranny of which you are only the intermediary
executioner has erected for my murder, that X am accountable for
all the blood that has and will be shed in this struggle of the
oppressed against the oppressor—shall you tell me this, and shall I
. be so very a slave as not to repel it!
“ I do not fear to approach the Omnipotent Judge, to answer for
the conduct of my whole life, and am I to be appalled and falsified
by a mere remnant of mortality here I By you, too, who, if it were
possible to collect all the innocent blood that you have shed in your
unhallowed ministry in onegreatreserveir, your Lordship might swim
in it!”
[How many Norburys, Colhornes, Arthurs, Heads, Me Nabs,
Dretcs, and Princes, have we now in store?]


A RHYME FOR CANADA.
AIR—“ Maid of Llangollen.”
The rifle is heard, and the flag is unfurl’d—
A land to be free is a boon to the world ;
Each Briton true-born will respond to the strain,
That curses the wretch who invented a chain !
The spirit of discord through Canada flies,
And the sire, and the son, and the aged arise ;
They strive not for tongues, nor for creeds, but they call
For justice and freedom, the birthright of all,
’Tis a call on the bosom that’s noble and good—
’Tis a call that speaks home—that is well understood—
’Tis a call on the dead—on the child that’s unborn—
’Tis a wailing at midnight, impatient of morn!
Sons of brave forefathers! gallant in fight,
Who curb’d the bold steed in its furniture bright;
Be it known in the land where your ensign shall wave,
That your blood is too hot for the veins of a slave.
Oh, Canada! type of the rising and free,
The minstrel anew strings his lyre for thee ;
In your forest primeval, no longer deferr’d,
Let the proud hymn of Liberty loudly be heard.
The Young voice of Truth for a while may be crush’d
’Twill thunder ere long and disdain to be hush’d ;
And the dark venal page that asperses your name,
Your own after records shall blot out with shame.
Your groans were unheeded — half-frenzied—forlorn —
You begg’d for your rights—you were treated with scorn;
But the gauntlet is thrown—and the signal unfurl’d—
“ A LAND TO BE FREE IS A BOON TO THE WORLD !”
GEORGE WASHINGTON.


THE CANADIAN EXILE’S INVOCATION TO HIS
COUNTRY, AND ITS MONARCH-STREAM, THE
MIGHTY ST. LAWRENCE.
One sigh for thee, proud mountain land !
One sigh, thou monarch-stream, for thee !
Hills that my boyhood fondly scanned, —
Waves that are stamped with majesty !
Yea, —waves and mountains, on whose crests
The diadem of Freedom rests,
Spurning the arts that would enslave
Her sons, the generous, bold, and brave.
One tear my country, for thy woes !
One burst of passion for thy wrongs!
For still my breast indignant glows
As memory the theme prolongs.
How thou wast firm; how thou wast true,
To the liege oak round which you grew!
But, ah ! how curdled is thy heart
By wrongs that goad you on to part!
Hear as is Albion to my soul,
Thou O my native land ! dost still
Its noblest sentiments control
And woo my love thro’ weal or ill.
Hail then devoted land! afar
I watch thee as ray guiding star—
Thou art my hope, my light, my shrine ;
My thoughts, my prayers, my life, are thine I
ITnrrinf/ton Sound,
Oct. 3, 1838.
AN EXILE.


GENERAL NEILE S. VON SHOULTZ,
THE POLISH EXILE, AND HERO OF PRESCOTT.
There is a proud gratification in contemplating brilliant illustra-
tions of the spirit of liberty, however melancholy, when clouded by
the frowns, not of fortune, for liberty must eventually triumph, but
of the hitherto overbalancing power of despotism.
Tyranny has recently added to its blood-stained catalogue, one of
the brightest characters that ever humanity produced, freedom
inspired, or history recorded. Where the Russian miscreant failed,
English despots too well succeeded.
Neil S. Von Shoultz was a native of Poland, of prepossessing
appeaiance and mild manners. His father was major of a regiment
at Cracow. His unfortunate and gallant son was compelled to
emigrate to the United States in 1836, where congenial impulses
for the suffering Canadians, led him to an untimely end, at the age
of thirty-one.
He undertook an expedition for their liberation, and in command
of a small body of American citizens, and Canadian refugees, gained
a signal victory over a superior British force, at Prescott, U. C., on
the l3tb of November, 1838. The English afterwards returned to
the charge with overwhelming reinforcements, and hemmed in,
massacred and captured what remained of the small and exhausted
band, previously cut off from all communication with the opposite
American shore, by the conniving authorities of the United States,
in opposition to the wishes of an indignant border population. The
deceived, but not discomfited Shoultz, fought his way through the
ranks of the enemy, but having become exposed to the horrors of
a Canadian winter, without food or shelter, was eventually taken
prisoner, and met with thatsort of reward which successful tyranny
has ever allotted to revolutionary prowess, fie was tried at Kingston,
on the Bth of December, 1838, by court martial, composed possibly
of vagabonds whom he had lately put to disgraceful flight, or of
their associates; and the Hero of Prescott, under the matter-of-
course sanction of Celburne and Arthur, was immediately put to
death, in cold blood.
It was the sordid and prying meddling of one Colonel Worth,
that chiefly conduced to this degrading calamity.
The partial success of this brave soldier and estimable individual,
serves to shew what may be achieved by a determined and intel-
ligent body of men, when opposed to ignorant, passive, and hired
instruments of tyranny.
A few parting words as to Mr. Van Buren (the great Jackson’s
successor) of whom I would fain cherish flattering hopes. His
• bearing, with respect to Canada, and her brave and hapless exiles,
and his reciprocities with her enemies, prove his policy to be
b 2


hitherto at best ambiguous in regard to inherent rights and universal
justice. He is the first supreme magistrate of the great American
-Republic, who has hazarded the esteem of the true friends of liberty
in both hemispheres. Better that a host of his worthless Worths
had perished, than that one Von Shoultz had suffered.
The “ laws of nations” now in force, alleged to have influenced
the lamentable interference of the general government of the
United States, were concocted at the dicta, and according to
the usages of despots, and for their benefit, or as might best suit
their purposes; but I submit that the cause of the equal and
primitive rights of mankind demand the active intervention of
all free nations, and that the doctrine of expediency or of neces*
sity should not be admitted to contravene the common obliga-
tion on every country of ability and spirit, to extend protection or
assistance. The present laws of nations are, in fact, the laws of
combined banditti, who had successfully established themselves, and
whose objects were, not to consult the interests of the community,
but to consolidate their own, at the cost, and to the prejudice of the
various countries they infested. How long then is the civilized
world to be repressed by mercenary governments from manifesting
available sympathy for the down-trodden sons of Poland and Canada 1
The liberator of Canada would be hailed as the second Washington
of the new, and that of Poland as the first of the old World.
Noble and gallant Pole ! the fitting theme of admiration—of
example, and of eternal regret! of thee as of Riego, the victim of
Spain’s ideot-monster Ferdinand, it may be truly said—
“SFrem the crime-stricken land of the nobls and brave,
Thou art gone to the home of the free,
And liberty drops the bright tear on thy grave.
Which she sheds but for martyrs like thee 1”
VON SHOULTZ, THE DYING CHIEFTAIN.
BY THOMAS DALES.
Am— M When pensive I thought on my love”
He sets in the noon of his fame.
He falls in the hour of his pride ;
But myriads shall hallow his name,
And tell how the hero hath died.
He’d fought for the land of his birth,
His own native Poland, in vain!
His memory is hallowed on earth,
His spirit shall wrestle again \
Though ties might have chained him to life,
The strongest affection can hind ;
He fled to the scene of the strife,
And his love to Jus honour resigned ,


He paused not to wipe the sad tear,
That fell from a mother’s fond eye;
Nor look’d on a mourner more dear, —
Unshrinking he left them—to die!
Yet say not the hero is dead,
For glory can never decay ;
From its triumphs the spirit hath fled,
But raem’ry enshrines it for aye.
For he set in the noon of his fame,
He fell in the hour of his pride;
And nations shall hallow his name,
And tell how the conqueror died l
THE SHRINE OF MY COUNTRY.
On the shrine of my country I’d offer my heart,
Would the sacrifice render her free ;
Yes ! land of my fathers! with life I would part,
And smile, as I gave it for thee !
Oh ! there’s nothing se precious, so dear to the soul,
As the Freedom that Nature first gave !
And what is so hateful, so base, as controul,
And who so despised as a slave ?
Did the spirit of Nature declare I should live
Till the universe fails —and not free, —
That term of existence, dear freedom, I’d give,
For one summer’s day-light with thee.
Oh! there’s nothing—not even the vision of fame,
So precious, so dear to my heart;
With a feeling of rapture I murmur thy name,
To win Thee, with life I would part!
C. COLE.


CANADIAN ODE TO LIBERTY.
AIR—“ Toby Philpot.”
When the proud land of Britain would sternly maintain
Over far distant lands her tyrannical reign ;
When she sends forth her slaves to destroy Freedom’s sons,
May each slave that she send s prove a m ark for their guns; —
Here’s success unto freedom, her sons ever brave,
May the Patriot’s land prove the tomb of the slave.
May liberty flourish, and may its fam’d tree
Overshadow the land, and encircle the sea ;
May true Patriots defend it, nor e’er dread the frown,
Nor the swords of the tyrants that would cut it down ;
Here’s success unto freedom, her spns ever brave,
May the Patriot’s land prove the tomb of the slave.
May the children of freedom, whose climate is cold,
Have hearts like the lion, warm, gen’rous, and bold ;
Tho’ their land be bound up with the frost half the year,
Yet, Liberty’s tree shall grow thrivingly there.
Tho’ the Patriot’s land be more cold than the grave,
It shall e’er prove too hot for the tyrant and slave. ■
Then accurst be the wretches that prey on mankind,
Who still fetter the body, and darken the mind ;
"Who, that they'may places and pensions retain,
Would fill every land with the dying and slain.
May they find freedom’s sons ever daring and brave,
And their land prove the tomb of the tyrant and slave.
May the sons of the East, in their hot scorching clime,
Where it burns from beginning to ending of time,
Burst asunder their bonds, and declare themselves free,
And on their own soil plant fair Liberty’s free.
No climate is ever too hot or too cold,
When mankind are enlightened, determined, and bold.
It will thrive in all climes where the people are brave,
For the Patriot’s land is the tomb of the slave.
AnN AMERICAN CITIZEN.


IRELAND—A FRAGMENT.
(From the Examiner.)
Can it be —shall it be—that the loveliest isle
Of the thousand the -wings of this ocean-breeze fan,
Must lose the best blessings God gives to her soil,
In the curses and tears that are shed there by man,
Who starves midst the plenty he rears for the beast
Of his vagabond Lord or his merciless Priest ?
No—rather the pest or the famine should creep
Her fields and her desolate villages o’er,
Or the war or the whirlwind relentlessly sweep
From her emerald bosom her sons and their store,
Than man, as the slave or the tyrant be seen,
In the beautiful vallies his blood hath made green !
But the morning may come, and the gloom fleet away,
Ere the peasant shall raise his freed arm on the Peer ;
And I sing of despair, yet I look for the day
That hath broken afar, and shall kindle up here, ■
When earth’s despots must shrink from the gathering
waves,
Or the rod in their hands meet the sword in their slaves.
Yes; I welcome the dawning, whose far-flashing light
O’er the waves of Biscaya comes—bright as their gold—
And which beams for.the steel that is drawn for the Bight,
Where a New World beats back the worn sons of an
Old;
And I deem that young Freedom withholds but her smile,
Till we dare ask a ray for her evergreen isle !
In that morning, the tiller of earth shall raise up
His brow without clouds, and his arm without chains;
Yet no despot shall wear them, or drain the deep cup,
Of the grief, and the wrath, and the shame that remains,
When the toil-drop on his brow shall be rather ador’d,
Than the coronet-gem on that of “ a Lord.”
In that morning a purer beam brightly shall rise
Than the false ones the nations have knelt to so long;
And earth shall reflect its sweet light to the skies,
And the lips of her myriads pour forth one glad song,
As Eelioion soars free from the chains she had known,
Ere the temples of God were no longer man’s throne.


And that morning is coming—too bright for the gloom
That rolls back from Truth’s eye, as the clouds from the
sun,
And Freedom springs light from her couch, not her tomb,
To marshal the millions whose hearts are as one,
And onward that gathering torrent shall pour,
Till heaven and this world are held fettered no more !
FORGET NOT THE FIELD.
AIR—“ The Lamentation of Aughrim."
Forget not the field where they perish’d,
The truest, the last of the brave,
All gone —and the bright hope we cherish’d
Gone with them, and quench’d in their grave !
Oh ! could w T e from death but recover
Those hearts, as they bounded before,
In the face of high heav’n to fight over
That combat for Freedom once more; —
Could the chain for an instant be riven
Which tyranny flung round us then,
Oh ! His not in man nor in heaven,
To let tyranny bind it again !
But ’tis past —and, though blazon’d in story
The name of our victor may be,
Accurst is the march of that glory
Which treads o’er the hearts of the free.
Far dearer the grave or the prison,
Illumed by one patriot name,
Than the trophies of all who have risen
On Liberty’s ruins to fame !
MOORE.


SONG FOR THE DEMOCRACY.
A IR—“ The Gipsey King.”
I am a Democrat bold!
Of the rights of the people I sing;
I care not for baron or lord,
Por a priest, for a queen, or a king:
I am ready, when Liberty needs me,
In arms to attend her first call,
And proclaim that both crozier and mitre,
Are doomed by the people to fall.
lam a Democrat bold ! Ha ! ha !
I am a Democrat bold !
A Democrat truly am I,
And my wishes who pleases may know—
I’d have happiness brighten the eye,
And spread freedom w'herever I go ;
I’d have ignorance banished away,
That the bright eye of reason may see,
That he who is happy to-day,
To-morrow as happy should be.
For I am, &c. &c.
I confess that I am but a man!
And where is the priest who is more ?
Though he cantingly tells of his plan
Of happiness for me “ in store;”
But let him rave on with his folly,
I always adhere to my text :
In this world to be happy and jolly,
And leave him to look out for the next!
For I am, &c. &c.
Then prepare for the struggle, my brothers,
To level all tyranny down !
Too long we have struggled for others ;
Let’s a Government have of our own !
A Republic, founded on reason,
Qf the poorest and richest, the friend,
That, secure in all time and season,
Our troubles for ever may end !
For I am, &c. &c.
H. VINCET.
B 5


THE TRI-COLOURED FLAG.
A IR—“ The Missletoe Bough,"
Hail emblem of Liberty, spirit of light,
Thou cheerest my heart, and thou gladdest my sight ;
Thou beacon of hope to the good and the brave,
Thou foe to the tyrant, thou friend to the slave.
Ere long Britain’s sons shall awake from their trance,
And hail thy bright form like Republican France;
And the time draweth nigh, when thy banner unfurl’d,
.Shall wave in proud triumph all over the world.
Hail tri-coloured flag !
Hail tri-coloured flag !
Thrice welcome! thrice welcome I on Albion’s shore,
We-unfurl the. bright pageant —it shall float evermore;
The loud *houf of freedom shall echo around,
And the tyrant’s vile chains on himself shall be bound.
Thrice blessed, thrice blessed shall he the bright morn,
When waving aloft <fp r our heads thou art borne ;
When helots, and slftVes we no longer shall be,
As thou leadest us Dn to victory.
Hail tri-coloured flag !
Hail tri-coloured flag!
A LONDON MECHANIC.
FRANCE.
F ‘ To Wndly due* where beetle manner* reijrn
I turn and France displays her bright domain;
Oag, sprightly land of mirth and aooial ease,
Pleased with thyself, whom all the world can please.”
Land o{ tha gallant and the gay, and the abode of genial
sympathies, Idejoice to testify my appreciation of thee by greeting
thee on tbine own plains,—by declaring that in no country on tba
face Of the earth does a more generous spirit of sociability, or
more genuine natural kindliness prevail. Thy glories may bare
been clouded, but could not be tarnished—the demon of despotism
may hare' cast a ahads orer their brightness—yet the aun of bap


pier days will dispel the gloom and add to their splendour; and
much as valour and fondness of fame impregnate the national
character, it is to be hoped that, hereafter, the spirit of military
rivalry may subside into that of universal benevolence. This can
only be accomplished by cultivating true principles of liberty, by
dissipating personal vanity, buoyed by the produce of striving
industry and talent, and by bolding in contempt extreme splen-
dour as contrasted with the comfortless condition of the indus-
trious masses. What an invulnerable front would the French
people present if proper education were more generally cultivated
and bigotry less predominant. The cheering example which
their history presents*—springing even under the disadvantages
of contracted culture and compulsory circumstances—may convince
us what happiness might be expected if the whole public 0 rtd were
brought into action. Where, ia the history ef the world, do mere
chivalrous and gallant exploits appear than in the campaigns of the
republican armies of modern Gaul, inspired and, hallowed by the
elevated sentiments that run through the national hymh, a translation
of which follows this article. But, though her republican glories
have been preverted, the spirit is not extinct * though it should be
managed to submerge it a little longer, in proportion as the masses
may acquire intelligence, or kindly impulses impel the other classes
of society, may we hope that spirit will yet revive. Who, whether
native or foreign, that has revelled in fair France—that has com-
mixed in and enjoyed her convivialities—would not wish to see
her take the lead in the assertion of right principles ? Who, that
has witnessed the volatile spirit engendered by her brilliant clime,
can ever expect her to remain quiet under conscious injustice ?
Who, that has experienced the all pervading politeness of her
people, and has beheld the grace and fascinations of the eofter sex—
** whose gentler arts their bliss supplies"—can otherwise than hepe,
wish, pray, that they may all enjoy a/l the happiness which her
soil, her climate, and her position, are so capable of amply yielding.
Then, indeed, might we with truth exclaim,
“ So blous’d a life these thoughtless realms display.
Thus idly busy rolls their world away ;
Their’s are those arts that mind to mind endear,
For honour forms the social temper here.
Honour, that praise which real merit gains,
Or e’en imaginary wurth obtains,
Here passes current; paid from hand to hand.
It shifts in splendid traffic through the land:
From courts, to camps, to cottages it strays.
And all are taught an avarice of praise;—
They please, are pleas’d, they give to get eiteera,
Till, seeming bless’d, they grow t« what they seem.”
Fair France! now tby beauties are about to disappear in tbs
distance for a while, fare-thee-wcll!
Farit, I6tft September, 18$9.


THE MARSEILLAISE HYMN.
(Translated by Dr. Bowring.)
The day is come, the day of glory,
Rise, children of our country, rise !
Rise, for the despot’s standard gory,
The despot’s standard flaps the skies!
The despot’s standard flaps the skies!
And hark ! the hordes—the bloody minions
Of tyrants, bloodier far than they;
They come on desolation’s pinions,
To make your sons —your friends, their prey.
Then away, to the fray, with your bright flags high:
We go—we go,
And the blood of the foe shall our furrows dye.
These perjur’d kings—these slaves base-hearted,
Is it for us they forge the chain ?
For us—who into life have started,
Ne’er to know slavery’s death again!
Ne’er to know slavery’s death again!
For us—the free—the noble-minded,
For us—O, insult—crime and wrong !
What folly hath their vision blinded ?
For us—the proud—the brave—the strong!
Then away, &c.
They come to outrage God and nature’s,
First, best, and most sublime decree;
They—base and mercenary creatures,
To flout the sons of liberty!
To flout the sons of liberty!
They come—our free-born limbs to fetter;
To fling in dust our upward thought:
Spirit of freedom ! no! far better,
Thy sacred lessons were we taught.
Then away, Ac.


Then tremble, ye perfidious! tremble!
Corrupt and servile creatures, fly!
The hosts of liberty assemble ;
Your well-won recompense is nigh !
Your well-won recompense is nigh !
All here are heroes—all are brothers,
And-if they faint, and if they fall,
The fertile earth will bring forth others,
Ready to die or conquer—all!
Then away, &c.
Our fathers fought the fight victorious ;
Shall we our fathers’s names disgrace ?
We follow in their footsteps glorious,
And midst their tombs their virtues trace ! ,
And midst their tombs their virtues trace!
Their fame—their deeds—their memory cherish’d,
The brave are children of the brave ;
We will avenge them where they perish’d
And summon freedom from their grave!
Then away, &c.
Yet mercy—from her altar speaking,
Will cry—Restrain the avenging blow,
For some there are whose hearts are breaking,
Whose hands the bolt of slavery throw!
Whose hands the bolt of slavery throw !
But for the tyrants—those who seated,
On thrones, the best of men condemn
To scaffolds —be no mercy meted,
For why should mercy smile on them?
Then away, &c.
INVOCATION,
0, holy leve of country! speed us,
Our guide—our trust—our guardian be,
O, freedom, cherish’d freedom ! lead us,
And fight for those who fight for thee!
And fight for those who fight for thee!
Thy voice is heard, thy flag is flying,
Thy day is won—thy foemen see,
Whilst midst the dust in anguish dying,
Our glory and thy victory!
Then away, &c..


THE MARSEILLES MARCH.
Sung by the Marsellois of GeneraL Kellerman’s Army at the
approach of Battle.
Ye sons of France, awake to glory,
Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise,
Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
Behold their tears, and hear their cries !
Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding.
With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
Affright and desolate the land,
While peace and liberty lie bleeding ?
To arms, to arms, ye brave !
The avenging sword unsheath ;
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
Now, now, the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous kings confederate raise j
The dogs of war let loose, are howling,
And, lo ! our fields and cities blaze ;
And shall we basely view the ruin,
While lawless force, with guilty stride,
Spreads desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embruing?
To arms, &c.
With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile, insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
To mete and vend the light and air;
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
Like Gods would bid their slaves adore ;
But man is man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad u»?
To arms, &c.


O Liberty! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy generous flame ?
Can dungeons, bolts, and bars confine thee 1
Or whips thy noble spirit tame ?
Too long the world has wept, bewailing
That falsehood’s dagger, tyrants wield,
But freedom is our sword and shield,
And all their arts are unavailing.
To arms, &c.
N. B.—The name of the country, in the first line, might, if there
were a necessity for it, be altered to that of another, thus ;
“ Ye sous of Britain, wate to glory,” &c.
DEATH OR LIBERTY.
Adapted to the national French Air Of “ The Marsellois Hymn.”
BY J. S. BUCKINGHAM ESQ. M. P.
To Freedom’s sons! wherever dwelling,
Bid the welcome tidings fly;
The heavens, the earth, the seas, are telling
Freedom’s immortal victory !
Oppression’s iron ranks are broken;
The martyr’d slain have won the fight;
The triple ensign’s now the token
Of Liberty !—Man’s dearest right.
Then swell theheroie song
With loftiest minstrelsy,
And vow—and vow—the solemn pledge,
To Death or Liberty!


Heroic France! enshrined in glory,
For ever honoured be thy name !
And, oh! may England, from thy story,
Cherish bright Freedom’s sacred flame.
Give but to man the unfetter’d mind,
Let Freedom’s banners float unfurled :
Fair France and England, then, combined,
May rule, pretect, and free the world.
Then swell the heroic song, Ac.
CHEER UP! CHEER UP ! YE CHARTIST BOYS!
(From the Western Vindicator.)
Cheer up ! cheer up! ye Chartist boys!
And drive away your gloom;
Despair not yet of freedom’s joys,
For freedom’s day must come.
Cheer up ! cheer up! and sing
A merry, merry lay;
For liberty’s the thing,
Whack ! fal de ral de ray !
Cheer up ! cheer up! and show the foe
A dauntless spirit still;
In spite of each malignant blow
Invincible in will!
Cheer up! cheer up! Ac.
Cheer up! cheer up! with valour fraught,
And, till the work be done.
Think ye as Julius Cfesar thought,
The work is but begun I
Cheer up! cheer up ! Ac.


Cheer up ! cheer up! and raise your eyes
To see yon golden beams
That mark, on England’s joyous skies,
How freedom’s dawning gleams.
Cheer up ! cheer up ! &c.
Cheer up 1 cheer up ! just as the dawn
Removes the shades of night,
So Freedom’s veil sliall be withdrawn
When glows her glorious light.
Cheer up, cheer up, &c.
Cheer up ! cheer up! behold the day
Of Liberty shines forth ;
A western light, from far away,
Illumines all the north.
Cheer up, cheer up, &c.
A sun! a sun! a glorious light
Like that which burns on high;
Some darker spots upon the bright
In both may meet the eye.
Cheer up, cheer up, &c.
Nov. 20, 1839.
POLAND.
The aspirations for liberty in the Old World, with a few excep-
tions, have been dissipated by force or stifled by fraud. The im-
petus has been either too weak or too contracted. Power, or cor-
ruption, has overcome all detached attempts. Combinations of
despotic governments on the one hand, and the inefficiency of partial
efforts on the other, have been almost invariably the cause of failure.
It may be said that the finest physical conformation of the human
species develope the truest sentiments when properly cultivated.
This is exemplified in the instance of the Polish nation—it presents
the choice spirits of humanity in aspect and bearing; and if their
miseries were not traceable, we might be led to suppose that human
misfortunes gathered in proportion to the merit of the sufferers.
Happily the converse may be made to be the case—to give way to


any superficial impression to the contrary would stunt popular
feeling and serve to stimulate perverse rulers to interminable ag-
gressions. But for the covert intervention of neighbouring despots,
and her reliance on this country, Poland would have succeeded in
her last struggle. The English people are guiltless of the turpitude
of the Castlereagh government, in having sacrificed this fine country
on making the last treaty of peace; and their coming emancipation
will be the sure presage of the freedom of the Poles. Can no
Polish TELL be found to arrest the career of the modern Attila ,
and at once avenge the past and prevent further atrocities? What
glorious c&ntemplation would it not afford the friends of universal
liberty to behold the fair plains of Poland the refuge and resort of
the free and the intelligent. Despair must not, therefore, be allowed
to steep their senses in listlessness, and so passively contribute to
the stability of tyranny. Desperation, rather, should be made a
virtue of. The unceasing propagation of intelligence will prop up
the hope ©f brighter days. Let the brave Poles, therefore, take
fresh courage; they may yet greet their country, and enjoy its tri-
umph. Their unmitigated wrongs, like those of Ireland and of
Canada, call aloud for redress, and proud will be the day of their
deliverance.
O liberty I. the God who throws
Thy light around, like his own sunshine,
Knows how much they lov’d thee 1
The following poetical effusion bespeaks the long-cherished hopes
of a Cambrian bard in their behalf; though comißg from a poet and
a country unknown to them generally, the generous salute will not
be the less appreciated—indeed, surprise may add to the gratification.
TO POLAND.
From the Mountains of Wales .
BY THOMAS JENKINS.
Land of the brave! whose valiant sons inspired
With freedom's flame, stood foremost in the cause
Of Europe's liberties ; by all admired,
And though deserving of the world's applause,
No aid received, thy tyrant's course to stay,
When led by Liberty and Glory's ray !
The brave of every soil beheld with pride
Thy gallant heroes arm in Freedom's cause,
Eager to rush to combat at their side ;
But tyrant-rulers and convenient Jaws
Their ardour check'd; else had a glorious band
O'erwhelm'd thy foes, and sacred kept thy land.


The despots this foresaw—guilt quick perceives
Approaching justice. Trembling at the sound
Of Freedom’s name ! and nought their fear relieves
But thy misfortunes. There alone they found
One glimpse of Hope their tottering thrones to keep,
And Virtue o’er thy fate awhile must weep !
Where is the heart that mourns not o’er thy fate ?
What breast so callous not thy woes to feel ?
Tyrants, whilst plac’d beside the helm of state,
And minions, who their bosoms ever steel
’Gainst human sufferings, alone behold
Thy wrongs unmov’d—un mov’d thy miseries told !
Land of the brave!—though set awhile thy sun,
And barbarous hordes pollute thy sacred soil; —
Though clouds and darkness now thy skies o’errun,
And tyrants strive thy beauties to despoil;
Yet shall that sun in brighter splendour rise,
And spread its glories o’er far-distant skies!
Yes, land renown’d !—the day-beams from on high
Shall shine in gorgeous glory o’er thy soil
Shall chase the clouds of darkness from thy sky,
And all thy tyrants’ demon-hopes shall spoil
And thy brave sons, dispers’d o’er Europe’s plain,
Shall rally round thy eagle once again !
Adversity, the school of wisdom proves
And there thy sous have many a lesson read ;
Princes and kings their teachers ! And each loves
To malic apt scholars; and they well have sped !
Thy sons will know, in after days, what things
'To make of Princes, Emperors, and Kings.
Can they forget what once Napoleon taught,
When he the Destinies of Europe sway’d?
How gloriously for Freedom then they fought,
And how for their devotedness were paid ;
He who could freedom give to Europe round,
That Freedom promised, —but left Europe bound !
Hell-born Ambition, that itself o’erleaps,
And falls on t’other side, Lis curse became; —
He leagued with despots, and poor Freedom weeps
Above her early favourite’s fallen fame!


fey Nature’s Law, the eternal fixed decree
Who justice violates, ’tis doomed that he,
Though Earth and Ocean should obey his call,
And as Napoleon great, like him, must fall!
With him compar’d what paltry pigmies all
The rulers of the earth ! ’Twas his to fly,
With eagle genius, above those they call
“ The mighty of the world.” He tower’d high—•
As towers the Pyramid on Egypt’s land ;
Lying at its base ’hove common grains of sand !
Oppression is not evil, all entire,
It oftimes spreads the germ of freedom far,
And lights, midst darkest gloom, a sacred fire,
To be to the oppress’d a leading star!
Siberia’s wilds shall hear or Poland’s fame ;
Thy sons shall kindle there the holy flame !
Their hitter woes, though deeply we deplore,
And tears of anguish o’er their wrongs must shed ;
Some gleams of brightness Hope yet deigns to pour
Into the soul, which round their splendour spread,—
Shewing fell Tyranny the sooner falls,
Where’er its chain with heaviest pressure galls.
The goddess, smiling, shows the Western World—
“ Behold those broken chains !” aloud she cries ;
And shall not Europe’s tyrants soon be hurl’d
From power’s pinnacle, and Freedom rise
In might supreme, to crush Oppression’s name,
And drive her to the hell from whence she came ?
Land of the brave! their doom is seal’d—the chains,
Stretch’d to their utmost pitch, are giving way !
The bursting links now sound o'er all our plains,
And soon shall dawn the bright and glorious day,
When tyranny from Europe’s plains shall fly,
And Freedom reign triumphant ’neatii her sxy !


FALL, TYRANTS, FALL!
Sung on Lillsley Hill, at the Great Demonstration, near Gloucester
The trumpet of liberty sounds through the world,
And the universe starts at the sound;
Her standard Philosophy’s hand has unfurled,
And the nations are thronging around.
How noble the ardour that seizes the soul!
How it bursts from the yoke and the chain !
What power can the fervour of Freedom control,
Or its terrible vengeance restrain ?
Fall! fall tyrants ! fall!
These are the days of Liberty !
Proud castles of tyranny, dungeons, and cells !
The tempest shall sweep you away.
From the east to the west the dread hurricane swells,
And the tyrants are chill’d with dismay.
The slave, on whose neck the proud despot has trod,
Now feels that himself is a man;
While the lordly usurper, who ruled with a nod,
Hides his head ’midst his servile divan.
Fall! fall tyrants! fall, &c.
Poor vassals who crawl by the Vistula’s stream!
Hear, hear the glad call and obey !
Eise, nations who worship the sun’s sacred beam,
And drive your Pizarros away.
The cruel dominion of priestcraft is o’er,
Its thunders, its faggots, and chains ;
Mankind will endure"the vile bondage no more,
While religion our freedom maintains.
Fall! fall tyrants ! fall, See.
The trumpet of Liberty sounds through the world,
And the universe starts at the sound ;
Her standard Philosophy’s hand has unfurled,
And the nations are thronging around.


Shall Britons the trumpets of Liberty hear
With a cold and insensible mind ?
No! the triumphs of Freedom each Briton shall share ;
And contend for the rights of mankind !
Fall 1 fall tyrants ! fall!
Death to our bonds of slavery!
A NATION’S WILL IS LAW.
BY CHARLES COLE.
Author of ‘ Political and Other Poems .*
A nation’s will is law, —
Let but a people speak,
Tlie mightiest force the world e’er saw,
Before that voice were weak.
One high and moral tone,
Not dissolute and wild,
Would make oppression on his throne
Yield like a conquer’d child.
To tyrants leave their swords,
And slaves to wield them too,
There lives a spirit still in words,
No weapon can subdue.
Go meet the mental tools
01' power—still the tongue
That’s shaped to pass deceit on fools;
The bane of old and young.
Go where the sophist bawls,
And challenge to debate
Hired talent in the thousand halls;
Whose hat is your fate ;
With mind let mind engage,
Let Truth with Falsehood fight,
Clothed not in burning zeal or rage,
But panoply of light.
Tho sod is rvet with Hood,
The earth with gore is red ;
The warrior, in his wildest mood,
O’ermasters but the dead.
Firm Truth shall shake the creed
Of despots—and shall awe
Their minions.—Why should people bleed ?
A nation's will is law.


SCOTLAND.
The spirit of the present movement may be said to consist in a
strong determination to acquire at all risks, when a rational chance
presents itself, the right of free agency for the benefit of the indi-
vidual in common with the rest of the community. An elasticity
of character conducing to independence, of which the foregoing
principle is the only essential basis, may be said to predominate in
every country of the mountain and torrent. This is exemplified in
the history of ancient Caledonia, and in that of Cambria; in that
of the Tyrol and of Switzerland. Liberty seems, as it were, to
have alighted on the mountain top, and to have domiciled on the
heath; while corruption has, for the most part, insinuated itself
into fertile plains. Intellect is, probably, in Europe and beyond
the Atlantic, upon an average, on the same scale. If there be a
favoured sectional exception, Scotland may, perhaps, be said to
enjoy a superior order of intelligence. The Scottish character pos-
sesses a manly bearing, free from the weakness of frivolity, and
full of aptitude and vigour; the judgment is not warped by passion
nor relaxed by over excitement. And the physical is upon a scale
commensurate with the moral power; there nature has been ever
bounteous: the sons of Scotia are bold and comely, and her
daughters unsurpassingly graceful.
Formed of such materials from Nature’s master-hand, it followed
that the Scots have been in all ages very susceptible of freedom ;
their struggles for it have been frequent, long, and ardent; but
treason, Saxon aristocratic intrigue, and overwhelming odds, dug
the grave of Scottish independence; else had Wallace triumphantly
reared its standard, or Bruce established it. But, after all, brighter
days begin to dawn on her destinies, and the fraternal spirit of
Equality will render treachery, the spawn of inviduous ambition,
quite abortive, and ultimately cement the friendship, instead of
exciting the feud of the modern Anglo-Saxon. The divisiens of
elans, of creeds, of local and partial interests, must not be suffered
any longer to mar the common good. Fraternity has no limit; and
liberty, like love, levels all distinctions. Already the train is laid
throughout the land, and who knows but it may ignite on the other
side of the " borders,” and be first responded to from the summits
©f old Snowden and Plynlimmon!—who, that can appreciate the
blessings of success, would not live and die f r its accomplish-
ment!—who, that can draw the distinction between the present
partial and selfish dispensation of happiness, and that grafted upon
universal beneficence can otherwise than Join, and, if necessary.


act up to the invocation of the Scottish hard, who beautifully but
neglectedly sun" immortal strains to Freedom, which will be most
prized as her cause advances? —whose undying fame exhibits a
profitable moral to those who, having once trod in his steps, have
afterwards abandoned that glorious path for one of eternal infamy.
Sorry and unenviable is the situation of those who have perverted
mighty efforts for ignoble gratifications; when the present pre-
dominating influence of flagitious wealth shall fail to throw a false
glare on their apostacy, then will their perfidy he the more con-
spicuous, and that which we have once lamented may serve as a
valuable example how to avoid ignominy.
The following song, long familiar to every ear, contains not only
sentiments applicable to the approaching crisis—for a crisis it will
eventually he—hut such as will interest all posterity—will amuse
and refreshen all ages j—it is of itself sufficient to perpetuate the
fame of the poet and his country. It is a proof that the spirit of
Liberty is above the caprice and fluctuations of fortune, and that it
survives with additional vividness all discomfitures. Misfortune
consists not so much in positive defeat as in its paralyzing effects.
If a sense of rectitude can infuse confidence, we may rest assured,
once the multitude become sensible of it, that our cause will pre-
vail over all adventitious circumstances. The contest for freedom
is not new ; and, after all, defeat is not without its use, while i
single victory would be invaluable; it is despair alone that ca
retard success:
For Freedom's battle once begun.
Bequeath’d by bleeding sire to son,
Tho’ baliled off, is ever won!
BRUCE’S ADDRESS TO HIS ARM
BY ROBERT BURNS.
Scots, wha hae wi’ Wallace bled,
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led j
Welcome to your gory bed,
Or to victorie!
Now’s the day, and now’s the hour,
See the front o’ battle lour;
See approach proud Edward’s power—
Chains and slavery!
Wha will be a traitor knave?
Wha can fill a coward’s grave ?
Wha sae base as be a slave?
Let him turn and flee !


Wha for Scotland’s king and law,
Freedom’s sword will strongly draw,
Freeman stand, or Freeman fa’,
Let him follow me!
By oppression’s woes and pains,
By your sons in servile chains,
We will drain our dearest veins,
But they shall be free!
Lay the proud usurpers low,
Tyrants fall in every foe ;
Liberty’s in every blow,
Let us do, or die!
THE LASH!
Despis’d be the wretches, who heartlessly gave
Their sanction to cruelty base;
Who, heedless of feelings that honour the brave,
Still torture the freeman, with lash of the slave,
Entailing a lasting disgrace.
The highborn in power, who hear with a smile
The shrieks of their victims forlorn—
Who the loud pray’rs for mercy with tauntings revile; —
Are they fit preceptors for Britain’s fair isle ?
No!—Perish such wretches with scorn.
The bold hardy sailor —the pride of the sea—
Who ploughs the wild waves as they dash;
The generous soldier, who’d freedom uplift,
Can they spurn the mantle sweet liberty’s gift,
To jfover their backs from the lash ?
But soon may fresh rulers of England’s fair land
In pity and justice proclaim,—
That the power now vested in cruelty’s hand,
To wield the curs’d lash amid bravery’s band,
No longer shall tarnish her fame.
JOHN MARTIN.
e


FREEDOM’S TRI-COLOURED BANNER.
NATIONAL SONG.
Composed on the occasion of the Writer’s presenting the Metro-
politan, Merthyr, Pontypool, and Carmarthen Associations
each with the first projected Tri-coloured banner—com-
posed of green, white and blue, symbolical of the aspect
of nature —the green Earth, the Solar light, and the ethereal
blue, A banner with colours as predominant as Equal Rights
are universal j and now about to supersede the blood-stained
standards of the old world, of ancient and modern tyranny,
and so form the emblem of freedom, of fraternity and happiness
to the rising millions !
Am—“ Fill the Hamper Fair.”
Unfurl the banner bright.
Grasp it ever steady,—
The flag for freedom’s fight
Must needs be always ready.
Fair emblem of the free,
Of nature’s lovely dyes—
All hopes respond to thee,
The Earth, the Light, the Skies.
Unfurl, See.
Kind Nature’s genial laws
To all alike apply ;
But despots mar our cause,
Our equal rights deny ;
Then “ burst dishonour’s chain,”
Joint heirs of freedom be,
We dread, nor death, nor pain,
Determined to be free.
Unfurl, &c.
United face the foe,
Come hasten to the strife ;
Why linger, when w r e know
The hour with freedom’s rife ?


’Tis better freemen die,
Than live the life of slaves, —
All manly bosoms sigh
To baffle tyrant knaves.
Unfurl, &c.
Then hurrah for the fight,—
In gallant bearing stand—
Exulting millions shout,
And proffer heart and hand :
Let freedom’s cause infuse
Full courage to the heart—
Till every bondsman rouse
And act a Freeman’s part.
Unfurl, &c.
Let justice govern right,
And nature’s bounties share—
We wage no murd’rous fight,
No bloody ensign rear; —
’Tis ours the mind to gain,
With reason for our guide;
That power, once it reign,
Alone will conquer pride.
Unfurl, &c.
Away with servile fear
Thatpalsies every nerve ;
The slaves that nobly dare,
True Liberty deserve ;
Come hoist the banner high,
Every heart’s in motion—
The cause of Liberty
Inspires us with devotion.
Unfurl, &c.
Why lag at freedom’s call,
Or falter, once we start ?
Can patience win control,
Or handle freedom’s dart ?
Around your standard rail}-,
Defiance in each port,—
Can Courage longer dally,
Or haughty tyrants court?
Unfurl, &c.
c 2


On! on! ye dauntless crew,
The struggle to commence, —
One blow tells better now
Than dozens sometime hence ■
Ourselves must strike the blow,
If freedom we’d maintain,
Then lay the tyrants low,
And equal laws ordain.
Unfurl, &c.
Usurping factions quail,
And tremble at our might,—
Our efforts must prevail
United for the Right.
Fheedom ! heaven-born maid !
All hearts aspire to thee,
In all thy charms array’d,
With gen’rous rivalry !
Unfurl, &c.
W.
August, 1839.
N. 15. A short sketch may assist in constructing the glorious
ensigns of Libi rty.
The standard Radical flag will bear for its motto Universal
Liberty along the centre; the full flag andbanner—Tnuxn, Justice,
and Humanity, with the Sun gilded on the upper staff quarter
of each, and on the centre of upper part of banner. Size:
Standard flag, two feet square; full flag, four feet do.; banner, two
feet by three. Stripes horizontal, and in the following proportions:—
Grass-green below, two-hinths of depth ; white, centre, four-ninths,
and the rest deep sky-blue. The material may be had at any army
clothier’s, or military store. Or the flags may be made up of strong
silk.
The prevailing wearing Radical colour for public occasions, and
for any portion of dress particularly that of females, is understood
to be green. A bay or laurel leaf may be mounted for public
meetings or the display of principle.


SHENKIN SHON.
This article, and the song-notes and commentary which follow,
bear na political tendency or reference, save a slight turn in the
concluding verse of the parody containing the moral, and save inci-
dental deductions in the course of perusal, I have presumed to
introduce the subject as interesting to the general reader, though
appearing at first sight but of local or sectional application,
inasmuch as it illustrates a much-vaunted portion of English
history and more particularly the origin of civilization, from
the wild or savage state, and the source from which “ the pride
of ancestry” is derived. In other respects it is intended as a
lyrical sketch of character of the bold and buoyant race of Cardi-
ganshire peasantry, familiarly styled Cardies, and thence of the
principality, from the supposed remote formation of society to the
present time. It is, moreover, calculated to elicit genial feelings
and conviviality. The county of Cardigan has been selected, as
presenting perhaps the choicest specimen of native character and
usages now continuing in pristine simplicity, of any other in Wales,
Grateful predilections assisted in making it.
SONG.
SHENKIN SHON,
The real ould Shentleman of Wales.
From a parody, parodied, with additions and notes,
BY H. W.
Prepared by particular desire, for the highest com]ietitory prize of the
Golden Harp at the Bardic Congress.
I’ll sing you a decent song, that was made by a Taffy’s
pate,
Of a real ould Card! shentleman, who had a fine estate;
Of noble race was Shenkin Shon, a squire of high degree,
The very top ancestor of the earliest pedigree,—
This rare old Card! shentleman, the boy of the olden
time.
He first contrived a dwelling-house t.pon the common land,
The right he swore was primitive, and on it took his stand;
Whose mansion it was made of sods, and the entrance
show’d the light,
With a hole at top through which the smoke so graceful
forc’d its flight,—
This stanch ould Card! shentleman, the boy of the
. olden time.


And snug lie built his freehold there, all rendered weather
proof,
The floor was dry to rest upon, wild heather form’d the roof ;
It was a grand discovery such luxury then to gain,
For his only home of yore had been, the mountain, glen,
or plain,
This prime ould Cardi shentleman, the boy of the olden
time.
His airy shed was furnish’d with the devil a thing for shew.
Except a trusty sapling which had knocked down many
a foe,
And there Ap Shenkin sat at ease, with does and feetless
hose,
And quaff’d his untax’d norm da to warm his fine long
nose,
Like a jolly Cardi shentleman, the boy of the olden time.
To Llanarth’s plain his custom was to go to every fair.
And though he’d seen a few score years, he still was
young when there;
And while tire lads they pledged him, and the lasses all
were kind,
He’d sing and dance, caress and fight, till lushing did him
blind, —
Hurrah for the Cardi shentleman, the bov of the olden
time.
But, ohmy Cot!—onceat a rowould Shenkin seemed queer.
He caught a rap upon the nob which finished his career; —
They laid him out so orderly, and then set up a moan,
Och! bachgen anwyl, Shanco bach, why was hur die so
soon 1
And they watch’d this Cardi shentleman, the boy of the
olden time.
Most things but change their passing forms, as seasons
glide away,
So Cambro hearts, of olden time, live in their sons this
day ;
Each Cambro lad, when on the right, will prove himself a
man, —
For to enjoy all fun, all free, it always was the plan
Of a real old Cambro gentleman, the boy of the olden
time.
The very top ancestor of the earliest pedigree.] —The annals of our
first recarded ancestor, Shenkin Ap Shon, carry us back to the


-extreme verge of Cambrian territorial antiquity. After taking great
pains in researching, among musty records, we discovered that he is
about the earliest subject of biographical history—all beyond is
involved in doubt and obscurity, save what we may surmise to have
existed of pastoral life in rudest simplicity. Ilis biography, slight
as are the outlines, may assist us to trace the rise and progress of
civiliza.tion in Wales, and consequently, of the arts and sciences;
and thus, to be the better able to value present advantages derived
from ages of observation and experience. The architect of his own
home, his own fortune, and the founder of Welsh ancestry, cele-
brated all the world over,—it has been essayed to sing his fame.
Our ancestors of old, the ancient Britons, lived generally in a state
of nudity—their habitations were caves in the mountains, in glens,
or in the recesses of the forest, as best suited their migratory pur-
suits and dispositions; subsisting by means of hunting and fishing,
and .on acorns, sloes, or other spontaneous natural productions.
It was left to the great Shenkin Shen ap Morgan, to make
the first approaches to civilize his countrymen from this state
of comparative barbarism. After all, refinements have been but
tardy, and often conduce to deteriorating luxury:—for instance, in
the reign of one of Shenkin’s descendants, old Queen Bess, (“ pan
oedd Bess yn teymasu,”) the “ presence chamber” was strewed
with hay, which has made way for the more modern indulgence of
carpeting, at the expence perhaps in some measure of general
health.
And he first contrived a dwelling house upon the common land.J—
The ancient claim to land in Wales was that of the next best title :
actual personal holding. It is difficult to trace precisely the system
relating to ownership, or enjoyment of lands, under the Anglo-
Saxon government, but it is clear the law was controlled, if not
altogether remodelled by that of feudal tenures, being allotments of
land by the Norman conqueror, and his immediate successors, to
their subsidiary chiefs and dependants, made descendible according
to the order of primogeniture, in consideration, or on condition, of
most abject military and other personal services, which have been
since redeemed or abrogated. When the feudal system was
imposed upon Wales, on its subjugation by the semi-barbarian
Edward 1., a custom gained among the Welsh peasantry, and it
still partially prevails, of erecting cottages, covertly or by stealth,
■during a single night, thence called “ Ty-un-nos ” from ty, a house,
tin one, and nos night; and thereupon claiming the absolute right of
ownership. It was pretty generally conceived by the natives, until
a recent period, that the law could not, under the circumstances,
divest the occupier, and the popular maxim, that “ Every man’s
house is his castle,” was construed to give further credence to the
supposed right; but legal means have been long devised, by which
such appropriation may be abated as a nuisance, or the party ejected
from possession. However, this is the origin of the greater portion
of “ freeholds” now existing in Wales, where the prowess or


dexterity of the possessor, or “ lord of the soil/ 1 defied all the
force of law and its artifices.
For his only home of yore had been the mountain glen , or plain,]—*
Mr. Shenkin Shon was the first of bis countrymen who fancied the
comforts of a dwelling-place, his wild and undistinguished an-
cestors having thriven in the unrestrained enjoyment of native
liberty. It is to be regretted that his history, presenting so noble
an example to his posterity, should so long have slumbered un-
heeded. National gratitude demands that his name should be per-
petuated. From Ap-Shenkin descended the house of Tudor, which
gave birth to several of the immaculate English sovereigns.
And there Ap Shenkin sat at ease, with docs and feetless Aosc.]—
lt Clocs a baesan,” part of the peculiar costume of the ancient
Britons, on emerging from a savage state, the “ clocs ” being wooden
soles, with skin or leather vamps and quarters, still continuing in
common use by the peasantry. They never dreamt of the effemi-
nate luxury of “ feet” to their hose, hence baesau, in contradistinc-
tion to the full stockings— sanau. Clocs are prevalent in Holland,
and when duly seasoned are a good protection from damp. Stock-
ingless female feet in thin shoes, sandals, or slippers, are nowa-
days, not unusual in some of the gay provinces of the south of
France, and were possibly worn coeval with the customs of the
aborigines of Britain.
Sijenkix inherited and displayed all the generous impulses of
human nature, unalloyed by the rival feelings of modern society,
and remained in happy ignorance of systematic or hereditary dupli-
city and avarice—of heartless scheming and invidious jealousy. He
was equally a stranger to the vice of arrogance arising from the
suppositious superiority of “ property,” and of distinct ancestry and
descent—passions and propensities which have engendered a palpa-
ble distinction between the physiognomies of untutored and those
denominated civilized nations, to the great disparagement of the
latter. His brief history enables us to trace the common origin and
progress of society and of civilization, which it is presumed has
been much the same in most countries. But the fame of Shenkin,
like that of some other illustrious characters of antiquity, is likely to
survive his mother tongue ; which, while it is confessedly one of the
most powerful, comprehensive, and melodious, is .getting obsolete,
and will probably, at no very distant period, sink into oblivion.
This is not so much to be lamented, inasmuch as, we venture
to think, there should be but one uniform language; and which, if
intelligence progress (as it now promises to do, despite the ob-
structions of despotic governments), will, sooner or later, be the
case. Already such a uniformity may be conceived in perspective,
remote as the prospect may now seem. Common written language
would appear to be as easily attainable as the present mute one of
figures, which describes the same ideas expressed in varied modifi-
cations of sounds, or in the languages of different countries. The


organs and notes of human speech are all naturally constructed
alike, and the expression of ideas thereby conveyed could, as is
conceived, he most ad vantageously assimilated also, as best conducing
to general utility and extended intercourse. Social interchange and
reciprocal benefits comprise the positive acme of temporal enjoyment
—-of all that can make life an object of desire, or that can recompense
and solace the mind in contemplating, or whilst enduring its ills, or
the pam of final extinction. Free intercourse and generous recipro-
city, hitherto restricted by the mistaken or wicked policy of corrupt
governments, will be a matter of universal compact when education
and knowledge shall become fully diffused and accessible to all,
I will add a few parting words, and close my subject. Peace-
then to the manes of the renowned Shenkiu Shon. May his memory-
live as long as the green hill that gave him birth shall overlook
the ocean-wave—may the pure spirit that animated his clay never
flag in his grateful descendants. When I perform a pilgrimage-
to the summit of the far-famed Plynlimmon where repose hia-
hallowed remains, I would, were I able, delineate his true image,
and set it
•* up there
Like a Korn an statue—to stand,
As if death had made him marble I*'
I would, moreover, carve his epitaph, to record his qualities and
lineage, and sum up his plain and simple annals, his peaceful and
rural virtues, as the first subduer of the primeval barbarism of his
country, without, like sanguinary contemporaries of greater celebrity,
brandishing weapons of offence, but those only of conciliation; as
the first great benefactor of bis fellow-men, by devising their early
comforts without imposing public burthens or duties on any save
himself, and those gratuitously performed ; as having contributed to
the happiness of mankind without visiting them with a single con-
flicting misery ; as extending equal benefits to the reconciled foe
and to the ardent friend ; as living in the native dignity of superior
intelligence and secret charity, regardless of fame, but which has
nevertheless been perpetuated in the consequent welfare and remem-
brance of his countrymen, anxious to shake off the evil influence
that now encumber and deter them from freely treading in his steps.
Such was Shenkin Shon, who died, alas! before his time, after,
however, doubly enjoying it, in beneficence, hilarity, and sport.
Such was the great original of the ancient British character—the
first recorded ancestor ef Cambro-Britons:—
“ He only in a general thought,
And common good to all, stood foremost;
His life was gentle, and the elements
So mix'd in him, that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world—this was a man I '
These are getting long—they are short, however, as
intended to depict the early stages and progress of society, so as to
deduce its subsequent formation and present state. It maybe sup-
c 5


posed by some that society has advanced in manners and comforts,
while others contend that its progress, with respect to the latter, espe-
cially, has been insignificant, compared to what it might have been,
unimpeded by sinister distinctions and restrictions, utterly hostile to
the growth of liberal principles and general happiness. I leave it
to the reader to speculate on the future. I shall be satisfied, if I
have succeeded in getting up a tale that may enable him to point
a moral so that by testing his own conclusions with that of others,
he may arrive at the true one.
THE FAIR MAID OF DOVEY.
Having dedicated tins collection to our fair Queen and Country-
women, 'a song for their especial amusement may not form in-
appropriate variety. It may not appear at first exactly in keeping
to intermix an amatory effusion with the nervous strains of political
poetry; but it may induce a perusal of other portions, and to allot a
small space to melody, which may peculiarly interest kindly feel-
ings and latent predilections, cannot prove unacceptable to our fair
readers, hooking at the spirit arousing among our beloved country-
women, who knows hut that we may become in a great degree
indebted to them for the most glorious revolution the world has ever
beheld 1 Let the women of England but act their part on the coming
occasion, and they may strew that path with flowers which might
otherwise become overshadowed with cypress ! I have therefore
devoted a niche for an exclusive tribute of respect to those whose
countenance may alone, as if by enchantment, ensure the success of
the cause of liberty.
It may he permitted to explain that the Dovey is a river of North
Wales ; with waters as clear as crystal, and so pure as to he ever
impressed on the memories of those who have early,traced its mean-
derings, and reposed upon its wild and verdant hanks,
’TIS THE FAIR MAID OF DOVEY.
From tfooro’s “ I.a-t Rose of Summer,” transposed, with Additions
by H. W.
Air—“ Tis the Last Rose of Summer
’Tic the fair maid of Dovey,
Left pining alone ;
All her lovely companion*
Are mated and gone ;
Not a sister is there,
No admirer nigh,
To reflect back her blushes,
Or waft sigh for sigh !


I’ll not leave thee, thou lone one,
To droop in the dell;
Since the lovely are mated,
Come mate thou as well 5
For kindly I’ll treat thee
And cherish thy home,—
Nor far from thy presence
Will I ever roam.
0 deign, dearest maiden.
My suit to receive—
I’d not for existence
Thy true love deceive.
1 heed not for station,
Nor riches in store, —
‘Tis thy graces I value.
Thy virtues adore.
And soon will I follow.
When thou shalt decay,
And from love’s gentle circle
The charm glides away.
When fond hearts lie wither’d,
And chaste ones are gone.
Oh, who would inhabit
This bleak world alone!
THE HORN OF LIBERTY.
The Horn of Liberty sounded for the attendance of the popu-
lace on the long-Bridge across the Severn, by Llanidloes, where
they were addressed by speakers from the parapets ; after which
they hurried t» the rescue of their comrades, apprehended for
training or acquiring the art of self-defence, held as dangerous
by partial and jealous legislatures to the peace and security of
despotic government, and moral duty therefore: converted "into
legal offence; whereupon the authorities and their;force (consist-
ing of some two hundred or more armed police and: hireling
special constables from a neighbouring district, rival* ,’in ancient
feuds, and suddenly ushered into the town, f(?r, the purpose,of


thereby suppressing their meetings) were completely put to the
rout, April 30th, 1839. Vide Report of the trial at the Mont-
gomeryshire Assizes, 17th of July, 1839, of the Llanidloes and
Newtown Chartists, defended by the writer, charging with train-
ing and attending unlawful meetings, &c., when forty individuals
were convicted and adjudged—three to transportion, and the re-
mainder to various terms of imprisonment in Montgomery Gaol,
who now undergo their sentences.
THE HORN OF LIBKRTY.
BY H. W.
Air-— u Good'h kLmoui'etiand merry”
The herald of Freedom sounds far in the dale,
Its notes full of rapture sweep aloud through the gale ;
Gay prelude of Liberty’s heart-thrilling voice, —
“ Now’s the hour, my Sons, to assert your free choice;
Each bosom’s inspired to combat the foe,
So greet the death struggle with patriot glow!”
She comes, lo! sh.e comes, to our blood-reeking land, —
She sighs at the wails of her long faithful band ;
Her Martyrs she .cheers, who indignantly scowl,
As despots add insults to injuries foul ;
Fair Truth and .Humanity grace her bright train,
While Justice rejoicing thrice blesses her reign !
Lasting honour to those in adversity true.
Who nobly stand foremost demanding our due ;
Away with the timid—’tie treason to fear, —■
To surrender or falter when danger is near;
For now that oUr Leaders disdain to betray,
’Twere base to desert them, or succour delay !
’Tis time that the Victims of labour and cafe,
Should reap for reward what is labour’s fair share;
’Tis time that their voices in council be heard
The rather than pay for the law of the sword ; —
That power is ours with a will of our own ;
We conquer united—divided w.e grohn !
Then, hail, brothers, hail, the shrill sound of the horr • —
For ages deep wrongs have been hopelessly borne ;
Despair shall no longer our spirits dismay,
Nor wither the arm wheir uprais'd for the fray ;
The conflict for freedom is gathering nigh; —
We live to secure it, or gloriously die!


In speaking of “insults added to injuries,” I refer to the treats
ment the Chausists endure while in custody for political offences.
For instance, vide report of the brutal indecencies committed upon
Dr. Taylor, and on Messrs. Lovett and Collins, in Warwick Gaol,
set forth by the latter in their petitions to the two Houses of Par-
liament, the recital of which excited the scornful laughter of certain
members of the House of Lords, and the morbid contempt of the
Commons,—also, the account of the privations imposed upon
Messrs. Vincent, Edwards, Dickinson, and Townsend, in Mon-
mouth Gaol—Upon Dr. M'Dowall, at Salford—on Messrs. Carrier,
Roberts, and Potts, at Devises—and on Messrs. T. Powell and J.
Lewis (of Cripplegate), in Montgomery ; and withal, denied books,
pen, ink, and paper, and their communications subjected to the in-
vidious inspection or interdiction of official meddlers, who com-
mend themselves by exercising paltry vigilance. Such are the
merciless and petty annoyances practised by revengeful instruments
of arbitrary power, emanating from an absolute government against
parties accused of sedition; an accusation so vague as to be impos-
sible to understand where the law ends or crime begins—but which
is said to mean, in general effect, the bringing the government and
the laws into contempt and exciting discontent, to the danger of the
public peace. If this be so, what ought to he the reward of a
government, or of a legislative body, which brings itself, by its acts
or its laws, into contempt, and thereby creating disaffection among
the people ? Here, therefore, is an anomaly, that the rulers of a
country guilty of causing contempt by their measures, not only es-
cape condemnation, but may not, for such conduct, be held up by
any of the sufferers to public reprobation qnd obloquy; or the
offending parties become prosecuted by the perpetrators of the ori-
ginating mischief, as its sole instigators ; the contemptible in effect
punishing the contempt. This appears to me to be a legitimate line
©f argument to a jury on the defence of a trial foiv sedition ; and
notorious acts of impolicy or injustice on the part of the legislature
or the government should be thereupon adduced and canvassed in
justification. But, from the manner a jury generally is, or may be,
now summoned, no defence on a trial, for what may be judicially
held to be sedition, can by possibility succeed. The late trials have
not, however, been without some use—some good will be extracted
from them after all. The eloquent addresses of Messrs. O'Conner,
Lovett, and M’Dowell,on their defences in the several prosecutions
against them at the Autumn Assizes of 1839, throwirg forensic
displays into the shade, and government prosecutors from their
propriety, are invaluable both with respect to the cause and its
leadership—inefficiency in either case would have been unadvised
and possibly injurious. And these are the sort of men that the
strong arm of the law, or, properly speaking, the strong arm of
perverse power, is to put down ; and this at the discretion of pro-
bably ignorant clod-hoppers, in the shape of jurymen, who may be
possibly previously selected and Umpored with by the enemy. A


packed set of these vagabonds, composed of the insolvent, the cor-
rupt, the ignorant, the dependant, and the prejudiced, may be im-
pannelled to judge or condemn the public mind—to decide upon
the effect of essays on liberal principles—upon the •public expres-
sion of opinion on the public acts of the governing power under
which the country suffers. A Radical, accused of a legal offence,
becomes a foredoomed victim before such moral delinquents. As
well might he appeal to the overwhelming storm. Even a panel of
the brute creation would be more tractable or better disposed to
kindly impulses. But, under the best regulations, such an engine
is inefficient to decide a question of sedition; and there would be
no such crime known in the law, once good polity prevailed.
Truth can never bring a good government into contempt—falsehood
cannot damage it. To acknowledge or entertain a dread of being
brought into contempt is a clear confession of guilt. But, as mat-
ters now stand, time will best tell what may be got by coercion. We
shall see by and by what calculating men, of substance and of
capital, think of these goings on ; let the government cast its eyes
abroad for a little while. Affairs begin to assume a problem new in
political ethics, but which may not eventually require a seer to
solve. It has been hitherto the case for leaders to sacrifice the
people—it now remains to be seen how far the case may be re-
versed, and the people can desert their leaders, when they have the
power, if they have the united will to avert all consequences.
Time will show all this also. But if this do happen, the rising
generation will, probably, profit by it, so that in the distance there
are at all events some gleams of hope. For (he present, the,
political horizon appears black enough, for we are about to have
regularly disciplined brigandism let loose upon us, if practicable,
in pristine and compound terrors.
THE TRI-COLOUR!
Air—" The Swiss Boy;" or, “A Bumrper of Burgundy."
“ Hark ! hark! ’tis the trumpet of .liberty sounds,
As the tri-colour flag is unfurl’d
With joy at its notes “ every bosom rebounds,”
While the echo is heard o’er the world.
Her cause is as pure as the deep azure sky,
It cheers like the bright sunny ray,—
Refreshing and lively as nature’s green dye,
Ever gentle, unchanging, and gay.


And hark ! the glad throngs now re-echo the sound—
Responding to liberty’s call, —
No longer by craft and by ignorance bound,
Since bigotry—tyranny fall!
Then array the bright ensign ’gainstpower and guile,—
Uprise ye the gallant and bold, —
And grateful to heaven we will die with a smile,
As we sever our fetters of old !
Nov. 5, 1839.
W.
TO LIBERTY.
Oh! that the tuneful Nine would guide my hand,
I then might hope to raise a glorious hand,
To hail in fitting strains Heaven’s own fair Queen,
Immortal Liberty ! Here seldom seen.
Where despots league to baffle her brave friends;
But now her faithful harbinger she sends—
Pair Knowledge —to enlighten trampled man,
To pave the way, and public morals scan, —
So that he yet may burst his galling chains,
Spread “Justice, Peace, and Truth,” o’er earth’s
domains; ,
From power usurp’d the cruel tyrants hurl,
And far and wide her glorious flag unfurl.
Had I command of all the vocal train,
To sing loud poeans o’er the land and main;
Could I bid tongues of every realm on earth,
Join in sweet concord to proclaim thy birth ;
E’en then I’d deem my homage unto thee,
But a faint presage of the joys to be,
When thy just reign shall triumph o’er this globe,
And thy free sons shall wear thy peaceful robe.
Triumph thou wilt! let tyrants me gainsay,
(At length there darts a kind propitious ray)—
Let them conspire thy progress to destroy,
“ They shall not find lov’d LIBERTY, a Troy.”
CATHERINE.


MY HEART IS IN THE BATTLE-FIELD.
AIR—“My Heart and Lute;” or, "O ! bring me but my Arab
Steed.”
My heart is in the battle-field,
And there ray grave may be ;
My all I’ll risk, my life-blood yield,
To set my country free !
I long not for a victor-wreath,
No warrior-fame for me ;
I’ll humbly join till latest breath
To set my country free !
I’ll wed me to our cause for aye,
A fondled mate to be, —
The same I woo’d in earliest lay
To set my country free !
And fast as passion binds this heart
To one who’s true to me,
I still from her, for death would part
To set my conntrv free !
"
Nov. C, 1839.
W.
DAUGHTERS OF LIBERTY !
AIR— “A Bumper of Burgundy;" or, "A Daughter of Israel Sat
by a Stream."
Lov’d daughters of Liberty ! smile, smile away,
Bright beams of your happiness rise,
For Freedom at length has emitted a ray
As bright as the beams of the skies.
Long, long have the fetters of tyranny bound,
The blessings kind heaven ordains,
And despots unsated contrive still to wound,
The firmer to rivet our chains !


Deep shame on the wretches who heartlessly doom
The best gift of nature their prey !
We pant to dispel at your summons your gloom.
Your bondage to burst in the fray.
Daughters of Albion 1 enchantingly fair,
All graceful in carriage and mould,
And buoyant and pure as the free mountain air.
No longer your solace withhold.
Strike aloud the sweet lyre—arouse thee the muse—
Let beauty each bosom inspire;
The smiles of the fair will fresh courage infuse,
And kindle a patriot fire.
The calls of the helpless our efforts invoke,
Till affection is writhing with pain ;
’Tis not in the spirit of manhood to brook,
That woman a slave shall remain !
Jan. 1, 1840.
W.
GOD SAVE OUR NATIVE LAND!
I do not know of any song, in any language, or belonging to
any country, whether civilized or called savage, more objection-
able in some respects than the so-called "National Anthem,"
“ God Save the King.” To appeal to Almighty power to annihi-
late or overcome the enemies of a piece of the usual run, if not
of inferior mortality, styled a king,” himself possibly, from cir-
cumstances, the medium of immolating both friend and foe in com-
mon ruin, appears a sad reflection on humanity. And yet this
lauded song has been greeted by royalty, hailed by statesmen of
all parties,—by sages, warriors, and divines, —by lawgivers and
teachers of public morals and examples, of all the grades, call-
ings, and conditions that now capriciously divide and oppress
society. It has been sung at public festivities and rejoicings,—in
our theatres and public places of amusement, —and chanted on
solemn occasions and thanksgivings to Heaven in “sacred”
places and at “festivals!” And all this by way of manifesting
appreciation of supposed divine blessings in partial benefits or
human sacrifices, at a grievous cost to universal happiness and
justice. Thus a rhapsody propitiating the Deity for vain-glorious
land selfish objects, has bean proclaimed as the “National An-
them” of a whole people. It is time, therefore, that the sons of


industry and labour should be relieved from the slander, the
public taste disabused, and false notions rectified. Anxious
withal that my brother Radicals should cultivate a spirit of con-
ciliation towards their enemies, whether from interest or preju-
dice, and that the divine principles of peace, charity, and good-
will should be practised as well as professed in their genuine
purity towards alt men, rather than that sentiments tending to the
trade of war, to discord, and destitution, should be disseminated
and encouraged from high places, and received as truths by the
untutored multitude, I have presumed to offer the following as a
veritable National Anthem, to the air of the old song,—as a sub-
stitute, until a better is provided. I mayadd, that I could hardly
wish that “my own loved native land ” should be saved, or that I
should remain in it, unless my industrious brethren were to im-
bibe better sentiments than the royal doggrel contains.
GOD SAVE OUR NATIVE LAND!
NATIONAL ANTHEM.
God save our Native Land,
Vouchsafe thy fost’ring hand,
God save the land—
From bread-tax, tolls, bastiles,
Barracks, and cat-nine-tails,
Game laws, excise, and jails,
God save the land !
O bless the brave and free,
With peace through liberty !
O bless us all.
Bless us with holy might,
To gain our first, best right,—
And fortitude to fight,
At Freedom’s call!
Great God ! “with equal eye ”
To thee th’ afflicted fly_
With plaintive voice.
Disperse each plund’ring crew
Of ev’ry grade and hue, —
Train’d bullies, red and blue,
And we’ll rejoice !


From ignorance and pride
The sons of labour guide—
Save ere we fall.
Save us from sordid lies—
From bigots, traitors, spies,
And factions’ tools and ties,
That us inthral!
In tiiv Almighty hand
The scales of Justice stand.
Even for all.
Grant, in the trying hour,
When seeking equal power,
Though Hope at peril low’r,
We never fall!
“ 0, men of England rise 1
Demand the precious prize—
Your birthright all.
With firm—with iron hand,
As one let millions stand,
A true and gallant band—
Triumph or fall!
Lord ! o’er our own lov’d land
Spread thy protecting hand,”
And malce us free.
“ Save us from tyrant knaves—
Let us no more, as slaves,
Fill base inglorious graves,”
But happy be!
W.
Bread-tax,'] —This is the only country where the landed interests
conspire, in a self-elected House of Commons, to impose a tax on
corn, consumed for the most part by the unrepresented, thereby
doubly increasing its price and their own incomes; and who now,
when the fraud is detected, affect that it would ruin the country to
be relieved of the burthen, so as to give the poor cheap bread.
Tolls,] —There is no country where legal plunder, in the shape
of tolls, prevails to as great an extent as in England and Wales.
The several corporation, light-house, port, ferry, fair, market, and
town tolls are grinding and monopolizing enough, but those col-
lected at turnpike-gates, or common-road-plunder-bars, are still
more grievous. All tolls impede traffic and intercourse; and, beside


their impolicy, are a most clumsy and corrupt species of taxation*
Highways should be under one general and responsible direction,
possessed of talent and scientific skill. The amount of our turn-
pike-road tolls might be made alone to defray the cost of a mode-
rate government; as it is, but a small portion is applied to the
actual improvement of the roads, while the greater part disap-
pears into a variety of dark channels—in peculations, jobs, and
patronage.
-Basfi/cs.] —This is the only country in the world where the
reduced middle classes and all the wealth producers, composing the
great majority of the national voice, are reduced to a worse than
savage life ; where they have no prospect in poverty and old
age but imprisonment in union workhouses, there to be treated
as impostors or criminals; separated frem their wives and chil-
dren, and subjected to the caprice of a host of officials living
on the poor-rates in ease and luxury; thus steeped in poverty to the
very lips to have their best feelings outraged, and their most sacred
engagements held in scorn.
Barracks ], —Barracks and a standing army, the latter composed
for the most part of the most idle, ignorant, and depraved, if not the
most brutal portion of the community, are a pestilence. There
would be no need of either under a just government. Periodical
swarms of locusts would be far less injurious, and from which we
would be allowed occasional respite. Dissipated and insolent
soldiery should not be permitted to pollute any country ; but abso-
lute governments cannot render them unnecessary by trusting
military tactics to an enlightened people: hence barracks and
trained bullies, independent of our controul.
Cat o’nine tails ]—This is the only country where we have laws
to protect dumb animals from .cruelty,and to subjectits soldiers and
and sailors to be tortured to death by the lash ; where the instruments
for that purpose are the very comrades of the victims, with the power,
would they but so resolve,instantly to suppress the inhuman practice,
and who, after all,compcse the “ physical force” on which our rulers
rely to prevent their sympathizing fellow-countrymen from acquiring
their just rights, whereby to abolish such brutality, and to redress
their ©wn grievances.
Game Laics.]— -Where we endure laws and institutions handed
down to us by the wisdom of our ancestors , amongst others, that of
the scoundrel-robber, William the Conqueror, who first introduced
Game Laws into tills country, by which wild animals, the common
property of all, are protected for the amusement and luxury of the
rich, productive of legal crime and vindictive and ferocious feeling
in rural districts, and punishable or repressed at the cost of the
coerced people; where the parlies enforcing such laws, or tbeir
immediate associates and connections, form judge and jury in their
own cases, whereby the persecuted have no means of redress from
even the partial dispensation of unjust enactments.
JEirise,] —Where we pay a tax on every article we daily use.


generally more than doubling the prime cost; where the whiteslave
farmer cannot brew beer for his own use, from Lis own raised
barley, without undergoing taxation, making it too expensive for
the producers own consumption; where the working classes pay a
greater amount of taxes than all the rest of Kurope put together,
and yet are deprived of all controul as to their assessment and
expenditure.-
And Jaik.]—Where poverty and misfortune, produced by mis-
rule, are treated as crimes and visited by imprisonment; where the
only tendency of the law is to punish and not to prevent crimes;
where those engendered by poverty and ignorance, are subject to
be visited by relentless cruelty; where common gaols, and not
education, precept, and example, are made the legislative means of
debasing instead of correcting the morals of the unfortunate delin.
quents.
Bigots , Traitors , Spies,] —Where the policy of the government
has ever been intimidation and coercion, duplicity,bribes, and undue
rewards, the encouragement of traitors and spies, and the fomenting
of dissension among the people, when about to unite to press their
just demands, all which is fully exemplified by referring to the
history of the insurrection of former times, to that of the glorious
American revolution, and that of more recent commotions. As for
bigotry, it would be hardly prudent to risk exciting it by even
adding a remark, but it is as well to be reminded of its first
weapon of attack.
Trained bullies']. —Where it is intended to answer the present
complaints of the people by an armed police, gagging kills, and the
considerate restraint of all means of self protection from the abuse
of power; where, when we ask for our dues, we are threatened with
prosecutions, dungeons, and extermination. After all, this is the
only country which its aristocracy has vaunted as “ the envy of
surrounding nations, and the admiration ofthe world,”(!) and yet no
other has ever imitated its example, or envied anything belonging
to it, but its resources, drawn from the blood and sinews of its
working population.
The people now know their only remedy: bow that is to be
legitimately effected depends in the first place on their determina-
tion; when the question will turn not on the predominance of
power, for that they abundantly possess, but on due management
and economy; and assuredly among the chief precautiens will be
the avoiding precipitation and violence. If all this be observed, suc-
cess is certain, and time will consecrate the most glorious triumph
that this kingdom has ever achieved or generally contemplated.
Gnce sound Radical reformation is acquired, this brief notice of
the present state of things may possibly hereafter supply food for
papular history, while it will almost appear to comprise “ scenes
surpassing fable, and yet true.” Made on the verge of a momentous
crisis, gradually approaching, notwithstanding the danger is affected
to he despised by parties i ntent upon opposing its arrival, it is


gratifying to reflect that our emancipated descendants will be the
better able to appreciate the blessings it will be their happier lot to
enjoy, on beholding the mighty contrast between the corrupt
prostration and the generous expansion of intellect.
SONG TO THE MEN OF ENGLAND.
The following heart-stirring appeal was written by Percy Bysshe
Shelley, when he was residing at Leghorn, after hearing of that
brutal affair—more revolting to the spirit of freedom than the
worst passages in the past history of our country —the Manchester
Massacre. Shelley, the warm-hearted sympathizing Shelley, heard
of this event with mingled feelings of indignation and compassion.
—•Editor of the Working Bee.
Men of England, wherefore plough
For the Lords who lay ye low ?
Wherefore weave, with toil and care,
The rich robes your tyrants wear?
Wherefore feed, and clothe, and save.
From the cradle to the grave,
Those ungrateful drones, who would
Drain your sweat—nay, drink your blood ?
Wherefore, Bees of England, forge
Many a weapon, chain, and scourge.
That those stingless drones may spoil
The forced produce of your toil ?
Have ye leisure, comfort, calm,
Shelter, food, love’s gentle balm ?
Or what is it ye buy so dear,
With your pain and with your fear ?
The seed ye sow another reaps—
The wealth ye find another keeps—
The robes ye weave another wears—
The arms ye forge another bears.


Sow seed, but let no tyrant reap—
Find wealth, let no imposter heap—
Weave robes, let not the idle wear—
Forge arms , in your defence to bear.
Shrink to your cellars, holes, and cells—
In halls ye deck another dwells.
Why shake the chains ye wrought 7—why see
The steel ye tempered glance on ye ?
With plough and spade, and hoe and loom,
Trace your graves and build your tomb,
And weave your winding-sheet, till fair
England be your sepulchre.
LIBERTY.
BY SHERIDAN KNOWLES.
That I were dead !
O, what is death compared to slavery !
Brutes may bear bondage—they were made for it,
AVhen Heaven set man "above them; but no mark,
Definite and indelible, is put
Upon one man to mark him from another,
That he should live his slave. O heavy curse !
To have thought, reason, judgment, feelings, tastes,
Passions and conscience, like another man,
And not have equal liberty to use them,
But call his mood their master! Why was I born
With passion to be free—with faculties
To use enlargement—with desires that cleave
To high achievements—and with sympathies
Attracting me to objects fair and noble—
And yet with power over myself as little
As any beast of burden 1 Why should I Jive ?
There are of brutes themselves that will not tame,
So high in thorn is nature—whom the spur
And lash, instead of curbing, only chafe
Into prouder mettle;—that will let you kill them,
Ere they will suffer you to master them.
I am a man and live !


HYMN OF THE BREAD-TAXED.
BY EBENEZER ELLIOTT.
( From the Anti Corn-Laio Circular,)
With Additions by H. W.
How long shall idlers tax the bread
Which starving toil hath earn’d ?
And toiling men, half-clothed, half-fed.
Like dogs he spurn’d ?
Why wilt thou, dupe? why wilt thou, thrall
Why will ye homage bear,
To those who curse the land of all,
And take your share?
How long shall mothers rue the day,
When bride’s rings first were worn ?
And children to their fathers say—
“ Why were we born ?”
A crime to love ! it cannot be !
’Tis those whom crime doth stain, —
Who, while you keep from labour free,
Your love restrain!
Yes, love restrain ! and faster bind,
With fiend-like glee your chain, —
And seize your wealth, and curb your mind,
And mock your pain.
O when, ye chainless seas and winds,
Will trade be chainless 1 When?
When soulless tyrants shall have minds,
Or slaves be men.
Then British hands will gather grain
From every teeming soil;
Then no starved wretch will ask in vain
For leave to toil.
No matron then will wildly pray
That God her womb would close,
And take her poor last born away
From all earth’s woes..


For plenty dwelleth with the free,
Free barter is cheap bread ;
Then why, ye demons, should it be
A crime to wed.
, N. 8.—1 have taken the liberty of altering the second verse hy
introducing the second and fourth lines in the place of those in
the original, to substitute the fourth verse save tbs first line, and of
adding the fifth verse.
THE FREE!—THE FREE !
A IR—“ The Sea !—The Sea !”
The free! the free! the gallant free!
The true, the frank, are kin to me !
Against the chain, against the lash,
Their eagle-glances scornful flash ;
They flout the despot, and spurn its slaves j
They hail the man his wrath who braves.
I'm with the free!—l’m with the free!
The only fellowship for me!
With hands so steady and hearts so true,
What shall our brotherhood undo 7
Alike our hopes and alike our lot—
Come danger—we will fear it not.
The lore—how dear that lore to me !
How full of proud and fiery glee!
The lore that taught my infant heart—
Chalked out for me the patriot’s part;
And told how brave a thing it w r ere,
And how much nobler to prefer,
To the cunning Sophist’s laboured saw,
Clear Truth, and Reason’s holier law.
'Twas childhood’s lesson—the earliest learn’d.
And thus deeply into the spirit burn’d ;
It bound to Freedom my blood and breath,
And her’s it made me in life or in death!
D


To mountain high, or ocean wide,
Where the wild bird soars or barks may glide,
To the fair green forest and flower-decked heath,
Where nature exults and glad airs breathe,
I look—and the magic symbol I see—
Stamped on them all are the words— be free !
Free are the birds, and free is the brook;
Shall man alone wear a galling yoke ?
No!—With bounding thoughts and impatient power.
And swelling bosom, he waits the hour,
When shouts o’er a startled world shall break,
And tyrants tremble, and Freedom wake!
D.
HURRAH! HURRAH! WE ARE WINNING NOW.
A IR— “ Away ! Away !to the Mountain’s Brow."
Hurrah ! Hurrah ! we are winning now 1
We escape tlia night of ages ;
Hurrah! Hurrah! we are winning now.
As the glow we feel presages.
And Knowledge and Truth shall fly o’er the world —
On the wings of the wind they shall fly!
And Freedom, her banner for ever unfurl’d,
Will light Earth with her glorious eye !
Hurrah! Hurrah! if the strife was hard,
How mighty the hope that spurr’d us !
And where now is the spell our course to retard,
Since both Earth and Heaven have heard us ?
And Knowledge and Truth shall fly o’er the world—
On the wings of the wind they shall fly ;
And Freedom, her banner for ever unfurl’d,
Will light earth with her glorious eye!
D.


WILLIAM TELL.
When William Tell was (loom’d to die,
Or hit the mark upon his infant’s head—
The bell toll’d out, the hour was nigh.
And soldiers march’d with grief and dread !
The warrior came, serene and mild,
Gaz’d all around with dauntless look,
Till his fond boy unconscious smil’d—
Then nature and the father spoke.
And now each valiant Swiss his grief partakes,
For they sigh,
And wildly cry,
Poor William Tell ! once hero of the lakes.
But soon is heard the muffl’d drum.
And straight the pointed arrow flies ;
The trembling boy expects his doom,
All, all shriek out—He dies ! he dies !
When, lo ! the lofty trumpet sounds!
The mark is hit! the child is free!
Into his father’s arms he bounds,
Inspir’d by love and liberty !
And now each valiant Swiss their joy partakes,
For mountains ring
Whilst they sing,
Live William Tell! the hero of the lakes.
D 2


TYRANNICIDE.
“ In myrtle veil'd will I the falchion wear,
For thus the patriot ewor.t,
Harmodius and Aristogeithon bare.
When they the tyrant's bosom gored.
And bade the men of Athens he
Regenerate in equality.”—t
CALLISTRATUS.
Private wrong or individual suffering may sometimes arouse the
-spirit of patriotism to glerious enterprise, and lead to consequences
of the greatest moment. Harmodius and Aiustogmiiion, two cele-
brated friends at Athens, had their attention first moved to free
their native land by an indignity cast on the sister of the former,
by Hipparchus, the suhverter of the liberties of their country; to
avenge which they conspired together, and stabbed the tyrant to
the heart, about two thousand three hundred and fifty years ago.
Hipparchus had insinuated himself into power by skilful duplicity',
and attempted to reconcile the people to gilded bondage, by
patronizing some of the learned men of the age, and distinguishing
himself by bis fondness for literature and the arts—a course net
(infrequently pursued in our own times. The conspiracy was so
secretly planned, that a discovery was next to impossible; and so
wisely carried into execution, that it is related that the only person,
necessarily, in the plot—a lady—cut her tongue off.lest she should,
inadvertently, betray the secret reposed in her. This she, doubt-
less, did from a devotion to the sacred cause of liberty : — an in-
stance ef unparalleled patriotism, in a female depriving herself
of the proudest and most valuable endowment she possessed, to
avoid the bare possibility of endangering the emancipation of her
country!
The Athenians, to reward the daring achievement of these illus-
trious citizens, and to immoitalize them as examples ef public
virtue, made a law that their names should never be borne or
assumed by any others; which law has, I believe, remained
inviolate to this day. They were distinguished by many other
honours, and had statues erected to their memory. “The names,”
as observed by ray late and ever-to-be-lamented friend, Augustus
Beaumont, “ of those assertors of Athenian liberty, who thus
disposed of a tyrant, have been embalmed by the lay of many a
lover of freedom, frem the days of their contemporaneous poet,
who sang their praise, down to the present Chief Justice of
England; who, it appears, has been delighted to translate into
English verse the impassioned eulogium of the Greek bard on the
tyrannicides, Harmodius and Aristogeithon.” Here we have also
the most remarkable instance on record of fraternal affection and


friendship braving every risk of a barbarous and revolting punish"
ment, for the love of country, singularly rewarded by the mos‘
appropriate and generous honours that gratitude and admiration
could bestow. The circumstance presents a subject worthy the
loftiest aspirations of the tragic muse, and of the boldest pourtrayal
of histrionic art; in preference to the frittering away of talent on
uninstructife, and, frequently, on immoral themes, which are still
brought f-rward to eccupy public attention, for the purpose of
nurturing and gratifying conventional prejudices, capricious taste,
and sensual impulses.
May the progress of intelligence enable us to profit by the moral
to be drawn from one of the happiest traits in the history of as
refined and amiable a people as ever graced humanity or honoured
true patriotism ! How discouraging would it be to contemplate
the condition of their degenerate descendants, now become the
prey of a demoralizing aristocracy, were it not for the hope that the
circumstances which generate its foul and withering spirit, will, ere
long, be dissipated, or, at least, so far neutralized as to be rendered
innocuous!
Brighter days will yet dawn on the liberties of Greece, when
the happiness of a gallant race of men will realize the fond anti-
cipations of the last lays of the immortal Byron.
THE ATHENIAN COMPATRIOTS.
Translated from the Greek.
BY MR. (NOW LORD) DENMAN.
I'll wreath my sword in myrtle bough,
The sword that laid the tyrant low,
When patriots, burning to be free,
To Athens gave equality.
Harmodious, hail ! though ’reft of breath,
Thou ne’er shalt feel the stroke of death ;
The heroes’ happy isle shall be
The bright abode allotted thee.
I’ll wreath my sword in myrtle bough.
The sword that laid Hipparchus low,
When at Minerva’s adverse fane,
He knelt, and never rose again.
While Freedom’s name is understood.
You shall delight the w r ise and good ;
You dar’d to set your country free,
And gave her laws equality.
d o


OBSERVATIONS.
Now that I have closed this collection I may, perhaps,
be allowed a few parting words with the reader. I am
desirous that there should be no mistake as to my motives
in making the compilation, or as to the sentiments pro-
mulgated in the few songs and pieces thus submitted to
public notice. My object is not to precipitate the cause,
but to cheer it on—not to advance before, but with it—not
to disparage or lacerate the present order of society, but to
propitiate as urgently as the state of things or the change of
circumstances may admit, the educated classes in the cause
of liberty; indeed generally to conciliate and induce all
grades and conditions gradually and deliberately to
assist the progress of justice and humanity, so as to add
to the happiness of all without substracting from that of
any. I would not, therefore, contemplate even justifiable
“rebellion,” but fervently avoid the bare possibility of it
for gentler means. I would entertain no violence what-
ever, save that (if it can be so called) which an inherent
spirit of resistance to oppression would justify—not that
of restive suffering, or reckless desperation, but that
which intelligent and concerted public opinion would ap-
prove and adopt. The progress of the arts and the spread of
knowledge will have immense weight in propelling the
cause of liberty, and this humble auxiliary may contribute
to gild and cheer its course; whatever may be its recep-
tion, I am satisfied that the sentiments it embraces will
outlive the perversion of mind of selfish and interested


men, and the persecutions of the ’supporters and abettors
of tyranny. The more crafty the tyranny, the more in-
sufferable it becomes when rightly understood; once
the people learn that they are deceived as well as robbed ,
regardless of their privations, and they will feel an
unquenchable hatred of plunderers. The oppression of
which the people of England complain, consists prin-
cipally in being governed by a power over which they
have no manner of check. This, where it prevails, is an
intolerable grievance, and may be held to be the chief
root of all the evils that now incumber the industry of
the country. If the industrious masses have no voice in
the appointment of public agents or servants, whom they
alone support, it is a state of vassalage but a few degrees
removed from positive slavery, for every man is a slave
who lives under the absolute controul of others; or to
speak more definitely, who is governed by laws in the
making of which he has no influence, and against the
consequences of which he has no effectual remedy. To
tax any individual, directly or indirectly, against or
without his own consent, or that of his duly appointed
agent, appears in the light of insidious robbery ; and to
dispose of the proceeds of taxation, without his know-
ledge or sanction, palpable fraud ; and the shameless
guise of “ law,” lacking the authority or assent of the
whole people through their proper representatives, aggra-
vates the iniquity. I would wish to be informed whether,
if a self-appointed House of Commons were to ordain
the qualifications of its members the extension of
the period of service, and to limit the suffrages of those
on whose authority it assumed to legislate—it would not
be guilty of a direct contravention of that authority,
and sf a gross breach of trust, if not of a criminal act
of usurpation. For any body of men thus to re-
strict the personal right of the community to add to their


own power, would be to set themselves up as principals
instead of agents. No person should be even permitted
to limit or alien his own natural right of sclf-advoeacy, or
the fundamental one of free election or common suffrage.'
The qualification of members was one of the most fatal
triumphs of landed despots—one of the most mortal stabs
at the liberties of the country ; it was not enough that by
means of the feudal law of primogeniture the latter wielded
the preponderance of “ property,” but they arrogated to
themselves the dictation of qualified instruments as well.
From the time the gross ordinance was perpetrated—one
hundred and thirty years ago—parliaments have become
more and more corrupt; and public debts and general
distress, to the advantage of .the monopolizing few, have
consequently increased, until we are now becoming the
most abject and pitiful nation in all Europe, or, indeed, on
the face of the earth. We may better judge of the benefits
arising from qualifying the choice of legislators by the
quality of the present House of Commons: composed of
a body of men for the most part self-elected, or, at best,
nominated by the unproductive portion of society ; some
hundreds of its members consisting of the idle, the dis-
solute, and the ignorant, of placemen and public paupers;
the latter, in the shape of unblushing pensioners, sine-
curists, retainers, hangers-on, &c., with no other quali-
fication or capacity to legislate than that they are said to
enjoy a certain amount, real or nominal, of the surplus
labour of those who are debarred from any choice in their
selection: the very parties who should first exercise their
right, and who alone are excluded from it; in consequence
of which the great body of the people arc deprived of all the
comforts of life, and rendered too enfeebled and toil-worn
to exercise their mental jjmeers so as to elicit the general
mind. If the composition of the Commons was un-
exceptionable, the assumed “ danger of change” would


form some plausible pretext against the concession of
extended power; but even that plea cannot be set up, for
the appointment being founded in fraud, and the quali-
fication spurious, the duties become either neglected or
discharged corruptly and inefficiently. It might be said
that if the House is so [constituted, it is a [proof of itself
of its utter incompetency to act for the benefit of the
country ; and that such a flagitious selection ought to
operate as a forfeiture of the franchise in the present con-
stituency, or at least (if there were not other far more
cogent reasons) to warrant' an extension of the suffrage.
Public character i should form the object of the gene-
ral suffrage, and ability and integrity the only test of
fitness. Now that the cause is progressing, we behold
the Government—some of the members of which were
among the foremost to advocate liberal principles—
instead of making the least concession to the popular
will, become bent on suppressing all attempts at their
adoption, by resorting to physical force—the last resource
of absolute or usurped power; but which the force of-
public opinion will not be long in shivering to atoms.
When the first right of the people—the right of common
suffrage or free agency—is claimed and denied, the
matter resolves itself into a question of strength. As
intelligence and public opinion advance, and the claims
of the people arc persisted in, so will public confidence in
an adverse state of tilings be shaken; distrustwill follow,
and the gradations of society become disunited and con-
flicting. When public credit becomes affected, irre-
trievable confusion, such as few have the courage to
calculate, will ensue. Viewing, therefore, our situation
any how, we present the aspect of a mighty kingdom
rapidly advancing to decay, and engaged in suppress-
ing intestine disaffection and commotion ; incapable ef
competing on equal terms with foreign powers, or of


resisting foreign aggression. Instead of being u the
admiration of the world,” we at length present the sad
spectacle of a Government at war with the people,
and the country under military and constabulary sur-
veillance. The adoption of personal suffrage would
to be the only condition on which public safety can be
based and confidence restored. The working classes ap-
pear to be so conscious of it, that they will not hereafter
rest until it be acquired as their first right, and as being
the class who ought, if any priority were admissible, first
to enjoy it; they claim it as their birthright, not in
respect of property in the possession of others, of which
they are the makers. But history, as well as observation,
teaches us that when common justice is subjected to the
policy of corrupt government, or class interests, all sense
of rectitude is out of the question ; that to the fears of our
rulers the appeal will be to be made; and that we cannot
hope for redress until circumstances make it their interest
to submit to the just claims of the suffering millions.
Come what may, the condition of the industrious classes
cannot be worse. As matters have hitherto gone on, the
present order of things is at best but a state of refined
barbarism, incapable of amelioration or improvement,
but at the still continued sacrifice of the useful classes.
The propagation of intelligence, and unceasing agitation
among themselves, cannot fail to ensure their right, in
spite of all the obstacles that insult and oppress them. It
is now that the people begin to think on cheap and good
government, after ages of primeval inertness: and, whether
prosperous) or distressed, their chief attention will hence-
forth be directed to the best means of securing it.. What-
ever be the conflict —whatever the transition or the
result I shall be satisfied if this small tribute to
tbe generous cause of humanity, to the common good
of my industrious brethren, will be acceptable;


I shall be ever content with their response, for theirs ,
when guided by enlightened public principles, and un-
tainted by sinister habits and caprices, will be uudeviating
and permanent.
** And whether to the torrid zone I go.
Or print my footsteps on eternal snow.
Or lonely wander in more genial climes.
Blind Fortune’s sport, or victim of tbe times;
Thy faithful son, Immortal Liberty,
Devotes his every thought to Truth and thee I
February 18, 1840.
W.


INDEX.
PAGE.
Awake the Torpor of this Dream 7
To Switzerland 8
Liberty’* Address •• •• .♦ ~ $
Loud the Song of Triumph raise ' 19-
On, on ? yc brave Canadians U
Masanlello’s Call to the Neapolitan* 1C
Wat Tyler „ ~ is
Is there yet Spirit in England ? 2*
Robert Emmett ' 23
A Rhyme for Canada 15
The Canadian Exile’s Invocation 18
General Neil S. Von Shoultz •• ~ 17
The Shrine of my Country ~ .. to
Canadian Ode to Liberty .. so
Ireland
Forget not the Field •• •• .• 32
Song far the Democracy ~ 33
The Tricoloured Flag .. 34
France .. „ „ ~ 34
The ManolUhe Hymn 34
The Marseille# March .. •• 39
Death'or Liberty 39
Cheer up f cheer up I ye Chartist Boys! ~ 40
Poland .. .. .. . 41
Fall, fall! Tyrant*, fall [ 45
A Nation's Will is Law 40
Scotland .. „ „ ~ 47
Trie Lash ‘49
Freedom’s Tricolourcd Danner 50
Shenkin Shon.. 53
The Fair Maid of Dovcy
The Horn of Liberty ~ 59
The Tricolour 52
To Liberty aj
My Herrt is in th<s Battle-Field
Oaughtersj>f Liberty A 4
God save our Native Land/ •• ~ ,* tf AS
Song to tho Men of Euglan 1 * t t # # . 7A
Liberty ~ «, ~ •., t , 71
Hymn of the Bread-Taxed t# 72
The Free .'—The Free I 73
Hurrah! Hurrah 1 wc arc,Winning Now .. ~ ~ .. ~ 74
William Tell..
Tyrannicide 7ii .
Observations .. ’ .. • 7i
H. Hetherio’gton, I‘i Inter, m, Strand, London.
