

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
BRISBANE, 1895.
NATIVE TRIBES OF PORT DARWIN AND ITS NEIGH-
BOURHOOD.
By T. A, PARK HOUSE, formerly Accountant and Paymaster, South Australian
Government Railways, Port Darwin.
Distribution. —The territory of the Larraki‘a,* in which Port
Darwin is situate, embraces the seaboard from Shoal Bay to South-
port, and extends inland to the forty-sixth mile on the railway line,
the Waggait, whom both tbe Larraki'a and Awarra detest, being their
westerly neighbours. The Wulnar tribe occupy the country to the east
of the Larraki‘a, from Marrakai cattle station on the Adelaide River to
Shoal Bay and thence along the coast to beyond Escape Cliffs, their
easterly neighbours being Alligator River blackfellows. The Larraki'a
and the Wulnar are allied tribes, between whom intermarriages are
frequent.
At near Rum Jungle, on the railway line, and south to the
Howley, is the country of the Awarra, who have the Berrigvirruk, or
Mary River tribe, to the east. South of the Awarra, from Fountain
Head to Pine Creek, are the Awinnmul and Aggrakundi; their
country extending near to the Evelyn, which is within the borders of
an Alligator River tribe. Between the Aggrakundi and the Daly
River are the Aggagowilli, and south the Adowen and Mennagi, whose
position I am unable to locate. The Awinnmul are natives of Burrundi,
and at one time were a tribe distinct from the Aggrakundi; but one
disastrous season decimated the Awinnmul, and greatly reduced the
number of the Aggrakundi, resulting in the amalgamation of the two
tribes. It has been said that the Aggrakundi headman, Manuel, is the
last of the Awinnmul tribe, but I have reasons for doubting whether
more was meant than that he was the last representative of a family
group in that tribe.
The Awarra, Awinnmul, and Aggrakundi have been hitherto
known to Europeans only as Wulwdngga, and a member of either tribe
so designates himself, keeping secret the fact that the Wulwdngga are
subdivided. My Larraki‘a boy, in whose camp at Southport had
lived for years the son of an Awarra woman, knew him only as a
Wulwdngga until I referred to him as an Awarra; they spoke in
Larraki'a, and I heard my boy question it and the answer in confirma-
tion. The tongues spoken by the Awarra and by the Aggrakundi or
Awinnmul are distinct, although with more affinity than Larraki'a and
Wulnar, and I can discover no closer tribal relationship than that
existing between those tribes. Why the two latter should set forth
their autonomy and the former obscure it remains to be determined ;
the reserve maintained by the Wulwdngga inclines one to look for
class marriage in explanation.
* The aspirate, indicated by the sign (‘) is often associated with the sound of y in
the native tongues, and a letter italicised is often elided, or only indicated; thua these
names have been spelled Larreekeeyah, Larrakeeha, Larrikia, Woolna, Woolner.


Note p Principally Concerning the LdrrahVa. — Between the
x 4 a a id the neighbouring tribes a neutral zone of some eight or
ten miles is reserved, upon which no habitations are erected, game
remains unmolested, and none trespass without good reason. I gather
—although my inference is upon this point from insufficient data, and,
if correct, needs verification— * that with permission granted it may be
used as a highway for a tribal journey, and game and other food may
at such time be taken from it to supply the needs of the band
travelling upon it.
The land is subdivided among the several families, with territorial
rights, and the ownership is a real one. I have heard strong expres-
sions of dissatisfaction at a friend who had outstayed his welcome,
and it was forcibly put to him that food was not so plentiful that his
presence was any longer desirable. During the wet season a good
number congregate at Port Darwin; but, the “ season over,” the
several members of a family, with the exception of those engaged by
the whites, may usually be found “ sitting down,”f at one of their
country residences upon the ancestral manor. These are wurleys of
the usual construction, made of bark, in section egg-shaped, and
arranged in a circle or segment of a circle, the openings being towards
the centre. “ Hunting boxes” or “ fishing lodges” are formed of
boughs thatched with grass or reed.
At Port Darwin, on the Lammerru Beach, as it has been for
generations, is the camp of the family in whom that part is vested,
among them being also descendants of black trackers introduced by
the police from the McArthur or other districts. A half-mile
distant, at the head of Smith and Cavenagh streets, is the main camp
of the Larraki'a, comprising several circles of wurleys (at onetime four
circles, with from three to seven wurleys forming the circle or seg-
ment), and another quarter of a mile on, towards Point Emery, was at
the same period the camp of the Daly family. About 150 yards
removed from the Larraki'a main camp north is a second camp, con-
taining three circles of wurleys, in which reside Wulnars, related to
the Larraki‘a by alliance or descent. One of these is occupied by the
family named after Emu, a headman of the Wulnar, who, although
spare, stands 6 feet 7 inches in height; the second by the family
of another Wulnar headman whom I know only as the brother of
Minnergwdn-gwa (a savage of 6 feet 1 inch, splendidly built, not to be
trusted) and father of Long'aba; the third I can identify only by two
boys, W‘annung-a and Mannmitt. Another Wulnar camp has been
formed in the scrub on the north-east side of Cavenagh street, which
is frequented by natives of that tribe coming in from the bush who
are not related to the Larraki‘a.
At the camps each circle preserves its privacy, and the blacks to
be seen within it are members of the family, or visitors who are tribal
brothers ; even the children in their play together do not go to each
other’s houses, but whistle or call from without. The camps are not
kept particularly clean, but human or canine excreta does not defile
* The usual highway may have been for some distance only upon the neutral belt,
and not the belt itself the highway for Alligator River blacks, for instance, proceeding
to Port Darwin from Burrundi.
f This turn of expression would seem to prevail over the whole continent; where
we say a man is living at Burrundi, the black says he is “ sitting down.”


them, and the dogs devour the bones or other refuse from a meal;
both males and females, however, urinate in close proximity, whites
not being present, unabashed, and without concealment of the action
or parts.
As Emu’s brothers are likewise referred to, and give their names
as Emu, and as the Solomons and Dalys are numerous, and there are
several Slocums, it may be inferred that there are distinctive native
family or group names. Although lam inclined to think that this is
the case, all attempts to elicit them have failed. Two of the sons of
the Wuliw headman Emu are named DTinnmannagwa (Benedict)
and L'uerdwoa (Erancis) ; it will be interesting to observe whether
these young boys retain those names in manhood, and whether the
headship descends to either.
The following incident may possibly have reference to names or
to totems. My boy being told to remove a green jumping frog, and
misunderstanding my remark, besought me not to kill it, alleging,
“ That one my father.” His father was long dead. Upon my
remarking that he had killed one at the office, which I still think was
of the same species, he waxed indignant, and laboured to assure me
that “ This one my father indeed ( godloa , truly) ; that fellow no belong
to me.” Some months after, he pointed out a pigeon to me : “ See
that fellow? him my father” ; and, upon my recalling the incident of
the frog to his mind, he replied, “ That all right; him my father, this
one another father. Whitefellow no savee.” I could not ascertain,
nor do I think, that his father or father’s brothers bore their names,
and totemism is denied, either personal or for sex or clan.
A widow and orphans are kept alternately by her own and by
her deceased husband’s family, and in some instances I know the time
of relief is eagerly looked for. This rule also obtains when the
parents belong to different tribes ; the children, however, are of their
mother’s tribe. Keddell, the son of an Awarra woman whom a
Larraki'a had stolen for wife, is an Awarra. His parents both died in
his infancy, and until puberty he was brought up principally by his
father’s family; he now lives with the Awarra, but in the Larraki'a
camp when he visits his father’s people he takes his place of right in
their circle. A Wulnar by his first wife had two sons and two
daughters, and later by his second wife, a Larraki‘a dwelling on the
Elizabeth, two sons —Berber and Lemallagwa. He and his first wife
are dead, ana his issue from both marriages have resided with the
brother of the second wife, who remains a widow. I cannot say
whether the first wife was a Larraki'a, but all the issue are Larraki'a;
one of the daughters has some knowledge of the Wulnar tongue, the
others have forgotten it. The widow’s brother has now taken to wife
a "WYilnar, a girl of thirteen, named Minn-gari, unable to speak in
Larraki‘a. L‘uerdwoa, a Wulnar previously mentioned, and
Lemallagwa are tribal brothers, but in fact their parents were not
brothers or sisters.
Infants are betrothed spouses, and in some cases the bestowal is
made, sex being favourable, antecedent to birth. My boy at one time
pointed out a blackfeliow going past the veranda, and said, “ Suppose
me a lubra, that one my husband ( naow'a ),” To my inquiry, “ What
name that blackfeliow?” with a view to investigation from other points,
I was met with—“ Oh, him blackfeliow,” and I could obtain no more.


At another time he said of a boy, “ Suppose that fellow a girl
( hun-ngogolo ), him my wife (dlladiklc) Somewhat similar observations
were casually addressed to me by others, who, seeing 1 was interested
in the subject, at their own time and with just as much as they
thought it desirable for me then to know, proceeded thus, placing
stones where the asterisks are,
pair :
That one him married man\
(mdllinnyu) f
Him have two-fellow lubra *
That fellow lubra him have! «
em boy ( nimm) J
By-and-by him catch him'j
lubra, him have em boy J-
(nimm) J
illustrate the genealogy of one
f Him lubra have em girl
\ (hun-ngilla)
{By-and-by girl big fellow,
him husband (naow‘a)
catch him, him preg-
nant (miloa), have em
girl (hun-ngilla)
By-and-by nimm big fellow, by-and-by hun-ngilla big fellow, him
catch him. These would be half first cousins, a relationship, I believe,
within the blood-tie in which marriage is unknown; but it is not to
be understood that the relationship was so close, the black indicating
the line of descent and not the number of degrees. These details were
given, not extracted; a Larraki‘a was explaining the matter, and an
Awarra who was present verified his remarks. In three instances the
cases were certainly specific, although they may point merely to
ante-natal agreements entered into by the parents ; the others may
have been and probably were generic, indicating that the persons
referred to were within the group from which the speaker was entitled
to a wife.
It was but a few weeks before my departure from Port Darwin
that this subject was introduced, and I was unable to follow up the
genealogy. It would be well for anyone in a position to do so to pre-
pare tables on which the native name, sex, apparent age, circle in camp,
tribe, and, as it was learnt, the relationship to other blacks would
appear; with such charts intermarriages between the Larraki‘a and
Wfilnar would soon be clear, and, to one apparently in possession of
the facts, instead of the reserve manifested, interest in making other
points intelligible would be exhibited. It would indeed appear
possible only by piecing together details such as those given to arrive
at any definite results. After thirty years of occupation and much
patient study, the foregoing pages contain almost the sum of our
knowledge concerning the laws governing marriage, and, bare as are
the facts, there is a distinct advance on previous information. All
who have made the attempt will admit the difficulty of obtaining from
the L&rraki‘a or Wfilnar any information upon tribal matters.
Confidence is freely given to those whom he esteems, and much kindly
interest is taken in imparting his lore, but his confidence is not to be
forced, and questioning must be only conversational. Affection
prompts the boy to make his master (whom he regards as an elder
brother) “ close up blackfellow,” and he instructs him as he is
sympathetic to his teaching, not in gratification of curiosity.
Children live with their parents until puberty, when girls become
members of their husbands’ household, residing sometimes with him,
and at other times at the parental camp Their virginity is respected
until the breasts are fully developed j they become mothers at from


sixteen (perhaps sometimes fifteen, but rarely, if at all) to eighteen.
Before coverture a corrobhorie is held, and the ceremony of marriage
by capture is observed ; I tbink, but cannot definitely say, that this
custom is invariable.
At a corrobborie which I witnessed, held preparatory to marriage,
the betrothed husband wore a belt from which hung in front the small
apron of fringes, with a tail of black feathers dependent behind. On
his head was a pointed cap about 15 inches high, in shape just like
a fool’s cap, formed of paperbark and covered with white down, while
his face was whitened with pipeclay, and white bands ornamented his
body and legs. In the ground a post had been fixed, and painted with
red ochre, the representative of the dubbo-dubbo, the devil ( hirduel ),
which so frequently figures in corrobbories. With this post, and with
bark painted into a grotesque representation of a man, a figure was
made, and surmounted with a conical cap similar to that worn by the
bridegroom. The corrobborie was after the usual order, and seem-
ingly set forth the prowess of the man, his dexterity with the spear,
and skill in the chase, and I think it may be read as a challenge in
which the man publicly announces his intention to take the maid.
Women and children were present. On the next day there was great
commotion, as a rumour of another blackfellow having declared his
intention to “ catch” the girl spread. At night in the camp there was
a veritable babel of tongues, the women discussing the matter in all
its bearings in their camp, and with their neighbours across the camps.
Occasionally above the din an old lady would harangue, and now and
again the headman in the Wiilnar camp, the father of Long‘aba,
would answer in a speech delivered from his camp 150 yards distant.
It was long after midnight before the camp was quiet. Towards five
on the following day the Larraki‘a congregated near the camp, and
two sides formed, armed with reed spears. In the open space between
the two lines of spectators sometimes a single black would hurl his
spears one after another at an opposing blackfellow, who would as
adroitly avoid them, ducking his head, bending his back, or shifting
slightly to one side, while sometimes seven or eight on each side would
be engaged. As the spears were thrown others gathered them up,
and in their turn hurled them back; occasionally, but rarely, spears
were flying in both directions. Two or three were wounded, and in
one the spear stood in his skull over the ear. He staggered, and the
spear being pulled out, was carried into the scrub; I did not expect
to see him alive again, but he was about some days after. I noticed
that good humour prevailed throughout, and that the contestants
appeared to be actuated more by a desire to exhibit their skill than
instigated by bad blood. Muttered signs of approval, irrespective of
the side, were given at any good throws or a particularly clever
avoidance of the spears, and hearty applause, much laughter, and
derision when there was a hit. After dusk the uproar of the preceding
night was resumed, but the next day it was known that the rivals
were to settle the question by a duel with clubs, he with the hardest
head to win the maiden’s hand. The result was adverse to the
betrothed, and later, when the girl fled and was pursued by the tribe,
it was by the gallant who had won her love she was captured.
In another case, when the betrothed husband desired to claim his
spouse, the maid preferred single blessedness; and notwithstanding


frequent solicitations during the six or seven years which have elapsed,
she still remains a chaste virgin.
The boys attaining to the age of puberty are seized at dusk by
men who have been watching their opportuuity, and borne away into
the bush. After the news has been spread a corrobborie is held, and
they are then removed to a place on the Adelaide River and taken in
charge by those whose duty it is to train the youngsters in the arts and
lore of their forbears. Here I was told they lived in a large wurley,
which would accommodate all the boys. The boys’ house of the South
Sea Islands came to mind, and I have much regretted that I was unable
to accept an invitation made me to accompany a boy who was taken,
and see for myself what was actually the case. As a fact, besides one
lad who has so far eluded capture, and a few living on the premises
of their masters, no boys between fourteen and nineteen are seen at
Port Darwin.
Circumcision is not practised by the Larraki‘a; it is said that it was
in vogue at one time, and a reason was given for the custom falling
into desuetude that the skin became too tender.
While at all times blacks are constantly coming and going at the
Port Darwin camp, every year at the close of the wet season there is a
general migration on a day previously fixed. They go away in good
condition with sleek skins, and come back, some after a week or two,
and others later, thin, rough-coated, and dirty. Ido not learn that
any particular rites or corrobbories are necessarily observed ; even the
reason for this annual migration has been always kept a close secret.
In one year, 1890, I was informed that after two days’ journeying the
ceremony of making young men would be held, and later I heard one
or two, accompanying the recital with excellent mimicry, telling my
boys what had occurred. Incidentally I gathered that the young men
each shouldered a heavy branch of a tree (the speaker showed the
size, the small of his thigh) and marched round and round in a circle
with downcast mien, their eyes fastened on the ground; then they
lay prone on the earth, their races buried in their hands; grass was
placed over them to carry the flames over their bodies, and fire set to it.
The practice of taking the kidney fat obtains, and the victim in
rare cases, it is said, occasionally recovers; but the idea of eating the
flesh of a human being, adult or child, is an abhorrence.
Parturition is in secret. If the pangs of labour come on on the
march, the woman will go aside from the track, sometimes attended by
a female, while the others go on, and the woman, having been
delivered, after a slight rest rejoins them; if in camp, the wurley is
reserved to her accommodation. The child, born of a very light tan
colour, is at the first opportunity coated with ashes.
Toothache, neuralgia, headaches, coughs and colds, and malarial
fever are the usual ailments, principally confined to women and children,
and on the whole there is little sickness. In syphilitic diseases the
sufferer is buried in mud to the navel for several days.* Dangerous
illness is ascribed to an enemy pointing a bone, or to his burning
some hair or other personal belonging of the native stricken down.
At death there is woeful lamentation, beating of hands, and
wailing, but the manifestations of grief are only within the family
* Mr. F. H. Wells also refers to this treatment as practised in the Diamantina
country. See Reports of the Association Adv, Sci., vol. v., p. 516.


circle of the deceased —not from want of feeling, the others speak
softly, mournfully, and, I may add, reverently of the deceased, but
avoiding mention of his name when stating the fact. The body is
sometimes placed in a tree, and sometimes buried in a sitting posture.
About a mile west of the Adelaide Kiver railway station are several
mounds where Awarra have been buried, and there is a Larraki‘a
burying-place not far from the Port Darwin cemetery. A belief in a
spiritual existence was perceptible ; a happy life seemed to be associated
with it, but I could gather nothing further concerning it. This was
apart from any ideas originating from the teachings of the Jesuit
Fathers. I was surprised to observe ti’aces of the oriental superstition,
“ Evil eye.”
Ceremony of Circumcision amonq the Aggrakundi. —To perforin
the rite, Emu, the Wulnar headman, travelled with some 200
Larraki‘a men, women, and children 125 miles to Burrundi, the
journey occupying about a month ; but the Larraki'a spent a fortnight
of the time at Glencoe cattle station fencing, heedless of the
impatience of the Aggrakundi. I was given to understand by
Manuel, the headman of the Aggrakundi, that the boy had been sent
to the Wulnar headman and remained in his charge, but I was
unable definitely to learn when and where he was handed over; my
impression is that it was at the entry upon the Aggrakundi territory,
of which the northern boundary is near Glencoe.
I was present at the ceremony, which was held near Burrundi, at
a time when I happened to be at the township. Taken to the camp
at sunset, I saw the boy, who was about twelve years of age, and who
exhibited none of the fear that the Larraki'a boys entertain at the
first step towards being made men, seated in state under a tree, his
body and face adorned with pipeclay, a white fillet encircling his
head, from which hung on either side a few inches of fibre string
ending in a fluffy ball, similar balls hanging from bands around the
upper arm. His long rough hair was red, like his body, with ochre.
A corrobborie was then held, the Larraki'a being the performers.
It took the form of a drama, and the admiration of the Aggrakundi
at the representation was unbounded. The story played was a true
one, of a Larraki'a boy of three or four years of age who had strayed
along the beach and was lost. The boy (L‘uerdwoa) who represented
the child wandered here and there, at times lying down in very
weariness, and then, although exhausted, again striving to find his
people. They on their part seek him in one direction and another,
and the incidents of the day are reproduced—hero they see an emu,
there a snake, at another place a kangaroo has crossed, until at last
they find the dead body of the child. A blackfellow mimicked the
appearance, the cry, and gait of the emu to perfection; the snake, for
a human being, wriggled and darted wonderfully here and there as it
was headed off, until it bounded into the bushes, and the kangaroo
was seen hopping in the distance. The ever-present power of Evil was
there, now worming himself along the ground, anon towering aloft in
exultation ; skurrying rapidly along, his body almost touching the
earth, lying down, rolling, grovelling. While the corrobborie proceeded
the women and girls, all nude, sat in a semi-circle and made the familiar
music, singing the weird chant and producing an accompaniment by
slapping their hands upon the thigh in admirable rhythm.


Before sunrise the next morning I was awakened by a lad, and
accompanying him to the ground I found the boy upon whom the rite
was to be performed was still in the same place, two or three of the
men coaching and encouraging him. In a few moments Emu, Manuel,
and others in full regalia approached, and the lad was catechised.
The answers being satisfactory, he was borne away to a spot in the
bush which had been cleared, and where eight men lay on the ground,
their faces in their folded arms, head and feet alternating, the backs
forming a platform. Upon the buttocks the boy was laid; black-
fellows sat on the shoulders of their prostrate companions and held
him, while Emu, using a piece of a glass bottle, removed the foreskin.
The mother of the boy, who sat, accompanied by two or three other
dames, a little removed at the lad’s feet, received the portion of skin
excised in the canoe-shaped water-vessel hollowed from a log, and, after
washing, swallowed it. A piece of grass was placed round the penis, the
skin drawn over it and bound with another bit of grass, and hot ashes
applied. To aid him to preserve silence the boy had had in his mouth
a tassel containing a pebble on which to set his teeth.
General Characteristics. —These aboriginals, in common with the
other tribes north of the Mac Donnell Bange, are lighter in colour,
and are destitute of the hairiness of the natives south of the range;
there is little beard, moustache, or whisker, and the chest and limbs
are smooth. The eyes, moreover, do not appear to me to be so deeply
set, nor the racial characteristics generally so marked. The hair is
fine, and in some instances very curly. When among strangers or
engaged in some occupation, making a march or lying in indolence, the
countenance is plain and emotionless, impassive almost to sullenness ;
but when the face lifts in responsive interest and friendliness it
becomes pleasing and frequently very attractive; kindliness and
affection lighten the heavy features, and bright honest eyes kindle and
dance with mirth and joyousness. The sudden lighting up of my boy’s
face, as his heart responded through his eyes at some kindly remark,
changed his coarse, heavy, ugly features —and the Australoid charac-
teristics were in him most pronounced—to something very near beauty.
The first time I caught this glance it was indeed a revelation to me.
Cicatrices. —The bodies of both men and women are adorned
with these marks raised on the skin, but the Larraki'a say that no
meaning is attachable to them now, and that they are merely for orna-
ment. Formerly one on the side of the buttock is said to have
represented a husband lost, and on the shoulder a brother, &c.;
further inquiry is therefore desirable. I have observed three lines
across the body below the lower ribs, a row of short perpendicular
cuts across the chest, and three short cuts on either shoulder
downwards.
Weapons, Articles, Sfc. —The weapons in use are spears of seven
to ten feet in length, variously barbed for hunting and combat, and
of two or three prongs barbed for spearing fish, as well as stone-
headed for battle. There is also a light reed spear with 15 to
25 inches of stick inserted, simply pointed and hardened in
the tire, in all about four or five feet in length. The wommeras are
of two kinds : one a piece of flat wood, 3 feet 1 inch to 3 feet 4 inches
in length, and If-inch in breadth at the widest part; the other round,


about i-inch in thickness and tapering somewhat, and a few inches
longer than the flat wommera. The latter is only used for the light
reed spears. The natives towards Port Essington occasionally carry
a third variety, flat but curved. A sword-club is sometimes (if not
always) taken into a tribal combat. At the Adelaide Eiver it was
borne, grasped in both hands, by a woman of great age, terrible in the
energy which fired her. No blows were struck with it, but it seemed
to be used to direct and to animate the warriors. It is of very heavy
wood, and is fish-shaped. The one I possess measures 4|- feet in length,
li inches in breadth at the narrowest part to 3 inches across at 7 inches
from the point to which it then curves. The bumerang is not found
among them, and they are unable to make it, but they have heard of
it from Queensland natives who have come over with white men ; nor
have they shields. The flat piece of wood, inches in length and
I - inches in breadth, which attached to a piece of string and whirled
round the head produces a whizzing noise, has its place in their
ceremonies. Stone tomahawks and cutting instruments have gone out
of use since the intercourse with the whites.
Belts of bark and of hair, and occasionally little fringe aprons a
few r inches in length and width, are worn by the men. The hair is
often confined by a band or a fillet, and the Wulwbngga lads have at
times a head-dress of kangaroo teeth embedded in gum, through which
they are strung together. The young women and girls are fond of
necklaces composed of bits of dry grass threaded on string, and the
Whlnar girls often wear an arrangement of twisted cord coloured with
red ochre, relieved by bands of pipeclay, crossing over and under the
breasts, passing under the arms, and reunited at the back. All wear
neatly plaited armlets of grass. A nosepin is said to keep out the
dust and to be a protection when a fever-wind is blowing. Dillybags,
plaited reed baskets, and the kulamin are used, but the latter has
been nearly superseded by the billycan. The string is made from
fibre by rubbing it with the hand upon the thigh.
The Larraki‘a made canoes of good size hollowed out from a tree,
and one was worked round from Southport to Port Darwin, Eire is
kindled by a stick twirled rapidly between the hands, the point being
inserted in a notch in another stick held firmly by the feet.
Smoke and Hand Signalling. —At the Adelaide meeting of the
Association in 1893 a paper of much interest was read by Mr. A. T.
Magarey upon “ Smoke Signals,” which provoked considerable corres-
pondence in the public Press ; and two facts will be of interest. In
1884 Messrs. H. Houschildt, J. Noltenius, J. Landers, and T. Schol-
lert were murdered by blacks on the Daly River. Although I was not
in the country at the time, I learnt from both whites and Larraki'a
that the latter knew from smoke signals of those murders before the
former had any information, although all speed was made by the
horseman conveying the news to Port Darwin.
The other instance transpired in 1890. My boy was sitting on
the doorstep, and apparently apropos of nothing (for a boat was not
expected, it being supposed that the “ Guthrie” had gone past without
calling) remarked, “ Steamer, him come on ; him sit down lame
fellow,” getting up and limping across the room to my table. Eour
days afterwards the “ Guthrie” came in with a broken shaft, and I


then questioned him whether he had been able to see her. He told
me, IS T o ! that the boat was too far away, but “ blackfellow him make
’em smoke, blackfellow been tell ’em” ; and he proceeded to show me
by action how the smoke was manipulated. He did not himself know
the particular signals, but “ blackfellow”—that is, some of the black-
fellows—“ him sabe.”
There is a wide range, too, of hand-signalling, such as : “A dead
blackfellow is here,” “I have food,” “Wild blacks are coming,”
“ Where are our people?” “ Come on quickly,” “ Go that way,” &c.






NATIVE TRIBES
Port Darwin


