

fii o
301 -
1 °l 3 >
NATIONAL HISTORICAL
MEMORIAL
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
Founder of Australia
ST. MILDRED'S CHURCH,
Bread Street, City of London




The complete Memorial in position on the front of
St. Mildred's Church, Bread Street, City of London


The Portrait Bust of Admiral Arthur Phillip, R.N.
Charles L. Hartwell, R.A. (Sculptor)
Page Two


ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
The Founder of Australia
THE Memorial, which was unveiled on December 7th, 1932, by
His Royal Highness The Prince George, makes some amends to
the name and fame of one of the greatest of our Empire builders.
Admiral Arthur Phillip was born in the Ward of Bread Street on
October nth, 1738, and it is therefore fitting that the founder of what
was destined to become the Commonwealth of Australia should be
honoured and his memory perpetuated in the City of his birth.
At the age of 17 Arthur Phillip entered the Royal Navy, where he
served in various vessels until he was retired on half-pay in 1761, with
the rank of Captain. For twelve years after this he lived at Lyndhurst,
in Hampshire, and during this time he acquired that practical knowledge
of farming and building which served so well to ensure the success of the
first settlement in Australia. In 1773 he accepted a position as Post-
Captain in the Portuguese Navy, in which he served with distinction for
about three years. At the age of 49 Captain (afterwards Admiral) Arthur
Phillip was appointed as the leader of an expedition which was to be sent
out with the object of establishing a settlement in New South Wales,
and in May, 1787, he left England as first Governor of the new colony.
Page Three


His fleet consisted of eleven vessels with a total tonnage of under 4,000
tons, the smallest being the “ Supply ” of 170 tons. Captain Phillip
arrived at Botany Bay on January 18th in the following year, after a
voyage of nearly 9 months. Considering the over-crowded conditions
of the vessels and the inadequate food supplies the voyage was accomplished
with an extraordinarily small loss of life, (The second fleet, which followed
a year later, lost 400 souls during the voyage.) Being dissatisfied with
Botany Bay, Captain Phillip, on the 21st of that month, set out in three boats
and explored Port Jackson. He decided upon Sydney Cove for the site
of the settlement, which is now the City of Sydney (with a population of
1,250,000), on Wednesday, January 23rd, 1788, as is depicted on one of the
pictures on the memorial. Three days later he disembarked from H.M.S.
“ Supply ” and began the founding of Sydney on Saturday, January 26th.
The remaining pictorial panel on the Memorial illustrates this event.
Amongst those who accompanied Captain Phillip at his first landing
and became the leading men in the new Colony were Captain John
Hunter, R.N., who afterwards succeeded Phillip as Governor of the
Colony ; Captain David Collins, first Judge-Advocate of the Colony,
and later Founder and first Governor of the Colony of Tasmania in 1804 ;
Principal-Surgeon J. White, R.N. ; Lieutenant P. G. King, R.N.,
subsequently third Governor of New South Wales ; and Lieutenant
George Johnston, A.D.C. (Acting Governor of New South Wales in 1808),
in command of a Guard of Marines.
Captain Phillip remained as Governor until April, 1792, when he
was compelled by ill-health to return to England after four years. In
the face of appalling difficulties he had been responsible for the largest
territorial addition ever made to the British Empire at one time. The
expedition was poorly equipped in almost every particular. Fortunately,
Phillip proved himself to be a genius at improvisation, and was able to
deal effectively with the administrative, legal, naval, military, engineering,
town-planning and other problems which on all sides so urgently called
for decision and action. The enterprise received little encouragement
from the Home Government, which for nearly two years sent him no
official instructions nor any supplies. Tools and equipment of even the
most rudimentary kind were urgently required, and these Phillip
improvised on the spot by one means or another. Until the farming
Page Four


and stockbreeding activities of the colonists became productive there was
a shortage of the necessities of life, and by the end of 1790 the Colony
was reduced to the verge of starvation. It was characteristic of the man
that during this period the Governor shared exactly the same ration as
that distributed to those in his charge, which was a weekly allowance of
si pounds of flour, 2 pounds of rice and 2 pounds of pork—the latter being
four years old and practically uneatable.
Phillip was ordered to establish the settlement at Botany Bay, and his
first great service to Australia was his sound judgment in choosing instead
the site which afterwards became Sydney. History proves that he chose
well, but he showed great courage in thus backing his own opinion and
overriding his instructions. Had he remained at Botany Bay there can
be little doubt that the expedition would have resulted in a tragic failure,
and Australia might have been lost to the Empire. Phillip possessed the
ideal qualities for his task, and he quickly established amicable relations
with the Aboriginal inhabitants as far as their savage way of life permitted.
From the very first he had a profound and prophetic faith in the future
of the Colony. Within a few months of the landing he wrote to Lord
Sydney affirming his confidence that “this country will prove the most
valuable acquisition Great Britain ever made.” He foresaw the Sydney
of the future, and his plans provided for avenues 200 feet wide at a time
when it was but a struggling settlement of one-storey huts.
Captain Phillip returned to England in May, 1793, and was promoted
successively to the rank of Rear-Admiral, Vice-Admiral, and in 1814
Admiral of the Blue. He retired to Bath in 1806, where he died on
August 31st, 1814, and lies buried with his wife in the Church of
St. Nicholas at Bathampton, nearby. Phillip takes his rightful place
amongst those immortals of our race whose courage and vision have left
their mark upon the history of the Empire. The National Historical
Memorial stands as witness that London now joins with the people of
New South Wales and of the Commonwealth in honouring one of her
greatest citizens. Londoners and their kinsmen overseas rejoice in this
enduring bond between the Motherland and the Great Commonwealth
of whose achievements they are so proud.
“ What do they know of England
Who only England know? ”
Page Five


THE MEMORIAL
WE owe the conception of this National Historical Memorial to
Mr. Douglas Hope Johnston, M.A. (Cantab), F.R.Hist.S.,
Barrister-at-Law (Inner Temple), the great grandson of
Lieutenant-Colonel George Johnston, who was A.D.C. to Governor
Phillip at the first landing in Sydney in 1788, where his descendants
have since lived without a break : he is thus the head of the oldest
family in Australia and New Zealand. He is also the Founder and
ex-President of the Australasian Pioneers’ Club of Sydney (membership
of which is limited to the direct descendants of the Founders of Australia
and New Zealand), the official representative of the Families of the
Founders of Australia and a recognized authority on their history. It
should be added that the project of this Memorial has had the advantage
of the hearty support and co-operation of the Commonwealth Government
and the Australian Minister in London.
The Memorial—the gift of Lord Wakefield of Hythe—is the only
one of its kind and the largest bronze Memorial fixed to the outside of
a Church in London. Its height is sixteen feet with an additional in-
scription tablet below of four feet by six ; its width is twelve feet and its
total weight one and three-quarters of a ton. The metal used is monu-
mental bronze, a particular copper alloy ; the lettering on the upper
panels and the decorative “ rising sun ” are finished with the process of
mercurial gilding which is absolutely impervious to weather conditions.
Page Six


The central feature of the Memorial is naturally the portrait bust of
Governor Phillip. This was modelled by Mr. Charles L. Hartwell, R.A.,
from the painting in the National Portrait Gallery, with reference also to
that in the Mitchell Library, Sydney. Every effort has been made as
regards this and other portions of the Memorial to secure absolute
accuracy, and the correctness of the historical data was confirmed in every
possible direction, thanks being due to the various authorities consulted
at the Admiralty, Royal United Services Museum, Greenwich Hospital,
The Science Museum and Australia House, for valuable advice and
assistance. The two pictures which appear one on each flank of the
Memorial are from a series of pictures of scenes taken from Australian
history, of which Mr. Hope Johnston is the author. The portions of the
work other than the portrait bust already alluded to were modelled and
prepared for the foundry by Mr. W. Hamilton Buchan, the general design
being interpreted by Mr. George Johnson, of Messrs. G. Johnson Bros.,
the founders and erectors of the monument, from rough notes and sketches
supplied by Mr. Hope Johnston, the entire work of preparation and
erection being under the supervision of the Architect, Mr. J. Reeve
Young, A.R.1.8.A. All the work has been carried out in London by
British craftsmen with British materials, the casting in Bronze of the
intricate relief portions calling for the highest skill in the various handi-
crafts employed.
Page Seven


The Founding of Australia
Details of
Page Eight


Memorial to Admiral Arthur Phillip , R.N.
the completed Memorial
Page Nine


ST. MILDRED’S CHURCH
and the Ward of Bread Street
THE Church of St, Mildred, Bread Street, is not the first to occupy
that site. Its predecessor, itself almost certainly not the first,
was consumed in the Great Fire of London of 1666, as was the
neighbouring Church of St. Margaret Moses, in Friday Street. The
Parish now includes that of St. Margaret Moses, whose Church was not
rebuilt after the great disaster which gave Sir Christopher Wren his
opportunity. The dedication of the Church to St. Mildred, a Saxon
Princess and Abbess of Minster, suggests that the foundation ought to be
Page Ten


traceable to Saxon times. No actual records earlier than about 1300,
however, are now available. Some three hundred years later there was a
rebuilding and beautifying of the Church, the accounts of which show
that it was then divided by columns and arches into nave and aisle or
aisles. It seems probable that the Church at that time covered a larger
area than the present edifice, for St, Mildred’s to-day is one of the
smallest of City Churches.
It is, however, one of the most perfect, and it is unfortunate that it
should be so hemmed in by the warehouses to its north and south. The
spire is lofty (and also slightly aslant), and to those who heed its beckoning
is presented one of Wren’s most charming churches, practically in its
original state. The Church, which was consecrated in 1683, is con-
structed of brick, with Portland Stone on the west front. Its interior is
a pleasant surprise to one entering the Church for the first time. It is
far more spacious, airy and elegant in appearance than could possibly
be inferred from without. The body of the Church is a square, defined
by two deep panelled arches, enriched with scroll-work, running from
north to south on the east and west sides. This central portion of the
Church is domed, the base of the dome being decorated with a band of
flowers, foliage and fruits in striking plaster-relief. The whole effect,
in the limited space afforded by the ground-plan, constitutes one of Wren’s
major achievements, albeit on so small a scale.
The woodwork is in good preservation and unusually interesting.
The pulpit, surmounted by a magnificent and elaborate sounding-board,
is of oak, and the rich carvings of this and the altar-piece are generally
attributed to Grinling Gibbons. Whether his work or not, they are of
exceptional merit. There are the original pews, of great depth, taken right
up to the altar rails and with no centre aisle. The Civic Pew has the Lion
and Unicorn, of oak carved and gilded, with a sword-rest between them.
A white marble font, ornamented with cherubs’ heads and foliage, has
an equally ornate canopy of oak. This canopy and the small figures
on the pulpit are the only known relics of the Church of St. Margaret
Moses. The font and its cover were formerly hidden beneath several
coats of stone-coloured paint, but their full beauty is now revealed. The
organ, built by Thomas Griffen (Gresham Professor of Music in 1763)
in 1744, is in a gallery at the west end, where the choir sits. It still
contains the original metal pipes, and is famed for the quality of its tone.
Page Eleven


On the south is a stained glass window, presented by Alderman Lord
Wakefield in memory of the men of the Ward who fell in the Great War.
Although the north side is blocked by buildings, and the south window is
flood-lit to obtain the best effect, the Church is really well lit, and its
wood-carving and work in plaster and metal show to great advantage.
Here indeed is seventeenth-century art at its finest, displayed for the
devout admiration of all lovers of the period.
Something should be said of these early patrons of St. Mildred’s
of whom we have record. Lord Trenchaunt, of St. Albans, is mentioned
as having added to its amenities as early as the year 1300. On the north
wall of the Church is a tablet of benefactions on which his name appears,
together with that of Sir John Shadworth (Lord Mayor in 1401), Mr.
Copinger and Mr. Thomas Langham. Sir John Shadworth gave the
“ parsonage-house, a revestry and churchyard ” to the parish, and was
buried in the chancel. Towards the end of the fifteenth century the
Rector of St. Mildred’s was Hugh Oldham. He was a notable figure of
his day; Chaplain to the mother of Henry VII., he afterwards became
Bishop of Exeter. He established a school at Manchester, where he was
born.
The Crispe family were inhabitants of the Ward, and closely connected
with the parish during most of the seventeenth century. Alderman
Ellis Crispe was Sheriff of the City in 1625, but died during the Plague of
that year before he had served in that high office many days. His son,
Sir Nicholas Crispe, was a staunch supporter of the cause of Charles the
First; his generous loyalty was praised by no less a person than Dr. Johnson.
Nicholas Crispe gave to the Church a noble east window, and also
presented the font and two sacramental vessels which are still preserved.
His mother and his brother also presented windows. Sir Thomas, son
of Nicholas, is commemorated by a tablet on the south wall : the epitaph
includes a reference to his father’s fidelity to Charles I. and Charles 11.
It is records of this nature that make our City Churches such precious
monuments to civic patriotism.
In the vestry room is a massive chest, saved from the Great Fire,
containing the parish registers ; these are preserved complete from 1559
onwards. Therein is the entry of the marriage of the poet Shelley to
Mary Wolstonecraft Godwin, on December 30th, 1816. Another little-
known fact of some interest is that in this Church were married, in 1791,
Page Twelve


Henry Cecil, afterwards Earl of Exeter, and the “ village maiden,” whose
romantic story was the subject of Tennyson’s poem, “ The Lord of
Burghley,” It may not be amiss to mention here that another and greater
poet, John Milton, was born in the Ward. He was baptised in the Church
of Allhallows, in Bread Street, which was destroyed during the last
century.
The Ward of Bread Street, in these days known as a centre of the
textile trade, was originally the quarter of the Bakers, as the name of its
principal street suggests. In Friday Street and part of Knightrider
Street (formerly Old Fish Street) the sale of fish was carried on, the
market being served from Queenhithe Dock. In Bread Street, prior to
1555, stood the Compter, a debtors’ prison. Several churches formerly
within the Ward were not rebuilt after the Great Fire, while the Church
of St. Matthew, in Friday Street, was pulled down in 1885. The com-
paratively modern western section of Cannon Street contains the Hall
of the Worshipful Company of Cordwainers, a new building upon a site
which has for several hundred years been held by the Company.
The birth of Admiral Arthur Phillip within the Ward provides the
link between a National Historical Memorial to a great citizen and
pioneer of Empire and St. Mildred’s Church. St. Mildred’s is almost
certainly the only building left that was in Bread Street when Phillip
lived in the Ward, and is thus appropriate as the site of the Memorial
to this son of the Ward.
NOTE.
Reference has been made to the following works :
A. E. DANIELS. London and City Churches. (Archibald Constable & Co., 1895.)
G. H. BIRCH, F.S.A. London Churches. ( B. T. Batsford, 1896.)
G. B. BESANT. City Churches. (Selzvyn & Blount, n.d .)
PHILIP NORMAN, LL.D., F.S.A. (from a paper published in the Transactions of
the St. Paul’s Ecclesiological Society. Vol. VIII., part IV.).
Page Thirteen


St. Mildred's Church
The War Memorial Window
Page Fourteen


St. Mildred's Church
The Organ Gallery, Civic Pew in foreground
Page Fifteen




J sJ y 'V ]5-<J --^o^SsZSZSik
a
Vy
W
AT
c
c
gfji
U / / \
A/
/ 7
> A/
' Ay
u^/
R°a
f
Kh
V)
o
'2
♦“— *
£
U1
cu
/ 7^
/** /I/ \*®iaJy
/ \g^M
A 5 /?/ V^KJ
rK» E
KRW
VICTORIA
rj //
0
* si
Gig
l[ MAI
no. At
/ Wof )|
sXIOljQ^J
SHEWING ST, MILDREDS CHURCH g


TRUSCOTTS
LONDON.


The Parliament of the Commonwealth.
THE LIBRARY,
14tli > ie.pt mibm* #
CANBERRA,
19 -
Mr, Ferguson,
X ex* posting to you herewith a copy of the
leaned is connection with the unmiXinc of the
IteiorlaX to AdKiiral jorthsxr ItiUiii E*S*, at sst* Mli4rai f a
Chureh* Loudon, as tlio Cmrmt res able to oottoly with
egr r equest for a few additional sop ion*
Youre faithfully.
Librarian*
Ferguson, Esq,,
University Chambers,
167 Phillip Street,
Sydney,
NEW SOUTH WALES*


iflilbreb, Preab Street
Thursday, October 12th, at 3.1 y p.m.
The Rector and Churchwardens cordially invite
to attend
The First Annual Service in commemoration of
o ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP
horn in the Ward on the 1 ith of October, 1738
Founder of Sydney and Australia, 1788
and to maintain and strengthen our good and cordial relations
with Australia.
TEA after the Service at Cordwainers’ Hall.
R.S. V.P. to F. IV. Mander, M.A.,
Cordwainers ’ Hall, 7 Cannon Street, E.C.4
J. RICHARDSON-EYRE, Rector
ALDERMAN LORD WAKEFIELD y
T. GRONOW DEV AS OF HYTHE )
IV. LEONARD TAYLOR
H. E. HILL, C.C. I


S. MILDRED, BREAD STREET
CANNON STREET, E.C.4
LORD STONEHAVEN
P.C., G.C.M.G. D.S.O.
Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief, Commonwealth of Australia,
1925—1930
WILL GIVE THE ADDRESS AT
THE PHILLIP MEMORIAL SERVICE
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 12th
ORGAN MUSIC, 3 to 3.15 p.m.
SERVICE, 3.15 p.m.
