

National
Preservation
A Plea by
THOMAS RYAN, M.L.A.
(Essendon, Victoria)
Delivered at Moonee Ponds
Town Hall,
Thursday, Nov. 8, 1917




THOMAS RYAN


To the Electors
of
Australia
With the sincere desire
to assist you in the
momentous choice you are
called upon to make,
this booklet has been printed
for free distribution.
Additional copies will be
supplied on request —
THOMAS RYAN.
State Parliament House
MELBOURNE.


National Preservation
Looking backward, how much has been won!
Look around, how much yet to win !
The watches of the night have passed,
The watches of the day begin.
TO the electors of Australia, for the second
time, have been assigned the privilege and
responsibility of expressing an opinion on
the means necessary to strengthen the forces
which were brought into existence for the defence
of our country and all that is best in the country.
Comrades in Arms
I say, advisedly, forces, because long experience
has taught us that there should be Two arms to
our defence— Naval iand Military —and though
the purpose of each is identical, yet their forms of
Government differ in so far as that controlling the
army, compulsory service hitherto being confined
to service within the Commonwealth. This does not,
however, apply to their comrades in the navy, for
section 33 of the Naval Act says:—“Members of
the naval forces may be required to serve for training
on any naval service, either within or beyond the
limits of the Commonwealth.” And under that pro-
vision 6000 men are to-day serving under the British


Navy, and but for the British Navy, Australia would
be a pawn in the spoils of the Pacific.
A Vital Question
Now, the question you have to determine is
having realised that an army is No DEFENCE unless
it is available for service abroad—'Are you in favour
of the Government having, in this grave emergency,
the same compulsory powers over citizens in regard
to requiring their military service, FOR THE TERM OF
THE WAR, outside the Commonwealth, as it now has
in regard to military service within the Common-
wealth ?
The purpose of the question is—Do the people of
Australia desire to place Australian soldiers on such
parts of the battlefield where they can best protect
the traditions of our Empire and the homes of our
people ?
As to the righteousness and the necessity of our
part in the war, public opinion has never wavered ;
rather, its convictions are held more firmly as the
causes of the war become more clearly understood.
Of the war itself public opinion is fundamentally
agreed that
Ours is the Right Faith and the Just Cause.
It IS A CONFLICT OF FAITH AGAINST FAITH.
System against System.
Custom against Custom.


Law against Law, and, in a fuller sense, a choice
between Democracy AND Autocracy ; and to the
credit of Britain and her Allies be it said ; She
Stood, and is Still Standing, for the People’s
CAUSE, and so confident are we that it is a people’s
cause that we are exercising a REFERENDUM, the
essential part of the machinery of DEMOCRACY.
But let us remember that DEMOCRACY will not
stand by its own virtue. If it lacks loyalty, courage
and strength to defend itself when attacked, it must
perish as certainly as if it possessed no virtue.
Now, the virtue of DEMOCRACY is the RECOGNITION
of MANHOOD, and the tie that binds the man to the
cause is the suffrage, but suffrage implies service, and
without the right of the State to call on our service
Democracy is Merely an Impostor.
But it is not sufficient that we are able to call
on the service of the Nation ; it is a sacred duty to
those who are conducting National operations that
they shall not only have the right to call on the
service of the people, but that such people, when
put to work, shall go into such work as the best
possibly trained men for the work in which they are
engaged.
Essential to Safety
This will demand the disciplining of the Nation's
services, as an undisciplined Nation engaged in any-
thing like an equal contest with a disciplined Nation
must be defeated.


With this truth firmly imbedded in our minds we
view the position with which we find our dearest
interest endangered.
Peace is the greatest of British interests, greatest
of all Australian interests, but peaceful intentions
will not insure peace in Australia any more than
they did in Belgium or Serbia.
This is not a time for mealy-mouthed whimperings
after ideals, but for resolute decision and the adap-
tation of the full resources to the crisis with which
we are faced. WHAT IS THIS CRISIS? The crisis is
a war, carrying with it all the crimes of wax. WHO
Committed the Crime? Germany. This crime
of which Germany stands accused is that she delibe-
rately aimed at war, and that when there seemed a
chance of her plans miscarrying, she promptly took
steps to render peace impossible.
Of this crime no people in the world will acquit
her, and Italy, her own Ally, then condemned her
by refusing assistance.
Their diplomats informed her that —
Serbia Did Not Want War.
France Did Not Want War,
Italy Did Not Want War,
England Did Not Want War,
Belgium Did Not Want War,
Russia Did Not Want War.


Austria wanted war with Serbia alone
Germany encouraged Austria to bring on war,
because Germany saw in it great opportunities.
The main purpose of Germany’s aggression was
her hatred of the DEMOCRATIC system of which Bri-
tain was the embodiment and Australia the leader. So
in this war, DEMOCRACY is fighting for its very
existence, and we know it cannot endure unless
capable of self-defence.
Enemies Within the Gates
It is to insure our means of self-defence that you
are asked to vote Yes on December 20th. Against
those of us who ask you to vote Yes you have men
like Mr. Blackburn, who says :
“ Materially, the working class has very little to
lose by a German victory. Even a German
conquest of Australia would leacue it hardly
—if at all — worsened .”
“ 1 do not think that Britain is threatened with
reduction to the status of a Belgium or a
France
I do not think that she finds her task of
4 humiliating ’ Germany greater than was
expected
“ I do not feel called upon to aid in 4 humili-
ating ’ Germany


Australia’s True Frontier
But I hear someone ask, WHERE IS AUSTRALIA
ATTACKED? To such an one I say, with a picture
of Burning Serbia, Bleeding France and Out-
raged BELGIUM, that in each of these countries is
Australia attacked, for these are now the FRONTIERS
of Australia:
And there is Australia’s true frontier, though it has
not occurred to you,
Who never heard from the quarterdeck the thud of
the submarine’s screw.
You sit at ease in your safe backyard —but who is it
guards you there ?
The men that are holding the line in France, and
doing Australia’s share.
Australia’s first duty is to fill the gaps in the
ranks hard pressed. The method by which this shall
be done has causedi many of us to make shipwreck
of old opinions. The dread of a name must be jet-
tisoned for the higher truth that man is born, not
only to his parents, but to his country, and on an
efficient system of defence alone can the security of
our people be retained. NEGLECT THIS, AND BEL-
GIUM’S Yesterday will be Australia’s Tomor-
row.
Blood Calls to Blood
Australia’s blood cries from the sands of the far
peninsula and the fields of Flanders to this coun-
try, that it shall no longer beg , but through its exe-
cutive, determine who shall serve in the trenches and
who shall serve in Australia.


Call it conscription if you will! but let those who
cavil at the system remember Australia’s freedom is
being defended by the conscripts of Britain and our
Allies on the battlefields of Europe. And, further,
the blood shed in the defence of women and children
should not be taken to excuse men able to follow the
flag, who are, instead, keeping up the corner posts
in the streets and selecting the winners on our race-
courses.
My -firm opinion is that the enacting of universal
service at this stage in this country will thunder
through the. ranks of our enemies , and will inspire
07ir Allies with the momentous fact that in this fight
they stand with old Britain and the new.
Is the method to be adopted the right method ?
Nay, is it the best method ? I am bound to say Yes
because the men governing our country, men like
Mr. Hughes and those who are following him, for
all the days of their lives have served DEMOCRACY
only to advance it. They have said what we want,
and must have—trained men, for to send untrained
men into the trenches is Murder.
The great issue the country has to consider
is: Will the Government Proposals Insure a
Sufficiency of Trained Men, ready when they are
wanted ? The Federal Government say, Yes, and
that no other proposal can do so. I repeat this—
That No Other Proposal Can Do So—for the
voluntary system has unmistakably failed, las it


was bound to do, and such additions as wc
have recently been making to our forces have
been largely in the way of young boys, many of
whom should still be at school. Thus there is set
before us a definite task, which we cannot evade with
HONOUR; dare not neglect for SAFETY. Thus our
duty is plain. The Nation cannot permit itself to
be the sport of hysterical emotion on the one hand,
and apathy and indifference on the other.
Who Shall Serve ?
Between now and the end of the year we are asked
to decide whether we shall quit the war by adhering
to an unjust voluntary system or whether we shall
quit the unjust system and effectively further the
prosecution of this war. I ask you has the time not
arrived when the executive of our country should
determine that equality of service should be more
than a by-word, and that each man should take up
that duty for which the Nation is most in need, and
in HIS RIGHT Turn? This is a call not only from
the living, but from those —
On fame’s eternal camping-ground
Their silent tents are spread ;
And glory guards with solemn round
The bivouac of the dead.
There are numbers of willing persons in the com-
munity who see other men more eligible for service
with less responsibility, and who desire that they,
too, shall take their place with the colours. “ Thou


sands of these men are not shirkers. They have no
cold feet; hut they are waiting for the Nation to
summon them to their post of duty, knowing that
they would march in due order and time to the task
assigned them. We will, from this system, get, in
addition to a few unwilling and reluctant men ,
others, who, when once the National conscience has
been awakened, will march quite cheerfully with
their brothers-in-armsT
Why Stand Apart ?
I regret to find many of my old Labour comrades
are not standing with me in this fight, and I ask
them, Why Stand Ye Apart To-day? Has this
word COMPULSION suddenly taken horns that ye
dreadl it? Is not this very compulsion the founda-
tion on which we have raised the superstructure of
Labour? When men would not join the unions of
this country we said :
Compulsion !
Compulsion as to Membership.
Compulsion as to Hours.
Compulsion as to Conditions.
Compulsion as to Wages.
When it was proposed to bring from abroad men
under other contracts to work in our lands, Labour
legislators cried, DESTROY THESE CONTRACTS ; and
when they refused, COMPULSION came to the rescue.


When landlords desired the erection of slums and
refused to construct homes in conformity with the
health requirements of our people, COMPULSION we
demanded.
When employers would not desist in asking for
overtime, COMPULSION, we said.
When employers would not cease, in days gone
by, employing little children in factories and in
mines, and in dangerous positions, COMPULSION, we
cried.
When parents were anxious to use their children
to earn money instead of sending them to our
schools, Compulsion came to the aid of the child.
When adults, unconscious of the heritage be-
queathed to them in the form of a franchise, refused
to register their names on the rolls of the electorates,
COMPULSION was the political weapon ; and even in
the fight for reform, COMPULSION was the lever—
one day to turn the sheep off the farms to make
room for the people, and another day to put your
little children out of factories, into the schools.
Many persons tell us that Compulsion is antagon-
istic to Democracy, but if we leave the political
arena and enter the philosopher’s study, and place
on record the characteristic features of DEMOCRACY,
the very first would be that of COMPULSION.—Com-
pulsion as to the services required to be done, and
compulsion to enforce abstinence from individual
desires. The DEMOCRACY for which Labour men have


given their life work connotes a regulated com-
munity, in which individuals have to be debarred
from committing some acts from which they obtain
pleasure and profit, and compulsorily may do such
things as the general welfare of the community de-
mands ; and I ask the working men and women of
this country to remember what it cost us to get
COMPULSORY measures on our Statute books, and
not to refuse to exercise a sane COMPULSION in the
preservation of all which makes life worth living.
Honour Australia’s Pledge
What is it that you will do by voting Yes ? You •
will make sacrifice. And what is the sacrifice you
will be called upon to make? Simply that AUS-
TRALIA will be true to the sons she has sent from
these shores.
“ The Allies will inevitably conquer in a cause the
most just that has ever raised the deadly weapon of
war; for we fight, not for the concerns of a day, but
for the security and happiness of ages ; not for an
insulated privilege, but for the rights of human
nature; not for temporal blessings, but for eternal
happiness; not for the benefit of one nation, but
for all mankind.”
Yes does not mean a fulfilment of a duty to
Britain , or France , or Serbia, or Italy , or Belgium;
hut Yes means the fulfilment of a duty by Australia
to our Australians , for to Australia, as well as to the
other nations, has been given a certain length of line


to defend, and remember, this cannot be shortened
without at the same time shortening’ the route be-
tween Germany and Britain and Germany and Aus-
tralia, and, whether at Gallipoli or at Flanders, these
Australians never quailed before the magnitude of
the task; but in their darkest moments, with com-
rades dropping dead at every side, instead of whin-
ing and whimpering and trying to measure where
duty commenced and ended, they faced the odds,
and exultingly cried :
Now God be thanked who has matched us with His hour,
And caught our youth, and wakened us from sleeping,
With*hand made sure, clear eye and sharpened power,
To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping.
At the present time we have in Australia thou-
sands of fit single men, but to keep our lines and to
fill the gaps thousands of men will be wanted.
Thus, to vote Yes means that those gaps will be
filled, and remember it is an undisputed fact that
the more men you send to help keep those lines , the
fewer men you send to the graveyard. And surely
those of us of the National movement who contend
that the men who come to work in the tramcar, to
the office, or to the factory, when one health officer
decides how many windows we shall have, where an-
other determines that the floors shall be dry, and an-
other that all machinery must be as safe as possible,
and another still to see when all these things are
complied with, that eight hours shall be his day’s
work, surely we, of all people, are not going to say


eight hours for the man in the city and eight days at
a stretch for the men in the trenches in Flanders. If
any body of men are justified in asking for shorter
hours it must be those who are defending Australia.
Sons Before Sires
We have all seen married men joining the colours,
leaving their wives and little children behind them,
while thousands of single men, without chick or
child, were busily engaged watching races and foot-
ball. The First Call of This War is to the
SINGLE Men ; the rest of us, with most of our lives
spent, will soon pass away, and it is to those to
whom the morning of life has yet scarcely dawned
that we first speak ; it is they who will inherit the
great privileges which are being bought by the
world’s best blood to-day. These privileges cannot
be got without paying for them; but no price known
to a free people will be considered too great for Aus-
tralia to pay for the preservation of British tradition
and humanitarian ideals; and when marking your
ballot paper I appeal to you to remember your duty
to God and to your country, and with the paper
ready to be crossed in front of you, I ask you to
think of the women who will that night bend their
knees in prayer for the welfare and safety of a son
or husband, out in the trenches, waiting for a rest;
of the mothers and sisters and wives who, with God
alone in their chambers “sigh for the TOUCH OF A
Vanished Hand, and the Sound of a Voice that


IS Still. Think of the little children, who, with
closed eyes, will lisp their baby prayers for a quick
home-coming of father; and remember that your
Yes on the ballot paper is the only hope of 'the
child's prayer being answered.
Honour Redeemed!
When your ballot paper has been signed and your
duty done, let there be such an overwhelming answer
in favour of rendering the help that is needed, that
whenever again the question is asked, Who Are
These Australians? the winds and the waves of
the face of the world will reply:
They are still her ancient seed,
On younger soil let fall ;
Children of Britain’s island breed,
To whom the mother in her need
In confidence did call.
Though I regret to find that these old comrades
who, for a quarter of a century, have stood
shoulder to shoulder in many a hard-fought fight,
are in opposite camps, yet for these men and
women consistently following the dictates of con-
science nothing but the most sincere respect and feel-
ing of comradeship exists; and may it always exist
With such we have had differences; with them we
have never quarrelled. But I must direct attention
to an anti-Labour and an intolerant spirit which has
of late stalked rampant through the councils of
Labour, brandishing a hydra-headed sword of com-
pulsion. conscription and expulsion.


Arrogance In Command
This small, but arrogant, minority seems to have
forgotten that the present Labour movement, brought
to its present stage by the tears and blood of its
most devoted founders, ever kept as its watchword
in things essential UNITY, in things doubtful LIBERTY,
but in all things CHARITY, and has instead, adopted
expulsion as its watchword , and destruction and dis-
memberment as its purpose; and from this band .
none who have dared to differ have been allowed to
escape —not even after long years of devoted
self-sacrificing service to the cause. Many of us
worked for this country’s freedom when those who,
to-day, controlling the Junta, were still in swaddling
clothes. I say to such, and thank God there are but
few in the movement, though, for the moment they
seek to exercise the power of the whole movement,
that neither their threats nor their expulsions have
deterred us from either thinking or speaking for our
Nation’s need. We throw back their edicts, and, in
doing so. we say :
We will speak out, we will be heard,
Though all earth’s system crack,
WeTl not abate one single word,
Nor will we take it back:
Bet cowards shrink, let liars fear,
het traitors turn away,
But that which we have dared to think,
That we wall bare to say.


What we think and what we say is that in the best
interest of our common weal the votes of Australia
should be recorded in favour of Yes.
Rebuild from Within
The present cataclysm which is convulsing our
civilised world from turret to foundation stone has
put to the test Australia’s determination to protect
the freedom of our race with the blood of our sons.
And our holy dead on the shores of the far peninsula
will secure for the human race a revised Magna
Charta that will constitute an extended lease of
individual freedom.
Though honoured with the privilege of addressing
a gathering of women, I make no special appeal to
them, for I know that no appeal of mine is necessary
to urge them to do their duty or to continue making
such sacrifices as duty will demand and conscience
dictate. The woman’s view was expressed long years
ago, when a mother said :
“ Had I a dozen sons, each in my love alike, and
none less dear than thine .and my good Marcus, I
had rather had eleven die nobly for their country
than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.”
But, above all, remember that no person can truth-
fully say that one line of this Compulsory measure
shall live one day longer than the cessation of hosti-
lities, and no acts of Parliament would be needed
to revoke it on that day; but a new Act of PARLIA


MENT would be needed to keep it in existence for one
hour longer than the duration of the war. May God
hasten the coming of the day of PEACE!
“Lest We Forget!”
Remember you are voting Yes so as to bring into
existence the only sure means of retaining your coun-
try’s liberty, and the hastening of the coming of a
peace with honour. Vote Yes, and I have no fear
that in the days to come those of us who advise you
to vote Yes will be able to face you with the con-
sciousness that we advised you in a! manner worthy
of the best traditions of our Imperial race.
Join with us to call from every platform—
Fall in,
Comrades by the right,
Here’s a watchword for this fight,
Clear the clouds for Freedom’s light,
Fall in ! Fall in !
Men and Women,
Britain’s myriad voices call,
Sons be welded one and all,
One in an Imperial home,
One with Britain heart and soul,
One Ivife, One Flag, One Fleet, One Throne.
We are sure that the disloyalty of men who say
that “ Materially the working class has very little
to lose by a German victory; even a German con-
quest of Australia would leave it hardly—if at all—
worsened ” has been in the past responsible for the


negative vote which was given. But the time has
come in which Australia WfLL Redeem Her
Honour. She will shake off the shackles of infamy
with which she has been saddled, and throwing
aside every weight that oppresses and hinders in the
race for National Liberty, she will on this occasion
decide as one common people, realising that in this
war there is hut one call.
We Are in This Struggle for All We Have
and Are.
4 4 No easy hopes or lies
Shall bring us to our goal;
But iron sacrifice
Of body, will and soul.
There is but one task for all,
For each one life to give ?
Who stands if Freedom fall?
Who dies if England live ? ’ ’
VOTE YES
[Authorised by Robert Manderson, 49 Washington Street,
Essendon]
John Osborne, Print.


We war for the end of
war;
We fight that fighting
may cease;
Why do our cannons
' roar? —
For a thousand years
of Peace !
