

Nature:
Our Mother.
T. P. BELLCHAMBERS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
ADELAIDE:
W. K. THOMES & CO., RRINTERS GRENFELL ST
1918




Nature: Our Mother
BY
T P. BELLCHAMBERS.
(Reprinted fioin The Saturday Journal.);
C 0 P Y It I G H T.
Adislaidk ;
W, K. Thomas & Co., Primkhs, CJuk.nfkix STnthir
1918.


OFF THE BEATEN TRACK.


INDEX.
page
Why I Write on Nature's Subjects g
The Link that Binds 10
The Promise of Life 11
The Two Bird Lovers 12
Shy Wild Birds 13
Feathered Friends to the Rescue 14
Mallee Fowl' 16
Sooty Kangs of Kangaroo Island i 20
Uncle Joe 24
Snakes .. 25
The Saltbush Track 29
In the Mallee 30
Tool-using Wasp 33
The Whistling Eagle 36
JPelican’s: Sagacity 37
.Black-throated Grebe 38
Nature’s Larrikin 39
Dodger, the Decoy Duck .. .. 40
Lazarus 41
Mysteries of Plant Life 42
Voices of the Mallee 44
Shall we let the Emu “Go West"? 45
Pigeons, Wild and Tame 46


My D ear Mother.
She died in 1917, aged 86, and was one of the greatest of
Nature lovers. Her escort in the picture is her grandson, my
small son; and age and youth were one in heart in mutual
love for the bird's and animals of the bush.


UNAFRAID


NATURE—OUR MOTHER.
Studies and Anecdotes by a Nature Lover.
\
Written for the young folk to try and help them to obtain a.
anore sympathetic understanding of their fellow creatures of the
wilds.
The little book is dedicated to the memory of a great nature
lover —my Mother.
This publication was made possible by tbe unfailing kindness
and practical assistance of the Proprietors of The Register, and
I desire to take this opportunity to warmly thank them, and all
other good friends who have aided me. May my life work help
young Australians to fully appreciate and love Nature’s Store-
house of Beauty .all about them.


PREFACE.
Recognizing that our future men and women are the children
■of to-day, then all true reforms must come through the right edu-
cating: of minds still plastic and impressionable. Mankind has
drifted very far from Nature and become, as, it were, a stranger
to the benign and ennobling influences, which 'a closer contact with
Nature would give. A vast storehouse of innocent pleasure lies
close at hand, in the readjustment of our relationship ' toward
these, opr fellow creatures—creatures that in fulfilling Nature’s
laws, reap the blessings of health and happiness, and are at the
same time helpful to each-.other, and many of them the staunch
allies of niiju. They arc quickly responsive to friendly advances,
and friendships so made, give' fine opportunities to study their life
habits.«nd God’s wise laws, for the safe-guarding and |>lessing
of his myriad creatures. i
The harp at Nature’s advent strung
Has never ceased-to play;
The song the stars of morning sang
Has never died away.
T. P. BELLCHAMBERS,
Humbug h'orest,
Aiigust, 1918.


A FAIRY CRADLE.
THE NEST OF THE FLOWER PECKER OR MISTLETOE BIRD.
The material used in its construction
appears to be a felt manufactured from
spider web, and a downy material gather-
ed from flower and seed. The nest is
built to swing as a hammock, from the
under side of a branch or twig, with suffi-
cient roof projecting over the entrance to
prevent the encroachment of rain. The
fabric is so soft and pliable that breathing
movements of the young within, are
plainly noticeable.
This nest was photographed when it con-
tained 3 young birds, but, owing to den-
sity of foliage it was not a success. After
the young had left, the conditions were
made more favourable, and this photo-
graph taken. The Mistletoe Bird is said to
have no stomach. Leach gives its food as
honey, pollen, fruit, and insects. It has a
scarlet throat, breast, and under tail; back
steel blue black. This bird is the chief
agent in the distribution of the Mistletoe,
the seed passing through its system unin-
jured, becomes attached to _ lighter
branches of the various eucalypti. It’s
favourite host is the scrub gum, and the
root penetrates the bark and forms a junc-
tion with the underlying sap wood. The
nests of the Mistletoe Bird are generally
placed among the branches of a wattle
tree and the time of breeding coincides
with the ripening of the fruit of the Mis-
tletoe, on which the young are reared. This
bird is only found in conjunction Tnthi the
Mistletoe, and as another instance of
Mother Nature’s wonderful dispensations.


WHY I WRITE ON NATURE SUBJECTS.
In my wandering up and down the fringe
of settlement I noticed, with sorrow, that
the lust of destruction threatened every-
where the extinction of much of our native
life, both faunic and arboral; ruthless
destruction in the name of sport, that wan-
tonly pulls the trigger on any living thing
nothing being sacred —not even the mother
birds with helpless broods of young.
Commercial destruction, for plumes
and skins, tihat complacently sees
the young egrets starve in the nest, their
parents murdered that they may be des-
poiled of their God-given beauty. There is
also the destruction caused by the indis-
criminate use of poison, which has gone
on unchecked for years, doing irreparable
mischief. The blowfly post is a man-made
peat, the direct outcome of this poisoning
business, and other insidious evils are
creeping on us. In. sowing the wind we
must reap the whirlwind. Poison has been
most destructive, especially; to the useful
and very necessary bird life. I have
noticed, with pain, the callous laugh at
sufferings inflicted on God’s innocent crea-
tures, and the strangely unnatural belief
that to be callous of these sufferings was
to be manly, and to be considerate, branded
one as being effeminate. Apart from the
brutalizing and degrading effect of these
ideas on our own race, there is the evil
that comes from the destruction; of valu-
able links in Nature’s chain, on which
man’s very existence largely hangs. There
is the depiction or valuable food supplies,
both directly and indirectly—directly by
destruction of natural game, timber, and
other supplies), and indirectly by destruc-
tion caused through insect pests and
vermin that otherwise would have been
held in cheek. Again, there is the brutal
vandalism that will put a match to a grand
old gum for the pleasure of seeing it
crash to the earth in flames.
—The Great Question.—
Il does not pay to ignore natural law.
bes'des the infliction of an enormous
amount of unnecessary suffering, there is
n big loss in our natural resources, and a
bad effect is produced upon our morals;
besides the degrading of much beautiful
environment by the loss of arboral, and its
vital faunic life. In this the so-called
educated dlaesrs ecera to err as badly na
those nvho belong to the more ignorant
classes. The subjugation of this wonder-
ful island continent ‘to the uses of civilized
man seems to have been carried out in n
haphazard fashion and by a very irrespon-
sible people. It puts one in mind of the
actions of school children turned out from
their playground with their iliorizon limi-
ted to the day and no past experience to
guide present action —a mad scranfole for
individual 'benefit and devil take the hind-
most. Judged by the past are we fit and
proper persons to hold so weighty a charge
of future destiny? Where are our wise
men, are they in Parliament? lake Par-
liament, like people. 'May ihoso whose
cry is “Australia for the Australians,” yet
prove worthy of the trust, and worthy of
the gifts and chargee included iu that trust-
—The Future Hope.—
Onr chief hope lies in itlie right educating;
of the children —the hardened sinner ot
city and bush will pass, and, in respect to
these matters, let us hope, be replaced by a
more reasonable and humane generation,
there should be given to the children les-
sons on Nature. Nature w r ith a soul, not
just dry scientific facts which are bub dry
bones. Let us try and reawaken the
dormant “Nature conscience.” Ido not
believe the natural man to be destructive —
he would recognise that hie very existence
demanded that be should conserve all natu-
ral resources, and I believe it is possible
for civilized man to live much more in har-
mony with Nature than he does—to the
mutual gain of the human race. Nature
study, on right lines, provides a veritable
fairyland for the young—a source of end-
less delight. My chic, reason for enter-
NATURE: OUR MOTHER.


ing the literary .world has be™ ithat I
might possibly help in a small way to a
better understanding of man’s relation to
the “all mother Dame Nature”. I am
pleased to find that there are many who
think and fed on (this question as I do.
It has given me much happiness and con-
siderable -encouragement to have come in
touch with some of these able exponents of
Nature. (Lacking education, my efforts
must be crude and my expression faulty,
for which I be'g my reader’s tolerance.
THE LINK THAT BINDS.
What a lot of memories arise of camps in
the open on frosty nights, with, stars over-
head like a vast host of 00M, trembling
diamonds, or of nights when the ram came
down in sheets, or again of the lucky
nights among the timber, wiith a hollow
tree and a good fire in trout, when you
look up into the charred hollow above and
Wonder how many tons of stuff is swaying
overhead, and, as the wind rises, and an
ominous creak makes itself heard, you
look closely at its remainina.siinrorts. then
at the wildly swirling smoke and spitting
fire, and you decide to remain and take
your chance. The warm gflow of the fire
brings out some of the life forms from
their hiding places, where they have been
waiting the coming of the spring. A
foolish centipede goes blundering straight
into the hot ashes; with a stick you throw
him 'blear of danger and away from your
blankets. You roll up snugly and go to
sleep to the soothing note of the boo book,
and the distant howl of a dingo.
—Wonderful Mother Nature. —
A yawn and a stretching of limbs and
you open your eyes to a glorious dawn,
sunlight just catching the treetops, mag-
pies singing and every leaf holding a pen-
dant jewel, and the music of running water
in your oars. Wiith body refreshed by
the sweet air, you can drank and enjoy
of Nature’s beauty, hut where and
when possible something more substantial
for breakfast. But enough of this gene-
ralizing. We will turn our attention to
the old igum, a picturesque old ruin, with
most of its limbs gone. Two hundred
yeans ago a willy-willy dropped the seed in
an open glade. A little reddish-brown
speck of dust; it rooted deep into the rich,
brown soil, and, in time, became a mighty
S filar of strength. As it grew it ifound it
ad needs it could not supply, and enemies
it could not .oope with; in fact, that it
must depend on others ,or many services,
and give service in return. In flowering
time it needed an army of workers to
attend to the fertilizing of its seed; in re-
turn for this service it manufactured a
beautiful nectar and placed so much in the
cup of each flower generously refilling
them' as they were emptied by the honey-
eaters and insects who laboured there.
No stint, no strike, labour troubles
were unknown. It needed primers
to hold its vigorous growth in check,
and make a more spreading habit
hence it gave asylum to the op-
ossums. Various blights, scale, and
caterpillars attacked its leaves and bark,
and boring insects its trunk and branches.
Now, ifor each of these enemies Nature
had provided special workers to keep
them within bounds. Some had charge
of the flowers, some the leaves, some
the bark. Who has not watched the .tree
creeper and the tree runner at work, and
noted how the work of the one fits in and
perfects the work of the other. Others
again have charge of the hard woody por-
tions, trunk and branches, and special tools
are required for this, such as the power-
ful beak of the wyla or black cockatoo.
Some people, seeing this bird at work
making the chips fly, would say, “See
what 'mischief he does,” not knowing that
the bird was digging an enemy from the
vitals of the tree, the larva of one of the
goat moths.
—Welcome Guests.—
Look high up the left aide oif the trunk.
Two big limbs have gone, dry rot has
eaten away the strength of the higher one,
the larva of the goat moth has weakened
the lower. One sultry day 70 or SO years
ago that top limb came away with a crasin
striking the lower one in its fall, and that
too, came to the ground. Both those jag-
ged ends have become smooth by the over-
lapping bark, and both have long been the
snug home and shelters in winter of some
of the tree’s guardians. Tim tpp one is
claimed by a pair of wylas at nesting times,
the lower one is occupied by honbnok owls
Behind the trunk the jacks have a hollow,
and to the right the opossums have an
entrance —welcome guests, all of these, t>


ROSE IN THE BUD.


AMONG THE NATIVE DUCKS,


the old gum. In this big burnt out hol-
low of the trunk are the old nests oif the
welcome swallow. In due season the pert
little greeney swings its hammock nest iln
the lower branches, and the wood swallow
neeps from her nest in the loose baric 01
the trunk. These are all servants of the
tree, and the tree is a servant to them all;
and, to go deeper they are all servants to
each other; yet each is working for self
and there is no master save the law of
God, In this chat f have not touched on
the ground surface, or the great root sys-
tem beneath, where the same work still
goes on. Infinite and varied are the
agencies at 'work, and at the bottom is
the great law of universal love, universal
service, Hod's law, Nature.s lav, and to
teach this law Christ washed the feet of
Ji:a disciples.
-Keeping every further star in its course,
Aik] rules in the milky way,
To_thc furthest paint of the universe.
The same great law holds sway.
It is strange that so few men fit in with
a natural environment, that, with many,
contact with Nature awakens the desire
to destroy, whereas the law of Nature is
ever constructive.
Cod’s will to all is life,
Abundant, full, and free,
No one Ilvet.li to himself, cays God.
So service it must be.
THE RESPONSE OF LIFE.
The glorious spring is upon us, and all
Nature puts on a garment of beauty, for
is not this her wedding raiment? The law
of progenitiveness comes to the front with
renewed force. Life, glorious, throbbing
life, must he renewed, hence the garment
of gladness, Love reigns—love of mate and
love of young. A tender solicitude is over
all for the welfare of the coming new
■generations of life. It is seen in the plant
world, it is seen in the animal world, for
all life responds to Nature’s call.
—The Invitation.—
The sun rises over hill and 1 plain, river
and swamp, to the joyous song of birds.
“Como,” says the flower to the bee and
the butterfly, “come to my wedding feast
—and touch with your magic wand the
secret spring of life.” _ And the birds, are
they not all busy building wonderful cradle
homes swinging in the tree houghs, and
■ giving them sweet, soft linings of moas and
downy feathers? Some are at work in
the tussocks, others in the reeds and hol-
low trees, but all are studying most care-
fully the comfort of the new generation
to come, for all know the helpless depen-
dent need of the young. All look forward
with joy and gladness to the arduous duties
of parenthood. No need here for Schools
for Mothers. Boys and girls of Austra-
lia. and 1 -grown people, too, I hope you will
all be tender and kind to the nesting birds.
Of course I know that with some of our
imported birds it is necessary to destroy
them, os man has, by introducing them,
upset the balance of Nature, and done
harm. We have many native birds nest-
ing in our garden, and good servants we
find them. Some have become so tame
that they take bread from the hands of the
children. It is interesting to watch the
quaint little ways of these feathered folk,
who were terribly frightened at first that
we would interfere with their young, but
eventually became willing to share their
joy with us, and have now made their
homes with us for many years. We have
one scamp of an harmonious thrueh who if
good watch is not kept, will suck their
He brings hia young every year to
visit us and share the crumbs, hut does not
nest in the garden, choosing the near-by
scrub for that purpose.
—Beauty in Nature.—
That Nature, or the Supreme Intelli-
gence, has departed from the strictly use-
ful forms (in an economic sense) to evolve
forms of beauty, there can he no doubt.
This question puzzled me for some time,
but, talking some of Nature’s gems, I fol-
lowed their life history, seeking for their
place in Nature’s scheme of balance; that
is—service rendered. In some cases I
found their places, with others I always
lauded back weher T had sfcart°d from
until at last I came to the belief that it
was their service to beautify, to uolift,
and bestow a moral force instead of a
physical service. Many people think
that only man responds to the srimulus
of beauty, but I feel sure that all ani-
mated nature more or less appreciates the
beautiful. Bird life is most susceptible


to its influence, and to these bright fairy
creatures how lavish Nature has been
with her colours; what lustre and exqui-
site blending of shades there is, with
variety of feather and plume.
—Flowers and Insects. —
The beautiful coiloura and scenfa of
flowers in most cases ’.have an economic
value, being means or efforts put forth
to attract service. Even admitting thait
beauty of colour and scent exist for eco-
nomic reasons, why do beauty and variety
of form, seeing colour and scent alone at-
tract the required service? In the stately
gum or the symmetrical pine we have
beauty, yet the growth of one is haphazard
and the other is developed on a system.
Taking the insect world, some forme seem
positively harmful in the larval atage, yet
in the imago, or complete stage, are not
only wondrouely beautiful, but also render
most important service. Here the beauty
is not -apparently necessary to the service,
but to some extent may be necessary that
each species shall easily distinguish its
fellows. Who has not admired the simple,
delicate beauty of the lace wing fly, with
its eyes of gold? In -the story of creation
we read, "And God saw 'that it was good."
The law and aim of Nature is good, and
that which is ©ood evolves beauty, beauty
the joy of the creature and the glory of
the Creator. That which is ugly is but
the imperfect, the incomplete.
They said it was the will of God
That man should suffer and be still;
They mid it was His chastening rod,
We -must bo patient to His will.
But iHe who notes the sparrows fall,
Wbo filed the earth with lovely flowers,
Who gave the birds their minrtrelsy,
Wills not these sorrows ours.
His will in perfect and all good,
Tho 1 not by man so understood.
THE TWO BIRD LOVERS.
, Once upon a time there lived l , not far
from Adelaide, a certain landholder who
made friends with the birds, and' often in
the early morn, when he would be in the
dewy fields or by stack or etockj-ard, would
stay his steps to listen to their gloriously
happy voices, and to watch their grace-
ful movements and funny little ways. He
would take an interest in all the neats Ihe
found, watching the brooding bird's and
rejoicing with them in their callow, ever-
hungry young ones, and he even placed fait
caterpillars in their gaping yellow hills.
The birds knew him as a friend, and took
possession of the trees and bushes around
the homestead.
—Owl Friends. —
One evening, in spring, there came, on
soft and noiseless pinions, a pair of owls,
rejoicing the heart of this lover of birds,
who watched their coming and going in the
soft moonlight, from stack to barn—along
the hedgerows. Keen eyes were watching
for rats and 1 mice, and as they were friends
to him, why should he not give them
sanctuary? They took up their quarters
in a hollow gum in the creek, and got to
at last, recognise the tall, kindly human
as a friend who at least would not molest
them; and, as time passed, they completed
their simple nesting arrangements and the
female had l laid one egg of snowy white-
neas, But living some few miles away was
another landholder, who ako yvus a lover
of birds. He loved them so well that ha
had l drawers full of glorious creatures all
stark and stiff, with hits of white wadding
showing where their ilittle bright eyes
should have been. Hundreds of them,
lily -word, he did love birds! There wore
lovoly plumaged birds from the tropical is-
lands and from all pants of the Common-
wealth, some of which had cost him dear in
cash, but for his love of the birds, be did
not begrudge the sacrifice. To see him
gloat over his treasures, his myriad corpses
of God’s jewels, you could not doubt his
love for the birds. But —and it worried
him greatly, among all these corpses that
ho treasured so, he had not one of the
Delicate Owl. That there was a pair
down at Mr. M ’e he knew, and why
•should he not get them? But he. knew
well that Mr. M would never listen to
such a suggestion, and money would not
count there. Time went on. It worried
him for some weeks. Then —It was moon-
light He would slip down there after
■midnight and secure them. He must
have them to complete his collection of
strigiidue, and yes! for value to science.
—Love and Death. —,
Yes, she had laid one snowy white egg,
and she would soon have to lay another.


MR. BELLCHAMBERS'S DAUGHTER
with a wild robin. The bial comes
at call, and settles on the hard or
any member of the family. Note the
robin on the girl's land


KANGAROO ISLAND WALLABIES BEGGING FOR BREAD.


She was thinking of the snug hollow in the
gum tree by the creek. ‘She would have
another look around the stack, and then
to her nest. But hark! the soft “ehug”
of a slowly driven motor. It stops on the
road, and a man steps out. Yes, it is he,
the other bird lover —and look—on soft
wings, the female owl is heading for her
nest. Crack! she tails, dyeing .the grass
red with her blood. Leaving her lying
there, this “lover” watches for the male.
Stepping into the shadow he raises the
gun—crack! a thud, and the male lies gas-
ping not far from his dead mate. Picking
up the two—no, not birds, they have now
become specimens—he retraces his steps
to till•• motor. Softly it clmga away from
the place, and then getting up speed, races
home.
The morning breaks, and Mr. M is
abroad early. Yes, he had heard the shots
in the night. He walks clown past the
owl’s tree and notices the blood l on the
grass, and an odd feather or two. Walk-
ing to the road he finds a man’s tracks and
back a couple of chains, the tracks of
a motor where it had turned and gome the
way it had come. Yeis, he knew where the
owls had gone. That other lover of birds
had given them sanctuary .in one of those
drawers. Angry and saddened, he retraced
his steps, glancing with sad eyes at the
nesting hollow and at the blood on the
ground, as he passed.
—'"lnfinite Longing and Sadness.” —
That there are several kinds of bird
lovers must be .admitted, and they want
classifying. For myself, 1 prefer the term
“Nature lover.” I remember an old' travel-
ling woman coming to the door, years ago,
when my wife was picking ducks. She
threw up her hands in rapture, and ex-
claimed —“Oh, good lord, ll do love ducks.”
Here again you have a bird lover. Then
there is your sportsman. How he loves
anything with feathers on. In fact, there
are a lot of sub-species that want some die-
tinguidlung mark. As a lad I suffered an
attack of collectors’ fever. I woke to
better things by hearing the song of a bird
(a caged thrush). It Wits the soul of a
bird speaking to the soul of a boy. Infinite
longing and infinite sadness were in that
song, and as he sang of the wild woods,
rippling rills, and the glorious freedom of
Nature’s children, I stood entranced,
listening to a language strange and beauti-
ful. This, and 1 the song of his wild mate
from the top of a tall beech tree, heard
in the early morn, of a day long past
caused me to readjust my values.
And that readjustment still l holds good.
It la admitted 'that allowance for museums
and scientific research must be made —but
men will travel around the world to secure
the last specimen of a dying specie. I hold
the idea that science would be more truly
benefited by paving the species first and
getting the specimens afterwards. But
then., you see, it is the rarity of a species
that gives the value, and hence the un-
seemly haste in the destruction of those
very species. Truly, it is time that man
grew wiser.
SHY WILD BIRDS.
The natural altitude of wild crea-
tures is be friendly 'towards man.
Man originally was God’s steward
and assistant—the protector and friend of
wild creatures, and they looked upon him
as their Providence. But, since man
tunrnd out an unjust steward, they have
lost faith in him —yet this beautiful faith
and friendship can easily be regained. The
quick intelligence of birds soon recognises
a friendly disposition, and they respond to
each advances. I have never been long
in a bush camp without establishing
friendly relations with my neighbours of
the bush, mostly birds. The birds’ first
moves are generally prompted by curi-
osity: they will subject you to a close
scrutiny, gradually approaching nearer, and
often scolding you and chattering among
themselves. But throw them a few
crumbs and leave them a drop of water,
and in a few days you are on their visiting
list, and most entertaining visitors they
are.
—A Pathetic Case. —
The shepherds’ companion quickly makes
friends with busbmen, and generally gets
a .good reception, but I have not seen
much of him in the malice country. Years
ago, 'when living on the 'Murray, one of
these foirds regularly visited us. It always
came in at meal times and shared our
food, like one of the family, until nesting
time came, then it always disappeared for


■some time. One clay there came three of
t'he “smart" people from the township, wiih.
pea rifles, taking shots at any small birds
they could see. The worst culprit of them
ill .was a local doctor. I got this
gentleman’s wool oil on one occasion by
telling him what I thought of such con-
duct. Well, after these brutes hud gone
back to the township, toe family sat down
to tea, and being Sunday, was an early
tea. "Will'' Wag” was missed at the
early part of the meal, but at last he came
in and stood looking up at us with troubled
dyes. The children throw him Homo uiou,
which he tried to pick up, but could not.
On a closer inspection we found the poor
little creature hud his lower hill shot clean
off. Poor little bird! None of us will
ever forget the mute appeal in his eyes.
The children wanted no more tea that
night, and I noticed several of thorn were
crying. Alas! there are too many like that
doctor. Of course it was “sport,” you
know, and “good practice.” On one of
my trips into the malice a pair of chest-
nut-backed ground birds introduced them-
selves, and became regular 'visitors. The
male T noticed always treated his lady
most gallantly, and he would always see
that she got her share of the food. A
pair of bob-tail lizards also introduced
themselves, and made camp under my pil-
low'. When I turned them out they would
just come back again. These lizards were
always around at mealtimes, and would
eat anything, hut cheese rind was their
special weakness. I was in that camp
for six weeks, my pensioners increasing all
the time, and among them were some
butcher birds. But these were great
bullies, and no other birds were allowed
when their visit was due. The following
summer I spent a few weeks in the same
camp, and I had not been long there when
along came the ground lords, quite pleased
to see me again; no ice to break thus time.
—A Blessed Intuition, —
1 hare spent some very hot weather in
the -malice scrub, when the birds were
suffering greatly from thirst. These birds,
catching the glint of liquid in the billy by
my have given me to undei-
ctand they wanted a drink, so,
dipping out a tea-spoonful of tea, I have
herd it to them while they drank. In two
different camps I got birds to take it from
my band. On, the second occasion there
was a big bush fire raging near, and the
heat was terrific. I was camping near
the: edge of the scrub, when a pipet came
alongside, gasping, and with wings droop-
ing, T was having dinner, and it had found
Qut that I bad the means of quenching
thirst. By way of answering its mute
appeal, I held out a teaspoonful of tea, and,
■watching my face, it came closer, and,
apparently satisfied that I .meant no harm,
drank the tea with great relish, and came
the next day for more. Poor little chap,
he would be disappointed the third day, as
1 thought it advisable to get further from
the /ire, and left that ca.mp. The birds
nesting around my camp soon got confi-
dence enough' to remain on their eggs when
I came to have a peep at them, and they
soon became used to my voice. Being
alone in the hush, T often talk to the
birds, and ; n my work among our wild
creatures I find it a great help in winning
their confidence. tam always interested
in their domestic arrangements, and their
wonderful care for their young especially
attracts. Also I have found they are
capable of kindness to birds apart from
their own young, and I have known in-
stances where they have adopted the young
of other biVdfi. Ak-n, does not the young
cuckoo find other birds to feed it when
it leaves the nest besides its foster
parents? Birds will help others when in
distress, and I have seen good evidence
that the process of reasoning goes on in
their active little brains. Pert, beauti-
ful title fairies of the wikis, they deserve
our care and protection. I have told you
how I gave drink to the thirsty birds.
Later on T will tell yon how they were
the means of getting: water when two of
us were doing a “perisher” on a long bush
track.
FEATHERED FRIENDS TO THE RESCUE,.
I think the year would he about 1881,
and the time was a few days after Christ-
mas. Hot! My word, it was hot humxj-
ing our hhiey. We had covered more than
100 miles of the settled districts, and our
last stage had been the 3()-raile trip up the
lake. Skipper MeKeath and his sns were
old friends, and it had been a pleasant
break in the journey. The oatmeal_water
also had been in much demand, for we
were having one of the real old-fashioned
summers when you could cook an egg and
rasher of bacon on a sheet of iron exposed
to the sun. We landed at W , and


waited for our mail, and, after gathering
what information we could as to waters eu
route, turned our faces towards the desert
track. '.Mote than 100 miles separated us
from the next township, and 90 of this was
a desert—a monotonous sea o c whip-stick
malice, sand, and limestone, with such
weird prickly undergrowth as could hold
its own through the long dry heat of sum-
mer. My brother, poor fellow, had met
with an accident that marred iris life sadly,
It had turned him from a bright, active
young fellow into a man of taciturn and
morose disposition, yet he proved kindly
and considerate to me who had not his
strength of body.
—The Most Terrible Death. —
Just before leaving W the news came
in that a traveller was lost, his swag hav-
ing been found on the desert track.
Can we not picture his terrible fate,
lost, perishing of thirst? No . shade
from the scorching rays of the burning orb
overhead, maddened by the cruel pangs, ho
leaves hie swag and throws off must of his
clothes. Dying eyes vainly search the en-
circling ocean of scantily clothed sand
waves that touch the horizon in every
direction, and that vaguely suggest a petri-
fied sea. Staggering steps are ever iTuvel-
ling in circles, the victim looks up at, and
listens to, the croaking of two hovering
crows, and knows why they have followed
him these two days past. Yesterday he
swore and raved at them, but still they
kept him leisurely in view. Yesterday
they had left him for a while, and he had
seen them fly straight for where, like a ball
of fire, the sun was setting in the west.
Had he but known it, they had gone for
that—to him—most priceless thing, water,
which was but five miles from where he
had stood watching them go. He falls,
and. rising to his knees, falls again. Alas!
no human aid is near. The only moving
objects are the two black fiends of crows.
Wheeling around, they flout him with their
wings, for, living they still hold him m
fear, and the dead they fear not, for they
would know- if the life had yet left his poor
withered body. There it lies, alone, in the
vast silent sombre, desert space. It has
been some mother’s hoy and she will wait
and wonder why the long years bring to
tidings. Thus, pondering ami picturing
the fete of the man who was lost, a gloom
was cast) upon us, which was not
lightened when we passed some of the
poor fellow’s things along the track. Evi-
dently he had been lost for several days,
perhaps a week. We kept a sharp look-
out, but dared not leave the track, as our
water supply was just what we could carry
in the one biilly we had between ns, and
we had already had a foretaste of the
pangs ot thirst, for even with doing our
best it would not carry u.s far. Our
faithful old dog. Nero, had bo share out
ecant .supply. When thin ty he would bail
us no and bark at the. billy. We called
at several,stations during the week, and
were hospitably received at each one (ge
nerally by the cook). Not knowing the
track, we were several times hardly put to
for water, and much of our sufferings came
through having no water hags to carry a
sufficient -supply. Several ‘of our expe-
riences were very strongly impressed on my
memory, and these I will give, for they
show at least the value of a knowledge of
the habits of God’s wild creatures.
The sun was getting few in the western
sky, and we had not found the water
marked on our plan. For some miles ive
had been anxiously scanning the country
on our right, looking for a clump of desert
gum that should mark our watering place.
Sweeping the distant view, my glance hit
on some moving objects about three-quar-
ters of a mile distant. These turned out
to be six emus, and they were making a
course nearly parallel with our own. See-
ing that they kept moving in a straight line,
I was comforted' by the knowledge that
they were making for water, and, being
careful not to alarm these majestic crea-
tures. we kept them in view until the
clump of desert gum came into the field
of our vision. Putting on pace we broke
covet near the waterhom. fearing off the
thirsty emus and filling ourselves to reple-
tion. We then made preparation for
camp as usual by spreading green leaves
on the ground for a mattress, and lying
down we watched the stars and pondered
on the mysteries of life. One day, as we
were travelling along chewing malice leaves
to try and moisten, our parched lips, I
noticed an. .emu Pad slanting across our
track, a few yards on another, pad crossed
at right angles, a few yards further on a
third pad ca.me eloping across the track.
This was nature’s signboard, and,, to one
who understood her language, it spelt
water. The sharply -converging lines
showed it to he -close at band, and, turn-
ing back to the centre pad, we dropped our
swags -and followed it in to where was a
granite outcrop. An aperture about 2 feet
across disclosed a natural underground tank
full of beautiful cold water. We refreshed
ourselves with the lifegiving fluid, and,
noticing the absence of human signs, de-
cided to mark the place for the benefit of
other thirsty travellers. Going back to
the track, we built a -cairn of stone point-
ing in towards the water, and cut the word
"water” lengthways up a nearby mallee
stem. Then we broke a clear track to the


hole, and built another cairn of stone, and
placed a slab of stone over the hole to
prevent evaporation. This I afterwards
regretted, as it would prevent our good
friends the emus from getting a drink,
which was a poor return for favours re-
ceived.
Privations and Pluck
There being time to do a few more miles,
we did not camp, and this we afterwards
regretted. Our supper that night, and on
several other occasions, was raw oatmeal
just mixed with a little of the precious
water. This diet oia not agree with us,
as it always produced heartburn. When
the dawn broke and fierce old Sol flung his
fiery rays across the forbidding landscape,
it was with some misgiving that we faced
the seemingly endless track with scarce the
moans to wet our ling in the billy. We
suffered greatly this day, but the afternoon
brought a distant v.-ooUhed in sight, and
revived one drooping spirits. This place
wo'reached in fair time, feeling happy that
another bad stage was over. The following
afternoon we struck a water hole, the
water of which was so bad that we had
to filter every dron through my old felt
hat. Wc had to camp there, as no
other water was available. On the
track again we went, with the hot
wave still holding, but a slight improve-
ment was noticed in the flora around, and
large patches of desert gum were met with.
The mail boy passed along, the only human
being we had met on this track since leav-
ing W . Passing through a clump of
gum, hot, dry, and miserable, the ever-
pressing need weighing heavy on our
spirits. Yet, with senses alert to Nature's
signs, T noticed a tree-creeper .leave the
trunk of a fair-sized desert pun that stood
about SO yards in front. Settling on a
neighbouring branch he wiped ids beak,
shook himself, and started to plume ms
feathers. Once more was Nature speak-
ing, and again it was the word “water .
Could she be cheating ns? No signs of
water could be seen on the ground surface,
but what about that tree trunk. Walk-
ing up to it, I found, about six feet from
the ground a hole. Plunging my hand
into this my fingers came into contact
with cold water. A welcome .supply was
stored in the hollow 9f the tree, and we
speedily got to work with the pannircau and
ladled out full measure for ourselves and
the billy, not forgetting old Nero, and
thanking God dn our hearts, that three
times on this very trying trip (which took
up a week) He had provided for our need
through tl\e birds. They were truly our
feathered friends. A* our goal was now in
sight, and I have kept my promise to tell
your readers how the birds gave us water
on the lone desert track, I will dose by re-
calling the episode of c-ne -Tost traveller.
Some throe or four years back, I met the
man who had found the swag, and through
him I learnt tuat it was not for many years
that they had found his bleached and scat-
tered bones, Those black devils, the crows,
had nob followed for nothing. Some years
later a family travelling through missed a
lad when neoring this same place. He had
chased a rabbit into the 'scrub, and though
the scrub was scoured for males around he
could not be traced. But on the same
ckv, 12 months after, his bones were found
at’ a deserted station, where I was told
was abundance of water, but the well wag
deep, ami he had no means to draw it.
This poor lad must have lingered long, as
he had travelled far from where he was
lost. What terrors must have beset hia
lonely track that led to death! I, too,
have known the hopelessness of the “lost
in’ the Australian bush but it was under
■winter conditions, and there was no lack
of -water. This is a vastly different pro-
position, for one is saved the agony of
thirst, and hunger is the lesser of the two
evils. Perhaps some day I will spin that
yarn.
MALLEE FOWL.
"When the last rays of the seating sun
tip the malice and the pine with gold—
when, all is silent save for the whispering
of the night .winds that gently stir the
myriad leaves, or the sudden whirr of
■wmigs as a Mated thirsty bronzewing
flashes -past, bound for some settler’s tank
■—.then it is the playtime of the mallee fowl,
listen! It comes from the rising ground,
the solemn moaning call of the mallee
cock—Uh, uh, uh, whoo-oomc, whoo-oome,
whoo-oome! Again, it is repeated, inma-
te rut, and! searching, and far-reaching.
Hark! There comes the answer, Whauagh-
whauagh j whauagh—with a rising cadence
on the end. ’Tis the female. Standing
there among the dead 'leaves .and bark, yon
can hardly distinguish it is a bird. But,
see! Her bright, watchful eye has marked
the approach of the male, and she now


PUTTING IN THE HEATING MATERIAL
LAYING


MALE PLACING EGG IN POSITIOX.
THE MALE REPLACING GOVERING


greets him with a softly tittered whoo-how,
whoo-bow; and, in a deeper tone, he re-
plies whoo-how, whoo-hovv. With tail
spread and sweeping the ground, and high-
lifted wings, he -approaches at a run,
passes one uplifted wing over her crouch-
ing (body, and dashes away down a Jong
open isle between the trees. Away they
go, first one then the other in the lead;
wheeling, feinting, strutting, hiding, back
and forth they go. As they wheel the
near wing sweeps the ground, and the
other wing is held high. Truly a pretty
sight to watch them display their charm-
ing plumage and grace of action —a eight
that is seldom seen by man, as the birds
are very shy and difficult to approach.
—The Betrothal.— -
Wo will suppose ttie mouth is now April,
and that this pair of birds have decided to
(become life partners. During the past
ages mounds innumerable have, become dot-
ted over all the most favoured situations.
There is no need, now, that there, are
more old mounds than birds to use them,
to start on. a fresh one. The situations
most favoured are those with a north or
north-eastern aspect, and the mounds are
so placed 'that they get the sun through
the warmest hours of the day. Well, the
birds, having, with much talking together
and thorough examination of the ground
for material, decided on one of these old
mounds, they proceed at once to clean out
the pit. Some of those pits are of con-
siderable size. I measured one 9 ft. in
diameter and 2 ft. 3 in. in depth. When
nearing the bottom, the male takes his
stand about half way down, the female
takes the lowest level, and throws ito 'the
male, the male throwing the stuff over the
rim. The material is all thrown toy the
feet, alternating, every three or four
throws from one foot to 'the other. The
excavated material forms a bank around
the pit. and 1 when it is completed they turn
their attention to the material for the hot-
bed. II situated on sloping ground, the
material will be mostly brought from the
higher side, the birds’ intelligence telling
them that it is easier to (bring it down hill
than up. The material is first scratched
out from under the bushes and mallee into
the most open routes to the pit; then,
starting at the nearest point to the pit,
they worked outward, along the lines, mov-
ing all the debris towards the pit. When
they reach the end, they return and start
again at the nearest point. As all lines
converge on the pit, all material must
eventually finish in the nit. Consider-
ably time is taken up over this
filliniv. and when the pit is at last heaped
full there is much work in deosicating the
core and so much of the surface aa wii!
not be needed for the solid hotlbed. The
dessicated material is used to mix with
the sand covering, to make it porous for
.passage of air. The place of the core
eventually (becomes the egg chamber.
Daring the winter months the rains per-
meate the mass, and decomposition starts,
which will provide a bottom heat. In
conjunction with this, the (birds make large
use of solar heat, and thus their
work ia almost continuous. About mid-
September laying commences, and the ave-
rage interval (between, the eggs is about
six days. It is now that they start put-
ting on the .blanket (i.e.J, the sand cover-
ing. The lower tier of eggs is placed on
its small ends', in contact with the walls
of the hotlbed, and this position is chosen
to_ facilitate the escape of the Chick, thus
guiding it straight upward through the
loose sand covering. ■ If these eggs were
placed on their side the chick would meet
the hard walls _of the egg chamber and
.perish. The (birds are very industrious.
1 have frequently seen the male 'working
(by moonlight on the approach of bad
weather, putting on. extra covering. After
laying commences all the. heavy work is
done by the male.
—A Discovery of 1884.
In the summer of .1834 I found my first
mallee fowl mound in the then pretty
dense scrub that stretched from near
Palmer to iMa.nn.um, and uip and down the
flats for many long miles. The finding
of this meet was the starting point
in the moat interesting and fasainating
nature-study I ever took in hand. During
the last 15 years I have had
many lonely tramps, vigils, and camps,
sometimes lasting for six weeks at a time,
away in the dry mallee lands.
Not much was known of the habits of
the mallee fowl when I set out to win Na-
ture’s secrets. Much was surmised, but
how far from the truth these surmises were
can be seen by comparing my notes with
standard works on our fauna. Among
Aher things, I have seen it stated that (1)
this (bird uses its wings as a brush to
sweep tire material of the mound together;
(2) that the birds were p'olvgamio; (3) that
thev were communistic; (4) that they held
the egg upright with one foot while they
covered it up (what with? the other foot?—
what did they stand on, I wonder?); (5)
that they assisted l the chick to cseape from
the mound; and, (6) that a clutch of eggs
was laid in the top of the mound. I con-
trast mv own personal experience of the
mallee fowl:—{1) The feet only are used:
(2) the (birds are monogaraic; (4) the ex


planationps very simple, and 1 have drawn
frequent illustrations of it; (o) unassisted
(see account in this article); (6) see des-
cription in this article. The question of sex
habit was settled! toy removing the birds
from 30 mounds. By this means they (were
proved to be monogamlie, aa in every in-
stance a single pair of birds was at -work,
With regard to air for the hatching chick,
the sandy cove-ring toeing mixed with a
large amount of defalcated leaves admits of
the passage of air The mound is fre-
quently opened, and the birds always
break up the crust formed by rain, to
admit of the passage of air.
In incubation the shortest period noted
was 55 days, and the longest 99 days; ithe
latter would be due to retarded incubation.
In a proper working mound the number
of eggs would not be more than nine when
the hatching started; tout, should there toe
delay in reaching proper temperature, the
number of eggs would increase until the
hatching started.
—A Mirade of Independence.—
As the chick is born with fully developed
flight feathers, it has the immediate power
of flight, and is equipped in every way for
an independent existence. It has, as it
wiere, an oid head on young shouldem. Its
food, consisting of seeds and insects, is pro-
cured- chiefly by scratching, and the various
acacia seeds in many parts form its chief
diet. Thinking a model' section, of mound,
showing intenor construction; birds, eggs,
and also chick in transit, would prove an
attractive exhibit in our Museum, I offered
the suggestion, with sketch of same, to the
■then fiireotor, Sir Edward Stirling, I was
pleased to see that the authorities later on
adapted my suggestion; but, to make this
exhibit technically correct, a little more
material is required around the base of the
mound. This could be done without any
disturbance of bir-tta, On the question of
how the chick emerges through a covering
of 2 ft. to 2 ft. 6 in. in depth, I was lucky
enough on three occasions, when opening
mounds, during the long study of the sex
haibit, to meet newly hatched chicks in
transit. This enabled me to examine their
•positions and mode of procedure. When
travelling upwards, the shoulders are used
for boring through the loose sand, while,
with the feet, they push themselves up-
wards; the head 1 is carried flat against the
front part of the body; a screen of bristle-
like feathers guides the (particles clear of
the nostrils, nresevtlng the chick from
suffocation, Regarding aeration of mound,
I suppose the heat wnuM' euro*' a certain
movement in the air. The birds, om open-
ing the mound 1 , test the temperature by in-
serting the beak (in the walls of the hot-
bed) past the nostrils, and remain thus for
about half a minute. There are many
interesting episodes connected with this
long trail after -knowledge, and much of
interest attaches to the birds I have in.
captivity. I have secured a -wonderful
scries of photographs illustrating their
life habits.
The following anecdote speaks wed for
the malice fowl’s sagacity. A new settler in
■the mailee, who was much worried over the
water question, on passing 'through adja-
cent scruto, one day noticed- a fair catch-
ment, but of small area. On tihfis he dug
a temporary hole just to catch a few
buckets of water when the next rain should
come. It was long ere the rain came, but
'Come at last it did. Judge of iris sur-
prise when, instead of a nice hole of water,
ihe found a small .Mil of loam and leaves.
A pair of mailee fowls in search of a likely
spot, had found a pit ready dug. Straight-
way they had raked all the rubbish in, and
■here was their incubator, complete and in
full working order! History does not say
how the rival claimants settled the matter.
Probably the birds were fined all the eggs
laidjn that mound.
With many of our feathered folk court-
ing days are iperennial—-with the mailee
fowl each spring sacs counting days re-
newed. With them the joy of life finds ex-
pression in frolicsome play and tantalizing
coquettishness.
When spring is old, and dewy winds
‘Blow from the south with odour sweet,
I see my love, in shadowy groves,
Speed down dark aisles on shining feet.
Sometimes these games end tragically,
for whan Reynard happens to he a spec-
tator the finish is a swirl of flying feathers
and the mournful calling of a lonely bird
for one that comes no more.
—Mature’s Gentleman.—
The mailee cock is one of Nature’s gen-
tlemen, in that he treats his spouse in- a
gallant manner by taking all the hardest
work upon- himself. The frequent opening
of the mound for sun heat and the gradual
replacement of the heated sand are his
work, taking up many hours of the many
days on which this is done. Ilia intervals
for rest are spent under a nearlby Ibueh,
and at night, as though loth to leave
the scene of their labour of love, his
shadowy form is often seen sleeping on the
■highest noint of the mound. Male and
female do not remain together, but I think
are usually within call, as on the day on
which the egg is laid they always appear
on the mound together. On- moot other


SHOWING CONTENTS OF EGG CHAMBER
(three of the later egss placed outside the circle)
TWELVE-DAY CHICK AND showing large car office and the development of flight
feathers in the newly-hatched young. (Note blend of colouring with surroundings)


USING SOLAR HEAT MALE REPLACING BEATEDA MATERIAL.
SECTION OF MOUND, SHOWING CONSTRUCTION


occasions it is 'the male alone wiho will
be at the mound. Two _ long months
elapse ere their patience is rewarded 'by
the appearance of the first chick. Then
one morning, while the songs of the scrub
birds are filling the air with gladness, the
malice cock notices in a slight holloiw on
the top of the mound which he hadl been
watching, a movement as of sand falling
from its side.
—Wonderful Offspring.—
A few minutes pass,, then: with a lifting
motion, two feathery shoulders appear—a
kick, and there annate the first chick o!
the season. It had taken. ,10 hours in its
dark and laborious journey up from the
egg chamber to the beautiful light of tha
sweet early morn. See! It lifts its head and
looks round, then stands on its feet, and
with a staggering run, disappears into tlhe
bush —its parents watching and contentedly
wihoo-hoowing in soft tomes of pleasure.
Prom now on through the next three
months, these chicks will come, sometimes
one, sometimes two, a week—each chick,
as it arrives, disappearing into the bosom
of Nature. Bach is fully equipped lor life’s
battle from the start; and instinctively
alert to possible danger, they each and) all
run for the shelter of the bushes. Just
watch one, see its bright eyes follow the
movement of a small beetle, then it picks a t
it and finds it is good. Again, it is a seed
that attracts its attention, that too is good.
Under the shelter of the bushes it finds
just about all it needs, and is hidden from
the gaze of the soaring hawks. Soon
schooled to know its proper food, having a
very keen sense of hearing, and born with
the power of flight, this wonderful little
creature is well fitted for an, inidapedtent
existence, and like Topsy, it “just grows"
—no father nor mother’s care needed.
Though it is hatched with proper wing
feathers, the covering of tlhe rest ol the
body is somewhat different, but this ia soon
covered Iby ordinary feathers, which form
as it were, an overcoat, for they do not
moult at this time. It also quickly grows
a long tail, which very considerably alters
its appearance. The chicks scatter over
the surrounding country, pursuing the
oven tenor of their allotted way. 1 have
noticed them three and 1 four miles away
from the nearest mound.
—Adaptable to Circumstances.—
They dio not seem to .reach maturity until
pretty well the third season—but, aa they
acquire the calls or language of their kind
during the second season., there must then,
toe some aßSOcia'tdon. between individuals
about that time. Preparation for nesting
made during the ‘third season—
such ae digging out and filling the nit, with
tne tisual leaves and didbris, ready for the
coming seaison. A period of six months
.viii often elapse between, the start and
the laying of the first egg, but that they
are 'able m cases of emergency to much
more quickly form a hot bed incubator, wifi
oe neen from the following. On one of
my trips I had under observation two
mounds 'that a scrub roller bad passed over.
One was left about .12 chains from the
standing mafflee, and this, one of the birds
continued to use, as fresh eggs were- still
Jaw there. The other mound was about
two chains from the edge of the clearing,
and the heavy roller had gone right over
the top, crushing It out of shape. The
birds forsook 'toe mound, and., for some
reason, it would hatch no chicks. As the
season was still early I concluded the birds
would make a fresh start. The scrub was
fairly dense around there, /but, as I had
to pass that way each day .en. route for
other mounds, I determined to beep a look
nut. It was nearly "two weeks later that
J. at last located them, and, as I had! sus-
pected, they had taken possession) of
another old mound, and it was already
ruled with debris, and) waiting, I suppose,
for a shower. About seven weeks lalter,
on returning from further out, I again
visited this mound, and found five, eggs
were in .the egg chamber. These I did not
(asturib,
—A United ,Family.—
My experience has shown, me that occu-
pied mounds are generally in groups, gar
from 200 yards to half a mile apart. It
was not unusual to find three eepararte
pairs near neighbours when the birds were
more plentiful. Studying the sex habit
gave me a tremendous lot of extra work,
as mounds over a wide area had to be regu-
larly visited at stated intervals, after
having secured 'the birds. Each mound
was named and. entered in my diary. On
one occasion I had' removed' a pair of birds
from the Quondong mound, but, to my sur-
prise, on a subsequent visit 'the mound waa
undergoing the process of sun heating.
ODening the mound I found no more
'than I had left the previous werk. My
next visit found work still being done, buit
no fresh eggs. I now thoroughly searched
surrounding country, and then, discovered
the Short Scrub mound. This was within
easy reach of the Quondong mound. It
took me several days to secure this pair of
birds, and then all work ceased, at the
t'nondong mound. This was nretty good
evidence that this male bird had bean


carrying on the 'Work of the two mounds
after the removal of ‘the first pair.
The birds I secured on these trips were
to the orders of various zoological gardens,
museum and sanctuaries, and by Govern-
ment permit, Ail the expenses of these
trips were to come out of the proceeds,
but on some of the turps I was consider-
ably out of pocket through so much time
being taken up by observation. In the
search after knowledge some sacrifice must
be made. I am sorry to say that some
of our settlers still trap and shoot these
wonderful creatures for the table, and also
make large use of their eggs. _ That these
birds are doomed to extinction in their
wild state is very evident. That they
can be saved 1 iby stocking reservations and
sanctuaries is equally assured. Thanks to
the efforts of the S.A. Ornithological So-
ciety, these birds have been placed on the
Kangaroo Island Reserve, where, if unmo-
lested, they should become established.
But, though some years have passed, no
one has examined the country to see what
they are doing in the way of mound Ibuild-
ftrom knowledge gained of tihei structure
of the mounds, I have, when occasion
needed, built them and hatched etneka.
To get my birds to start breeding, I used
the power of, suggestion. Previous to
this, I had kept a few of these birds for
years with never an egg or attempt at
nesting, but by keeping .them prompted at
the night season, X at least got them inte-
rested. They took it up and. worked vigo-
rously all the following winter, eventually
bringing 'their work to a successful issue.
The most amusing part of the whole busi-
ness .was when a recently acquired wild
male of quiet disposition began to take
interest jin the work. He straightway as-
sumed the position of overseer of works,
and ‘would stand on the. bank, apparently
advising and directing the work of excava-
ting the pit—occasionally going down to
show them how it should be done, the
other birds standing aside and listening to
him (as he talked in low tones) with the
respect due to superior 'wisdom. It was
really funny, but, as these birds seldom
agree to a third party at breeding time,
I removed him from that aviary. In con-
clusion, I would urge the importance of
concerted Government action, throughout
the Commonwealth for the saving, for all
time, of the most wonderful fauna g and
flora this world contains. Surely it is
worth some effort!
THE SOOTY KANGS OF KANGAROO ISLAND.
A KANGAROO STORY.
This is the story of the Sooty Kangs, as
told by Darby, the Captive, and is written
for the young folks. The scene is the
dense bush of Kangaroo Island.
With his little hands he opened the
curtains of his mother’s pouch and peeped
out. His first sight was of a grey,
dripping world of wet bush. It had been
warm and comfy, with plenty of sweet,
warm milk in the pouch; but, as time
passed, and hie body grew larger and hia
brain began to work, he got restless and
wanted to see what was doing in the
wonderful place outside, that his mother
had whispered to him about sometimes.
Again he pulled open the curtain
and thrust forth his little head, getting
hia nose dragged through the wet grass for 1
hia pains, for hia mother was feeding in
the high grass of the river flats. He
looked forward and could see hia mother’s
nose and arms, and, at the side, he saw
Ilia father, who put his head down and
gave him a soft caressing touch with hia
velvety nose. Further out, in the moon-
light, hie big brother was having a friendly
bout with another young buck.
But hark! down the wind comes a
sound, a sharp wouf, wouf, wouf, several
times repeated. His mother and father
sit up and look at one another. He can
see his father’s ears trying the wind; one
ear moves hack, the other forward, then
one to tihe side, then both forward—-and
then, as they start in long leaps for the
dense sc.ruh of the ironstone hill, he
quickly popped his little head back, with
a vague sense of fear in his heart. Crash-
ing over the hushes, they at length strike
a cut line, and have easier going for about
a mile; then, turning off into some timber,
and take a breather and listen in-
tently for that terrifying _ sound.
Nothing further was heard, and it being
time for camp, they made 'their way more
leisurely Ip a dense thicket of ncoocia bush
a the highest point, and. as the rain still
came down, they made camp under some
grass trees, and. sheltered from wind and
rain, laid themselves down to wait the


MUTUAL LOVE


A GOOD SAMPLE.


coming of evening. Joey was curious to
know the reason of this fear and hurried
flight, hut was told to wait until lie was
older. Thus three months passed away.
The old doe always saw to it that he got
a choice picking cf good feed besides the
milk.* Then, one evening, just as the sun
was sinking an the west, and before leav-
ing camp, he tumbled right out on hia
long, ehaky legs, and stood up with his
little hands on his mother, while the old
doe fondled and cleaned him. The old
man came and put his soft nose to him
and gently patted him with his great
Strong hands. Then, as it was time to
po dn search of feed, he was ordered back
to the pouch, and in long leaps they set
out for a clearing where the most wonder-
ful. sweet, long grass grows. But it waa
late before they could venture on it, as, on
reaching the edge of the scrub, they gw
the scent of those tall strange animals
that ware destroying it,he scrub and making
this sweet tempting grass grow m its
place. And down the wind came disquiet-
ing sounds, so thev spent several hours by
the river flats.
—Strange Experiences.—
It was here that the doe told Toey about
the fearsome creatures that stood up liko
a stick, but did not jump; and that they
had other terrible animals with them that
always killed the sooty kangs. “We are
always in fear of our lives,” said the old
doe, "but it was not always so. The far-
off olden times were times of peace. The
emus, wallabies, and ourselves lived hap-
pily together, and our numbers were very
great. One day a strange thing happened.
From over the big waters, that are nor.
good to drink, came a big thing with white
wings spread to the wind. At last it
stopped, not far from the shore, where the
land runs out on each side—then a smaller
thine left its side, on which were a lot
of these strange stick-like creatures. A
crowd of the sooty kangs watched them
land. They had no fear, juefc friendly
cariosity—for, before that time, wo had no
enemies. Even when they came right up.
it was the same. The sooty kangs wanted
to know more of these strange creatures,
hut when the sooty kangs began to go
down before their clubs, it was realized
that enemies were among them, and they
fled to the scrub for safety. After a
*Tt is usual wlicn ueo-Htii*' fn-r rlio tloo to so ar-
range lUnt the young, whiln still in the pouch,
can xcach and cat of the most succulent herbage,
when feeding my k<T:gaToos I have 'frequently
•een the doe push a pontion along within reach
of the young ono before starting feeding herself.
time, those creatures came to live here,
and now our lives ate spent in fear.
Therefore I must make it plain to you,
that if these creatures send their fierce
animals after us, I cannot escape if I
carry you, as they would speedily overtake
and destroy us both. So you will be
thrown into a bush and must lie quietly,
and. if I escape, I will return later for
you. If I don’t, you must shift for your-
self. The old man can fight, but generally
they are too many for him.”
With that, they made a start for the
sweet grass clearing, which was entered
from a point that ran back into the
scrub. Just on the edge of the last
bushes they stayed awhile, the old man
doing some scouting. From the
lowest point of scrub ha
had a good view of the
sweet grass clearing, and, after an interval
of looking, listening, and sniffing the air,
he _ returned with word that all seemed
quiet in the direction of the ‘TongstickB 1 "
camp, and that Smutty-nose was lower
down with his doe and Joey—also that
Holey-ear waa a little nearer to them with
his_ family. Smutty-nose was always rash,
and as he was nearest the hmgsfcicks, they
should get timely warning if danger were
abroad. With that, they ventured on the
sweet graes, which Joey found wonderfully
nice, especially the milky heads. Thus
they were enjoying themselves, and the
moon had scarce moved the lengfch of a
leap, when, from behind some bushes down
the clearing, came a flash of light and a
stunning report. Instantly they were
erect, and, looking in that direction, saw
Smutty-nose topple over, give a convulsive
kick, and lie still. Jumping to the shelter
of some bushes, we stood, a frightened
croup, while Smutty’s doe came tearing; by
with two of those fierce animals after her.
As she was passing, she threw her Joey
into some bushes just in front of us, and
there the poor little thing sat and trembled
with fear. As nothing could be done, we
hid to leave it. just telling it to be quiet
and wait.
—Tragedy.—
I waa sharply ordered into the pouch,
and, as the terrible animals were entering
the scrub at the tar end close to Smutty-
doe’s heels, we started for the high ridge.
The quick beating of my mother’s heart
caused me to lie still and quiet with fear.
We had not gone far when a gutteral
"whoosh” from the old man who was in the
lead, caused us to stop. Peeping out, I
found we were on a clear, straight line,
hushes and branches of trees all built along
one side, with handy gaps here and there
for getting through. But what was this


the old man was looking at? A poor old
doe was lying dead near one of the gaps,
with something 'tight around her neck, one
end of which was fast to a large branch,
and, sitting u- near its dead mother, was
a poor little Joey, shivering and crying
■with the cold. “She’s gone,” said the
old man, ‘and its the work of the ' long-
etieks,” for I smell them on the thing
around her neck.’ With that he told us
he had known of these things long ago, but
there was no time then to tell us more.
He simply gave us orders never to at-
tempt the gaps, but jump oyer the brush,
as the “longsticks” put magic in the gaps,
which worked evil on any creature which
tiled to pass through. “Poor little thing,
said rav mother, looking at the Joey,/ that
makes two, to-night, left to perish an the
cold.” “Two!” said the old man, "There
will ho more than these two, seeing that
this work goes on in many other places.
But we can do nothing for them, for they
are too young to follow us; and, as the
"longsticks” will be coming this way soon,
we had better be going.” With that, we
resumed our journey and reached our camp
on the high ridge at an earlier hour than
usual. We finished our feed with the
coarser growths of the hush, saddened by
what we had seen that night, and did not
venture near the sweet gra;s for some
time, but kept to the dense scrub and the
coarse bush feed, just visiting the river
flats late at night for water, and having
to he very careful, as the longsticks’ magic
was laid along the river when the hot
weather came. And with us all the time,
was a vague, uneasy sense of danger; a
danger that was not visible, which was
very trying to the nerves.
Meanwhile Holey Ear and his lot had re-
joined us; but Smutty’s doe had 1 not been
seen since the night of the sweet grass.
Holey Ear was a grim fighter who had
suffered at the hands of the Long Sticks,
and it was whispered that he had slain
one of their fierce animals by drowning
him in a hole in the River, and that from
the bank a Long Stick had pointed some
magic at him which made smoke and noise,
and left a bleeding hole in his ear. Leap-
ing up the opposite bank, he had escaped
hut was marked ifor life with the hole
through hia ear. He was old and wise
and being so, had some standing in the
OQiinci’o of the sooty kangaroos. Holey
Ear nearly always camped near us. I was
glad of this, and always felt safer for his
presence. He was so wise, and knew all
about the Long Stick’s magic, 'and was
very brave. We young ones could always
sleep the better, knowing be was near.
—A Warning.—
One .day, just as the aim was going down,
we were much startled by hearing him call
out, “Whoosh.” He was intently watch-
ing the scrub toward White Stone Ridge.
Observing his moving ears, I saw them
settle to the same direction; then we
heard 'the 'thump, thump, thump, of a
sooty kangaroo. We were much relieved
to notice no sign of terror in the approach-
ing sounds—probably a messenger—and so
it was, ifor it was the Old Man from the
White Stone Ridge Camp, where three
other families had taken refuge and got
their living as beet they could the other
side of the range. Of late they had done
pretty well on the ground where the fire
had licked up and eaten all the scrub, for
there were now plenty of green shoots
about. But last night, they found the
Long Sticks had cut a lane and laid their
magic between them and the green shoots,
and to go there now meant danger, and
•perhaps the loss of some of their folk. One
young kangaroo had not returned, and they
feared the magic had got him. Then the
messenger told how two of the savage ani-
mals from the Long Sticks' camp had at-
tacked them up at the White Stone, and
that one of them had a long
rattling thing draggling from his neck. Ha
had faced them, while the other kangaroos
got away, and then led them off through
the thick brush where tihe one soon got
tangled up and was left behind, making a.
moat mournful noise. The other he had
sent back howling, with a deep cut in hia
shoulder. The mournful noise from the
first one had kept up for some time, ana
then, ceased, and afterwards for several
days, the crows ihad been seen near that
place. “And now,” said the Old Man, I
will have to bring my folk over this way
for feed, but we will stilll hold the camp.
After- this, we frequently met the Old
Man and inis folk, and there was a lot of
fun with the young bucks who were taking
lessons ini defence. Sometimes tee Ufa
Man gave tlhera lessons, and, my word,
there were some hard blows struck. With
head well back and chest out, they would
prance in on their toes, grip and wrestle;
then, suddenly, one would prop on Ins tan
and land bis two feet on the other's
stomach, with a plop you could hear for
several hundred yards on_ a still night.
Yes, it was fun out there in the moon-ht
clearing; and there were soft-eyed gentle
does to rub noses with. There was, with
us, a daughter of old Smutty Nose, who
was killed down in the sweet grass. A son
of Holey Bar wanted her for his mate, but.


since the advent of the Old Man’s party,
one of his young bucks had paid court.
This matter had to be settled. So, one
moonlight night, the son of Holey Far met
and fought the stranger buck to exhaus-
tion. Tlhe rule is, they must then retire
from the field. No wounds are inflicted in
these bouts, for the formidable ripping
claw is not used—the blows being given
with the flat of the foot. It is merely a
test of strength, agility, and endurance.
—Violation.—
One hot day clouds began to rise, one
after the other, all along the river flats;
and later, we heard 1 a crackling noise. All
day these clouds were rising, and, with
darkness the red gleam of fire shone on
them. Closer and yet closer it oame; and,
then, with a roar, it raced up the side oi
the range, chasing us out, and away over
to white stone ridge. Hungry and 1
frightened, we were making for the green
shoots, for both feed and safety; and when
we were steadying down from our mad
flight, and were passing the end of the
Long Stick’s magic, a most horrible sight
met our gaze. A heajyof red, naked bodies
Jay stark and terrifying. There were
possies and wallabies, and the missing buck
from the White Stone Camp. Their beauti-
ful furry coats were all torn off, and only
their poor red bleeding flesh left. The
right was horrible, and added new terror
to our fight from the devouring fire and
the terror of the hidden magic of
the Long Sticks. However, we reached
the green shoots in safety, but were fright-
ened at every sound. Once it was those
stupid woolly things that stamp their feet
at you, but except that they get the best
of our feed, they do not hurt. Well, we
managed to get a bit of feed, with the Old
Man and Holey Ear on watch. But the
Old Man suddenly gave a warning
"whoobh,” which made us all sit up—and
there, coming down the track through the
green shoots, was a Long Stick, carrying a
soft, furry bundle on his shoulder —and
with his scent there came to us the smell
of blood. Nearer and nearer he came,
and, in mortal terror, we broke and fled
for the scrub. I went straight for a gap
in the bushes, but something caught me
by the throat, and I went crash! with a
thousand shooting stars around me and
choking for breath. Every struggle made
the choking worse. It got me down, and
I just Jay gasping and miserable, and a!)
alone, with the thought of that red, reek-
ing heap, and the Long Stick with the soft,
fluffy bundle and the smell of blood. All
this added to my terror, for I knew _the.
magic had me fast. Slowly the long night
passed. Once a horrid thing with fiery
eyes came right np and smelt me. It
humped its back and spat when I moved,
and then sneaked away. Then a prickly
thing came snuffling among 'the grasstrees
and turning over the rotten boughs. He
stopped and looked sideways at me, and
then shuffled away among the bushes.
And so .that long night passed.
—Among Friends
Then came an agony of choking, thirst,
and heat, and at last one of the Long
Sticks came. When I kicked and struggled
he said something that sounded good, out
I did not know what he meant. It
sounded like “Now-now-now, poor little
chajrpy, poor little fellow." He took the
magic off me, and shut me in what he
called a bag. and the next thing I knew
I was tipped out into a .place all webbed
around with strong web that hurt my nose
when I tried to jump through it. ’ And
then I found I was not alone, for with
me was the poor little doe Joey, of Smutty
Nose, who was killed that night in the
sweet grass. Well, we were fed every
evening on sweet grass and thistles, and
we at last got over our terror oif the Long
Stick, who fed ns and talked softly to us.
Later we were taken over the water that
is not good to drink, and now we live in a
small paddock. Little Smutty is my
mate, and, though we have not much
room, we live in safety, and no longer have
fear o? the Long Stick’s magic. We still
hear the possies at night, and wallabies
we can see in the next paddock. Of
course we miss the wild freedom, but we
also miss the terrors of that time. The
Long Stick, who gives us feed, calls me
"a lucky beggar.” Well, perhaps I am.
Anyhow, this is the end of the story of
Darby the Sooty Kang, of Kangaroo Is-
land.
Note.—For children’s reference: —Long
Sticks—men; thing with white wings—
ship; terrible animals—dogs; magic—guns,
snares, etc.jrafctling thing—cho.in; sweet
grass—crops, wheat, etc.; woolly things—
eiheep.


UNCLE JOE.
Uncle Joe is of the tribe of the «rey
kangaroo. In earlier days they were very
numerous. The old men of their tribe
were always noted for their pluck. •‘■l l6 ?
would always put up a good fight, no
Blatter at what odds. Uncle Joe was
caught as a youngster and presented to me
bv my soldier son. Joe, is now well grown
and has a nice little doe for his wife, and
their first piccaninny gazes out cm the
wonders around from the snug cradle of its
mother’s pouch. Though Uncle Joe takes
a -paternal interest in his little one, he 10
a bit of a martinet .with his wife and has
do faith in moral suasion. He reckons an
occasional cuff on the side of the ear keeps
her docile and subservient to her lord and
master. Joe having no enemies to light,
keeps fit by fighting the wattle trees.
Sparring up to them, and dancing ground
in orthodox fashion he will get a grip with
bis hands, and land a few terrific sweeping
strokes 'with his feet, which are armed with
iforaniidible ripping daws. As the stroke
is delivered by both feet at once,
he props on his tail to deliver it.
Several wattles have succumbed to
his onslaughts through being under-
mined by Jus circusing continually
around them. Sometimes I think Joe
would like to have a slap at me, by the
truculent look in his eyes; but no won-
der Uncle Joe’s nerves are a bit irritable
when he is always seeing (an imagination)
the bones of his murdered predecessors
dotting the plains, and he knows that even
now few of his kind die a natural death.
Anyhow, Joe reckons to go in for a certain
preparedness. No wonder Joe’s nerves are
always on the jump; no wonder he still
expects the cruel snapping fangs of hia
enemies at his throat, or the cruel rip of
a bullet through his vitals.
—Am Interview.—
Walking down the paddock I fin'd Joe
having his noonday siesta, “Now, Joe.” I
said, "I mint to lintemiew vou on behalf
of readers of this bonk. Don’t look so
fierce; it’s peace talk I am after, which I
admit is net much in vogue at present, and
not often conducive to the peace of the
talker.” As Joe rises from his recumbent
position I hold out my hand for him to
take a sniff (this is etitiueUe when inter-
viewing kangaroos). If the interview is
declined, they just cooly turn tlin'r hacks
on and go off with a look of dasgust
on their faces. B'ut Joe was feeling
friendly after having had a good feed, and
so far overcame his racial antipathy (the
outcome of long years of m usa , ga
atrocity by our race) that he decided to
stay.. Of course, 1 admit he has reason on
his side, for pretty well all of Joe’s
ceetora and relations have of recent times
been killed by the whites, chivied and
hunted, never knowing when they were
safe for a moment Joe knows, all this.
The knowledge has been handed down, and
I don t blame Joe for his antipathy, gome-
times I think he would like to have a shn
at me to pay off some of the outstanding
debts, but he never attempts liberties. Joe
reckons there is a sort of fee-fi-fo-fum
flavour about all whites. "Ah, Joe I re.
member when your tribe numbered’many
thousands. One time I was crossing a
natural clearing in the scrub west of the
Hinders. L’ulling up, I, f rom my
vated position in the saddle, counted 70 in-
dividuals—old men, does, and joeys. The
clearing would be about 30 acres, and they
were mostl- in family groups. Except
that the nearest moved farther off, they
took little notice of me; but I had no doga
with me. It was a typically natural Aus-
tralian bush scene that now belongs to the
past, when for thousands of years your
tribe had enjoyed the boundless freedom
of a fenceless country.
—A Cruel Sport.—
Ah! Joe, those fences puzzled your folk
a bit, those long stretching strands of
wire not easily seen in the scrub; there
wore many a, erne] buster, broken necks
and ’mow hopelessly einared in the twisted
wires aioi.vly dying of thirst, starvation,
and the •fierce heat of the sun. Though
not directly willing this, yet I know we
•were responsible, but yon will have this
consolation Joe, our race having sown
cruelty, are now reaping the fruits in a
world soaked in tears and blood of our own
kith and kin. Ah! Joe, the human race
does not show much of its boasted wisdom
or humanity, and between you and me, 1
sometimes feel ashamed to claim relation-
ship.”— Whether Joe took it all in , 1
don’t know. He just rubbed a ekeeter
from his nose, flicked hie ears, and was
gone. Tint reader, ollo of Hie crnchostßporU
of the past has been kangaroo hunting. I
have killed many a one from necessity,
chiefly for food, but many a. time I have
palled off my dog and let the star of hope
into their fear-stricken hearts, gladly
watching their joyous leap into the liberty
of the wide, blue hush plains, where the
timid flying doe awaits their return. One
old hunter told me, with laughter, that


BABYHOOD AND MOTHER LOVE. (KANGABOO ISLAND) O POSSUM AND YOUNG).


TAME “WILD” DUCKS.


lie had a dog that always tore out certain
organs from the ’roo’s anatomy. That
this would cause excruciating agony there
can be no doubt, but the joke I failed to
see. Strange that though these animals
haive become so scarce they are practically
harmless to settlers, yet this animal is
still hunted for sport. Sport, the badge
of civilization, whereby man vents some
of the cruelty that is inthim.
SPORT.
(Dedicated to Unde Joe.)
Whore roamed the long-limbed kangaroo.
With gentle, soft-eyed flying doe,
I rested oft in myall’s shade.
That edged the plains of long ago.
I've seen the punting kangaroo,
That finding speed of no avail.
With back against a 'tree or bush
And faintest hope ho might: prevail,
Calmly wait the fateful rush*
And waiting thus he seems to me
A patient beast, of higher type
Than he who claims humanity.
Poor beast, his liquid, fawnlike eyes,
They hold for us a rente appeal,
And in their depth a mild surprise
That we should seek his life to steal.
He -calmly waits the fateful rush;
Yet bravely waits those cruel fangs;
How slender is his hope, he knows,
Because on savage man it hangs.
A dog has got him by the throat;
He reels and falls, then strikes him free;
Poor beast,, his chance not worth a groat.
Yet nobly fights for liberty.
The myall-scented shades of yore
That edged the saltbush plain I knew,
Are gone, and from those parts have passed
The doe, and old man kangaroo,
T. P. Bellchambers.
SNAKES.
THE OARPEJT SNAKE.
In studying Nature he is wisest who i«
Slave to no sect, who takes no private road;
But looks through Nature up to Nature's God.
The carpet snake, or Australian python,
is not venomous, and when not too large
is quite safe to handle. The danger in
handling the larger ones comes from their
power of constriction, and one would be
pretty helpless when once they asserted
their embrace. A G-ft. snake, grasped by
the neck, speedily stops all circulation in
the arm by tightening his coils. In the
early clays this species of snake was plenti-
ful along the Murray and the eastern,
drier portions of our hills. Up in the
Flinders Range I have known this snake to
reach a length of 10 ft., but on_the Murray
country have not seen them longer than
8 ft., though, from tracks noted, I believe
there have been larger ones. Rabbits
are a favourite dish with the “carpet/’ for
which he generally lies in wait among the
gnarled roots of a big gum, or among the
rocks and ledges of the cliffs, like
Micawber, “waiting for something to turn
up.” But when it does at last turn he
•can move like streak lightning, and before
that rabbit 'Can realize what has happened
his bones are cracking under the pressure
of those •muscular coils. An 8-ft. snake!
■can easily swallow a full-grown rabbit.
In ’the sultry.summer days of long ago’
a favourite bathing place of mine waa under
some 'willows, and these willows 'Were also
the favoured haunt of a carpet snake. I
generally found it coiled on the branches,
and it would usually uncoil half its length
or more, and, hanging from the branch,
watch me splashing in the water. We
never interfered with each other. Once,
■when pulling into dome net stakes, one
dark night, just aa the boat .9wung i into po.
flition, some unusual object just missed my
cheek. I struck a match, and found I
was staring into the eyes of a large snake.
Tracing its body along by 'the flickering
light, I 'was relieved to find it was a
carpet that had for some reason chosen to
roost on my net stick. As he waa in my
road I had to send him into the river.
The “carpet” is a great tree climber, and
frequently camps in hollow trees, caves,
and crevices among -the rocks, and cliffs
are also much favoured. It was along the
Murray cliffs that, on two occasions I came
across a female “carpet” brooding over her
cluster of eggs. In the first case I had
seen the snake enter a hole among the
rubble and loose rocks at the base o: a
,h cliff. On opening out this hole I found an
h enlarged chamber at the end. In the
/{centre of the floor was a duster
-I of 21 eggs, and around these the
ifenake was coiled. Later on I
Ifound a second lot in a rock crevice
Mwith about the same number of eggs. On


breaking one I found a young “carpet,”
9 in. long. The eggs have a parchment-
like skin, and are all stuck together in
the form of a pyramid. The snake, start-
ing at the bottom, places her coils around
in tiers, and finishes at the top, completely
enveloping the eggs. Now, as snakes are
cold-blooded creatures, I do not under-
stand the reason for such action, unless it
is done to protect the eggs from their
enemies.
—An Old Friend Again.—
A few of our farmers are beginning to re-
cognise that this snake has its useful
points, and they permit it to make its homo
in their barns and outbuildings, to their
mutual advantage. One season, while col-
lecting snakes for a certain zoo, I disco-
vered a large “carpet” in the crevice in a
cuff. I visited that spot many times, and
frequently saw the snake, but could not
reach it, as it was too far back in its rocky
refuge. Consequently, I had to leave with- -
out securing it. Hunting the same country
the following season, I found that same
snake was still a tenant of that crevice.
Again I was beaten. The last night came.
I was to break camp the following morn-
ing, and I had not got the “carpet.” I
determined to go down that night
and have one more try. The
night was dark, the way long,
and over "tigcr”-infested ground.
But it was my last chance. It was late
when I reached the cliff, but there waa
better light there, the cliff being a light
sandstone, and some light was reflected
from the river below. I found the place.
A platform of rock passed the entrance,
and, standing on a stone, I was able to see
over this, and I noticed a dark patch fur-
ther along. (Stepping back, I went several
yards further and again, quietly raised
my head above the platform—to find I had
the snake just under my nose! Quickly lift-
ing my hands, I seized the snake by the
neck and the tail. It waa a nice speci-
men, of about 7 ft. in length. I placed
it in a bag, and contentedly retraced by
steps to the camp. Though the “carpet”
is so quiet that even my daughters will
handle them, yet. on occasion, such as
rough handling, 'they can show temper—
and bite; and when they do they hold on.
—Wanted—Better Understanding.—
One day, when I was busy among m/
bees, my oldest lad, who had brought in
a large “carpet” the previous day, asked
ray sister to take his picture holding the
snake. She agreed to do so, but, thinking
he might not be careful enough in getting
the snake out, I called out for him to
wait for me to get it out for him. He
grew impatient, and opened the box,
caught the snake by the tail, in-
stead of the neck, and proceeded to drag
it over the rough deal side of the
box. That snake found its temper, and
also the tender calf of my 'hoy’s leg—and
it took considerable force to get him off.
I had “some picnic” with the womenfolk,,
my mother and sister being on a visit at
that time. The lad was closely watched
for symptoms, which did not appear, and
the excitement gradually passed off. The
same lad has been bitten several times
since, and for the same reason—rough
handling. When captive these snakes
will often put up a hunger strike. I re-
member one that kept it up for nine
months, absolutely refusing all food. My
wile, like a good many other people, con-
demns all snakes, without trial, to death
on eight. Our summer’s average kill of
snakes around the house and garden wou.d
he about 15. Their presence is mostly made
known to us lay the warning, cries of the
birds, numbers of birds having been en-
couraged to nest in the garden.
—A Terrible Experience.—
On one of my Murray trips I secured
two nice carpet snakes from my son, in-
tending to place them under my haystack.
But 'ivhen I reached home there was such
a corroboree that I was glad to escape
into the bush with those snakes, where I
liberated them just three chains from the
house, solemnly swearing my lad to secrecy
at t!he same time. Now, as these snakes
are much cleaner than cats, and not in the
halbit of holding concerts at night, have
not fleas, or claws to dig into your knees
when thev want to show their affection, 1
must at least consider this sort of thing
unreasonable. When I 'was a small hoy
1 used to take harmless snakes to school
in ray noekets, just for the fun of scaring
the wits out of the other silly lads. It
was their fault if they would not learn
better. My worst experience happened
while on that last snake hunt. I was
after black snakes. These hunt their
prey by day, camping among the rocks by
night. ’ I found them crossing the slopes,
en route for the lagoon, alboul 9 a.m. on
hot days. Along the edge of the swamp
was a belt of rushes, beyond this was
rough, dry mud, full of holes left by the feet
of cattle, and difficult ground to walk
over. On this day several snakes had got
into the rushes, where I could not
use my snaring rod, so I broke
a forked stick from a gum for the


purpose, of some of these,
and hung my snaring rod over my
shoulder. I was immediately engaged in
chasing a large blade snake, and, failing
to prong him in the rushes, followed him
as lie streaked out over the rough ground.
Just as I was striking, my foot caught in
a, hole, and, in falling, the jagged- end of
the -prong stick entered the socket of my
eye. It was some time before I was able
to proceed, but, using my handkerchief for
a bandage, I made my rvvay to the river
and bathed the injured organ with the cool
water. Again bandaging the injured optic,
1 resumed the hunt with one eye, caught
my next snake, and returned to the camp.
I then had to take things easy for a while,
and it was some time before 1 recovered
the esc cf that eye. Bad effects remain
to the present time; but, after all, I did
not return empty handed.
THE TIGER SNAKE,
Mankind, from youth to-p, has been
taught that snakes are horrible creatures,
to be billed on sight—yet they have their
place in Nature’s scheme. Admitted that
many have the power to inflict sudden
death, tha-t death, judging by my own
experiences of tfheir -venom, is at least
dlealt out in humane lines. The bite is
certainly very painful, hut, as the venom
speedily reaches the nerve centres, these
become dulled, and one would pass out un-
conscious of pain. Of dangerous snakes,
the tiger snake is the- worst we have. It
is pot found far from water, swampy laud
being its favourite breeding ground, a-io
hollow logs its favourite habitat. It preys
on frogs, _ mice, birds, etc. I do not know
if it catches fish, as does the black snake.
A fair average length for this snake is 3 ft,
6 in., but occasional ones are larger.
In snake yarns, as in fish yarna, folk are
much given to exaggeration. Che venom
is primarily for the use of fU.-'-ug thei:
and also for self defence.
The poison is discharged from glands up
through the hollpw tube-like fangs, passing
out § through an- orifice, back about J of
an inch from the point-Ahe needed pres-
sure (being supplied by the force of impact
when striking. That death speedily fol-
lows, we know. One day, on hearing a
frog squeal, and suspecting the cause, I
ran up and found, a tiger snake with a frog
in its mouth. The frog, when liberated,
gave -three jumps, then turned over and
died.
On one occasion' I killed a tiger snak"
near the homestead, not knowing a second
snake was lying in the same (bunch of
rushes. My boy-, seeing the tail of this
one, thought I ihad out the first one in two,
reached down and took hold of the
tail, and X was horrified -to see him pull
out another very lively tiger snake. You
may he sure I scared that boy into drop-
ping that snake pretty quickly. A pair
of young jacks we had were frequently
fed on young snakes by the parent birds.
On another occasion, being anxious -to se-
cure a black snake, which at my approach
had, along with two tissr snakes, slid into
a rabbit burrow, I closed the entrance,
which was under a (bush, with a trap cage,
and, taking a spade, went to -the other side
of_ the (bush to open the burrow. This
being near the surface, I broke through at
the first stroke, and a rabbit jumped away
from the back of the spade, and another
one went forward along the hole under the
bush. This one immediately squealed out. I
stopped! the hole with the spade, against
which I jammed the earth with my heel,
and ran round and pulled the trap cage
out. There lay the rabbit, and the tiger
snake, but already the rabbit -was dead.
Only a few seconds eould have elapsed
from the time it was struck. It happened
once on a station property where I -was
in. camp that the -three station dogs went
off one day for a hunt along the swamp.
They had not got far when they fell in
with a tiger snake, which, offering battle,
they accepted’ the challenge. One dog
speedily “went west,” and two sick dogs
turned, at once homewardb, where another
soon joined his dead companion. The _ other
dog eventually recovered. This is ex-
plained by noting that the first bite gives
the full charge of venom, the amount de-
creasing with each successive bite. _ A
tiger snake has the temper of a man with
the gout. So it is never advisable to play
with (hem. But. as I said before, they
have their place in Nature. I never kill
snakes when away from human habitation,
because of tbeir use in keening mice and
similar pests in check. This work the
mike is well fitted for, being able to follow
the rodents into their holes. -But for this
work the whip -and brown snakes are best.
It -were well if at least our people were
taught to -protect all non-venomous Snakes,
and encourage their (presence —particularly
in view of our recent losses bv mice. Half
th» antipathy to snakes is nothing but pre-
judice.
—Snakebite. —
The charge of venom from a tiger snake
has the appearance of gum when
dry and a spread of nearly the
sine of a threrioenny bit. Eor 'treat-
ment of snakebite, if possible, stop the
circulation by ligature, suck and squeeze


■the -wound, then rub in- Condy’s crystals.
Brandy and such like remedies have of
recant years been- proved to Ibe more
harmful than otherwise. The main thing
:e to act at once, and anticipate 'the doc-
tor, Seconds are important, especially
when the bite is from a tiger snake. To
scarify the wound and make it bleed would
help to carry off the -poison, but I put
most reliance on- ligature and suction. I
have had -the 'handling of hundreds of
snakes, hut have only received one
-bite, and that was from a chance
encounter, when not professionally
engaged. _ In _ all my dealings with
our vanned fauna, per medium of
their intelligence, I have found -that snakes
take the lowest place. Points -of contact,
as it were, are too few, and we get hardly
any response from friendly advances. The
-tiger snake brings forth its young alive,
and I have noticed seven and eight, but
heard of more. The black snake also
has its young alive, (but the carpet snake
lays eggs an-dl broods over them, like a
sitting hen. m-aldm* its nest in. a log or
cave, or sometimes in- a hole in the ground.
Bathing in the lagoons is a hot risky- On
several occasions I have, hurriedly left the
water on, seeing a tiger snake ’rise near
me. preferring nlvvavs visible danger to
that which la invisible.
A SNAKEBITE.
Australia, having no dangerous carniv-
ora. makes the most of her -snakes—hence
snake yarns are much in vogue. Said the
local trooper to me one day, when I hap-
pened to meet him, as I was returning to
camp with a bar of snakes and my snar-
ing rod. “you v ] ] )e -rjv'n r u „ a nasty job
some of these days to hold an inquest on
yon if you don't leave those tiger snakes
alone. Don’t you ever get a bite? Bur,
I need not ask that, for then you would
not he here -to tell me.” "Oh, yes. I have
been bitten, but not by a 'tiger 1 , though
I know the feel of their venom, from ac-
cidently getting it in my system. Many
years ago, up in the north, I happened to
kneel down on some rubbish in which a
snake lay hidden, -and pinned him to the
ground. Having his head mad neck free,
he just whipped around and jabbed hia
fangs info my right knee. It made me
jump, you bet, and had the feel of red-
hot needles. Anyhow, I killed the snake
and examined my knee, which showed two
punctures. Says my mate, 'you better
get straight away to yonder hon=e, which
is nearly a mile away.’ Maybe, I said, its
not a very bad one; it’s only a little fel’ow.
‘■Go, 1 says he, ‘don’t be a fool; the longer
you stay the worse for you.’ With that,
I started, and, barripg the pain and the
swelling, I did not feel too bad. But
when I had covered about half the distance
I felt a sort -of shock just -where the spine
joins the skull, not unlike a stroke -of the
sun. I then began to get shaky on my
legs. Staggering and giddy, I stumbled’
along, a numbing sensation gripping my
brain, and in a confused way I began to
wonder if this was to be my finish —if -this
was to be good-bye to the blue sky and
that fierce old sun overhead. I thought of
my people in far-off England, and, as I
stumbled on, the more confused I got, but
a ray of hope soaked into my dazed brain.
X had on new moleskin -pants, stiff as a
hoard. Would these not have received
most of the venom? -Surely they must—
they must. It dinged slowly through my
sleepy 'brain—they must! Then my
thoughts changed, and I concluded the
death would be an easy one, a« all sensa-
tion seemed tc be getting dulled and
blurred. And then I was at the house.
They -took me in and brought out the
brandy, but this I would not take, so they
used hot fermentations of vinegar and
water, and I lay in a sort of comatose
state for some time. I gradually rallied
and by the evening was able to get about
once more, though ray knee was swollen
considerably. What really saved me was
■those stiff old-fashioned moleskins. The
force required to penetrate them -had
brought up the venom, and so most of this
had been wiped off from the fangs and left
on the moleskin. Good old moleskins;
well for me that they were new and stiff.
It is strange, -but as 'the anniversary comes
around I get a yearly reminder in a pain-
fui! knee.
In after years, through a pricked finger,
I got -a small amount of -tiger venom in me.
and experienced the same symptoms in a
leeser degree. One unpleasant experience
I won’t -forget. I was getting over a barb
wire fence with a bag of tiger snakes fas-
tened to my belt, the barb caught me by
-a leg and I fell, sitting on _ top of the
bag of squirming snakes, making them snit
like a bag of -cats. I bad to free my -leg
from the batlb before escaning from that
uncomfortable position. The tiger snake
is very game, and I have had many lively
experiences with him. But one gets used
to most tilings, and I got used to them and
their sweet tempers. Many a one I dug
from its hole with my bare hands, and
threw into the clear spaces for -the final
tussle. But I never took -the Heuzen


roedcr business in band. No unnecessary
familiarity for me. My business was just
to supply orders from various zods ait 10/
per bead. But I bare not bandied the
business for some years past. Oh, yes; I
could tell a few snake yarns, even going
as far as dishing them up as a dainty for
a hungry man. In Nature’s scheme the
snake is useful in keeping down mice and
other small vermin. The black snake 'is
an expert fisher, and often enjoys a feed
of fish. In the Murray this is often re-
versed, and he falls a victim to the cod. I
have found snakes in the stomachs of these
fish, and have caught them with this bait,
after -finding they had a weakness for this
delicacy.
SALTBUSH TRACK.
A hot day, with a throbbing, shimmer-
ing haze -over the plains, several whirlwind
pillars to the north, apparently motion-
less, as they have been there for some
hours. I am passing a clump of myall-
good feed for the horse, but not much
shade, and no water. There is no getting
away from it; I -must “make” the lime-
stone dam before dark. Yon far-distant
belt of sandalwood marks the place. This
monotonous slatey blue of the salt and
the blue bush is ever before tmy eyes, oc-
casionally broken by the dumps of wal-
laby and umbrella bushes. A mob of 16
emus cross the track in front, and the
metallic rustle of ‘their feathers reaches
my ears as they pass, for the cart wheels
make no sound in the soft chocolate dust,
fine as flour, which floats away in a cloud
behind. A few red kangaroo hop out
from the myall, as I approach. They sit
up -and stare curiously at me. then lope
a way for the next dump for shelter from
the heat. And, my word, it is hot! The
sweating horse is caked in the red-plain
dust; lit gets into my mouth and nostrils
when I am walking alongside, but when
riding, my head is above its billowy clouds.
Yet one must walk sometimes for a change,
and to stretch the limbs. What with the
heat, duet, and flies, -one longs for the night
to come—and needs the patience of Job!
That last dam was an all I
bad found a hlackfallow camping there
with Ms luhra and piccaninny. They were
picking tlie bones of an opossum wdien I
arrived. “Hello, what you do, eh?” “Me
catchem emu,” says he. “Where you come
from? You gotem powid-er?” “Yes,” I
replied, and gave Mm some of the real
thing, diamond grain it was. Shortlv after-
words I heard a tremendous hang. He had
been using the treble F brand, a couple of
tots to a 12-bore, amd, not knowing any
better, had put the same measure of d’a-
m'ond grain, and it took Mm off Ms legs.
To this day it makes me laugh to think m
the surprise that fellow got. “My word,
him plenty strong,” he remarked as he
picked himself up, "Shot go one way, gun
go notber way, that one plenty strong
powder.” I wonder 'if any WaokfeUow
will be at the -limestone dam, ’twould he
some company if there was. That picca-
ninny was a comical kid, with eyes just like
a 'possum. I wonder what they’d say if
they met a family party like that down
one of the Sussex lanes now. So mus-
ing, 1 travelled on along the track.
—Hardships.—
On, ever onward. The sandalwood looms
■larger, and a further "belt of mallee comes
into view, and, just as the sun is setting,
I wheel around to the far side of the dam,
and, pulling up, rush down for a drink.
But thirsty as I am, I cannot drink that
rotten stuff left in the ‘bottom of the dam,
and I can go no further. So I take /kh-e
horse out, and reckon I must just make
the best of it. Things don’t look too
cheerful, the flourbag is empty; but ns
there is an advance guard of the rabbits
located here (pioneers they are), and in-
the bywash of the dam is some native
spinach, there is food enough, and no need
to go hungry. But that water is too hor-
rible, and, thirsty is no word for it, I
must have a drink. Taking my billy, I
go -onee more to the dam, and am up
against the rotting carcase of a bullock.
I go to the far end, a dead kangaroo meets
my gaze; olog the far hank a dead emu
has possession, but the top end of the
dam is -clear. But the water is low, and
a beastly oily scum and maggots float
around. Brushing the soum aside, 1 dip’
the billy from below tihe surface and carry
it to the camp. Phew! It was pretty
bad, I can tell yon; but they say boiling
kills germs. So, lighting a Ere, X put the


billy on to boil, and skim, the cream off as
it rises. I also get three wire snares from
the cart, and set them for rabbits.
Then I gather spinach, after which I take
two small rabbits from the snares, and
put some of the boiled water in the quart
pot for tea. Then X put the rabbits and
spinach on to stew, and, as I sit on a roll
of 'blankets attending to my cooking, I
watch the fading glory of the rugged moun-
tain range away to the east. For, ■though
the aun 'has set, its higher peaks are stiff
bathed in the ligTit of its beams, and jagged
rocks, nooks, and crannies stand out clear
and beautiful. Slowly the shadows creep
higher, and at last the topmost peak loots
its crown of glorious light and nigjht en-
velops the saltbush plain. Them the
centre of the universe, lor the time being,
is my camp fire, and the cooking viands
all being ready at last, X get tin plate and
pannican and proceed with supper, eon-
soling myself with the thought that the
next day would see stores replenished, a®
I Should reach a township. I was at this
time a fencer, and used the turnout for
shifting from one job :to another. Curling
up in my blankets under the stars, I
dreamed I was back In dear old homeland
once more, but rousing to the howl of a
distant dingo and the thumping of thirsty
kangaroos, I knew I was still in the land
of the saltbush plain. When .the sun rose
I turned again to the north, with the
smell of the horrible limestone iam still in
my nostrils. I was not game to try it
again. X“hew! that was a terrible ex-
perience.
IN THE MALLEE.
When on my frequent collecting rambles
I have, from choice, made it a rule to
travel and camp without the distraction
of human society. Nature is not so re-
sponsive to crowds as to the solitary
human; but you, my reader, are welcome
to have a look at my camp and see Nature
through my eyes—and, as all lonely bush-
men are given to the expressing of their
thoughts aloud, you may listen to my soli-
loquizing. Well, imagine you are some-
where in the malice.”
Away in the east are the roseate colours
of dawn, and, from various points, come
the usual happy morning greetings of the
feathered fairies of the hush. Yes, it was
quite time to get up and see about some
breakfast. There had been a heavy dew,
and, from where I lay, I could see the pen ■
daut drops on the tips of the mallee leaves,
for there were no walls to my house in the
bush my house was just a tent fly,
stretched between two mallees, and pegged
down on the weather side. It was open
in front and at both ends, and my bed
was just a litter of sweet mallee leaves
spread on the earth. My stores were
mostly kept under the epmi-
fex bushes, and the most valued of
these stares were a few oranges and lemons
brought from the home garden. make
a spinifex coo! chamber, you just kick up
all one side of a bush (you cannot use
your hand, too many needle points), lay
a piece of hag or paper on the ground,
pack your stores, and cover with a sheet
of paiper. Then, with a stick or your hoot,
bring the hush down over all, and that
gives yuu line coolest pCace in w.hich to
keep your things. The water supply is
contained in two 60- lb. honey tins, and my
captives have to have a share of this.
Sometimes a lucky thunder shower comes
along, and I catch a drop with the tent
fly. Sometimes my good farmer friend will
bring me a tin of water out on a Sunday.
As I lie breathing in the sweet scent of
the broombush and listening to the charm-
ing music of the waiting birds (waiting for
the full light of day), a faint breath of air
stirs t.he mallee tops and sends the dew
pattering down on to the tent fly, and I
wish it were a shower of rain, for my water
tins are low. It is strange, but dew is the
only known drink of the malice i.owl when
in a wild state. _ Captives require water,
and when learning to drink they first
peck at the water—one good thing,
the dews are frequent. Ail, well,
I suppose this won’t do—some of my
feathered friends I see have invited them-
selves to breakfast, amd are evidently chid-
ing me for not being ujp, not knowing that
the “skeetas” and dingoes disturbed my
rest over night. In turning
over my pillow a neatly packed
bag of spare clothes I disturb a
couple of bobtaikd lizards. They generally
sneak back here, no matter how often i
turn them out. I don’t mind these, ‘out
I do object to the scorpions taking up
tbc-ir quarters in ray 'blankets, which they
too frequently do.
—Studios From Life
That reminds me of an episode that hap-
pened at this very camp. Talk about hot!


The scrub was like an oven. I had been
a Ion? round, and arrived hack at camp
wet through with perspiration. I stripped
and hung my things to dry, when my
eye was attracted to the movements of a
prettily marked lizard that had stopped
just in front of me. He watched me in-
tently for about one minute, then made
a clash for my foot, under the sole ot
which a large scorpion was making an
effort to retreat. When the lizard retired
he had that scorpion hanging from both
sides of his jaws. I quietly secured
pencil and notebook, and took a sketch of
him. which I still have in my possession.
How one’s thoughts do wander! I must
get that hilly on. and s.e about breakfast.
My fireplace is a hole in the sand, for
safety, and about a chain away, in the
clearest space 1 could The coun-
try is carpeted with a tindery debris
from the trees, the accumulation of many
•years, and highly inflammable. So soon
■as the fire is done with, it is covered with
sand. I have fed the birds, both wild
and captive, and, while I have breakfast,
I vainly scan the pages of an old news-
paper for items I may have missed. When,
'■hark! the danger call of the birds in the
thick scrub in front of me, then the crack-
ling of leaves, ond I catch sight of _ a
dingo as he breaks cover. I keep quite
still, and he comes within 20 yards, sits
up and takes a startled, enquiring glance
at me, and then bolts, I very much re-
gretted that, owing to the damp morning,
the rifle was not as usual by my »ide. r I
regretted it still more, when a second dingo
came' trailing the scent of the first to
within 30 yards of me, and, giving a
startled look in mv direction, he too bolted.
I had been doing some practice with the
rifle, hoping to meet with these gentry,
and I also owed a debt to Bre’r Fox. At
this camp I have been much interested in
a pair of chestnut-backed l ground birds. The
acquaintance has lasted for two seasons, and
was renewed with pleasure when they
■calmh- came to afternoon tea soon after
mv arrival _ The male is noted for his
tender solicitude for hie consort, alwavs
giving her the choicest titbits. Although,
naturalh-. a very shy bird, these have
oeconne exceedingly tame. They neat on
the ground among the hushes. Their action
strongly reminds one of the pigeons and by
some they are known by the name of
ground pigeon, or dove. The most
cheeky of my visitors are the butcher
birds, and, at their advent, the other birds
always have important business elsewhere
and leave in a great hurry.
—The Echidna.—
Well, as it is time to bo moving, I will
cover up the fire. So, taking a few bis-
cuits and the water-bag, I start on my
round. The first part of the journey lies
due north across the crests of the sandy
ridges, and, as I reach the top of these
create, I get a view over the .hollows be-
tween. Throe crests ace past, and, yea,
this would be the- Porcupine Flat. I won-
der if 'there are any fresh trades. Yeti!
here they are, fresh-rooted earth, showing
here and there among the spinifex. I fol-
low the track for about 40 yards, look in
likely (places for the camp, but, as usual,
fail to find the animal’s quartern.
The echidna is a nigjht feeder, and,
by day, will bury himself under any
scrub, debris, or spinifex, or pass the time
in a mbbit burrow. It is rarely seen,
but a few specimens of this strange egg-
laying mammal still wander over the scrub
lands out east. So far as my experience
goes, they emit, no sound, being practically
dumb, except for a faint snuffling noise.
1 have bad specimens under observation
for considerable periods. When tame
they show considerable intelligence, reoog;
Rising their keeper with some show of
pleasure. They are very expert with their
long wihip-like tongues, by means of
which they secure their food,
which mostly consists of ants.
But on Kangaroo Island I have noticed
that they root out the decaying cores of the
dead grass trees for the maggots that arc
to be found there. This island is the only
place in South Australia where these ani-
mals are to be lound in any number; 40
years of research on the mainland
only yielded 2 living specimens of
this _ animal; and there (K. 1.), each
snaring season secs many of them
cl os (.roved. My experience proves
that the porcupine is not a success in cap-
tivity, as those I have had refused all
food excepting ants —and, owing to the dif-
ficulty of keeping them, I eventually libe-
rated them. In mj; opinion, it is in the
platypus or llie echidna that we will find
the key to the mystery attaching to mar-
supial life (mystery of birth). Our scien-
tific men claim the process to he the same
as with domestic animals, up to a certain
stage, but, seeing that the embryo has no
sign of a navel, there should be something
further to say on this question.
And now, having climbed two more
rises, I see my landmark an isolated tea-
tree. Around me the birds are still twit-
tering and calling, and from the hol-
low ground in front come the sweet


notes of the hell bird, but as the heat in-
creases their songs will cease and they
will sit panting in the shade, waiting for
the cooler hours of the waning day. A
bronzewung hurriedly leaves a pine by which
I am standing, and, from curiosity, I ap-
proach and find his simple structure ol
twigs on which are nestled two young
pigeons. Although prolific breeders, these
birds are not so plentiful as they used to
be. They visit the settlers' tanka and
dams every evening for water and large
numbers are shot for meat. Thus, many
nestlings perish through the non-return
of the parent birds. Like the mallee
fowl, these birds live largely on acacia
seeds, but they are also fond of earth
worms. The bronzewing has often proved
a godsend to thirsty bushmen as a guide
to water; for, as the evening approaches,
the bronzewings’ unerring flight -points tee
way. 1 once found a valuable waterhole
by the aid of these birds. t Their rote is
sweetly soothing but inclined to melan-
choly. It stirs the lonely hushman to pen-
sive thought, and puts him
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
Bring sad thoughts in their train
Several wattle birds have ventured quite
close, and should a person stop, these birds
are the first to give him their inquisitive
attention. They are subjecting me to a
keen and very inquisitive scrutiny, and
are excitedly calling “kwok” to one an-
other, and peeking and peering at me from
the nearby mallee. I wish I could under-
stand their language, for I fear they are
not complimentary to ray appearance, and
I think they are blaming me for intruding
upon their domain. However, I will re-
lieve their feelings by moving on. I take
the bearings of the teatree, and make
for the lower ground, where the view is
limited to my immediate surroundings-
Yes, those white objects are the bones of a
kangaroo, and it must have been the last
one here, for I have not seen a living re-
presentative here since I started on thid
portion of the big scrub seven years ago.
There are odd groups widely scattered, but
none here. Passing a fallen pine, I notice
four of those quaint birds—the tawny frog-
moth or mopoke (Podargus strigoidis).
They are sitting solemnly in a row, and
ns silent and motionless as the log they are
on. I know their eyes are intently watch-
ing my movements, and that they hope I
will pass without observing their presence.
They know something about camouflage,
and had there been but one, I might have
passed it for a broken end of a branch.
But four of them too-cther drew my eyes,
and gave the show away, .
—The Tawny Frogmoth,—
This is one of our most useful of birds.
Their nesting habit puts one in mind of
the bronzewing pigeons—three eggs seem to
be their limit, and, on the approach of
danger, they flatten themselves out and
become, as it were, a -part of the branch.
But should the approaching object be of
such a nature that they think they can.
scare it away, their feathers rise and their
appearance is absolutely ferocious and awe
inspiring. Talk about camouflage, you.
cannot teach the frogmoth anything in
that line. It is erroneously called
“mopoke” by the country people. I
know the birds, and bad one as a pet when
I was a young fellow, and every_ morning,
when I opened my eyes, I found old
Mopy’s goggle eyes glaring into mine. He
would always finish up the nightly
beetle hunt by nestling on my pillow be-
side my face. Poor old Mopy came to an
untimely end through eating a bit of salt
meat, and was buried under a nearby wil-
low. I missed my quaint pet sadly for
some time. Well, here is the teatree at
last, and about 80 yards west, past the-
four pines, will be our first mound to visit.
A few fresh soratchings under a scrub
wattle indicate our near approach to the-
mound, but this scrub, being so thick,
limits our vision to a small area of ground
surface. This should be the place, just
through those bushes. Yes, here is the
mound, and they have been working, for
the mound is partly open.
—The Mallee Fowl.—
Ah, but what have we here? A broken,
egg, and a trail of feathers and fox tracks.
See! here is where he crept, and made hia
spring from. The bird I wanted to send
cast (Melbourne Zoo) has surely "gone-
west.” Here the fox has dropped a mouth-
ful of tail feathers. Has the bird escaped?
No! Before she could rise, he has seized
her again, and this tragedy of the bush is
complete. Plucky though these birds are,,
they are no match for the foxp probably
the male will be the next victim, as he
carries out hie lonely duty of attending to
the mound. Well, I think we mighty as
well see what is in the mound, so, kneeling
on the hot sand, I use my hands to scoop
away the crown; then, working first on
one side and then the other, I throw out
the loose sand down to the egg chamber,
the hard rim of which is the guide I look
for. Then, with more care, I remove the
loose sand, and explore its wall of matted
vegetable matter. Well, this is strange.
There does, not seem to be much in it.
Yes. here is an egg. and. by testing it,
I find it to be about a weeic old; and hero


“WILD” DUCKS AT HUMBUG SCRUB.


LAZARUS.


is another, which I find to be nearly two
months old, and then not another egg to
be found, That makes three, with the
broken one, and indicates that about six
are missing. Mr. Fox has been having the
eggs, and has been a pretty regular visitor,
and bus wound up by taking one of the
birds. Curse the brutes! Why were they
brought here? Had we not enough to con-
tend with the dingo, without this sneak-
ing, hungr-y-gutted creature?
—ln Mallee Land. —
Hot and dirty from the dust of the
mound, I take a few minutes’ rest and a
much needed drink from the water ba.g,
and then, retracing my steps to the tea-
tree, once more strike northward over a
high ridge, where I stop and have a look
around. There is now no sound of the
small birds. They have sought the shade
of the pines, ami the only sound that
breaks the silence is the shrill note of the
cicada. Sombre and dark, the primeval
mallee scrub stretches away in undulating
. waves to the far horizon, save in one direc-
tion, where a faint light streak shows the
entering wedge of the wheat'lands. For
thousands of years the mallee has nodded
to the rising sun, and sheltered-and fed its
children; with now a brief interval of
ovaving corn, and then a howling waste of
drifting sand. So is the work of the ages
undone. I pass a dense thicket of scrub
pine, and enter country very hard to travel
over, the ground being strewn in all direc-
tions with dead, fallen wood. It is the
track made by a long-ago bush fire—so long
ago, that the dead charred trees that have
fallen have again been replaced by living
scrub. Here the fire track is only
half a mile wide; and, from the tracks
hereabout, there shou'd be a mound not
far away.
—A Difficult Quest.—
They are hard to find in this sort of
country; it means one has to zigzag it in
strips 50 or 60 yards wide—backwards and
forwards—and as the birds disguise the
mounds to hide their work, one has to
keep his eyes about him or be would pass
one in scrub like this without ever seeing
it. I have tried the country to the right,
hut could not find it —it must be bore
somewhere. Well, now, that was lucky;
found at last! A funny looking mound,
too. A mallee growing right out of the
middle of it, and I expect it is the first
time it bus been in use since the fire, so
that, meanwhile, the tree has grown in it.
Now for a landmark to_ find it by again.
I have it; this clump is higher than all
the other mallee around. Finding rhe
usual shelter bush, I left some feed there
and retraced my steps, brushing out my
tracks with a bough. That pair of birds
arc going east, if Brer Fox does not get in,
before me. Now, keeping a little to the
west, I cross to the other edge of the
burnt strip, to have a look at another old
mound. Steering by the contour of the
high ground-in front, I make for the side
from which as the best cover .in order to ap-
proach the mound unseen. We will, if pos-
sible, see the male at work making use
of the solar heat to warm up the sand
blanket.
Hiding my approach by the intervening
bushes, then dropping to my hands and
knees, as I noticed a slight haze of drifting
dust in the direction of the mound, I
dowdy make my way from bush to bush,
until at last, from behind a spinifex, I get
the mound in full view, and about 12 yards
away, the mule bird is on the qui vice;
with crest erect, he stands on the high
mound, anxiously scanning all approaches.
He is evidently suspicious, and, keeping
perfectly _ still, I watch hia statuesque
form, which is silhouetted against a bare
white patch on the slope beyond. With
craned neck and high-lifting feet, he walks
halfway round the mound, and, perfectly
erect and motionless, listens. But, as he
is between me and the point from which
the very slight movement of air comes,
he gains no clue to my near presence.
Then, with a scarcely audible remark (in
mallee fowl language) he resumes his work.
With tail pointing toward the centre of the
mound, and frequently changing from one
foot to the other, lie is throwing the two
or three inches of sun-heated materia!
backwards with considerable force with
his powerful claws. The dome in the
centre slowly rises with the showers of fal-
ling material. Having at last completed
the circle, and briefly surveyed his work,
he stalks away with some dignity, disap-
pearing over the far side of the mound. I
know he is just retiring to his nearby camp
'to await the heating of the next layer of
sand —when he will again resume work.
This he will oontiiue to do until the mound
is complete and symmetrically rounded
off, and then a bit of rough debris scat-
tered over all. It was -rom here that
birds and material were taken to form
the group in the Adelaide Museum,
—Among the Birds. —
From here I make westward 400 yards, to
look at another old mound, and find ft is
not_ in use. It has only once been in use
during the six years I have known it. Get-
ting into some shady pines, I have my


lunch of biscuits and water. A faint
circular outline of slightly raised ground
indicates 'the site of a very ancient mound.
The reason of its Jong disuse would prob-
ably he that these pines, having displaced
the ancient malice, there was then no
longer suitable heating material at hand
for the hot-bed, Half a mile 'to the north
is another old mound, and I might as -well
have a look at that one. Grossing a
epinifex fiat I find this mound is again in
use, and from here I enter some very
heavy malice and travel westward. I have
searched this two-mile strip from end 'to
end, and have never found a mound. But
beyond this strip is another group of old
mounds. A few ringneck parrots are no-
ticed here, and a spotted night-jar rises
from the shade of some malice. I search
the place, hut cannot find its egg or young.
1 think it is probable that these birds only
lay one egg. ns previous occasions only
yielded a solitary young one. It was just
equalling among the dead leaves, no sem-
blance of a nest. 'Their food seems to con-
sist of moths and beetles and other night-
flying insects. It is strange that, though
■the wallaby, in the old days were in thou-
sands the other side of "the river, they
were not known on this side; 'but, from
all accounts, there was a small species of
marsupial, similar to the paddy melon
of the south-east, but I never came across
this animal or its tracks.
The tiger cat (a larger species of native
cat, have known specimens 3 ft. long, tip
of nose to end of tail), was at one time in-
cluded in the fauna of these parts. The
last specimen I handled would be over 30
years ago, and I have not heard of one
since. I think, so far as this State is con-
cerned, that this animal is now extinct.
A few years back our museum, wanting a
specimen, had to send to Tasmania to pro-
cure it. Though preying on birds and
small animals it was not nearly so destruc-
tive as the domestic cat (run wild), which
has now taken its place, and become a
serious menace to our smaller fauna. This
animal became such a pest to poultry
keepers in the north at one time that a
bounty of 1/ was offered for their scalps,
and I took a small part in thinning their
numbers, without any qualms of con-
science. The grey kangaroo was once well
represented, also the'emu and turkey
bustard. Settlers have been known to
wilfully flush the lastmuned bird from its
nest and shoot it. The bad old rule was,
"Kill everything on sight.” Let us hope
a better regime will come with the new
generation.
—Nature and “Civilization,”—
Well, at last here are the slopes leading
down to Acacia Flat, and just handy here
in a small pocket is another old mound.
With some little trouble I found it, but
it was not in use. Goins down the slope
I got on to the flat, crons a sand track
that shows no track, evidently very seldom
used. In the scrub beyond I come upon
a mound in use; but recent trucks of a
horse and boot tracks near the mound
show this one to he on somebody’s vwiling
list. These are useless to me." But just
over the rise was another, which, being
well secluded, had remained undis-
covered this was in nse and on my list
the previous season the wheat lands that
are approaching from the south and west
are within a mile of here, and I found on
a recent visit it had reached this place,
and had 'passed over Acacia Flat. Some-
where in those wheat lands was, or, I
should say, had been, .another group of
mounds that I used to visit, but the on-
coming tide had swallowed them up. Man,
looking upon Nature as an enemy, destroys
her stronghold remorselessly for very paltry
gains. Of typical Australia wo may yet
say with the poet—
Ah, me! the vision has vanished,
The music has died away.
Par better the scrub than a
desert of drifting sand. Soils that
will drift should never be cleared
for wheat farming, and the experience of
other lands should have taught our people
this truth.
—Nature’s Example.—
But time passes. I must get along, that
high ridge leads to the eagle’s nest, and 1
■reckon I will go that far. Last time I was
out that way the young eagles were just
leaving the nest, and the parent birds
were soaring around anxious Jest I should
molest them. Some small tits, seeking the
protection of these grand birds, had built
their nests in the underside of the eagle’s
nest. This seems quite the usual prac-
tice with these small birds, and it is evi-
dent that'their confidence is notmisplaced,
for the several families are roared in the
same structure. I have not been able to
ascertain if these tits render any service
in return for this privilege. Here we are,
for yonder is the massive structure, but it
has a desolate, deserted look that bodes of
tragedy. And whnt is this? Feathers, aye,
’tie feathers, and bones too. Alas! proud
bird, I know thy doom was sealed, but not
so soon, not so soon. Long hast thou


reigned in these solitudes, and from the
clouds hast watched the oncoming tide,
right from the big ranges down across the
fiats, over the river, ever creeping nearer
—until, at last, thou couldst' hear the
crashing of the falling trees, and the voices
of men when this ’wind blew 7 from the west.
Soon shall the hungry flames lick up thy
old “home nest,” thy proud labour of love
of many years! Turning my steps back
along the ridge, I at length roach the old
sand track, which I follow until I come to
where there used to be a blacks’ camp.
Not a trace is now loft. It was a camp
just made with boughs of mallee. I .remem-
ber I had seen tracks of natives out
among the mounds some years ago, and sup-
posed they were out after eggs, but I never
met them, and it was not for some time
afterwards that I found their camp. That
they were fond of these eggs, we know. It
was said that they preferred them in
an advanced stage of incubation.
This 'would have the advantage of includ-
ing very tender chicken in the menu.
—“The Day is Done.”—
Turning south-east, I cross the acacia
flat- This, at one time, was the favourite
feeding ground of innumerable malice fowl,
and, from the high ground beyond this, I
catch sight of the wheat lands, which a
few short yean? ago had been part of the
vast unbroken scrub. Out on these wheat
lands I have tracked the malice fowl and
found their mounds, and camped under the
starry sky; but so changed is the aspect
of the country, I doubt if I could find
many of the old spots now. And there,
instead of the morning call of the mal-
ice cock, is heard the droning hum of the
reaper, and behind the reaper comes the
drifting sand. And now, as the night
shadows fall, I reach the camp, make a
drop of tea, and have supper by the fire,
where I sit thinking of many things for a
while. Then I hear a flight of plovers
passing high overhead. It is time to turn
in. Another day is done.
So f.ulcs a summer cloud away,
So sinks rhe gale when storms are o’er;
So gently shuts the eye of day;
So dies a wave along the shore.
TOOL-USING WASP.
.While out among the mallee fowl in
the year 1913, I found the country in pos-
fcouioH of tile looper caterpillar. The
mallee was alive with them, their colour
simulating what they were on. Their at-
titudes were amusingly various, nascent,
couehant and rampant, evidently the art
of camouflage was known among _ these
depredators, and, that they needed it, was
known by the presence of their numerous
enemies—the birds, who were rejoicing in
a well-filled larder. eo the mallee
fowl, because to them it was not an un-
mixed blessing. ' Large areas of scrub
land were as bare ais if a bush fire had
passed that way, and the mounds of these
birdl? were rendered plainly _ visible—
to their human enemies—the dlingo and
the fox. I was curious to notice what
•steps Nature would take to cope with this
anny that had broken bounds, and upset
her balance; but I was too busy to give
much attention to the question for the
first two weeks, although I noticed the
sand watips fi.vhicb are of the genus Am-
mophiba) were unusually plentiful wher-
ever the loopers were in evidence. But
•on January 21 my opportunity came. De-
turning to camp after a six-hours' tramp
through the tangled scrub, I boiled my
hilly and had my solitary dinner, and
feeling too tired for further exertion that
day in the heat, I decided to rest for a
couple of houn?, and start again when_ it
oliould get a bit cooler. So spreading
mat and cushion in the shade of some
bushes, I lay down for a much-needed
root, and immediately a wacp came and
protested strongly against my presence by
flying several times about my head. It
then settled in front of me, looking angry
and worried. I guessed what the trouble
was, and moved a little further back, dis-
closing a bole in the 'and about half an
inch in diameter. This the wasp an-
rroaclied several times, but 'was evidently
.'•Pill nervous of my proximity. At last
she entered the hole and. set to work,
leaving the hole every' 15 or 20_ seconds
with a load of sand, which she discharged
while on the wing about 2 ft. from the
entrance—the shower of sand being plainly
visible each time. As she worked ve'v
quickly, she evidently got tirrd,
and felt the need! of refreshment,
which she took from the bloom of a native


poach close at hand. Then, after an in-
terval occupied in malting her toilet, sue re-
sumed work with renewed vigour.
—A \Vonderful Instinct.—
Curious to see what she would do, I
quickly placed a email stick across the en-
trance to her nest. Alighting at the hole,
she examined the stick carefully grasping
is in.her stong jaws, flew away with it.
X next placed a larger stick over 'the en-
trance, which, being ton heavy, she car-
ried away on foot. I them laid a leaf over
the hole. Bending aver, she grasped the
edge and flaw anvuy with it. She then
completed the excavation, and flew of! ,to
look for the victim. I measured the hole
and found a depth of about four inches,
“>1017,” I thought, "it will he a ease of
watching the ground surface for her re-
turn,” for T knew she would have a heavy
burden, which she could not bring on the
wing. At last she came, hut, how far she
had travelled I could not tell nr how she
managed to find her way through the laby-
rinth of leaves, sticks, and bushes, and past
other wasp nests in various stages of com-
pletion, hut she accomplished it, and
brought her burden to the exact apot.
Then, laying the caterpillar down, dhe had
a look at the hole and, coming back, lifted
it close to the entrance, She next hacked
partly down the hole, and, grasping the
caterpillar close to the head, walked back-
wards dawn the hole, pulling her load with
her. After a short interval, she came
up and proceeded' to gather a dry mossy
material, which she placed in the hole,
mingling a little sand with this, and finish-
ing off with all sand. Then, to my aston-
ishment, she hunted round, and picked
up what I took to be seed knob which
she used as a rammer, and well rammed
the hole, her head bobbing up and down
with every blow. Then, d/ropping
the rammer, she smoothed the surface
and then carried in a bit of stick, which
she laid over her work. This was evi-
dently for camouflage. Her work was
now complete, but I have no doubt than
she 'would carry through a like programme
in many other places. With what in-
telligence, and how conscientiously, she
had carried out her work of love for the
offspring she would never see! And
scores of these little creatures were hard
at work wherever I looked'—but only along
the advancing front of the lootpers. Hot
one wag seen in this denuded area loft
behind. Quietly, but .surely Nature waft
adjusting her 'balance, and without any
appearance of that inliiii infliction o'
suffering which man ia prone to accuse her
of: for each victim of the million's that
met this fate was rendered unconscious
of pain by the injection of some agent into
the nervous system.
God moves in a mrotorioun "way.
His won don t o perform,
Mr. Lee. of the Museum, kindly gave me
information as to genus of wasp, but, for
want of .specimens, could not identify 'the
auecies. Naturalists of other countries
had noticed the habit of using a rammer
in allied species, but it had not been
previously reported as occurring in Aus-
tralia. 1 sketched a series of articles on
the in at. and some day they will serve
to illustrate the work of this ingenious
wasp.
THE WHISTLING EAGLE.
The following incident happened when
we lived at Thun Thun, on the Murray;—
fronting the house was a long stretch of
lagoon, the bird life of which proved a
continual source of interest. To the left
was the usual strip of land separating the
lacoon from the river. These strips are
known as islands, but this is a misnomer,
as thorn arc land connections at the ends.
A creek, sometimes several, connects the
lagoon with the river, ancient mlgunu?
grow along these islands, from many of
which the primitive hark canoe has been
taken, as can be -seen by the long, wide
scars of dead wood showing on many of
their trunks—mementoes of clays that are
past, up, i of those light-hearted children
of the wilds —the ill-starred natives. Other
traces of them arc seen in the frequent
native ovens or middens. One. could find
much to say about these river islands and
lagoons, among which I spent many years
—but my subject has to deal with the
birds. One season a, pair of whistling
eagles built their nest in one of these nu-
trient gums. We watched their work with
some interest. Much of the material was
gathered while on the wing. As they
swept by a tree they'would, with a stroke
of the wing, break off a dead stick, dive


and catch it ere it could reach tie ground,
and wheel off to the nest with it, where
it was soon placed in position between the
upright branches of a desirable fork. Yes,
we had known they were 'there from the
start but we did not molest them, as they
showed no inclination to interfere with
our poultry.
—Retribution
But it was not so with a pair of crows.
These bad been taking heavy toll of duck
and hen eggs. Armed with the gun one
morniue- I soared thorn off betore they
eould secure their usual booty. I watched
them settle in their lookout tree on the
island, and, from there, saw one go scout-
over the hawk's nest. No one being
at” home, it wheeled around and alighted
on the nest, but oilier eyes were watching
that crow. With a call to its mate, one
of the hawks made a beeline for the nest,
with the other closely following. With a
frightened “eaw-k” the crow hastened
away, closely followed by the angry
lhawks. The chow tried to make
down the island among the -shelter-
ing gums, but time after time be
was beaded away into the open, and
always toward the lagoon. Succeeding at
last in getting him over clear -water, one of
the hawks struck him, and he went spin-
ning down into the lagoon. Recovering,
the crow managed to rise -a few feet into
the air, but was instantly struck down
again, an,l then, as he flapped about wet
and draggled in vain endeavour to escape,
ho was repeatedly struck by the circling
hawks, until, limp and quiet, that crow
floated dead upon the water, And then
the hawks returned to their nest, satisfied
that justice tad been done. Our folk,
grouped on the rising ground by the
house, had been interested spectators of
the cow’s tragic end. They -watched the
vain endeavours of the doomed crow to
escape, and the skilful manoeuvres of the
hawks to block every move, the choice of
the open waiter -for the Huai scene of exe-
cution by drowning affording no weedy
foothold -for .their victim, instant condem-
nation, swift decision, with prompt execu-
tion, and a co-operation, showing a con-
nected purpose. These must point to. the
use of reasoning faculties, -as instinct can-
not account for such a line of action. In
conclusion, though I have called the hawks’
victim a crow, I' -am not sure it may not
have been a raven. It is hard to distin-
guish these birds one from the other. Per-
haps some ornithologist will say to which
species the eggeating scamp belongs.
PELICAN’S SAGACITY.
Many years ago I had occasion to set a
gill net for cod bait, the river being high
the net was set-in -a hilla-bong in full view
of our bouse across the river. The shallow
waters of the billabonga are, at flood
times, alive with fish driven from the river
by the strong current and tempted by
richer food supplies. There they congre-
gate, and there the fishermen and fisher
birds follow them, Now the pelican, not
being able to dive, from necessity, must
fish in the shallow waters. One day six
of these birds -came graceinily sailing up
this billabong, and, -finding a supply of
silver fish -in the net, proceeded to help
themselves. One bird was not able to free
the fish from the net, so he swallowed the
fish and a -portion -of the net,, which be-
came twisted like a rope. This bird was
now tethered -fast, and whenever ho would
start -to fevim away the t-aut net would
jerk him back again. The commotion at-
tracted the notice of -the others, who now
gave their attention to what, to them,
constituted a deep mystery. Why was it
that, 'their mate could no longer follow
them? And why was he so distressed?
Evidently he could not help himself.
With considerable excitement they
examined and discussed the strange
problem. Now the whole _ mat-
ter was plain to me, simply because it be-
longed to my environment, and_ 'was an
occurrence to be expected. Thinking it
'would be possible to capture this bird
alive, accompanied by my wife, I got into
the boat and pulled across the river. As we
approached the narrow hank that separated
the billabong from the river, the birds’
excitement increased, unci, watching them
closely, we observed five start away _ down
stream, and looking back, /--all them im-
prisoned mate. He, not being able to fol-
low. four of them -flew away, out the ntth
bird, in spite of our proximity, returned
•to -the prisoner, and swam around him.
He wmdd call and start swimming away,
but finding his mate did not follow, 'would
burry hack again, repeating this manoeuvre
several times. But at last the rope of


twisted net attracted his attention, and
this lie hurriedly grasped with his beak,
aiid, spreading his wings for a leverage, he
gave a mighty pull, accompanied by a
powerful sweep of his wings, dragging net
and lish from the gullet oi his mate. Then,
beating Hie water for a few yards, they
rose majestically into the blue,' and were
soon specks in the distant sky. Hero was
a process of reasoning which, prompted
by affection, had arrived at the correct
conclusion, and had thus solved (to them)
a very puzzling problem, a problem 'they
were not prepared for by past experience,
as it did not belong ft, their environment.
—Wonderful Air Work. —
It is an interesting sight to watch these
birds fishing. With them it is a fine art,
a science. Those who live by lake or river
will recognise a flight of pelicans in the dis-
tance when it is just a long undulating line
with a short line branching from its head,
making a V point, and every movement of
the leader is .copied by the rest, even to
the boat of a wing. Let the leader rise and
each bird, as it reaches the same spot
in space, will rise too. This gives the im-
pression that they are passing over or
under invisible barriers, and lends a wavy
or undulating appearance to their lines.
Should the leader give three wing strokes
each bird, as it reaches that same place,
will give three wing strokes too. It is
curious and interesting to watch their
manoeuvres, for instead of these movements
passing along the line., it is the line that
passes the movement. So exactly is each
movement timed that each bird'passes the
same place before it follows suit. Often
one twill notice several curves in a line of
flight; each curve represents a movement
initiated by the leader when passing that
exact 'place. 1 If watched when they have
arrived at their fishing ground, the front
birds will break away and in grand sweep-
ing spirals they volplane down to the glassy
surface of the still lagoon, whence cornea
the splash of alighting birds. To just
glance .round, what a splendid sight to
watch several hundred : ot them!
—Expert Fishermen.—
See hoiv quickly they marshal into one
king lino that reaches just across the
deeper part of the lagoon. They are pre-
paring for a drive, and, ready for action,
they move forward with considerable com-
motion to frighten the fish toward the
shadows at the upper end. As they ap-
proae’h this jflace, the two ends gradually
curve forward, until at last they meet,
and, eloping up their ranks, encircle the
frightened fish. Then they reap the fruit
cf united orderly action,_ and "a miracu-
lous draught of fishes” is their reward.
Here, again, reason has played its part,
but through an easier channel, as belong-
ing’ to their environment. It may be
thought from the foregoing that the peli-
can is very destructive to fish, tout my ex-
perience, covering many years, proves that
this bird, us fair -as human interests are
concerned, is nut harmful, its food being
chiefly confined to the non-edible fishes,
such as bony brim (silver fish), gold fish,
and shrimps. Much evidence in their
favour was gathered by examining stomach
contents, and this was done over a long
seiies of the years. I admire the pelican,
and I think your readers will admit he is
not such a fool as he looks. lam sorry to
say these fine birds are often wantonly
destroyed for sport. To my idea the man
who inflicts suffering and death on the so-
c.illed lower creatures in the name of sport
is a criminal degenerate, deserving severe
punishment or restraint. It is passing
strange how hard some people work to turn
flod’s beautiful world into a weird and
silent desert.
BLACK-THROATED GREBF.
Early in the summer of 1915 a pair of
black-throated grebe took up their quarters
in the big dam. W-e were interested an
those birds, and hoped that they would
nest, but, as it is the habit of all the
grebe family to nest on floating weed and
there -was no weed in the dam, it seemed
very doubtful that tlhey would do so. How ;
ever, one day whom passing the end oi
the dam bank I noticed a sodden mat of
bamboo leaves moored among some etmk-
wor-t. about 3 ft. from the 'bank. It?
appearance suggested that it might be a
nest. On returning an, hour later I ap-
proached the spat, from behind the bank,
-getting within about 7 ft, of the spot under
cover. Wihcm I -rose I Iliad the pleasure of
seeing the female’s flustered attempt to
hide her eggs by dragging some wet rub-
bish over them —a practice adopted by all
the grebe family to safeguard the eggs from
the prying eyes of hawks, crows, and


human, beings. Hawing hastily done
her best, she dived, leaving the
eg«3 partly exposed to view, reappearing
about 20 yards away. Hhe male bird now
approached, apparently to remonstrate and
request me to remove my 'presence from
it,be vicinity of his wife’s cleverly hidden
love pledges.
Noticing that no harm came of rny fre-
quent visits, tihe birds became very came.
One day I observed a fragment of shell on
the edge of the neat, which at any approach
had been, as usual, covered up. I knew by
this final tihe chicks • wore hatching. The
next tlay the nest was not covered and was
empty. The two grebe were quietly watch-
ing me, and not a chuck was to be seen,
This went 'on for several days, and' still no
sign of chicks. 'Then, one day, my eon
and I. worked an old stw.ta.gem—we walked
along the water’s edge unitii we came to
some cover, behind which my son squatted
to keep watdh, while I walked away up the
guly. Thinking they were now unob-
served, tihe male bird dived and ait once re-
appeared witlh its prey, swam statist to
the female, and immediiabeily four email
heads reached 'out from her body, two on
each side, waiting for “Daddy” to feed
them. The mother was carrying iher
young attached to her hotly. When I
spoke of this at a meeting of the Ornitholo-
gical .Society, Dr. 'Morgan .stated that,
though known to occur with the grebe
of oilier lands, it had not previously been
recorded as ooouring with the grebe of th : s
country, that the young should thus attach
themselves to the body of the female.
During this period the male bird had to
feed tine lot, consequently he was kept very
busy. Later, whan the young ones were
swimming free, both birds worked hard
to supply their wants, and at last they
tauglht the young ones to fish for them-
selves. .
The following summer of 1916 the same
pair returned to tihe dam, went to the old
nesting place, and built on some Heating
bamboos, which, sinking with the weight
ot material, .caused dis-atisfaction, and all
tihe material was shifted to a new
site and rebuilt. When they had laid
a flood washed the nest inshore,
losing hair the eggs. Two days later the
bird was seen sitting on the nest in its
new position, then, becoming dissatisfied
tihe material was again taken to the spot
from u I'm eh it had drifted, and rebuilt,
Three eggs were laid, and thou, finding
the position too exposed to rough water to
be safe, they started _ pulling the nest to
pieces and rebuilt it in the swamp grass,
on a small island, about 100 yards fur-
ther up tihe dam. These proceedings were
watched' pretty closely, and it was noticed
tih-at they earned the material under water.
The new position was found by their
fierriy attacking any duck that ap-
proached the spot. Before finally demolish-
ing the old nest, ithe three eggs disap-
peared', a.nd as incubation started imme-
diately ait the new nest, we must conclude
that they also removed the eggs from the
old site to this new-built nest.
Their troubles were now over, and
they succeeded in hatching their brood of
three, the female, os before, carrying them
.around until they were fit to swim alone.
Last summer only one bird turned up,
a.nd had by some means lost its mate.
Seven birds spent the winter with us, and
are probably the birds that were reared
here. The grebe family have the curious
habit of eating feathers, from which they
are known in tome districts as "the feather
eater.” The for this is not yet
known, but I believe it in some way assists
them D tihe digestion of their food. Prob-
ably ; t is the means of retaining tihe food
fbr the required time in. the stomach. Con-
siderable interest has attached to the study
of these birds, and I hope to see .them-
again nesting here.
NATURE’S LARRIKIN.
Sweet of song, hardy and fearless, who
does not know Australia’s magpie and
Nature’s larrikin? The “little divil.” as
many a housewife has called him. What
country home, where there have been
children, has not had one at some time or
other? M aerie dearly loves to get into
mischief, and dearly Ibves a fight. With
what a zest he pits himself against the
marauding hawk, and even the lordly eagle
is not free from attack. Like many
human larrikins, he delights in inflicting
pain, and though vve have kept them as
pets, yet for this reason I do not like them
about where there are young children.
Our first magpie dates back to when I
sta-ted keening bees, which I had housed
along a blank wall at the end of the


dwelling. One day Mag. watched me' at
work, and, after I left, got up on the bee-
stand to investigate. Later on he was
found standing at a hive entrance, snap-
ping every bee that passed in and out.
The ground in front was strewn with the
proof of his prowess—dead and crippled
bees everywhere. When I tried to re-
move the culprit I was greeted with a de-
fiant note and a vicious snap, and, after
this, there was no keeping Mag. fropn the
bees but by shutting him up. This was
maggie No. 1. Nos. 2 and 3 1 must leave
out, with all their exploits and
•:ell you about maggie No, i. My
lad, who is with the boys in France,
brought him home and reared him,
and maggie soon developed the _ usual
(sporting instinct —the delight found in the
infliction of pain. On hot summer nights
some of ua would often camp out on the
grass, and at thel break of day Maggie
would be around, and woe betide the luck-
less sleeper who left his toes exposed, A
vicious dig from Maggie’s -sharp beak eoon
called his attention to the fact, and the
culprit, with ruffled plumage and emitting
a defiant hoo! hoo! boo! ah! would move
quickly out of reach. This bird never
seemed hapy unless' he was tormenting
something, and hd would get the helpless
nestlings from the fruit trees and torture
them lor hours if not seen. He got
caught in a rabbit trap one day and
sampled a bit of pain himself, but I fear
the lesson never want home, as he was just
as bad when he recovered. He would
■watch the planting of cabbage and onions,
catching grubs the while, but when our
backs were turned ho would haul out a few
rows of plants tor fun. He was following
up the hoc one day for grubs, and he got
the hoe on the top of his head, and 1
thought the “little di-vil” was gone, but
no! he was like a cat for lives. He re-
fused to be killed, or, as the little one said,
“he would not stay dead.” One day he
flew into the barb wire and cut himself so
badly that his entrails came out. The
lad, who is new in France, picked him up
and brought him in. The verdict was,
“Better put him out of his misery”, but
this did not suit my lad, who begged his
mother to put the machinery back and st<w
him up. His, mother (who is
chief surgeon in our establishment), gave
in, replaced the internals, the lad holding
the bird on its back while the operation
was carried out. It was sewn up, a bit
of vaseline rubbed in. and in about two
days Maggie was walking around again—
his dining room and scullery in good work-
ing order! But he had had enough of
civilization, lie picked up a mate and
answered the call of the wild. To- retain
him the boy cut his wings, and. through
this, he ended his days one night in the
belly of a fox. No, I don’t like magpies
as pete; they are best where Nature
placed them, chasing the hawks and carol-
ling in the gum trees. Elsewhere they
are, .what the housewife called them, “little
divils.”
DODGER, THE DECOY DUCK.
All life is the same, be it that of bird,
beast or man. Prom the eyes of all, the
same life looks forth upon the world. The
difference which is apparent is just a ques-
tion of limitations. Many years ago,
necessity drove me to the primitive life
of fishing and game hunting, my chief as-
sistants being a pair of wild black chioka
and a little decoy dog called “Skeeta."
The dog’s work was to entice the ducks
within reach of the gun when X was shoot-
ing from cover on shore, and also to re-
trieve. The ducks work was to induce
flying ducks to settle at feeding time with-
in reach of the shooting wurlie, and they
were also used on the duck boat to lull
-suspicion when X was approaching a mob
of ducks. "Dodger’ 1 was the best decoy
duok I ever had, and good company too,
for there was an excellent understanding
between us. Placed on the prow of my
duck boat, a screen of reeds hiding mo
from view, she would sit up and preen
her feathers and occasionally answer the
calls of the ducks around, and thus enable
me to approach near enough for a shot.
She eoon got used (to the report of the gun,
although at first much frightened. _ The
duck boat, of course, was painted in neu-
tral tints to match the -surroundings. The
pair of decoy birds became very tame,
paired off, and batched out a brood, ito the
great satisfaction of a pair of laughing
jacks (nesting in a neaflby tree), who se-
cured every one_ of the young ones the
first day they left the nest.


—A Difficult Gross
Noticing that the domestic ducks were
•able to converse with their wild cousins,
I decided to try a cross. This was ex-
tremely difficult as the birds bad already
paired. It took me many years to accom-
plish, hut I have since found that it is
much easier to succeed with young' unat-
tached birds. You see,' the black duck
takes his mate for life, and does not be-
lieve in divorce. However, ! eventually
succeeded with both the male and the fe-
male, causing them, I fear, much jealousy
and 1 unhappiness; and, although this was
many years ago I still have their descen-
dants breeding.. They are strong on the
wing, hut never go far from home. The
pure black duck is monogamic; with the
cross some have become polygamic, and
others have remained true to their wild
law and take a single mate. That their
attachment.is strong the following proves.
■On one occasion I tried to readjust the
pairing of two males who had already
chosen mates. In both cases the male
pined away and died. ,
—More Protection Needed. — ,
The black duck is brave in the defence
■of its young from hawks and so forth,
and will “gammon lame” to entice a dog
or human being away from (the vicinity oi
its. offspring, I. have known so-called
sportsmen to ruthlessly shoot them with
the helpless young in .sight, an action
Which, to my idea, merits severe punish-
ment. This bird is in much request for
the table. It is a good breeder, and under
wise protective measures there should be
no difficulty in keeping up supplies. But
the bird has never been allowed an ade-
quate close season. Many are hatching
out after Christmas, and it is evident,
therefore, that the close season should at
least include January. That there has
been a shocking wastage of our game birds
must he admitted. I have known parties
■come on to the river and shoot 500 ducks,
of which about two dozen were used, and
the rest wasted. This is massacre. Not
even sportsmen in these circumstances
could object to limitation of the bag.
(This was years , ago.) Nature provides
that all wants are mat by a surplus. Civi-
lized man destroys the goose that lays the
golden egg.
—“Dodger's” Tragic Death.
But to get back to my subject. I bad
“Dodger” and “Darky” for many years.
Having oue' day" shifted into a new camp,
I tunned “Dodger” out for,)a swim. The
rushes being thick and high, she got loot.
.Several days later, at my home 10 miles
up the river, my son, out with the gun for
meat saw a single duck swimming up-
stream. Getting under cover, he waited
and shot her, and to his sorrow it turned
out to he poor old “Dodger,” who not be-
ing able to fly, had swum all that way
home. The little decoy dog “Skeeta” fell
a victim to the jealous spite of home Ger-
mans, and a poison bait. In her I lost
one of the most intelligent and helpful
dogs I ever had.
—Nesting Habits. —
The black duck sometimes neats in hol-
low trees and sometimes on the ground
even going back into the, scrub. I
have noticed that if undistmbed they al-
ways return to the same nesting place.
They will carry their young from the nest
in their beaks if it is an awk-
ward situation. When the rest
is adjacent to the water, the
firet night • after hatching the, young
are taken to the comfort of the old nest.
It' is interesting to watch the mother’*
proud and fussy little ways, and her won-
derful alertness to all possible dangers.
Although taking no part in the incubation,
■the male keeps watch and ward in the
vicinity, frequently visiting the female, and
taking an intelligent interest in the pro-
gress of events. While she is thus engaged
he is not above a mild flirtation with unat-
tached females, just to pass away the time.
As a father he is a hit of a martinet, and
takes severe measures to keen the .brood
■together, bo straying is not allowed.
LAZARUS.
My dear mother christened him Lazarus
because he was such a cadger. He was n
white Ibis, the Sacred This of the ancient
Egyptians. I got him late in the summer
of the year 1900. The "Missus” had said
to me, "I wash you would take the gun and
get me an ibis to cook, there are _somc just
settled up the swamp.” The ibis at that
time were not protected. and_ were reck-
oned good eating by the river people.
Taking my gun 1 crept through the reeds
and marracro, hut the wily birds had


warning from a sentinel perched on -a- tall,
dry. tree, and they rose before' I got,near
the. open water, nut one bird tamed and
came, back over me. I brought him do wn
with a broken wing, and, seeing he was not
badly hurt, wo decided to spare his life,
and ‘ keep him . for a -pet. For the
first week-he- carefully,avoided .qs,_,how-
ever, he soon learnt that we.meant him no
harm;' iaid bceiStne. quite tame. He wss-'a
rogue./but at the sametime he was the
Snored Ibis, and .despised us common
mortals, ami iirsislcd upon due recognition
■of hisnacned■ rights. Alas, for his dignity!
he won . more daughter.. than- veneration.
With, all his wickedness wo could but,ad-
mire ■ his cavalier airs, also, his ingenuity
.in extracting' the hot meat .from a sauce-
■pan standing on . the hob, or exerted in
other ennally .denrnved ways o' securing
lootpsunh .as prizing up,the lid. of,an iron
boiler where;the bread was, kept, and, then
removing the soft middle of a loaf through
a email hole in the side, which often passed
unnoticed until the loaf was cut, revealing
a cavern. He was self-assertive. erro-
gorant.and amusingly cunning, for finding
he could.intimidate the younger children,
he became a bully; taking,their..bread-.and
buttcr.or other lood, .he would, send them
in,.howling for more. .Yet for all that,
they, used to .have, great iun with him,
playing.hide and seek, rr •‘king of the
castle." Often he -would rout them, and
be king himself. We older ones, bad
many a laugh at his- antics; how he would
bow, rutile his feathers, and honk loudly
.at-hie.'assailants, •kicking up as much raw
as they.did,.and making-many futile dives
at the’fleet-footed youngsters. He waa an
adept:-at catching sparrows-, and mice; to
r-oateh'the, former he . would walk up , at
feeding time into the mob of feeding ducks,
fake ,liis stand where the wheat lay pretty
thickly, and just look innocent, , The first
sparrow, that landed within peach -would be
instantly seized, and, carried off to the
grater,!where it would he macerated for a
while-before being oaten. To catch mice
he would insert his long, -eurved.biU, into
crevices under logs, stones. ..and other
places. He always, knew when.,mealtime
arrived,. and . would come - honking: in .at
the front door,, often ..to-.be- met by the
wife with the broom. In two, minutes
he would be at the: back door, slip under
the table, making the children quickly
withdraw their bare Imm. He never could
resist, a. sly dig., s-t .-th.em. If he got *.
chance he-woujd slip his -curved beak over
the table edge, and .test everything within
reach. I ,have-. known . him ;to, get. away
• with -half., a-pound-of butter, .or.- a,,good
sized chunk of meat. X! no , one . wfl»
about he-would hop upon Hie .sofa-and.take
bis cli'ice. . Strange to. say, this .bird,
whenever .nesting time .came around, would'
amuse’himself for weeks, budding a, nest.
This was. also done by a male straw-necked
Ibis I had at the saine time. Poor old.
Lazarus! We,had him, about 15 years, and
though he-was an arrogant rogue we- were
all-.so-m* when he "went west.” We
never properly learnt.bis language; perhaps
it was well -we did not, for I -am quite
sure it, was ,unparliamentary and disres-
pectful. Often from a stump or,some, other
point of ventage, he would harangue us,in
severe language, with, scathing
remarks. He had the run of the paddocks
and garden and proved a useful bird, in
destroying insect pests, sometimes visiting
the big mining, dam, down the gully ( -always
returning to camp on a bank at the back
of our house at night. The,.--wild west
winds- always “give him the call, of the
upper air; he longed to. sweep away in
ever-widening circles, away up to .'the;drif-
ting clouds. -With outstretched) neck: and
loild honks, stretching -wide his winge, he
would.leap into the' air, iforgett.i-ng that.he
could never more cleave his, way...through
the rare sweet upper, air, .with -the -wide
earth panorama stretching far below to the-
distant horizon.
MYSTERIES OF PLANT LIFE.
The true measurement of life is by en-
vironment. From plant life, .with .its
limitations, life spreads out in ever-widen-
ing circles through the animal kingdom to
man, and beyond; but, strange.to -say, we
have the anomally of man—in fact, whole
classes of men—whose environment
in as limited as that of a cab-
bage. This is largely due to social
conditions. However, my immediate sub-
ject is plant life; is it sentient? ,Animal
life, except in its lowest forms, moves by*
its own volition. Evolution seems -to
follow- -lines of inclination-; meaning oon-
scions desire. Thus, a -deer has .increased
its fleetness by the desire to escape from.'


ns enemies, and the giraffe has lengthened
its neck by desiring to reach the higher
branches. The sea leopard, through de-
siring.an ocean life, instead- of a -terx-astrid,
has exchanged its..two bind limbs for a
doubie-bladed tail or rudder, and its fore
limbs for - paddles.
■ Hooking at life in- the vegetable kingdom
we find a certain amount’of movement is
necessary. Evolution is at work there,
with the same -t-nd.in view. Living .germs
(seeds,: spores, etc.), must-move- away from
their parents to allow room for. growth,
and -to plant now districts. This need is
largely met by taking . advantage of_ out-
side foi’res,-;.-such-art- the- mimtfg-bodies -of
animals, birds, air, currents, and water.
Hence many devices have been evolved
such as hooks, barbs, balloons, springs,
and floats,
I think the most .wonderful. Thing, is that
the very provision made ifor these move-
ments by proxy, such as books, barbs, and
gums, -presupposes the existence of the ani-
mal kingdom,, as likewise the provision of
balloons and floats presuppose the existence
of. air and water currents. Evolution has
provided these means to take advantage of
forces known to exist. If then, evolution
follows lines of inclination, plant life must
be conscious life.
Hut we have actual plant movements.
Take the tigers -of the plant world, the
insectivorous plants,.such as the sun dews,
apparently using their leaves for trapping
and digesting food. Here we- have ap-
parently sentient movement,, as we have
also in the spring traps of some of our
native orchids, and in various sensitive
plants. I have, noticed with insectivorous
plants that the system, of root feeders.is
missing. There are merely the means of
support and storage for reserve aliment.
.’Recently, while -studying "Dro-iera
(a group of insectivorous plants) I
noticed on one of the smaller species two
freshly captured insects struggling ,iu the
viscid material exuded by the tentacles
which surround the oup-like trap-. I dug
up -the plant, and, placing it in -the water,
examined it at intervale, Tt being late
afternoon -there wag little time left that
day, and beyond a slight bending of the
tentacles, nothing was noticed, until th"
next-morning, wilion- the insects were found
within the cup pressed to the floor by the
tentacles, many fra-ib ones having now
■ attached themselves to their prey. The
prey of these plan'ts seems to largely con-
sist of sand iiiots, a blood sucking insoot
that enters the ears of its vieuins causing
severe irritaton—and. with young turkeys
uracil loss, as many of the young birds are
driven mad and die. Thus ire see the
work of the, Drosero in Nature’s, scheme'
of balance.
■lt must be admitted that uui-ctivorous
plants have evolved .numy .ingenious means
of securing food, such as the spring trap,
birdlime, cul-de-sac, and the use of bait.
■We have plants . that follow the .sun,,
flowers that close tueir petals bp night,
others by day. We.have the. strange, in.-
tuition that, leads the roots of . trees .to
water, or to. fertilizing substances, and of
creepers toward support.
.(Now, if evolution works on lines of in-
clination, to desire a thing is to sense a
want; to sense a want proves conscious-
life. It may be limited, but it is there
'without a doubt. The veil beween the
animal and th« vegetable kingdom,is hard
to, pierce. _ The two planes of life, are so
widely different, but because we are ..not
tuned to catch a certain note, we must not
deny its existence.
‘ (Did you ever compare a paddock of .rung
timber ’with the living forest around?
Gaunt, stark, and' stiff, the rung trees
stand, emblems of , the silent world of
death: but look at tiro living trees, how
gracefully they bow, and dance, and frolic
in the life-giving breeze. Here is move-
ment. perhaps not sentient, but movement
that Nature had to allow for in structural
arrangements. Who can say , they do not
rejoice in the glad sunlight, the summer
Showers, and their riotous frolic with the
■wind. Glorious, kindly old trees, the
friends -of all living creatures, and especi-
ally is,man,indebted to them; yet . there-
are vandals who, from pure oussedness,
will put a firestibk to a grand old forest
monarch, and glory in its .destraction.
Have T not seen it done—a deed that a,
blhokfellow would not do.
In conclusion I would urge that, owing
to the depletion of the world’s timber re-
serves, re-afforestation should he brought
■more prominently before the neople
Teach it in. the schools, and preach it in
the pulpits. Compel all owners o f land
over a certain area to plant so much tim-
ber suitable for their districts. Tt would
be to their benefit, and the benefit of the
State.


VOICES OF THE MALLEE.
Mallee—known to the housewife as good
firewood, and to the farmer ae an enemy
to be destroyed.
'Somehow I have come to love the mallee
lands, thouvd in my irequeut wanderings
and lonely camps tuerein I have suffered
much from thirst and sometimes from
hunger, for provisions run short when, a
elai- is prolonged. But both have been
allayed 'tis true when the welcome mound
of the mallee hen has come in sight.
Eagerly I would dmop to my knees in. the
hot sand, so hot that it was torture to
scoop away the hot, loose sand with the
bare hands. At last the pink treasures
are showing. The tops of Id eggs are un-
covered for examination. Several are so
discoloured I know they are far" advanced
in incubation. Others are criss-crossed
with faintly scratched lines.. The mark-
ings (scratches) on tihe eggs are, I think,
done by the birds’ claws in. the frequeait
opening of the mound. The oldest eggs
have the most scratches, the last having
none. Picking one clean pink shell, and
then one of the least marked of those left,
I further test them by the sun's rays.
Covering the rest of the eggs from the
fierce sun glare, I retire to the best shade
I can find or make, clean my grimy hands
■with bush top, and then take the top from
an egv and! with a twig mix the yoke
with thei white, which I then swallow with
considerable enjoyment and a fervent
“Thank God for that!” Tying the remain-
ing egg in my handkerchief, for future
refreshment, I rebuild the mound and pass
on, refreshed and revived 1 in' spirit as well
as in body. Wateiv-yes,. there is about
half , a gallon back at the camp, but the
remaining ecg will be needed before I
return thene. Sc v en days on two petrol
tins of water. Tn cool weather it wouhl
have lasted longer.
—The Menace of Sand.—
I remember on one occasion I had to
make shift with pigface juice squeezed
through a rag, a slimy, salt fluid most un-
pleasant to the taste. However, as I have
to explore this scrub to the eastward, be-
fore returning to camp, I must he on
the move. Yes, the great lonely mallee
'Scrub has a strong fascination for me. To
stand on a rise to see, stretching away
to the far horizon an ocean of sombre
green billows of mallee, to think of tho
-thousands of years these solitudes have
stood untouched! by civilized man, its
silence unbroken by sound of axe, of human
voice other than Nature's dusky sons-—the
buickfetiow! But,, hark! iainuyi 'from the
• outh comes the measured, strokes of an
axe. A new settler. I know the clear-
■.ng, having passed, it several times. A
sadness steals over my spirit. ’Tis but a
iainit sound, /but it is the knell of doom
to these solitary places where Nature still
keeps her kingdom with some show of rul-
ing. I see a brief span of golden harvests
of grain, ,the mallee eaten away as grass
before the locusts. Then I see a desert
of swirling, drifting white sand. The loose
sandy soils of which so much of our mallee
lands consist, will not acand continued cul-
tivation!. It is possible to work it under
different conditions than those ruling at
present, but, while Government only eon-
eider present gain, leaving the future fo
take care of itself, we can expect no other
tlian, a storing up of trouble for future
generations. This sand eddies around the
’imct'-tone boulders and the few bleaching
bones of the more recently exposed .re-
mains of the dark children of the bush.'
—A Living Ocean.—
Ah! little grey birds that chatter and
scold me away from your brood, your in-
heritance passes from you. And yon,
stately emu of the guttural voice, the days
swiftly come when you shall no longer
travel in the van and rear of your merry
(the, leads, the male follows)
family of chicks in search of the -wild
berries that grow in. these silent places.
And you, graceful, (bounding kangaroo,
with all your lesser brethren of the bush,
the hat has gone forth—your doom is
sealed in the doom of the mallee land—the
j'land of silence, yet_of many voices. The
i inallee growing, as it does, on marine soil,
o-lditime sealbeds, has taken of the spirit of
the sea._ At least to.me it seems there
is an affinity between the mallee and 1 the
ocean. Look from some eminence out
over the mallee on a calm day—lt is a
petrified, sea. ■ _ Watch it in a gale-rit i«a
living ocean with 'tolling billows of sombre
preen. Then again, harken to its voices.
When a zephyr moves its mjyriad leaves,
we get a longdrawn. sigh—a strong breeze,
and you have the sound of a receding waive
on a shingly (beach—a hurricane, and you
have the roar of breakers on a rockbound
shore. Watch them nn a stiff breeze, see
how they bend in long wares that swiftly
fellow each other.
—The Soul of Solitude. —
Though the mallee land impress you ae
a land of silence, yet it has: many voices.


»nd is full of life and movement.
You cannot know the mallee by travelling
Its long silent aivemues by motor or train,
or (by turning into wheat fieidls, neither
can the man who is loot in ks depths—-to
him the mallee lia as the Sphinx. To
know the mallee you must go alone and
live amid its silences—and know how
email a thing you are. Lie in its quiet
depths and watch the stars through -their
whispering leaves at night, and still -more
shbtle strings will vibrate faint echoes of
music, tim music of the spheres, vvii 1 reach
the sou.. This serves but to make one yearn
after mysteries that scorn almost within
reach, and say with the youthful Samuel
"Speak, Lord, for Thy servant hearefch.”
How sordid seeroa the ordinary world
of men, how 'paltry their aims when we I<l
such times -contemplate the serene majesty
that rulea in 'God’s- universe. You may
well scold, little grey bird, i:or am I not
also of the race that destroy ?
SHALL WE LET THE EMU “GO WEST”?
It is indeed, a matter for regret, not only
that the emus are going the way of the
dodo, but that so many interesting Austra-
lian fauna -are traversing tillo same path.
Mveiry true-hearted bushman -is grieved t at
■the continued and unnecessary destruction
of our faunie life. The dead monotony of
the lifeless bush and plains that is fast re-
placing the old order -of things, is a shame
and disgrace to our people. That, in the
past, it has been necessary to thin out mar-
supial life in places, is admitted, tor the
creatures that had been indispensable to
aboriginal life were, when in too largo
numbers, a menace to us. But that this de-
struction should be wontonly continued
long after the need is past, bringing valu-
able and unique life forms to the verge of
extinction, is more than a matter for
regret—it is a 'matter for action.
—•Ruthless Destruction. —
In 1884 the emus meed to water at the flat
about-a, mile below Mahnum, but the bird
soon disappeared from this side of the river.
I think it was in the summer of 1896-7 that
we were living at Thun Thun Rocks. Many
emus had found 'Sanctuary on the deserted
runs of the.barren lands out back. I know
there was a bad drought -on at the time
that drove the birds out of the back coun-
try and! forced 1 them on to the long
trek that led to the Murray, to
meet wfithin a fe'w miles of the river a
labyrinth of farmers’ fences, veritable barb
entanglements; and, I am sorry to say,
scores of the (poor wretches, never peached
the river. They were shot at sight or
■torn down by savage dogs. The birds
were in a most miserable condition',
poor and weak, and bo fell ,an easy
prey to their ruthless enemies. Need-
, less to say, those that reached my place
were not molested, for X also had known
the terror of the waterless- track. That
people belonging to- a so-called Christian
nation could act so cruelly to God’s al-
ready suffering creatures is hard l to under-
stand. For some years afterwards emu
skins “graced” the floors of many of the
settlers’ huts andl houses. They always
reminded me of the massacre of the inno-
cents. The same thing happened again
during the summer -of 1902-3, but the Ibirda
■were much diminished in numibens. It is
unnecessary to add; that they got exactly
the same reception, and 1 it is- doubtful if
a bird survived. In the terrible drought
of 1914 all ray enquiry only brought to
light one (bird. Other birds may have
been noted elsewhere, but I failed to hear
of them. During 101S5 I was in town
to see my eon, who was shortly
to leave for the front. I noticed
the soldier la<te from one of' the
States were wearing emu feathers
in, their slouch, hats. I said to my eon,
“That's the last -straw of the poor old-
emu.” “Yes,” -was the reply. “That
has about done lor them. It is a jolly
shame.” “Well,” I said, “It is a casei of
crow -and peacock feathers. It is not the
thing—unless they farm them the same
ha they do the ostrich.”
—A Suggested Sanctuary.—
What grander sight or more typical of
the real old-time Australian e'senery ia
there than a mob of these line birds feed-
ing or crossing a salt-bush (plain. I have
lived among them, and 1 laughed at the in-
nocent curiosity that prompted- the foolish
birds to investigate anything strange to
them, such as -an old red handkerchief
waved over the top of a bush. I have
seen the proud mothers with hay newly
batched Ibroodi/and though I/'Have the
death of manmf things to yet I
JfcJ


mover killed an emu. Whenever I visit
the Zoo I always look -up my old friend,
.the emu :there, give l him a tit-nit, and have
«. “yabber” albout old times outback,
where the quondongs grow that he and his
folk were bo fond of. The emu
cannot, like some of our fauna, exist
without water, and thus it is rarely found
further than 20 miles from source of
supply. Aibout five or six years ago there
were a few emus left at the far end of
Yorke’s Peninsula. Why not, as I hare
(before suggested, turn that into a sanc-
tuary for these birds? In spite of Go-
vernment protection, the birds were «t
that time still being destroyed.
PIGEONS, WILD AND TAME.
I think it was the summer of 1907, I was
busy packing the buggy for a trip among
the mallee fowl. Said my wife, "It b awk-
ward you going on these trips, for it is
generally two weeks before we know where
you are, and you never know what might
happen while you are away, and no one
knowing where to find you,” "Very well,”
1 said. “Get the boys to catch the two
homers to-night. I reckon they will soon
let you know where I am to be found.”
T got an early start the following morning,
taking the two pigeons, Whitey ;no
Blackey,. along, for mail purposes. Pour
days later, travelling slowly along a heavy
sand route in the mallee, I saw tracks of
mallee fowl crossing from one side to the
other. Stepping the old mare, who was
glad of the rest, I put the nosebag on, and
left her while J examined 'the traek ahead.
I found several other places wh’r.* the
birds had crossed, and decided to camp and
explore the locality. The top of a pine
suggested a good landmark, and I chose
this spot for a camp, taking Lie mare back
several miles to where I had aranged to
paddock her. On ray return I obliterated
tracks leading ini camp, and carried the
other tracks on by means of a stick for
about a quarter cf a mile, and then lost
them on hard grom d on the other side o(
the track. This precaution was taken to
prevent unwelcome visitors. The next day
disclosed two mounds within short dis-
tance of the camp. It whs now time to
send word home,'eo I wrote a .short note,
“All well; good luck; sand track three
miles east 8.5.. broken mallee left; pine
top right angle’so yards, camp. Time, 3.20
■p.m.” I had some trouble to get this bird
to start, but it reached home the follow-
ing ■'morning._ Later in the week I sent off
the other bird to report progress. This
last bird'(Blackey), on a subsequent nera-
•sion, with favourable wind, did 70 miles in
three-quarters'of an hour. He-turned but
much 1 the faster flier of the two. How-
•ci-r I regretted later on'that I ha I sent
-Blackey away sj soon, for I, had a . serious
illntfcs, lasting four days—days of agoni*-
torture, j had been eating tinned fish,
and I don't know if wha't J suffered *rom
ptomaine poisoning, or gastritis, but
those days and rrghte of anguish /pent in
tn*' lonelybu&V, beyond the reach t human
aid, are viv oV [impressed on my memory.
—A Mesalliance.—
Blackey does not believe m the celibate
hie. His om ambition is to brood over a
PiV 1 ’ € £2. s and help rear the young.
Hitherto his unlucky attempts in thi«
direction have been,’ to us, most amusing,
and, to him, most disappoint}ug, About
five years ago Blackey courted and won a
bronzewing hen, but a difficulty arose when
it came to the question of nest building.
Blackey wanted the nest buhe in
a pigeon box that was fixed on
to a dead tree. He coaxed and bullied
—aij of no avail. Bronzie would not look
at the box. That was useless to her, she
wanted a platform of sticks 'built in the
fork of a tree branch—and that he would
not hear of, as no respectable "Homer"
ever built in trees. Day after day they
continued .to argue ’the question, and,
when the first egg was ready, there wae no
nest to lay it in. Thinking she was run*
ning matters pretty closely, I took a hand
m the game, by building a rough imita-
tion of a bronzewing’s nest in a tree, near
our house. The bronzewing immediately
took possession, and the first egg was laid
that day. The "Homer" gave in, and
when the second egg was laid he proudly
look his turn at sitting; How it happens
that, among the favoured bird-denizens of
the garden are several shrike thrushes
apd ’these birds, watching their chance,
sucked the two eggs. I then, placed th&
Homer” and his bride in an gviary, where
they nested, and wore soon again sitting
on two eggs. But, sad’ to say, the thrushes
once more secured the eggs, which were
proved fertile by the blood on the shells.
I then Jet the pigeons out, and the bronze-
wing d;sa'ppearod—a victim to gun or cat.
46


Blackoy next chummed '.;p with a bronzc-
R-ini? male, and 'then these two ridiculous
birds actually 'built a nest on a gum stump
away in the’ scrub. Out of pity, I gave
■them two eggs, and 'the two birds took
turn about in the routine of incubation.
The bronze male took the night shift,
which is usually the hen bird's duty. They
had nearly completed their time when the
thrushes again came on the scene, and 1
found the shells on the ground early one
■morning. Securing another pair of eggs
from my aviary, I placed these in the de-
serted nest, and the strangely assorted pair
returned and again took up the apparently
hopeless task. But, the following day, the
thrushes got in their work once more—so,
considering that matters were hopeless, .1
left them to their lonesome fate.
—Nil 'Desperandum.—Blaekoy Becomes a
Rogue. —
Blackey believes that the duty of all
■conscientious pigeons is to “multiply and
replenish the earth.” There was a time
when they each had a mate, but when two
and two became eight, and eight became
16, and 16 32—1 for the sake of my pea
crop, had to banish all hut these two birds
(both males) that were useful as letter
carriers. Our native hronzewing is also a
great breeder, and my aviary of these
birds having become crowded, I decided to
give them, the chance of liberty. So ? quite
recently, I opened' the door of liberty
three days in succession. Two pairs de-
cided to stick to the old home, one pair
of which were sitting. On the third day,
hearing a great commotion in the aviary,
I hurried to, the spot, and found fresh
feathers drifting around the floor,
and a very ruffled and angry bronze male
perched near the nest. And there, on the
bronzewing’s nest, proudly covering the
e Sgs, was Blackey, the ‘Homer.” I hunted
the scamp out, but, no sooner was my
back turned, than he went straight back
and again took possession. To keep him
out, I had to close the aviary. Blackey had
been shepherding those eggs from the
wrong side of the netting for a week, anij,
as I noticed there was no bird on the eggs,
I put Blackey in the aviary, and, from all
appearances, he was a happy bird at last,
with those eggs to cherish, for he lost no
time before again taking possession of
them. But I had to 'turn Him out the next
morning for unmercifully •thrashing a hen
which refused to take a turn on the neat.
,W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Adelaide.
