

jl


.
. V


> y Ji^ci — /j£Lr~'
( /




NAUGHTY SOPHIA


»




7
’V'
v i




* ■ '* X
I


j mUGHTTOCOTA j
{ BYWIfflFRO LETTS S
WITH JMELARLY IOO
ILLUSTRATIONS i
BY -RUBY LIND I
' ~ I I
- 1 |
| j |
\
j
I GRATST "RICHARDS LTD. ' 1
| 7 CARLTON STREET, LOHQON.OW j


WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD.
PRINTERS, PLYMOUTH


THIS STORY IS DEDICATED
TO ITS FIRST CRITICS
NORAH AND KATHLEEN MANDERS
Blackrock, 1912
My dear Norah and Kathleen,
You read this story long ago. I forget the year,
but it must have been long ago, for you have each grown
a foot or more since that time. I won’t believe that you
and Nono and Joe and Charlie or any of the children of this
road are ever going to reach that prosaic age “grown up-
ness.” But if that dreadful day ever comes, and you are
at last too old to play Hide-and-Seek or Happy Families or
Pit, then take down this book, and remember all the happy
hours that you brought its writer.
Someone asked me once if I found it hard to write near
a window overlooking a garden where children were laugh-
ing and talking. The answer to that is that it would be
hard to write if children were not laughing and talking out-
side the window.
I hope that you will still like Sophia and all her friends.
If you want to hear about gnomes you must go to a
Tyrolese carver, Anton Dapr£, for he is the original of
Johann the Toymaker, and he knows the gnomes well.
As for Wunderheim, I hope that we shall meet there
some day. But I think I have met you all in some old
street of the city, or in one of the toyshops, and that is
why I love the town so much.
Perhaps, too, I shall meet other children there and get to
known them as I know you. I hope so.
Ever your friend,
THE STORY SPINNER


1 O ' ,
,f ■ vy
Hwu


PROLOGUE
•
.
•
PAGE
I I
THE WUNDERHOF AND THE ARCHDUCHESS SOPHIA
1 7
THE GRAND DRAWING-ROOM AND PRINCE FRITZ
2 7
MASTER JOHANN OF THE TOYSHOP .
37
SOPHIA WILL NOT EAT HER CRUSTS .
43
HANS THE FIGHTER
53
SOPHIA HIDES IN THE BIG BELL
6i
SOPHIA IN THE DUNGEON ....
73
SOPHIA ESCAPES IN A WINE-BARREL
82
THE ESCAPE FROM WUNDERHEIM
90
THE CAVE ON THE WUNDERBERG
99
THE HOUSE THAT THE GNOMES BUILT
110
PETERKIN’S BEER-GARDEN
122
THE CITY OF THE GREY GNOMES
•
•
129
KAISER SENDS HIS MOUSTACHE AS A TOKEN
.
.
•
138
A/, ml


GATHERING WILD STRAWBERRIES 144
HOW THE ROBBERS HAD HIGH TEA 154
HOW THE ROBBERS LISTENED TO A GHOST STORY . 162
OLGA, THE WOLF-HOUND, SAVES SOPHIA . . . 17 1
THE HERMIT WOLF . . . . . . . 178
JOCASTA THE JACKDAW BRINGS NEWS . . . -193
THE ROYAL COACH COMES FOR SOPHIA . . . .202
HOW SOPHIA SPOKE IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER . . 209
HANS HIDES IN THE CLOCK 2IQ
HOW SOPHIA WENT BACK TO WUNDERHEIM . . .229
HOW THE GNOMES MADE A CAKE 237
EPILOGUE 246


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
A TRUSTWORTHY SEA-GULL WOULD CARRY ME . . 13
JUST LIKE THE CASTLES YOU SEE IN FAIRY STORIES . 19
SHE WORE WHITE SATIN EVERY DAY . . . .20
“THAT IS ENOUGH,” CRIED THE PRINCE . . . .29
THEN TWO SERVANTS BROUGHT IN WINE . . . -31
SOPHIA WAS IN A LITTLE, DARK, NARROW HALL . . 39
PLAYING ROUND THE GNOMES’ FOUNTAIN ... 44
EVERY DAY SHE WENT TO SCHOOL WITH HANS . . 55
MASTER JOHANN SAT BEHIND THE COUNTER CARVING . 63
SOPHIA PURSUED BY AN ENEMY 67
SOPHIA AND THE RAT KING *77
FRIGHTENED BY A SNEEZE 83
THE ESCAPE ......... 93
KAISER AND SOPHIA 105
“and here comes gretchen, leading the goat” . 117
THE LITTLE MAN SAT DOWN UPON A ROCK . . 125
SOPHIA DANCED BEFORE THE GNOMES . . . . 133
THE LAMPLIGHTER CAME DOWN THE STREET . . 137
THE MAYOR AND THE TOWN CLERK DECIDED THEY MIGHT
TAKE A STROLL 139
THE HORSES GALLOPED DOWN THE WOODLAND SIDE . 149
HANS WAS CARVING A FUNNY PIPE 157


THAT NIGHT SHE WAS MORE GRANDLY DRESSED THAN USUAL 165
GRADUALLY THE ROBBERS FELL ASLEEP . . . . 173
THEY ALWAYS HOWL WHEN THEY’RE EXCITED. . . 185
A RAGGED FIGURE FLUNG ITSELF BEFORE HER . -199
RAISING HER EYES SHE SAW PRINCE FRITZ . . . 205
HOW THEY DANCED IN THE COUNTRY DANCE I . .211
HANS OPENED THE DOOR OF THE CLOCK-CASE AND GOT
INSIDE 22 1
RUNNING LIKE A HARE 233
“ YOU HAVE FORFEITED YOUR RANK ” . . . *243


PROLOGUE
“I’ll tell you a story,” said the Story Spinner, “but you
mustn’t rustle too much, or cough or blow your nose more
than is necessary . . . and you mustn’t pull any more curl-
papers out of your hair. And when I’ve done, you must go
to sleep at once.”
Margaret sat up in bed and stared in the direction of the
voice. It had come from the depths of the old arm-chair
that stood by the nursery fire. Now it was quite nine o’clock
on a winter’s night and the fire had burnt low, but Margaret
could just see the Story Spinner’s long grey beard and the
gleam of his big spectacles as he bent forward towards the
fire. She had seen him before, this kind little elfin man, who
spins stories on his spinning-wheel, and weaves them on his
loom. And she knew that when little girls really and honestly
cannot go to sleep, he will sometimes tell them stories that
take them to the very gates of Slumber Town.
“Oh, do tell,” she said; “I’ll promise about the curl-
papers. I’ve only taken out the one at the back and the
one over my right ear, because they’re so knobbly to lie


upon. Dear Story Spinner, do begin. But what will it be
about?”
“A little girl.”
“What sort of little girl—not a very, very good one, if
you don’t mind?”
“On the contrary, she was very naughty. She was, I
may tell you, an Archduchess, but a very naughty Arch-
duchess, and it is better to be a good goose girl than a
disobedient Duchess. Pray remember that.”
The Story Spinner looked towards the bed, and the light
gleamed on his spectacles. He is a little fond of making
moral remarks. “Are you likely to rustle any more?” he
asked.
“Oh! just a minute while I settle them all,” said
Margaret.
You see, she took her whole family to bed: a grey elephant,
a pink-velvet pig, a fur rabbit, a clockwork seal, a celluloid
duck, and a Teddy bear. So it was quite necessary to
settle them comfortably round her before the story began.
And the celluloid duck had been pert to the elephant that
morning, so they would not sit together, and the Teddy
bear and the pink-velvet pig had just been and
it was natural and proper that they wanted to hold each
other’s hands. Margaret had to manage this for them,
and it meant a good deal of rustling.
“Will there be a moral?” she asked the Story Spinner.
“Of course ! Peaches have stones and stories have
morals.”
“But, then, you always leave the stone and eat the peach.”
“You are trying to be clever,” said the Story Spinner,
“and that is very inadvisable. Let me change the subject,
and tell you that I had this story from a cousin of mine
who lives in Germany, and a very obliging fellow he is.


“A trustworthy sea-gull would carry me ”


Failing to have any postage stamps he wrote the chapters
on cobweb paper rolled round straws, and sent them by the
swallows that built in your barn this very summer.
“ Now let me tell you that my cousin has a most excellent
position as Hausgeist to a German Burgomaster.”
“What’s that?” asked Margaret, as she blew her nose for
the last time, and hid her handkerchief under her pillow.
“Well, a Hausgeist is a house fairy, and a very useful
creature he is ; there’s nothing he won’t do in the way of
dusting, sweeping, and cleaning. He’s a near relation to
the Kobold and to our English Lob-lie-by-the-fire. In
appearance he’s like a gnome, he has a grey beard, is no
taller than yourself, and wears a cap, grey or red, upon
his head. He always attaches himself to one house, and
interests himself in the fortunes of those who live there.
And, as I tell you, my cousin is Hausgeist to a Burgo-
master, and a very respectable fairy he is.
“Ah, how I should like to visit Germany some day!
How pleasant that would be! I gather from my cousin
that it is a most interesting country. They make toys
there and everything else you can think of, and there are
soldiers riding here and there, and haunted castles, and
gnomes, and good little girls with fair pigtails, and the
Rhine flows through it all in the most delightful manner
possible. Yes, I should like to go to Germany, and visit
my cousin and see the Burgomaster and his good wife.
But I fear it is too far, unless I could find a trustworthy
sea-gull who would carry me there at a small cost.”
“Is there a little boy in the story too?” Margaret asked
suddenly.
“Of course there is. His name is Hans, and he’s just
as old as your brother Geoffrey, who is now at school.”
“And let there be a dog, please.”


“Very well! There is a dog" called Kaiser.”
“ And a cat ? ”
“Yes, there is a cat called Mein Herr Katzchen.”
“A tabby cat?”
“Yes.”
“As fat as ours ? ”
“ Fatter.”
“Very well, then; do begin, dear Story Spinner.”
“ I’ll begin, if you don’t sniff. I dislike the sound
sniffing unless I do it myself: that’s different somehow
Well now, are you quite settled ? ”
“ Quite.”
The Story Spinner coughed, and then began


~~' i i'~ca
/
/
THEIVAJttDERHCr
AMD THE ARCH DUCHE6S
'SOPHIA


Chapter I
THE WUNDERHOF
AND THE ARCHDUCHESS SOPHIA
OW let me tell you, my dear that
by some strange oversight the town of Wunder-
heim is not marked in the map of Germany,
and there is no sign of the Wunderberg, the
mountain that stands behind it; but if they
are not really there, how can I manage to
tell you all about them ?
Now Wunderheim stands, as I say, near a wild, pine-clad
hill called the Wunderberg. We shall hear about this hill
later ; for the present I must tell you about the town. It
seems, from all that I can hear, that it is renowned for the
manufacture of toys and clocks. And a very queer, pleasant
place it is, full of towers and steeples and sloping roofs
tiled all with blocks of red and white wood.
It is a pretty sight to see it, either in the sunshine, when
the river sparkles as it flows under the queer old bridges, or
at dusk, when the oddly shaped roofs and chimneys are dark
against the pale western sky, and the river reflects the lights
of the bridges. Yes, all who have been there agree that
Wunderheim is a charming town, and that the Wunderhof
is a splendid castle.
Now the Wunderhof stands above the town, looking
straight across it towards the Wunderberg. It is a very


fine building, with turrets and towers and gates and arches,
just like the castles you see in fairy stories. Indeed, it had
been built on just the same pattern in the days of old.
And two little sentries, like toy soldiers, walked to and fro
before the gates and challenged all who came. And every
now and then the gates were opened, and a troop of soldiers
rode out, or perhaps a fine cavalcade of lords and ladies, all
the Prinzen and Grafen, all the Vons and Gnadige Frauen
going hunting, or riding down to the big cathedral in the
town. Or sometimes out came the royal coach with its six
horses and its outriders in blue and gold. And inside (if
you stood on tip-toe and stared very hard) you might just
see the royal nose of the Prince himself, or catch a sight
of the Princess. And it was even possible that you might
see the Archduchess Sophia, the Prince’s niece; for she
always craned forward to see the towers and chimneys of
Wunderheim, and to watch the boys and girls who played
round the town fountain, and the merry little dogs that
played with them.
For the Archduchess Sophia was only ten years old, and
she had no brothers nor sisters, and no father nor mother.
Her uncle, the Prince, was her nearest relation, and he was
not too fond of her, for, as I have warned you, she was a
very naughty little girl.
Now you may think she was very fortunate in being an
Archduchess and living in a great splendid castle. Perhaps
she was. But yet she wanted to live in the streets of Wun-
derheim, and to wear a cheap cotton dress, and to play
ball and skittles and skipping-rope with all the little Peters
and Karls and Gretchens who played about the streets.
She was naughty not to be more content. No doubt
the little Peters and Karls and Gretchens would have
thought it glorious fun to live in a great big castle, and


“Just like the castles you see in fairy stories”


X''
“She wore white satin every day”


to play in a huge nursery where the rocking-horse was
life-size.
The Archduchess Sophia was certainly as grand as grand
could be. She wore white satin every day and real pearls
round her neck, and she had six nurses and three gover-
nesses, who all three had Von before their names. And
though they agreed about nothing else, they did agree that
she was the naughtiest little girl they had ever known.
Now in the lives of most naughty people there comes a
day when, as it were, their naughtiness over-boils and they
do something that is bad beyond words. It is always well
to draw the line before that day comes, for, as you remember,
something really terrible often happens then. If you know
Peter Struwwel as well as you should, you will recollect
the shocking accidents that happened to Fidgety Phil, and
little Suckathumb, and to Harriett who played with the
matches, and to the wicked boys who laughed at the black-
amoor with his “ green umbrella.” Just such a day came
for the Archduchess Sophia.
All the week she has been growing worse
On Monday she stuck out her tongue at his Excellency
the Lord of the Privy Purse . . . and he saw !
On Tuesday she peeled a long strip of wall-paper off
a wall in the third grandest drawing-room.
On Wednesday she stoutly refused to say her Catechism
to his Grace the Archbishop.
On Thursday she threw painty water out of her nursery
window, though she knew that General von Hegel and
Baron von Schly were talking underneath.
On Friday— this was a terrible day—she threw a peeled
banana at Baron von Schly, and it hit him on the nose.
And this was because he had ordered her white mice to be
put under arrest as a punishment for the painty water incident.


Then Saturday came.
The Archduchess Sophia was by this time so naughty
that only under compulsion would anyone speak to her.
She was locked into a turret chamber, and told to learn Die
Lorelei and the ‘‘thirteen times” table by heart.
But she knew that she was so bad that she did not even
try to be better. She clambered on to a chair, and leaning
her elbows on the window-sill she stared down at the pretty
town of Wunderheim.
The tears rolled down her face and she smeared them
away with an inky finger. She had learnt no more of Die
Lorelei than the lines before Im A bendsonnenschein, and she
could not have told you the answer to six times thirteen.
But still she gazed at Wunderheim, and envied the children
who played there.
Oh how pleasant, she thought, to live in one of those
queer little gabled houses under the red and white tiles ; how
pleasant to run to and fro through the narrow up-and-down
little streets and stare into the toy-shops ! She wondered
if she could be better there than she was as an Archduchess
in a big castle, with Baron von Schly to scold her, and three
governesses to teach her good manners.
She sobbed and sniffed a good deal, and planned to run
away some day to the Wunderberg, and live there with the
wolves and bears, and to put out her tongue whenever she
pleased, and never to comb her hair or do as she was told.
Among her other faults she was a fidget, and it was not
too strange that presently the chair slipped from her, and
she fell bump bang on to the floor. She did not cry when
she was hurt, for she was the daughter of a brave man,
and she felt that one is not an Archduchess and a Serene
Highness for nothing. She pulled a face, kicked her chair,
and sat down on the hearthrug before the fire. Then she


looked about her for something to burn. That, of course,
was naughty too. This day was beginning as badly as
the others.
She tore the fly-leaf out of her poetry book, and scribbled
on it. Then she let it fly up the chimney. This was her
way of sending a message to the jackdaws who lived among
the turrets and towers of the Wunderhof.
The Queen of the Jackdaws lived there. She had the
bluest eyes and the greyest hood of any jackdaw in Germany.
And as she read everything that flew up the chimney, she
grew as wise as she was handsome. When the message
came up the chimney she read it, blinking her eyes very
intelligently ; this was always her custom. Then she looked
down the chimney and said, “ Caw-Caw-w-wk.” After that
she hopped to the turret window and peered in.
“ Caw-Caw-w-w-k,” she said again; “good morning,
Serene Highness not always serene, I hope I see you well.”
Sophia looked up. Her face was very dirty with tears
and ink-marks, and she had spilt ink on her dress.
“Good morning,” she answered; “I don’t know if you’re
Herr or Frau Jackdaw, but I’m very glad to see you.”
“I’m neither Herr nor Frau; I’m Queen Jocasta Jack-
daw, and as we’re both royalties it is pleasant for us to meet,
though I am sorry to see your Serene Highness in this quite
sad state of naughtiness.”
Sophia flushed.
“You forget I’m an Archduchess,” she said angrily.
“You do not look like one, Serene Highness; when one
royalty speaks to another it is possible to say what is true.
But now, if you will dry your eyes, I will tell you something
interesting and even exciting.”
Sophia rubbed her eyes with the back of her hand, and
mounted the chair again.


Queen Jocasta blinked her eyes several times, and hopped
a little nearer.
“Go on,” said Sophia impatiently.
“Go on—what, Serene Highness?”
“Go on, please.”
“What more ? ”
“Oh! go on, please, your Majesty.’
“Ah! that’s better. Well, my dear Archduchess, I went
as usual for a morning fly above the elm tops, and when
flying there I espied in the far distance a magnificent chariot
drawn by six horses. I noted the liveries of the outriders,
and flying nearer, the sixteen quarterings of the coat of
arms on the doors of the coach. Now, being a royalty
myself, I make a point of knowing other royalties, and I
knew at once that this was the carriage of the Hereditary
Grand Duke of Schonberg-Hesse. Yes, and it was his
Highness himself inside, moustache and all. And who
should be with him but his eldest son, Prince Fritz, a most
beautiful youth, with yellow hair and blue eyes . . . and a
very clean face, Serene Highness.”
“I’ll wash mine,” said Sophia shortly.
“Do. An archducal face should always be clean. Prince
Fritz was quite clean, and his nails had been cut that
morning. He did bite them, I must admit, but his royal
papa told him not to. Now the exciting thing is, Serene
Highness, that they are coming here on a very important
matter.”
“What’s that?” asked Sophia.
“What else but to arrange for a betrothal between you
and this handsome and excellent little Prince, who is so
clever that he can say Die Lorelei and several other pieces
with such expression that one would weep to hear him.
He can also do Long Division, and he knows the dates


of any king or queen you can mention, and in geography
it is impossible to puzzle him.”
Sophia stuck out her under lip.
“ Oh ! ” she said.
“Yes, what could be nicer or fitter than such a betrothal
to this clean, nice, well-educated Princekin, whose only fault
is biting his nails ? I have heard the whole matter discussed
by your aunt and uncle, for I put my head right down the
chimney to hear them the better.”
At this moment the key grated in the lock, and the door
opened. There stood Baron von Schly all in dark green
and gold, with his sword by his side. His moustache curled
nearly to his eyes, and he looked very much like a big,
rather stout, very indignant eagle.
He saluted, and Queen Jocasta flew away to listen at
the chimney top.
“The Serene Highness will at once deliver her person
into the hands of her servants,” he said in his big gruff*
voice, “and be made ready to meet the Hereditary Grand
Duke of Schonberg-Hesse and his Highness Prince Fritz.
The Serene Highness will be pleased to behave herself in
a becoming manner before the royal visitors.”
“Where are my white mice?” Sophia interrupted.
“The mice of the Serene Highness are in the guard-room
under arrest until the Serene Highness behaves properly.”
“If one of them dies I shall ... I shall bite you, von
Schly,” sobbed Sophia. She was growing more and more
naughty every minute. “I almost fear to go on with my
story,” said the Story Spinner, shaking his head.


THE GRAND
DRAWING-ROOM
& PRINCE FRITZ


L- ■" ' ~ i.« i it-r'i'i
Chapter II
THE GRAND DRAWING-ROOM
AND PRINCE FRITZ
HE Archduchess Sophia with a very clean
shining face was ushered into the grand draw-
ing-room of the Wunderhof. A gentleman-
in-waiting said her name as she entered the
room. She had ten names, and it took a long
time to say them.
She was dressed in very stiff white corded
silk, and there were pearls in her smooth yellow hair. But
her nose and eyes were red with tears, and she did not
look pretty. In fact, she looked just as ugly as all of us do
when we sulk.
She had to take a very long walk on the slippery, polished
floor, until she got within speaking distance of her uncle
the Prince.
The Prince introduced her by all her ten names to the
Hereditary Grand Duke, who in his turn introduced Prince
Fritz by his thirteen names. Then Sophia curtsied, and Fritz
and she kissed each other. Fritz just put a very cool round
cheek against hers, then he drew back and stared at her with
his big blue eyes. Sophia scowled at him. “She is very
ugly,” said Fritz to himself; “if she thinks I shall ever marry
her, she is wrong.”
Sophia sat down on a gilded chair and stuck out her under


lip nearly an inch. Then two servants brought in wine and
beautiful old Bavarian glasses, all jewelled and knobbed and
covered with gold. And cowslip wine and cakes were handed
to the children.
Then the Prince and the Archduke raised their glasses and
cried “ Hoch ! ” for that is the German custom. But the
children stared at each other. I don’t know which stared
the hardest, the blue eyes or the brown. When she thought
that the royal grown-ups were not looking, Sophia looked
at Prince Fritz and pulled a shocking face over her wine-
glass. She looked like the Imperial eagle in a fit. And even
that was not enough, for she stuck out her tongue at him too.
‘ ‘ Oh! Oh! Papa, look quick,” cried the little Prince;
“ the Serene Highness is putting out her tongue at me ! ”
But the Archduke was making a fine speech to the Prince
of Wunderheim; it was a speech he had been composing
during the journey, and he was now making it with his hand
on his heart.
“ Perhaps,” said the Princess, when the speech had been
suitably acknowledged, “the children would like to play
about the drawing-rooms, but first let us hear our dear Fritz
repeat Die Lorelei .”
Up he stood before them all, before the Altessen and
Grafen the Grafinen and Prinzen, and he shook back his
curls, and put out his right foot, and began to say the poem
in a loud clear voice. It made the Gnadige Frauen weep to
hear him, for he was very pretty.
He was good to say the poem when he was asked. But in
his heart he felt conceited and glad, for he knew that
Sophia seemed more naughty and ugly, because he was so
clever and pretty.
Everyone thanked him, and kissed him when he had done.
And then the Archduke begged that Sophia would repeat


“‘That is enough,’ cried the Prince”


something- too. But Sophia only stuck out that naughty
under lip, and stared at her beaded shoe.
“ She can say Le Poulet et le Renard when she likes,” said
the Princess, anxious to praise Sophia, “and she knows two
or three Psalms and the Catechism, and several passages from
the poets.”
But Sophia said nothing. That terrible attack of naughti-
ness was reaching a crisis.
“ Run and play,” said the Princess.
Fritz took Sophia by the hand, and they walked stiffly
away towards a great alcove where suits of armour stood
around the walls.
“ How charming a pair!” exclaimed the Princess of Wun-
derheim ; “they will certainly make a match some day. I
believe they are falling in love already.”
“You are pinching my finger,” whispered Sophia; “don’t
do it.”
“Won’t I?” whispered Fritz; “just wait till you marry
me, then I shall pinch your finger and no one shall stop me.”
“ I shall.”
“ You shan’t.”
“ I shall.”
“ You shan’t. ”
Fritz paused. Someone was watching them. He pre-
tended to look at the armour, and Sophia turned her back
on him. Then, all unobserved, he twisted her long hair into
the sword-hilt of the little sword he wore at his side, and when
she moved her head she felt a fierce tug. She struggled to
unloose herself, but she would not cry out, because at least
she was brave, and did not tell tales. But when Fritz
sniggered, and would not release her, she threw all restraint
to the four winds, and gave herself up to be as bad as ever
she could be. In the grand drawing-room of the splendid


_3\vra,t
“Then two servants brought in wine”


Wunderhof, Archduchess and Serene Highness though she
was, she went down on all fours and bit the little Prince’s leg.
Now though he could repeat poetry so beautifully he could
not keep silence in pain, and when he felt Sophia’s teeth
he broke into the most piteous screams.
“Oh ! papa,” he howled, “ she’s biting me. Save me,
save me!”
All the Altessen and Grafinen and Prinzen rushed to save
him. The Archduchess Sophia was dragged away and locked
into an ante-room, and two guards were set before the door.
By this time Sophia was really frightened. The ante-room
was dark and cold. She crept to a sofa, and sat there staring
before her. She knew she had been naughtier than ever she
had been before, and that something terrible would happen
to her. Had she not bitten the leg of her future betrothed ?
What could be worse ?
She crept to the keyhole, and tried to peep out. There
was a great deal of scurrying in the long passages, court
physicians were going to and fro, there was whispering and
talking, and through it all a most lamentable howling and
boo-hooing.
‘‘Well, I wouldn’t do that,” thought Sophia, and she
crept back to her sofa in the darkness.
Two hours passed. Sophia counted them on the cuckoo
clock. The good little cuckoo did not know what a
naughty child sat there listening to her voice as she told the
hours. She had only, in fact, done her last attack of
cuckooing when the door was thrown open, and two torch-
bearers came in, followed by Baron von Schly and three
lords-in-waiting.
Sophia stood up blinking at the lights. Her hair was
tousled, and she had twisted her lace handkerchief into
a ball.


“The Serene Highness,” shouted von Schly in his deep
terrible voice, “ will come at once to the Presence
Chamber.”
He waited for Sophia to leave the room, and he and the
lords and pages followed her. How her heart sank as
she walked down the long corridor, and passed into the
Presence Chamber !
At the far end sat her uncle the Prince; he was sitting
on the throne, and his face was terribly severe. Near him
was seated the Archduke of Schonberg-Hesse, and behind
him were the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, and
several Generals, Dukes, and Judges.
Sophia’s knees trembled, her mouth was quite dry with
terror, for everyone stared frowningly at her as she came
up the long room and stood before the Prince.
“Read the accusation against the Archduchess Sophia,”
said the Prince.
The Lord Chief Justice took a parchment scroll from
the hands of a page, and read aloud all the faults of this
shocking week. When he came to the terrible part where
Sophia had thrown a banana at Baron von Schly, the Court
turned pale.
“That is enough,” cried the Prince; “we do not even
want to know what more the Archduchess may have done.
Only a hopelessly bad child would throw a banana at
his Excellency, the noble Baron von Schly. We see from
this that her Serene Highness is quite unfitted for royal
society. One who could bite a little Prince’s leg is fitter
for the Zoo than for the Palace.
“However, to give her some chance to amend her ways,
we propose to send her to the house of Master Johann, the
Carver and Toymaker, in the Kirchstrasse in Wunderheim.
There she will have the care of a former nurse of hers,


Babina, and she will be well fed, clothed, and instructed
whilst she is there. But for the rest she will live entirely
as a poor child lives, and no one will know or believe that
she is an Archduchess. Her exile will continue at the
pleasure of the Council, and until our noble Baron von
Schly feels his honour appeased.
“I have spoken. Conduct the prisoner to the carriage,
and drive her down to Wunderheim.”
Sophia looked round her despairingly, but she only met
the triumphant eye of Baron von Schly. No one pitied
her. She was too naughty. Attended by a guard she was
marshalled into an ante-room, and clad by two of her nurses
in a homespun dress and a linen cap, then a red cloak
was put round her, and she was taken to a side door of the
Wunderhof.
There the royal coach was waiting, and she got into it,
followed by a governess and by two lords-in-waiting.
Ah ! how sad her heart was then. For there was no
one to kiss her good-bye, no one to wave a pocket-hand-
kerchief, no one to say “Safe journey.” And she had
loved the great Wunderhof with all its halls and corridors.
And she liked her own satin dresses better than this rough
homespun that she wore. She was sad indeed, and the
tears rolled down her cheeks, and fell on to her lap. And
she longed to lean her head on someone’s shoulder, and
cry, and cry, and beg to be forgiven.
But no one was sorry for the Archduchess Sophia !
Yes—somebody was. Something soft and warm, that had a
little, cold, friendly nose, leaped in at the window and
cuddled into her lap. Sophia held it close, wrapping her
cloak about it for fear it should be taken away. It was
Mein Herr Katzchen, the stable kitten, that had found her
out, willing to follow her into exile.


That was one little comfort as they rolled down the
wide road that led to Wunderheim. But how beautiful it
looked, the great castle on the hill ! How its lights
glowed in the darkness! How tall were its turrets and
clock-tower that seemed nearly to touch the stars ! But
Sophia was leaving it, and it was all her fault. Alas!
Alas!


r «- '
/* c'
r"
MASTER
JOHANN
OF THE
TOY SHOP


Chapter 111
MASTER JOHANN
OF THE TOY SHOP
OWN came the carriage, rolling down the
hill till it came to the great bridge over
the river. Sophia, peeping out of the win-
dow, saw the lights gleam and flash in
the dark water. How mysterious the river
looked, slipping by the walls and down,
down to the distant sea! Soon they were
in the great town Square, and she could
see the big fountain of the Hausfrau and the gnomes. How
often she had wanted to play round that fountain with the
little town children! Now she was not quite so sure. She
half wished that she were safe in her fine carved bedstead
in her room in the Wunderhof.
There before her she could see the great front of the
Cathedral rising up to the stars, and as they passed it the
huge bell boomed out the hour. It was all so vast that it
made Sophia feel very small and foolish.
Then the carriage turned into strange little streets, where
the houses on one side peered over to see what those on
the other side were doing. And no two houses were quite
alike in gables and eaves and queer chimney-pots. For
the people in Wunderheim loved variety, and anyone who
could carve or paint or work in wrought-iron did his best
to improve his house as far as he could.


Perhaps there was no street where there was such differ-
ence among the houses as in the Kirchstrasse, for some
drew back and some nodded forward, and all had curious
carvings and strange faces for waterspouts, and wonderful
old lamps that lit up the thick doors and the queer door-
knockers.
At the oldest, oddest-looking house in the street the
carriage stopped. Sophia’s heart beat fast. She clutched
Mein Herr Katzchen, the kitten, tightly in her arms, and
tried not to burst into tears. But her throat seemed full of
sobs, and her eyes were wide with terror.
“This is the place,” said a lord-in-waiting, and looking
very haughty he got out of the carriage, and banged the
queer knocker.
“Your Serene Highness will alight,” he added.
One great fearful sob escaped Sophia as she scrambled
down the carriage-step, and went to the house. Then
the old thick door opened, she went in, and it closed
behind her.
Sophia was in a little, dark, narrow hall with a tall woman
in a white cap and apron standing before her. The tall
woman had once been her nurse in the days before the
naughty Archduchess could talk. Now she took the
child’s hand, and led her into a room at the back of the
house.
As she came in, a man and a little boy stood up and
bowed to her, then they sat down again and went on carv-
ing. Sophia stared about her, and Mein Herr Katzchen
leaped from her arms, and ran boldly towards the poodle
that lay before the stove.


“ Sophia was in a little, dark, narrow hall ”


The poodle yawned, raised his head, met Mein Herr’s nose
for a moment, then lay down again.
“ You will have your bread and milk, my child, and then
go to bed,” said Babina in her soft low voice, and she
undid the cloak from Sophia’s shoulders.
Sophia was too hungry and tired to rebel, so she took
her wooden spoon and began the bread and milk. She
had time now to look about her, and to observe her new
surroundings.
The room where they sat had a low ceiling and a lattice-
window at one end. In the middle was a big stove, made
of porcelain, and from the stove came light and heat. But
there were candles too, in curious candlesticks carved with
gnomes and animals.
By the stove sat Master Johann, a big broad-shouldered
man, whose hands were never still. He had black hair
and a black beard and the kindest, most honest face in
Germany. They said that Master Johann was the friend
of the saints, for he carved saints for the churches as well
as toys for the children.
Opposite to him sat Hans his son. Hans was eleven,
but he was already a good carver; he had brown hair and
very busy hands. That was all Sophia could see as she
stared over her bowl at him. But presently he raised his
head, and looked at her with very serious grey eyes. That
made them both shy, and they looked away again.
The room was full of blocks of wood, of toys and saints,
and curious ,clock-cases and ornaments ; very interesting and
delightful things they looked. And no one was idle, that
was the curious thing, no one, that is to say, except the
poodle and the kitten. But at the Wunderhof everyone spent
the day in politely and gracefully doing nothing.
Sophia watched how Babina’s spinning-wheel flew round


and round, and how Master Johann’s hands moved, and
gradually it all began to be a dream and her head nodded—
and nodded—and nodded.
“ Poor child, how weary she is ! ” said the carver, and he
touched her head with one strong brown finger.
Hans looked up.
u ls she a very, very naughty princesskin, father?” he
asked.
“ So they say,” said his father ; “ but I do not believe that
children are very, very naughty, my son. I believe the good
God made them to be very good. In a month, in a year,
we shall see that the princesskin is good as gold.”
Then Master Johann lifted her up quite easily in his strong
arms, and carried her up the queer little dark stairs that wound
in a most surprising fashion, and Babina put her to bed
in the little wooden bed beside her own. It was very plain,
and the sheets were coarse and the down pillows were not
so big as most German pillows are, as you will know some
day when you see them for yourself.
And far away at the Wunderhof little Prince Fritz lay
under a satin coverlet, with a night-light in a golden
frame beside him. But, perhaps because he had not been
very good himself, and because he had told tales and made
a fuss about himself, he had bad dreams and thought that
wolves were hunting him. His room was very magnificent,
all hung with tapestry, and so softly carpeted that the floor
was like moss. But still, he did not sleep as well as Sophia
in her plain little bed in the Kirchstrasse.


SOPHIA
WILL NOT EAT
HER CRUSTS


Chapter IV
SOPHIA WILL NOT
EAT HER CRUSTS
WONDER, said the Story Spinner, what
it is that makes people sulk. After all,
sulking is so very dull, and most of the
trouble of it falls upon the sulky. When
you sit by yourself or moon about the
garden alone, and when you will not talk
or smile or run about, who is it that is
so miserable ? You, oh ! you silly little
sulker. And then there is the coming to,
and the trying to be natural and cheerful
again. All that is most awkward.
However, you will hear presently what Master Johann of
the Toyshop thought about it, and I must say I agree with
him. But all this in due time. I have been improving the
occasion by a few words on sulkiness before I tell you that
the Archduchess Sophia spent the whole of her first day in
the Kirchstrasse in a very bad state of sulks.
No doubt she got out of bed at the wrong side, that is
a thing that happens to all of us. She was home-sick too and
very shy, and that explains a great deal. And being unhappy
herself, she was inclined to blame other people for it.
After breakfast she did not help Babina to clear the cloth
and wash the cups, but she stood at the window drumming


“Playing round the Gnomes’ fountain”


with her fingers on the panes, and when Hans showed her
toys she turned away her head, and stuck out her under lip.
Now, of course, Hans had felt just like that himself, so he
understood all about it, but still it was depressing.
Presently he went out, for it was a holiday at his school,
and he was going to play with Anton Schmidt of the bakery,
and all the little Schmidts, Gretchen and Marie and Lizbeth
and Joseph and Peter and the others.
“ We’re going to the Town Square to play round the
Gnomes’ fountain,” he said to no one in particular, but with an
idea that Sophia might choose to come. But it was no good.
Sophia wanted to go with him badly, but something would not
let her. So she retired into a corner, and sat on a stool
staring at her apron, and that was very dull on a holiday
morning when the children were playing round the Gnomes’
fountain in the Square.
Babina came in and begged her to go with Hans, but
Sophia turned her face aside and stared at the wall, and she
pulled her hands away from her kind nurse’s and clasped
them on her knee.
And so they left her alone, and she was, as you may
suppose, very unhappy indeed. However, she took a vague
interest in what was going on. For Babina was making
something that certainly excited her curiosity. Sophia de-
cided that it must be a cake.
Presently Hans came in, and he too thought the prepara-
tions looked interesting.
“What are you making, mother?” he asked.
“A Himmelspeise, my son.”
“A Himmelspeise ! but that is only for grand days.”
“ But it is a grand day, for our dear Sophia has come to
stay with us.”
Hans glanced towards the corner, but he saw a very


severe face that was averted when he looked at it. No,
Sophia had not done sulking yet.
The cake had a very good smell while it was being baked,
and Sophia decided that, sulky or not, she would accept a
slice when supper-time came.
In the meanwhile Johann the Toymaker came in, and
they sat down to dinner. He had brought Sophia a
crocodile that opened its jaws and wagged its tail. It had
wide red jaws, and if you pulled its string it got into violent
tantrums, and clapped its mouth furiously.
Sophia said “Thank you” in her grumpiest voice, and
laid the crocodile down on the window-sill. She would not
play with it or seem pleased. And yet she wanted to. She
saw that Johann was hurt by her indifference. And in her
strange little heart she loved the Toymaker all the time that
she was seeming so ungrateful and discontented.
“ Perhaps she would rather have a bowing bird, or a
dancing bear, or the woodcutter and the gnome,” said
Johann; “she shall choose for herself after dinner.”
But Sophia shook her head, and glared sulkily at the
tablecloth. And so they had to leave her alone, and talk
to one another. Hans had so much to tell about the games
in the Square that there was plenty of talk round the table.
And Johann always had stories to tell about one thing and
another. So they were very cheerful—all except Sophia.
The afternoon was as bad as the morning. The longer
you sulk the harder it is to recover. All the children of the
Kirchstrasse ran out to see a performing juggler who was
doing wonderful things outside the Cathedral. But Sophia
sat in the corner tying knots in a piece of string, and pretend-
ing that it amused her, though of course it didn’t.
So at last the dusk came, when it would have been pleasant
to have lingered at the door with Hans, or to have sat by


the window and told stories. But Hans was happy with the
baker’s son, and nobody wanted her. Two tears rolled down
her cheeks as this sad idea struck her. But at that moment
Kaiser, the good black poodle, trotted in and laid his chin
on her knee. Sophia stroked him, and he looked at her
with kind brown eyes that seemed to say, ‘‘We all want to
be friends with you, if only you will let us. But still, I will
sit beside you until you feel better.”
Then Babina came in, and she lit the lamp and laid the
supper, and the room looked very cheerful, just the sort of a
room where a Toymaker would like to sit.
The Himmelspeise was put in the place of honour in the
middle of the table. I have never tasted one myself, but I
hear from my cousin, the Hausgeist of the Burgomaster,
that nothing could be nicer. He has promised to send me
a packet of Himmelspeise crumbs some day, and then I
shall know all about it.
However, of course no right-minded person begins a meal
with cake, so they all had large slices of bread and butter,
of good brown bread with excellent crust to it.
But Sophia always left her crusts. No one had ever told
her that if you eat your crusts your hair will curl. And as
that is not true it is a pity to repeat it. Sophia was dainty,
and she left all her good brown crusts round her plate.
“ Eat your crusts, Sophia,” said the Toymaker, “or the
King of the Mice will come out and gobble them up.”
“I never eat crusts,” Sophia answered.
“ Perhaps not at the Wunderhof. But here we eat our
crusts.”
“Why? I do not like them.”
“The good God has sent us both crust and crumb. And
to leave the crust is ungrateful and impolite to Him.”
“I never do eat them,” Sophia persisted.


“Never is a rogue who often changes his mind.”
“I do not change my mind; I am an Archduchess.”
“Very well, then. But Archduchesses who do not care
for their crusts do not care for Himmelspeise. That is plain.”
This surprised Sophia. And when she saw a slice of the
cake being given to Hans, she almost wished that she had
not made so much fuss about her crusts. However, of
course she would not eat them now.
What a greedy boy Hans was, she thought; his cake
seemed to have disappeared in half a second. But he
would not take more. Indeed, no one else took it, and all
because Sophia would not or could not share it with them.
Then the plates were cleared away, all except Sophia’s,
with its fringe of brown crusts, which was left there just in
case she liked to change her mind.
“Perhaps,” said Johann, “you will like them later in
the evening.”
“I am a Serene Highness,” answered Sophia, “and I
shall not eat those crusts.”
They sat round the glowing stove. Johann and Hans
were carving and Babina was knitting. But Sophia, with
Mein Herr Katzchen on her knee, sat staring at the stove.
The Toymaker and his son were whispering together.
“Oh! father, do let me,” said Hans.
“Very well, my son.”
Nothing happened for a minute ; then Hans leant forward,
and laid his own slice of Himmelspeise and two sticky sweets
on Sophia’s knee. But she shook her head.
“No, it would be mean,” she said; “I haven’t eaten the
crusts.”
Johann, without looking up from his carving, spoke.
“It is strange,” said he, “that the Archduchess Sophia,
who has so fine a sense of honour, should make so much


fuss about her crusts. For real ladies take with thankful-
ness what is put before them. They do not pick and choose
and take the best. They know that what we eat is not at
all important, and provided it is wholesome the rest doesn’t
matter.” He did not look at Sophia, but went on carving.
A few minutes afterwards she rose from her stool and
went, with great dignity, with her most archducal air, to the
table, and they knew that she was eating her crusts. But
this yielding of her will resulted in a very violent fit of
sobbing and sniffing, and many tears.
Master Johann put down his tools and drew her on to his
knee, and she sobbed and snorted with her face hidden
against his shoulder.
“Now,” he said at last, “we shall all be happy again,
for that rascal Brummbar has just slunk off through the
shop and out through the keyhole.”
“Who is Brummbar?” asked Hans.
“ Oh ! we all of us know him very well, though you may
not know his name. But if you hand me a pencil and a
piece of paper I will draw him for you. There ! you see
he is an ugly fellow even for a goblin. That sulky under
lip and that frown don’t improve him, do they, my
Princesskin ? ”
Sophia laughed and blushed, because Brummbar’s face
was just a little like what hers had been that day.
“Well,” said the Toymaker, “you have both of you
heard of the goblins, and perhaps you have met them. On
the whole they are not very nice people, they play silly
pranks, and snatch away one’s chisel or the scissors or the
nails just when one wants them. And they hide in dark
corners ... or we think they do, and on windy nights
they rattle at the door, and shriek round the house. They
are not very nice people, you see.


“ But still, there they are, and they like to enjoy them-
selves in their own way. So once a year at Christmas-time
they have a grand party in one of the caves of the Wun-
derberg, and there they assemble and play games till
daybreak.”
“What do they play?” asked Sophia.
“They play * Drop the handkerchief’ and ‘Hunt the
thimble’ and ‘Blind Goblin’s Buff,’ and all the games that
we play. And they scream at the tops of their voices, and
enjoy it all very much.
“ However, once Brummbar came to the party, and it
was seen that he hadn’t even brushed his coat or pulled up
his stockings. Goblins, you know, wear very long red
stockings, and they think it shocking to have them crumpled
round their ankles. But Brummbar did not care, he came
just as he was, with his hair uncombed and his nails uncut.
And he gobbled up as much supper as he could, and never
said a word. And he did not hand things to the other
goblins, even when they shouted ‘ Pass the Brandy-snaps ’
right into his ear.
“But after supper he was even worse. For he would
not be ‘ Blind-man ’ when he was caught, and when it was
his turn to hide the thimble he simply put it in his pocket
and sat in a corner.
“At last the goblins decided that they could not stand
him any longer. So they formed a little court of justice,
and they sat in judgment upon Brummbar. And their
sentence was that he must never play with them again or
come to their parties, but go by himself where he chose,
and afflict human beings with his grumpy ways.
“So now Brummbar does not shriek round the chimney
with the other goblins, or rattle the doors and windows,
but he steals about by himself. And being lonely he tries


cjL
to get little girls and boys, and grown-up people too, to sit
and sulk with him. And the longer they’ll stay sulking
with him the better he likes it. Now you know all about
him, Princesskin, and I think you’ll agree that we’d better
shut the door next time we see him coming, for the goblins
can’t stand him, nor can we.”


V HANS
THE FIGHTER


Chapter V
HANS THE FIGHTER
HEN Sophia had conquered Brummbar she
began to be very happy in the Toyshop. It
is true she missed the grandeur and dignity
of being an Archduchess, but, instead, she
could play in the streets and squares with
the town children. And she found this very
pleasant.
Every day she took her slate and satchel, and went to
school with Hans. At the school door they parted, each
going to a different class. But when the great bell rang
out “ Let them go, let them go,” the children came stream-
ing out of the doors, and joined their own friends, and went
off to play together.
Hans always waited for Sophia, and together they sought
for Anton Schmidt and all the little Schmidts. Hand-in-
hand with them they would go to the Gnomes’ fountain, or
whatever place they liked best.
The children in Wunderheim invent many new games.
There seems to be something magical in the air that puts
thoughts into their heads ; and then the houses are so old
and curious, the streets so full of shadowy nooks and queer
winding alleys, that it is the best town in the world for hide-
and-seek. And always at the end of the queer crooked
streets you see either the great pine-clad shoulder of the


Wunderberg, or the big castle of the Wunderhof with its
sentries, like toy soldiers, passing to and fro, to and fro.
Now when the children went to the Square it was to
play round the Gnomes’ fountain. Generally the game was
that a gnome would catch you if you dipped your hand in
the water, unless you could run quick enough to reach a
certain square of pavement. Or sometimes Sophia was the
Hausfrau, the good woman of the house, and the other
children were the gnomes who were trying to break into
her house. No wonder that one day Sophia fell straight
into the basin of the fountain, and had to be fished out by
the town crier who was passing at the moment.
And then when they were tired or hot, Hans and Sophia
would steal into the vast dim Cathedral, that was so great
and still, that something told you to speak in whispers
there, and tread very softly. Hand-in-hand the children
used to wander up the aisles, looking with awe at the bronze
knights that stood guarding some king’s tomb, or at the
carved saints and angels with their serious sweet faces.
But if the day were fine, the children liked best to go
down to the river, and sit at the foot of some old stone
stairs, and fish. No one had ever caught a fish, for their
hooks were crooked pins, but it was delightful to sit there,
and to pretend that a big fish was biting. They often pic-
tured themselves walking home to the Kirchstrasse with a
huge fish hung from a stick between them.
Anton Schmidt was an ardent fisherman, so ardent, indeed,
that if his little sisters had not held on to his jacket, he would
several times have fallen head first into the river. He could
talk very wisely about the ways of the fish, and as he was a
big boy no one contradicted him.
Those hours by the river were happy enough, even though
they never caught so much as a minnow; but water is delight-


Every day she went to school with Hans


ful to children, and the great river flowing by and the old
bridges and the overhanging balconies of the river-side houses
made pictures as good as any you could see in a book.
Whilst they sat there on the steps, the two boys intent on
their rods, Sophia would tell them stories. Sophia was a
splendid story-teller. Her voice went on and on, and she
took her listeners through the most terrible adventures, but
still she had always a way out of them.
Perched on the top step, her elbows on her knees, her eyes
fixed on the water, her pigtails hanging down her back, she
was often to be seen on a spring afternoon. And she was
telling stories—you could see that by the open eyes and
mouths of the little Schmidts who sat about her. Wonderful
stories they were, of dragons and bears and wolves, of brigands
and bad barons and good princesses, and there was always
a boy like Hans in them, and a dog like Kaiser and a kitten
like Mein Herr Katzchen.
At these times they were so happy that they did not often
quarrel. But sometimes, as you will see, there were subjects
of dispute.
One day—it was a mild spring afternoon —Anton Schmidt
felt quite sure that this time he would certainly catch a fish,
so he had got a fine basket of bait which he left on the
top step near Sophia. Sophia, in the excitement of story-
telling, knocked it over with her hand, and some of the bait
fell into the water.
“Oh ! ” said Anton, “look what you’ve done, you’ve upset
my bait.”
“ Sorry,” exclaimed Sophia and continued the story, leaving
Anton to pick up his bait for himself.
Half an hour passed, and just the same thing happened
again. Sophia upset the basket.
“ Don’t do that,” shouted Anton ; “how stupid you are ! ”


Sophia’s face grew red, and her eyes flashed.
“ How dare you speak like that ? ” she asked hotly; “ there !
that’s what I’ll do to your old basket.”
There was a breathless moment, then the basket shot into
the air, fell into the water, and sailed away down the river.
Anton watched it for a second with an angry face, then he
rushed up the steps, caught Sophia by the pigtail, and pulled
it with all his might.
Hans seized his arms. It seemed as if Sophia’s head
would come off with the next pull. But she did not scream
or cry, for that was not her way.
“You’ve got to fight me now,” said Hans. “I can’t
have Sophia hurt, even though she was quite wrong. Get
ready.”
In a terrible silence the two boys took off their jackets,
and prepared to fight. All the little Schmidt sisters burst
into tears, and even naughty Sophia grew quite pale.
“Stand back, girls,” shouted Anton, “and don’t interfere
with us whatever happens.”
A fearful scrimmage followed. Anton was bigger than
Hans, but Hans was wiry and strong. It seemed as though
one would never conquer the other. And all the time the
little Schmidts stood wailing and sobbing by the river-side.
Now, perhaps, the boys would still be fighting by the river
in Wunderheim, if there had not at that moment arrived the
Herr-Deputy-Inspector-of-Public-Institutions. He was very
tall and stout, and he found no difficulty in dragging Anton
and Hans apart; then he gave them each a good beating with
his cane, and marched them off to their homes, followed by
all the tearful little Schmidts and the now quite shamefaced
Sophia.
The Herr-Deputy-Inspector pushed Anton into the bakery
where the Schmidts lived, and left Hans and Sophia at their


door. Silently the two children went into the workroom, and
stood before Johann and Babina.
‘‘Oh! my son, my son, you are destroyed,” cried poor
Babina.
“Let him tell us what he’s been doing,” said Johann.
But Sophia spoke up rather breathlessly.
“It was my fault. I will tell,” she answered, and she
told what had happened by the river.
“Yes,” said Hans, “it was your fault. You behaved very
badly to Anton, but still I enjoyed the fight, and I believe
I should have won if only the Herr-Deputy-Inspector had
let us alone.”
Johann took Sophia on his knee, and looked at her with
his kind brown eyes.
“ What do Archduchesses do when they are in the wrong?”
he asked.
Sophia’s head drooped until it touched his shoulder.
“They say they’re sorry,” she whispered.
“Yes, that is just what they do.”
A little later Sophia appeared in the baker’s shop where
Anton, much swelled and cut, was having his face tended
by his mother. Sophia went up to Anton, and held out a
wooden crocodile to him.
“It’s mine,” she said; “I want you to have it. I was
wrong about your basket. I’m sorry, Anton.”
“Oh! well so am I,” said Anton, “so we’d better be
friends. Tell Hans he’s a good hitter ; I could have gone
on much longer if it had not been for the old Herr-Deputy-
Inspector. He might have let us alone, I think.”
Sophia went back to the Toyshop. Hans met her at the
door. He could only see out of one eye, the other was so
much swollen. She threw her arms round his neck.
“Oh! Hans,” she said, “now you are like the great


big knights in the Cathedral, for you have fought for a
a lady.”
“That may be so,” Hans answered; “but a proper lady
would know better than to fling Anton’s basket into the river.
Still, you behaved very well in taking the blame and begging
Anton’s pardon, and so I’m very willing to be your friend,
and to fight for you whenever I can. But you, on your side,
must mend my jacket when it’s torn, and be ready to lend
me your handkerchief whenever I need one, for that is a
girl’s part.”
“ Do you suppose Eve lent Adam her handkerchief in the
Garden of Eden?” Sophia asked him.
“Why, yes, of course.”
“Well, then, I’ll lend you mine—that is, if I have one.”


\W Of r vt! ;
SOPHIA
HIDES IN
THE
BIG BELL


Chapter VI
SOPHIA HIDES IN
THE BIG BELL
OW happily the days passed in the Toyshop
I cannot tell you. One would have to have
been there to describe it all. But those who
have visited Wunderheim agree that there
was no pleasanter place there than the
Toyshop in the Kirchstrasse. All the gos-
sips of the town would drop in to have a
chat with Master Johann, where he sat behind the counter
carving saints and gnomes and bears, and those tiny cows
and antelopes that seem almost too small to be made by
the hand of man.
Master Johann had many friends, carvers like himself,
and iron-workers and masons. And they, with their long
pipes in their mouths, would stand in the Toyshop talking of
the affairs of Wunderheim, or telling strange stories of the
Wunderberg and its haunted caves and rocks.
And they would say, shaking their heads at the children :
“Be good, my little ones, or Knecht Ruprecht will
certainly catch you, and take you away. He is always
watching for naughty children.”
“And what would he do with us then?” Sophia always
asked.
“Ah! that you must ask Knecht Ruprecht himself,”
they said.


Sometimes old Master Peter, the Princes huntsman,
would tell them stories of such marvellous adventures that
it was hard to believe them all. When he talked he would
fix his eyes on the ceiling, and every now and then he
winked, and then Johann laughed his great jovial laugh.
But Sophia and Hans believed everything that the huntsman
said about the Wunderberg. “For,” he would say, “if you
do not believe me, go and see.
“But,” he added, “do not think that all the wolves are
wicked. Many of them are, I admit, cunning, evil-minded
fellows, as bad as that French wolf who ate up Red Riding
Hood and her grandmother. They’d talk you fair, and bid
you come and see their houses or attend their feasts, and
then they’d crunch you all up in a minute, unless, of course,
you had the Hermit Wolf on your side.”
“Who is he?” asked the children.
“What! You do not know? Why, he is as good as the
wolf that was converted by the great saint, Francis of Assisi.
You know all about him, of course. But the wolf of the
Wunderberg is another matter. Now, you must know that
many wolves are not altogether bad fellows, they have their
scruples, and they know where to draw the line. No respect-
able wolf would eat a hermit or a saint, and the very par-
ticular ones do not even eat pilgrims.
“Well, our wolf, Wolfram the Fierce was his name, had
his lair quite close to the hermitage of a very holy man ;
and, as I tell you, Wolfram did not think of eating him till
one very cold winter. The wolves were sadly hungry that
year ; it was not until Wolfram was almost starving that he
began to think about the Hermit. And even then he said,
over and over again, ‘No, I won’t; no, I won’t.’
“All night he sat at the Hermit’s door, saying, ‘No, I
won’t.’ But by breakfast-time he swallowed all his scruples


“ s> —r V «-J > '
Master Johann sat behind the counter carving


and the holy man as well. He never knew quite how it
happened, but it did happen. He ate him up.
“Then he sat down in the Hermit’s hut, and a great re-
morse came upon him. He shed many tears, and moaned
aloud. And so he remained for several days, but at last
he resolved to be a hermit himself in place of the Hermit
he’d eaten. So he put on the Hermit’s cowl and robe, and
tried to read the Hermit’s books, and he never eats anyone
now, but lives on grass and roots and bread that the ravens
bring him.
“ If ever you are caught by the wolves, say you wish
to see Wolfram the Hermit, and he will certainly save
you.”
Master Peter told them many other stories in the long
evenings as they sat round the glowing stove. They were
more cheerful in the Kirchstrasse than any of the grand folk
in the Wunderhof. And when it was time to go to bed, the
Toymaker would open a big Bible, and read to them, and
repeat the Evening Prayer. After that they went up the
winding stairs to their safe warm beds, and dreamt good
dreams till the morning.
But such a pleasant time does not last for ever, and you
will hear what adventures befell Sophia.
One day, having left school rather sooner than Hans, she
wandered home by some of the winding, curious streets that
lie behind the Cathedral.
In one of these streets she came upon some boys who
had caught a jackdaw. The poor bird was squawking and
fluttering in their hands, and Sophia, whose heart was pitiful,
begged them to let it go.
“No, no,” said one boy, “we could sell it; we’ll put it
in a cage and tame it.”
Sophia put her hand in her pocket. She had a silver


shilling there. It was very precious to her, and she hesitated
for a moment. But the jackdaw looked at her so piteously
that she held out the money to the boys.
“I will buy it,” she said.
They thought the bargain was worth while, and gave the
bird into Sophia’s hands. When they had run away she sat
down on a doorstep, and stroked the jackdaw’s feathers.
“Thank you, Serene Highness, for paying my ransom,”
said the bird, winking her blue eyes. “ I never felt more
upset in my life. I’m quite giddy and flustered.”
Sophia now recognised her old friend the Queen of the
Jackdaws.
“Whatever was your Majesty doing down in Wunder-
heim ? ” she asked.
“Ah! that, my archducal young friend, you may well
ask. But, before I talk, let us retire into that archway,
where we shall be unobserved.”
Queen Jocasta hopped before her into the shadows, then
perched upon Sophia’s shoulder so that she might speak
into her ear, “You are in danger,” she squawked, “Baron
von Schly is determined to kill you. Yes, yes, I heard it
all by listening in the chimney. He and Privy-Purse are
raising a rebellion. Already the Prince and Princess have
fled in their carriage to Schonberg-Hesse. Von Schly will
be proclaimed Prince in the Market-place at noon. He has
got the army on his side by false promises.”
“Oh! then, what shall I do?” exclaimed Sophia.
“You must all try to leave the town. Von Schly will
kill Johann and Hans if he can, or put them in dungeons.
You had better fly to the Wunderberg, and hide there until
the troubles are over. No doubt the people will not long
keep this rebel for their ruler.”
Sophia looked about her in great terror. Tears rose to


her eyes, but she tried bravely to blink them away. She
must go back to the school and warn Hans, and together
they would run back to the Toyshop.
“Oh! dear Queen Jocasta,” she said, “how kind you
were to tell me this ! Fly home now to your palace, and I
will go to the school for Hans, and we will try to escape
before we are caught.”
“Courage!” said the Jackdaw; “rely on me as a friend.
I am very wise through my reading of all that flies up the
chimney, and I shall certainly be able to help you. Good-
bye, Serene Highness, at least for the present.”
Jocasta rose in the air and, flying high above the houses,
disappeared.
Sophia ran quickly towards the school. To reach it she
passed the Cathedral door. At the very moment when she
paused there the troops came pouring into the Square, so
that it was impossible to cross the streets.
A herald, mounted on a piebald horse, rode into the midst
of the people, and blew his trumpet.
Sophia did not wait to hear him. She could not reach
Hans, and she was afraid of the people about her, who
hustled and jostled together to see the herald. She noticed,
besides, Caspar von Franksberg, one of the gentlemen of
the Court, who had in the old days been no friend of hers.
For had she not once fastened a duster to his white satin
coat-tails ? And had she not got him to play the German
version of that rude game beginning with “I am a gold
lock—l am a gold key,” which tricks you into saying “I
am a don-lock, I am a don-key”? He was a very haughty
young man, so he had never forgiven her. And now there
he was standing in the crowd.
Sophia slipped into the Cathedral, and stood watching the
open door. Caspar von Franksberg came in on tip-toe.


V
*
“ X N
' v
Sophia pursued by an enemy


She could see the cautious movement of his peaked red
shoes. It was plain that he did not wish to be seen.
Sophia saw that the belfry door was open, so very quietly
she went in, and closed it behind her. Then she began to
go upstairs, round the corner, and round the corner, just as
you must when you go up a spiral staircase. Someone was
following her, for she heard the creak of the door and then
steps coming up, up, up. Sophia sped on, always manag-
ing to whisk her petticoats round one corner as the unknown
person came round the one below. She dared not rest,
though she was so tired, and her heart beat pit-a-pat.
It seemed that the stairs would never end, but at last
they did. She was in the belfry, and there were the three
great bells, old Wilhelm, old Peter, and old Paul, hanging
before her.
Old Wilhelm was the biggest and oldest of the bells. He
only rang on great festivals and at times of general rejoic-
ing and sorrow. His voice was so big, so full and so
mellow, that it seemed to shake the Cathedral, and to echo
from the Wunderberg.
He had tolled when Sophia’s father died, and he had rung
when she was born. He was very, very ancient, was old
Wilhelm, and gold ornaments had been thrown into the
red-hot metal when he was in the making. But that was
hundreds of years ago.
Sophia determined to hide inside him. She went down
on her hands and knees, and crept into the great bell. Then
she stood up, and climbed on to the tongue. She was quite
hidden from sight now.
Someone came in to the belfry and spoke aloud.
1 ‘ Are you here, Max? Why! where is the fellow? I
heard him going up the stairs before me. That’s strange ! ”
It was Caspar von Franksberg. Sophia knew his voice.


There was silence for several minutes, then other feet came
wearily up the belfry stairs.
“You were behind me, then?” asked Caspar crossly.
Someone panted hard for a minute, then answered.
“Why not?”
“Because I heard you, as I thought, go up before me.”
“ Nonsense, brother, it was the belfry gnome who likes
to play these tricks. He is probably hiding now under one
of those bells.”
“But it may have been some spy. Let us search the
place I ”
“Fiddlesticks! there is no one here at all but our-
selves. You are all nervousness and whims, brother ; our
new Prince had better have trusted me with his business.
You are not fit for these nice matters.”
Caspar was offended.
“You are quite wrong there. Did I not advise our new
Prince to catch the Archduchess Sophia, and cut off her
head, whilst you thought to keep her in a dungeon would
serve instead ? ”
“Well, well, so it would. But the first thing is to catch
her. They must watch for her at all the town gates. I
described her as a nice little girl with long hair and brown
eyes.”
“Oh! not nice at all. They will never find her.”
“Well, we will go to Johann’s Toyshop and catch them
all there. Then, leaving the others to the police, we will
put the Archduchess in a carriage, and drive her to the
Wunderhof, and throw her into the lowest dungeon. No
one will know that she is there, and she will die very soon,
so that our Prince von Schly will be rid of her.”
“Yes, that is the best plan. She was always a naughty
girl, a dungeon is just the right place for her.”


“Listen,” said the other, “the soldiers are shouting for
the new Prince. He has promised them oranges on Sunday,
and milk-puddings only once a week. There is nothing
he does not offer, from mince-pies every Saturday to milk-
chocolate every other day.”
“Now they will ring old Wilhelm,” said Caspar. “Let
us stay and hear him.”
Poor Sophia, clinging to the tongue of the bell, had not
thought of this. They were going to ring old Wilhelm, and
she would be rung too against his mighty sides. That was
a terrible thought. But still she dared not move. Yes, old
Wilhelm trembled, and his great tongue moved. Then he
swayed, and Sophia felt herself thrown against the metal,
once and again. She was made deaf and giddy too by his
great voice as he rang out over the town.
She let go her hold, and fell on to the platform beneath.
In spite of Caspar and Max von Franksberg she crawled out
of her hiding-place.
But they had gone. She was safe !
With a great sigh of relief she sat down on the belfry floor,
holding her hands to her ears to shut out the terrible noise.
It was not strange that she did not hear footsteps on the
stairs, and that she was surprised when Max von Franksberg
stood before her.
“Who are you?” he asked, “and how did you get here?
You were not here a moment ago when old Wilhelm rang.
You must be a witch or a fairy woman. Caspar—Caspar,
I have found a fairy, when I was only looking for my silk
pocket-handkerchief. ”
Sophia fell upon her knees.
“Oh! save me,” she cried.
But Caspar had come in, and was staring at her over his
brother’s shoulder.


“That is no fairy,” he said; “it is the naughty, odious,
most ill-mannered, badly behaved Archduchess herself. And
now she will really get what she deserves. Catch hold of
her, and bring her downstairs. The carriage is in the Square ;
we shall be able to get her away without being seen.”
“Come, Archduchess,” said Max; “there is no use in
resisting. It is always wise to see when one had best
submit.”


SOPHIA IN THE
DUNGEON


Chapter VII
SOPHIA IN THE DUNGEON
ASPAR and Max von Franksberg
drove with Sophia up to the Wunder-
hof. Then Caspar tied his scented
silk handkerchief over her eyes, and
they led her blindfold along many
passages and down many stairs.
Presently the bandage was taken
from her eyes, and she was thrust into
a dark dungeon, and all she heard was
the clang of the iron door behind her.
At first Sophia could see nothing. It seemed cold and
quite dark. She screamed with all her might again and
again, but no one answered. Then she flung herself sobbing
upon the floor. How desolate she was in this terrible place,
far from kind Johann and Babina, who had no idea where she
was all this time !
When she thought of the Toyshop her sobs came quicker.
How happy she had been there, never dreaming of this terrible
place. Quite worn out with sorrow she fell asleep upon
the floor.
When she woke a long moonbeam was shining through
a little grating above her head. She knew by this that it
was night. A big rat ran across the floor, but he sat down
in the middle of the moonbeam, and scratched his ear.


Sophia could not sleep any more. She was shivering with
terror. What frightened her was the great silence and
loneliness. She was almost sorry when the rat had dis-
appeared into his hole.
Then she remembered that she had not said her prayers,
so she knelt down and said them. After that she felt a little
less miserable.
She resolved to sing a song to keep up her courage. Long
ago when her father was dying he had said to her, “ Keep
a brave face, even though your heart be as timid as a mouse.
Never let the enemy see that you fear him.”
Sophia remembered this, and, though tears ran down her
cheeks, she began to sing in a shaky voice, “ABC. die
Katze lief in Schnee .” She sang the two verses several times,
and each time her voice was clearer and braver.
She had just paused to blow her nose when a little squeaky
voice exclaimed :
“Very good indeed, my child, but I should have enjoyed
the song more if it had not been about cats. That is a subject
I dislike. But pray sing something else. It is not often
that I get any music down here.”
Sophia stared into the shadows. Her eyes were round with
surprise.
“Please tell me who you are,” she said; “I cannot see
»
you.
Something moved into the patch of moonlight on the floor.
It was a big rat. But the marvel was that he wore on his
head a little gold crown. It was rather crooked over his
left ear, as he had just been scratching his right ear with
his hind paw.
“1 am the Rat King of the Wunderheim cellars,” he
answered; “royalties being birds of a feather naturally flock
together, and there are many Royal Highnesses under this


roof; I may say that I am not the least of them, for as
well as being King, I am Commander of the Forces, and
my army is as fine as you could see in Germany. Indeed,
I might take advantage of your presence to hold a big
review. You could inspect the troops. That would be fine.”
“I am very hungry,” said Sophia; “I could inspect better
if I had something to eat.”
“Well, well,” the rat exclaimed, “sing another song,
and I'll see what I can do for you.”
So Sophia sang the seven verses of Hausgefinde , and
the Rat King sat on his haunches and combed his whiskers,
doing it with a very sentimental air.
“Ah!” he said, “that is beautiful indeed. I could
listen to you for ever. But I will get you something to eat,
for a singer should always be fat, and you are rather thin.”
He disappeared into his hole, and half an hour passed
before he returned. When he came he was dragging a large
bit of cheese, which he laid before Sophia.
“I could not trust even the Chancellor of my Exchequer
to bring you that,” he said; “it would have been eaten up
on the way ; but here come six of my servants with bread,
a jam tart, a piece of seed cake, a hard-boiled egg, and
some toast crusts. We found them in the larder.”
Sophia was so hungry that she thoroughly enjoyed this
meal, and as she gave the rats a share they were all pleased
and willing to serve her.
When they had eaten up the last crumb the Rat King
begged her to sing again.
“We might sing a catch together,” Sophia suggested,
“you coming in after me. I will teach you, ‘ Oh } wie
wohl ist , ’ if you like.”
“That would be charming,” he agreed. “I shall be
delighted to learn.”


However, it took him a long time to remember the tune,
and he always forgot to begin Oh! wie wohl ist when
Sophia had got to IVenn die Glocke. But he took such
pains and was so anxious to learn that after some time he
could sing his part perfectly, and come in just at the right
moment.
“Of course, it would sound better,” said Sophia, “if we
had another person to sing too. Then we should have
three voices. ”
“Why, so we should. I might get one of my rats-in-
waiting. But, no ... it might tend to conceit. The
monarch should always be more accomplished than his
subjects.”
He sat on his haunches, and stroked his whiskers. He
had a musing air. Then he scratched his head a little, for
this, as he told her, always helped him to think.
“I have it!” he exclaimed suddenly. “I’ll get the Wein-
geist to join us. Perhaps you don’t know the Weingeist,
though he’s important enough in these parts. He is, I may
tell you, the gnome in charge of the royal wine-casks. His
castle is the great butt or tun, which is so vast that it could
hide a troop of soldiers. He is a jolly fellow, and he would
like to sing a catch with us, that is certain.”
“But how can we reach him?” asked Sophia.
“That is the question, my dear and accomplished little
friend. As you are a lady, it would be more proper that he
should come to you than that you should go to him.”
Sophia’s eyes brightened. A happy thought had struck
her. If by aid of the rats she could only reach the
wine-cellars, she might somehow make her escape. But
the Rat King, who was a stickler for good manners,
insisted that the Weingeist must call upon her first in the
dungeon.


[
A'
-—
■
* I*
Sophia and the Rat King


“ Well, I will then return his call,” Sophia suggested;
“but I could never crawl through a rat-hole, nor could he,
I fancy.”
“No; he is growing stout. I shall have to call my
people together, and make a tunnel to the wine-cellar. Where
there is a will there will soon be a way.”
The kindly fellow scurried off, and the poor little prisoner
soon became aware of a great scraping and gnawing going
on. This continued all the day, and at intervals Sophia
sang a song to cheer the labourers.
By noon of the next day the tunnel was ready, and the
Rat King was looking at his work with keen pleasure.
They had not forgotten to bring Sophia food, but they had
been unable to get her any water, and she was nearly dead
with thirst. Her throat was sore and burning, and she
could hardly hold up her head. In such a state it was
hard to seem cheerful, but for the sake of her friend she
praised his tunnel warmly.
“Now I shall bring the Weingeist to call upon you,” said
the rat, and he scampered away.
Presently he returned, followed by a little chubby-faced,
jovial gnome, in red tunic, hose and hood. I have once
seen his likeness on a German saucer ; he is standing on
a wine-barrel, holding a goblet in his hand. This saucer
proves clearly, I think, that someone has seen him besides
Sophia.
Bringing his red-heeled shoes together, he bowed very low
to Sophia, and made her a most elegant little speech. He
dwelt upon the great happiness it was to him to see one so
young, amiable, fair, and accomplished in the dark kingdom
of his friends the rats.
To this speech Sophia did her best to reply. She stood
up, although she was quite giddy with thirst, and holding


out her pinafore she curtsied to the Weingeist, and begged
him to be seated.
They both sat down upon the floor, the rat between them,
and talked a little about the affairs of the moment.
“ More wine is being drawn every day,” said the gnome,
“than ever before. I think there are great revels going on
under this usurping prince, von Schly.”
“Yes indeed,” answered the rat; “and there is great
waste in the kitchen, which is good for me. But still, Ido not
like rebels. And this von Schly will come to no good.”
“He took away my white mice,” said Sophia. “I wonder
what became of them.”
“I can tell you,” answered the rat; “the door of their
cage was left open, and they escaped and sought shelter with
the brown mice. They have all made excellent marriages,
and are much thought of behind the wainscot.”
“Now,” begged the Weingeist, “pray oblige us, most
charming Fraulein, with one of your songs.”
It was very hard to sing with her throat so sore, but
Sophia was, as I hope you have noticed, a brave little girl
in spite of her many faults, and she did her best.
Widewidewenne heisst meine Putt-henne pleased the Wein-
geist so much that he would have it again.
It is one of those long, pleasant rhymes that ramble on
like our English “The animals went in two by two.”
For it relates all the names of the animals in the farmyard,
and they had long names : Widewidewenne was the Turkey
hen, Sammetmatz was the cat, the pig was called Schmor-
topflein, Ehrenwerth was the horse’s name, Kunterbunt the
dog’s, and so on through all of them.
“I could sing better if my throat were not so dry,” said
Sophia, “but I am very thirsty.”
“That is soon cured,” cried the Weingeist. “I invite


you at once to visit my kingdom, and to join me in a glass
of cowslip wine.”
Poor Sophia could hardly restrain her delight. On hands
and knees, and quite regardless of the dust and dirt, she
crept through the tunnel after her two friends. But, alas !
she was bigger than the Weingeist, and she stuck half-way.
She could move neither backwards nor forwards. It was
a terrible state of things.
The Rat King gave a loud commanding squeak, and at
once a dozen bright eyes shone in the darkness.
“Enlarge the tunnel,” he shouted, and instantly the rats
began digging and scratching near Sophia’s shoulders. It
was not too pleasant for her to feel their cold paws and
noses, but she had to put up with that. And she was thank-
ful enough to be able to crawl into the wine-cellar, which
was a pleasanter place than the dungeon.
“Welcome, welcome!” said the Weingeist as he filled an
old glass with sparkling cowslip wine.
Sophia took the glass, and raising it in her hand cried
“ Hoch ” just as her uncle the Prince had done.
“It is clear that you are used to good society, my
Fraulein,” said her fat little host.


SOPHIA ESCAPES IN
A WINE-BARREL


Chapter VIII
SOPHIA ESCAPES IN
A WINE-BARREL
HE wine-cellar at Wunderhof was a wonderful
place. There was a huge cask, so very high
that there were stairs to the top of it and a
bridge across it. There is another just like
it in the Castle of Heidelberg, which you may
see some day.
And besides all the barrels there were shelves
you could not count, holding fat bottles and thin bottles, tall
and short bottles, flagons of all colours and sizes, containing
red wine or white wine, or wine that glowed like topaz.
There were rare wines distilled from flowers or from foreign
fruits, and sour wines that looked well but tasted ill. All
these were in the care of the Weingeist, and he was very
proud of them. He showed them to Sophia, and told her
the names and the properties of them.
Then he invited her to sit down on a barrel, and he sat
on another, and the rat on a third.
Sophia then taught them both to sing Oh! wie wohl ist }
and to come in at the right lines.
When they could sing it the effect was delightful, for
though, as it is in a catch, each was singing different words,
the music harmonised, and the melody kept rising and fall-
ing as each took it up in turn.


'J I HolbV, U,' D
" "7" “ I
Frightened by a sneeze


They were so much absorbed that they scarcely heard the
key turn in the lock and someone’s footsteps on the paved
floor. There was a cry from the door. Someone was evi-
dently frightened.
“Hide, hide!” whispered the Weingeist, and Sophia rushed
behind the big cask. A taper’s light flickered, and someone
else came in.
“What made you shout, Wilhelm?” asked a voice.
“Cause enough! As sure as I’m a Christian I heard
voices singing as I came in.”
“ Nonsense, it was just your fancy. Or maybe there are
gnomes here. Come along, we’ve got to get enough wine for
the banquet. I’ll hold the light while you get the bottles.”
Two figures moved through the shadows.
“What is that white thing behind the cask?” asked the
first comer in a trembling voice.
Sophia knew that it was her pinafore, and her heart sank.
“Whatever it is, leave it alone,” said the other; “be
quick and choose the wines.”
But between them they were slow enough to do their
business, and Sophia was seized with a violent desire to
sneeze. She buried her face in her handkerchief and
squeezed her nose, but it was not much good. A sneeze
is something that will not be denied, and before the two
servants had left the cellar it had come. Once and twice
and three times she sneezed.
There was a crash as a bottle dropped on the floor, then
a sound of rushing as the two men made for the door,
fighting to get out first. The door clanged behind them,
and the key grated in the lock.
“That was a great escape,” said the Weingeist as Sophia
came out of her hiding-place.
“Perhaps they will come back,” she suggested.


“No, they are timid fellows, Fraulein. We need have
no fear. Perhaps you can teach us another catch. It
makes me very gay to have such pleasant society. For, to
tell you the truth, being an old bachelor I am inclined to
be lonely at times, and this is the first time that a lady
has paid me a visit.”
“We do not even know the Fraulein’s name,” said the
rat; “but I am sure it is a nice little name, Gretchen or
Marie or Lisbeth, perhaps.”
“I have a lot of names,” she answered, “but I am called
Sophia . . . Sophia von Wunderheim.”
“Ah! Oh! you are the little Archduchess, the naughty
Archduchess, as they call you. Well, this is a happy meeting.
You are probably trying to be better, and I consider your
manners polished and easy. You do not bite your nails or
suck your thumb, and that is something to be thankful for.
Now, if you please, sing us a song or tell us a story.”
As she was still rather hoarse Sophia told them a story.
I forget what it was about, but they found it very interesting,
and the rat sat watching her with bright eyes, whilst the
gnome lolled at his ease with his red shoes crossed before
him.
“We could listen to you all day, my dear Archduchess,”
he said when she had done ; “ I only wish that I could make
you some return for your kindness.”
Sophia scrambled down from her barrel, and stood before
him with clasped hands.
“Oh! kind sir,” she exclaimed, “you can help me if you
will. Indeed, lam in great need of help. I was, as you saw,
a prisoner in the dungeon, and as Baron von Schly is
determined to kill me he will leave me here without food or
water. Do, I beg you, help me to return to the Toyshop
and to Johann and Babina and dear Hans.”


The Weingeist looked very solemn. He did not want to
let Sophia go, for her songs and stories passed the time most
pleasantly. And though he had been a bachelor for so long
he had quite decided to ask her to marry him, and to live in the
wine-cellar all her life. But he was really kind-hearted, and
when he saw the tears run down her cheeks he made up his
mind to help her, even though it cost him something.
“Well, well,” he said, “I could have wished that you
would stay here with me. But if you are anxious to go, I
suppose you must.”
“Yes,” echoed the rat, “we suppose you must. Though
1 should have been willing to adopt you and to treat you as my
own daughter. Still, young people are always restless, and
I suppose you found the dungeon a little dull.”
Sophia took his cold paw in one hand and the gnome’s
hand in the other. “ Dear friends,” she said, “ I shall be
sorry indeed to leave you who have been so kind to me.
But when I think of Johann and Babina looking for me
everywhere, I feel I must go to them. I hope we shall meet
again some day, and I shall always remember you and your
kindness.”
The rat was so touched by this that he wiped his eyes with
his other paw, and the Weingeist blinked away a tear.
“Yes, we will help you,” he said. “I can see the way
it must be done. You will hide yourself in an empty barrel,
and to-morrow when the men come they will roll you out
of that little door there. It will not be pleasant, but that
cannot be helped, and the slope is not long. Then they will
put you on a cart and take you to the Vintner’s, and you
must watch your chance to escape. It may be hard, but
you must risk that. It is the only way.”
Sophia thanked her friend, and, as they still had the night
before them, she did her best to amuse him with stories and


songs. The time passed happily with them, and every now
and then they dozed off to sleep, but always when the rat
or the Weingeist awoke they asked, “So what happened
then ? ” and Sophia had to go on with the story.
When morning came she crept into a barrel, and the gnome
put on the lid.
“You are safe now,” he whispered through the bunghole.
“ Good-bye, dear little friend. Never shall we forget you.
Together we will sing Oh! wie wohl ist and think of you.
And you must remember us.”
“Indeed, indeed I shall, dear Weingeist, I shall often think
of you both and the time we had together.”
At this moment the door was opened, and two men came
in to take away the empty barrels. They rolled them out
through a little door, down a steep slope to the place where
the cart stood waiting.
It was terrible for Sophia when she rolled over and over
down the slope. But she made no sound.
Then the men lifted the barrels to put them on the cart.
“This one is very heavy,” said one, as he raised Sophia’s
barrel.
“Perhaps it is not empty at all, and someone has left it
out by mistake. Say nothing, and we will take it home and
share the wine between us.”
The other agreed with a chuckle, and the cart started off
towards Wunderheim. All the time, as they jolted over the
stones, Sophia was wondering how she should seize the right
moment to escape. If the men never left the cart, what could
she do ?
However, they had reached Wunderheim, she could tell
that by the noises and by the chiming of the Cathedral bell.
They jogged along to a quieter street, and the two men
fell into conversation.


“ In this street lives my dear sister Maria,” said one.
“So?” inquired the other.
“Yes, my dear sister Maria, she has married Alfons the
keeper of the Beer-garden at the corner. It was a good
marriage that.”
“Good indeed. Your sister Maria will no doubt be glad
to see you. Let us stop at the corner while you go in and
greet her.”
“ Not alone, friend ; if you wish it I will present you to
my dear good sister Maria and to her worthy husband.”
“That will be an honour for me. But how about the cart?
and this cask that is not so empty as folk might think ? ”
“There is no one in sight. We shall have time to have
a minute or so with my dear Maria. Come along in now ;
here we are at the door.”
Sophia waited until she heard the door close behind the
two men. Then she scrambled out of the barrel, and without
looking behind her, ran like a frightened rabbit through the
streets.
For some time she did not know her way, but an old tower
and a queer water-pipe gave her a clue, and in a little while
she was in the Kirchstrasse.
Panting, she flung herself against Johann’s closed door,
and beat with both her hands. But no one answered her.


THE ESCAPE
FROM
WUNDERHEIM


Chapter IX
THE ESCAPE FROM
WUNDERHEIM
T seemed that the house was empty and
deserted. The windows were closed, and
the Toyshop had its shutters up. Sophia
felt all her courage die away. She sat
down upon the step, and wept bitterly
with great sobs and sniffs, and, as she was
dirty from head to heel after her days in
the dungeon, she did not look one bit like
an Archduchess or anything but a little
beggar-girl.
As she sat there Anton Schmidt came
up the street and stood before her, lost in astonishment.
“Why, however did you get here?” he asked. “No one
has known where you were, and a pretty state they’ve all
been in looking for you. However, it’s easy to see that
you’ve been in some dirty place, and so I dare say you’ve
had a pleasant time.”
“Oh! Where’s Hans?” asked the tearful Sophia.
“Hush! don’t talk so loud. Hans and his father and
mother are in the bakery. Soldiers came to arrest them,
but we managed to hide them, and they have only waited
to hear news of you. Now that you are really here, you
had better come and see them.”


That was a happy meeting indeed. Sophia was kissed
and washed and fed and comforted. And all the children
envied her her adventures, now that she had come safely
out of them. But there was no time for much talking. It
was plain that every minute spent in Wunderheim was
dangerous. It would soon be seen that Sophia had escaped
from the dungeon, and then a search would be made
for her.
Johann had decided to go to the Wunderberg, and to hide
there in the forest until it was safe to return. But the
question to be considered was how they were to pass the
town gates, for a watch was kept there, and Sophia would
be caught at once.
“If I were you, friend Johann,” said the baker, “I
should cut off the child’s hair, and dress her up as a boy.
We could stain her face with walnut juice, and if she wore
boy’s clothes no one would recognise her. You must dis-
guise yourself as an old man leaning on Babina’s arm, and
so, if you are ragged enough, you will be taken for a
family of beggars going to gather firewood in the forest.”
This seemed a fairly good idea. Johann took Sophia on
his knee and, with a big scissors lent him by the baker’s
wife, cut off all the child’s long hair until it was as short as
a boy’s. There were tears in his eyes as he looked at the
long locks that lay across his hand.
“Some day,” he said, “we will give these to your hus-
band, and tell him how we cut them off to save you from
the hands of the wicked.”
Then Babina took Sophia upstairs, and dressed her in a
shabby old suit outgrown by Hans. When she came down
again she seemed to be a rough-headed little boy. She
thought it no small fun herself, but Babina was in tears.
Hans squeezed his playmate’s hand.


“Now you are my brother,” he said, “and that’s fine.
I have missed you while you were away. I looked every-
where through the town. And now I will give you the
cuckoo-whistle that father gave me, and you can make
cuckoo-calls in the pine forest.”
Sophia shook her head.
“No, no, you like that so much,” she said.
“That is why I am giving it to you.”
“Oh! Hans, I wonder if we shall ever escape. Suppose
they catch us at the Town-gate.”
“ I will fight for you and save you.”
“Still, I am very frightened.”
“Never mind. It is an adventure. We shall like it
when it’s over.”
Mein Herr Katzchen, the kitten, jumped on Sophia’s
knee and purred to her.
“He must come too,” she said, “and dear Kaiser
For Kaiser was leaning against her knee, gazing at her
with his kind brown eyes.
“Yes, we’ll take Kaiser; he will guard us whilst we live
in a cave.”
“ In a cave ? ”
“Yes, where else should we sleep?
Sophia’s heart sank a little. After those nights in the
dungeon she had looked forward to her nice wooden bed
with its fresh white sheets and warm counterpane. There
would be no wooden beds in the caves of the Wunderberg.
By this time Johann had disguised himself as an old man,
and Babina had dressed herself in ragged, shabby clothes,
and made her neat hair rough and wild. They took leave
of the Schmidts and, followed by Kaiser, set off, the two
children dragging behind them a little cart in which were
provisions and a kettle and saucepan. These were covered


The escape


by a ragged apron. Sophia held the kitten under one arm,
and walked as best she could over the cobblestones, for the
two children were barefoot, to make them look the more
like beggars.
They went in safety through the streets till they reached
the Town-gate. Here a sentry challenged them.
“Where are you going?” he asked roughly; “no one
may leave the town.”
“We are only going to the woods to get firewood,
answered Babina.
“Then you may just go back. We cannot let you
pass.”
Babina looked at him with tears in her eyes.
“Oh! kind sir,” she said, “think of the cold wind and
these little barefoot boys who need a fire so much, and let
us pass.”
The soldier stared at them. He was a round-faced, jolly
man, and he seemed touched by their plight.
“Well,” he said, “it is quite clear that you haven’t got
the Archduchess with you and so, as you’re only beggars, I
think I might let you go.”
Suddenly, for some strange reason of his own, Mein Herr
Katzchen, the kitten, jumped from under Sophia’s coat, and
ran towards the sentry.
“That’s a good cat,” he said; “no doubt you stole it.
You can leave it with me, and the dog too; he looks a nice
fellow, and I’m very dull here. When you come back again
I’ll let you have the dog, maybe.”
“Oh ! but you can’t have Mein Herr Katzchen,” Sophia
exclaimed angrily, but Babina caught her arm and
squeezed it.
“The Herr-Sentry must keep the cat if he wants it,”
she said hastily. “My little boys, sir, are attached to


him, and are sorry to leave him. But you will treat him
well.”
“So I will, my good soul; and if I am tired of him by
the time you come back again, I may let you have him.”
Babina took Sophia’s hand, and hurried her through the
gate. With a sigh of relief she heard it close behind
them.
“Oh! but Kaiser and Mein Herr, how can we leave
them behind us ? ” cried the children.
“It is to save our lives,” she answered; “they will be
safe with the sentry, and we must leave them.”
For a mile they walked along the road, then turned into
the forest that lies on the slope of the Wunderberg. In
the summer there is no place more beautiful than a pine
forest when the air is scented with the fragrance of the
trees, when the sun shines among the trunks, and
warms the brown carpet of pine needles; but in the winter
and in early spring the forest looks dark and lonely, and
your thoughts turn to strange things, wolves or witches,
that might—who knows?—be peering among the companies
and companies of brown trunks.
Now Johann the carver knew more about the Wunder-
berg than any man in that part of the country. He knew
the great pine trees and loved them, and he knew all the
caves and hiding-places on the hill-side. The path they
had taken was too steep to let them drag the cart, so
Babina and Johann and the children carried their bundles
and climbed as best they could.
Every minute the sky seemed to grow darker, and the
cold wind blew in their faces, and made them shiver.
Sophia was so weary that she could hardly walk, and she
stumbled along beside Hans, wishing that she might lie
down and wait for the wolves to gobble her up. Even


that seemed better than this long scramble in the bitter
north wind.
“ I will carry you, my child,” said Johann, who had seen
her stumble.
“No, no, I can walk,” she answered. She thought it
would be a shame to her to be carried when Hans had to
walk. And was she not the daughter of a brave man ?
“But you are worn out,” said Babina.
“Oh! I can go much farther,” replied Sophia, and she
looked at the ground so that they might not see the tears
in her eyes.
They struggled onwards, and Hans took her hand and
held it.
“I know you are too tired to walk,” he said, and there
was admiration in his voice, a very pleasant tone to poor
Sophia. “ I would carry you on my back if I could ; some
girls would give way and cry, Anton’s sisters would. But
you’re like a big boy, and we’ll pretend we’re two soldiers
marching together after our brave General. Father’s the
General, and mother’s a Field-Marshal. We’ll get medals
at the end of the day.”
“Do you suppose we’ll get any tea though, Hans?”
“I don’t know, but we’ll pretend we shall. I pretend
we’ll have boiling milk and nice sandwiches and hot tea-
cakes and bread and honey and . . . and apple dumplings
just to finish up.”
“Well, I pretend,” said Sophia, “that after we’ve had tea
we go into a little inner cave, and there we see nice warm
beds and a fire blazing on the hearth.”
“There wouldn’t be a hearth.”
“Oh! never mind, it’s pretence.”
However, the game was stopped at this point, for they
had come to the bottom of a steep bit of rock which, with


Jj^p^
great difficulty, they had to climb. Sophia was so tired
that Johann and his son pushed and dragged her up.
“That is the staircase to our new home,” said the
carver.
They went a little farther and saw a small cave, whose
entrance was so low that even the children had to bend
their heads when they went in. Two great pine trees stood
outside the cave as though they guarded it.
“This is our home,” said Master Johann, “and may God
bless it to us.”
“Amen,” added Babina, and she kissed her husband
and embraced the two children. “ Home is always beau-
tiful,” she said, “even though it is only a cave.”


THE CAVE o.
ON THE
WUNDERBERG 5 ' A


Chapter X
THE CAVE ON THE
WUNDERBERG
OW dark it is!” whispered Sophia, as the
children peered into the black mouth of the
cave.
“ I’ll light a candle presently,” said Johann ;
“but first of all we must gather sticks and
cones for our fire, and dried fern for our
beds. We’ll leave our bundles here.”
In a little while they had collected branches and twigs and
piled them in the outer cave.
As they gathered cones the two children talked together
of their new house.
“If it isn’t quite as nice as the Toyshop,” said Hans,
“it’s more exciting. This is a real adventure, Sophia.”
Poor Sophia almost wished that the adventure were
unreal. To have found herself in her bed in the Kirch-
strasse would have been a pleasant awakening. Her whole
body ached, and she was very hungry and much inclined
to cry. But that is the value of friendship, one must not
be less brave than one’s friend, and if Hans chose to think
it a fine adventure, so must she. But the snow was begin-
ning to fall in great white flakes, and the wind was very
cold. Besides, her heart was sore for Kaiser and the
kitten.


Babina’s voice called them.
They ran into the cave, where a fire was kindling. Beyond
it was an inner cave, a little lower than the outer one. Two
candles were burning there on the ledges of rock, and Babina
was spreading out their supper on a white cloth, for she
had brought that, together with a kettle and saucepan, some
mugs, bread and butter, a few cakes, and a quantity of eggs,
and Sophia’s clothes, so that she could be dressed like a
girl again.
Johann had gathered plenty of dry fern and moss for their
beds, and Sophia was thankful to sit down anywhere. When
the fire blazed up the cave looked quite cheerful, and both
Johann and his wife wore that quietly happy look which had
been theirs in the Toyshop.
When grace was said, they gathered round the white cloth,
and took their supper with thankful hearts.
“At least we are all together,” said Babina, as she looked
from one to the other with gentle brown eyes.
“All but Kaiser and Mein Herr Katzchen,” answered
Hans rather sadly.
“No doubt they will be well fed and cared for,” Babina
suggested.
But the children could not quite be consoled, and Johann
was more sorry than he told them to lose such a valuable
watch-dog as Kaiser.
When prayers had been said, the two children crept into
the ferns and lay down.
For a while Sophia looked with sleepy eyes at the fire-
light dancing on the rock walls, and the strange shadows
that nodded and wavered. After all, one could not but feel
safe when Babina was there, moving about as she did in
the Toyshop, and when Master Johann sat carving a little
cow from a small piece of wood. Whatever was abroad


that night on the Wunderberg they were warm and sheltered
here in the cave, and for that Sophia was thankful. In a
little while she was sound asleep, her cheek upon the ferns
that smelt so pleasantly of the woods, and made her dream
of gnomes. But Hans, who had been so brave all day,
was lying awake with a heavy heart, and wondering what
had become of the faithful poodle Kaiser. How sad it
would be never to see that kindly dog again, never to pat
his curly shoulders or his shaven back, never to pull
his moustache or to hold his paw as in the old days in the
Kirchstrasse!
And they had suffered all this for the sake of Sophia,
who was after all a naughty little girl, who did many things
that should have been left undone. Yet, in spite of this,
none of them regretted what had been done for her sake ;
and Hans, looking at the shorn fair head, decided that
Sophia was the next best thing to a real brother of his own,
which was what he had often longed for.
Suddenly, in the silence, there was a loud, joyful bark,
and something covered with snow bounded into the cave,
followed by something that looked like a little shadow.
Sophia sat up among the ferns, and the something that
was snowy leaped at her, thrusting a cold nose against her
cheek.
“Oh! Kaiser, Kaiser,” she shouted; “and Mein Herr,
too.”
Yes, it was Mein Herr Katzchen purring with a noise like
a kettle boiling, in spite of the snow on his fur. They had
escaped from the town, that was clear, and Kaiser with his
keen nose had tracked them up the hill-side and into the
cave.
When they had been fed and praised they snuggled down
beside Sophia and Hans and went to sleep, and the children,


wearied with their long walk, slept too, and thought they
were back in Wunderheim.
Now the truth is that adventures are pleasanter in the
summer than in the winter, and in either case they should
not last too long. And the adventures of the Wunderberg
cave did last too long. There was no milk for breakfast,
and very little butter, and when the sky was grey the cave
looked dark and cold, and everyone thought of the happy
Toyshop, where there was light and warmth enough, and
where Master Schmidt the Baker lived near enough to sell
them hot rolls and nice new bread. However, the Baker
was still their friend, for in exchange for Johann’s toys and
carvings, which had been left for him to sell, he gave them
bread, cheese, butter, candles, and all they could need. It
was Anton’s duty to hide these in a certain place in a
hollow tree at the foot of the Wunderberg. And he took
away with him whatever toys or carvings were left there by
Johann or Hans.
Anton was a kind boy, and he generally left some
peppermints or a toy soldier or some other token for his
friends, who in their turn would leave a rare pebble or big
cone or whatever treasure they had last found.
But even with these supplies from Wunderheim, they
wanted many things they could not have, and to Sophia,
who had lived in a palace, the cave was terribly bare and
miserable. She was often cold and hungry and lonely too,
for Hans was absorbed in carving and toy-making, and then
all he would say was “’m ”or “Don’t bother, I’m busy”;
and though that was quite natural from his point of view,
it did not comfort Sophia.
There was a day, three weeks after they had come to the
cave, when Anton left in the hollow tree a lovely gelatine
serpent, whose price in our English coinage would have


been just a halfpenny. Oh ! how lovely and serpentine it
looked with its red spots and red eyes. Hans and Sophia
gazed at it with delight. It hung flabbily over Sophia’s
fingers.
“We’ll each pull an end,” said Hans.
Now Sophia knew that it was not quite fair to instantly
grab the head, for one should always draw lots, or take
some other fair means to decide in such a case of obvious
advantage to one side or the other. And as Hans pulled
the tail, he really got much less than Sophia, who had the
head and half the body too.
However, to do away with any chance of dispute, she
put her portion into her mouth at once. There followed a
long silence.
“You got the most,” said Hans, and he went into the
cave and settled down to toy-making, for Anton had left
them a bottle of gum and string and snippets of red
flannel, all of which were most useful in the manufacture
of toys.
For a time Sophia played with Mein Herr Katzchen by the
fire, but the kitten, as kittens will, kicked her with his hind
claws. She slapped him sharply. She had begun to feel
bad-tempered and discontented. Now she wished that she
had had the smaller half of the gelatine serpent. And she
thought of its soft, snaky body and red eyes with disgust.
Yes, she wished she had never seen it.
She took up the scissors and began to snip the flannel.
“Don’t,” said Hans, “I want that; you’re wasting
it.”
Sophia dropped the scissors, but she fidgeted with the
string and got it into knots, and then she upset the gum.
Hans jumped up and tried to save it, but most of it had
trickled on to the floor.


‘‘l wonder why girls were ever made?” he exclaimed.
“If it were my world, I wouldn’t let there be any girls in it
at all.”
“Then there’d be no mothers, my son,” said Babina,
pausing in her knitting.
“Well, I wish they’d be mothers at once, and then they’d
know how to keep still and not upset things.”
Sophia’s cheeks flamed with anger and distress. She ran
out of the cave and hid among the woods. Here among the
pine trees she lay on her face and sobbed. What a sad
world it seemed, where gelatine serpents make one sick, and
boys are cross and say unkind things! She felt very lonely
and ill and unhappy, and she almost wished that a bear would
come out of the woods and eat her up.
At that moment a wet nose was nuzzled into her neck, and
something licked her cheek. She sat up, and looked into the
black friendly face of Kaiser, the poodle. She threw her
arms round him, and hugged him with all her might.
“ Hans is so horrid!” she sobbed, with her face against the
poodle’s curly shoulder.
“Not altogether,” said Kaiser in a gruff little voice.
Now Kaiser had never spoken before, so these words were
a great surprise to Sophia.
“Why, dear Kaiser, you can talk!” she exclaimed, staring
into his wise face.
“ Not always,” said he; “but you must know that on the
Wunderberg grows a very rare plant called ‘ Dog’s Tongue,’
and any dog who eats a leaf of this can speak for just an
hour afterwards. Now I found some this morning, and so
I can talk to you for a little while. So let us sit down here,
and have a little chat under the pine trees.”
Kaiser laid his paw on her knee, for this was a habit of
his, he always liked it to be held.


*%■>/
/
Kaiser and Sophia


“It was that horrid spotted snake,” said Sophia; “ I wish
Anton had never sent it.”
“Well, you remember you took rather more than your share.”
“ Perhaps I did. But lam sorry now. Still, it was horrid
of Hans to be so cross.”
“Hans is sorry himself now; I heard him saying so to
his mother.”
“Did you? Oh! that was nice of him. Of course, I
shouldn’t have spilt the gum, and wasted the flannel.”
“Well, you are young, and you will grow wiser. Kittens
and puppies are always tiresome, wanting to hunt their tails,
and tear up things, and little girls and boys are quite like
them. But presently you will become like Mistress Babina,
who is never cross or impatient.”
“ I wonder how she grew like that, Kaiser—don’t
_ o yy
you r
“It is a way of mothers to be like that,” said the poodle;
“my own dear mother, who was a most respectable dog, and
lived in the house of the Mayor, was just such another.
I have heard her say that before she had puppies of her own
she was a very frivolous dog, thinking always of the ribbon
on her top-knot, and wondering what other dogs thought
of her. You see, she moved in very good society in Wun-
derheim, and had many lovers. And she has herself confessed
to me that she became very conceited and feather-headed. At
the Mayor’s house she was allowed to sit on a velvet cushion
in the parlour window, looking out at the street. The dogs
who went by used to stop to pay her fine compliments, until
her head was quite turned, and she grew so proud and so
dainty that she would soon have lost her friends by her
snappishness had not she become the mother of a large family
of pups.
“Then her cares began, and she had no time to think of


herself. She was so busy attending to her family, washing
them and feeding them and amusing them, that she never
even gave a thought to her ribbons or to the compliments
of the other dogs. And so, as I tell you, she became the
most excellent mother, an example to her three sons and
two daughters.”
“But I,” objected Sophia, “haven’t got any sons and
daughters.”
“ No, but you may have them some day, and what will you
do then, if you cannot spin and knit and mend and make
puddings ? It is never too early to begin. Hans already
is a good carver, and he will soon be able to work for himself;
but what would you do if you were left to keep house for
yourself? ”
“I am an Archduchess,” said Sophia.
“Well, well, excuse my plain speaking, but I don’t think
much of that. Among dogs we do not have any titles. And
an Archdog would be no better than any other dog. Be-
sides, here in the Wunderberg these grandeurs don’t count
for much. If I were you I’d put the Archduchess in your
pocket, and make more of the Sophia.”
Sophia did not like lectures at all. But she knew that
Kaiser was right, and, as he was growing a little grey about
his nose and a little stout, he had more right to speak like
this than if he had been younger. Being a wise dog he left
the subject of her faults at once, and told her many amusing
stories about the dogs he had known in Wunderheim. But
presently his voice failed, and he could only bark. The hour
had passed, and the effect of the Dog’s Tongue was over.
They went back together to the cave. But before they
got there, Hans came to meet them.
“Don’t mind about the gum,” he said cheerfully; “I
scooped up most of it.”


Sophia blushed.
“I’m sorry,” she said hastily ; “and I was a pig, and I did
take much the bigger part of the serpent, and it made me ill.
But it’s not my fault that I’m a girl, I can’t help that.”
“Of course you can’t ; and I don’t really mind a bit.
With your hair short you don’t look like one. And anyway,
father says that girls are quite as good as boys, and some-
times better, and he says we couldn’t get on without them.
So come and have some dinner.”


0%,


%■ „
Chapter XI
THE HOUSE THAT
THE GNOMES BUILT
E must build a house,” said Master Johann
one evening as they sat round the fire.
Babina and Sophia, who were knitting,
looked up, and so did Hans, who was carving
a little bear.
“Yes,” said the Toymaker, “a house is
better than a cave. And as we cannot go
back to Wunderheim whilst Baron von Schly is reigning in
the Wunderhof, we had better build a house here. I have
thought of this for some time, and I have left a message
in the tree below there, asking Master Schmidt for hammer,
nails, and saw, and all the tools we shall need. To-morrow
we will all go and see the place I have selected for our
home. In the summer it will be delightful, when the hearts-
ease and sulphur anemones are out. And as there is a
stream just below it we shall have plenty of water. Besides,
I shall buy a goat, and then we shall have milk. Behind
the house is a clearing where we can grow cabbages
and potatoes, radishes and lettuces, and then we shall do
very well. What do you say, mother? do you like the
plan ? ”
Babina looked up at him with a smile. “ I always like
your plans, Johann,” she answered; “and though we are


h a ppy enough in our cave, no doubt we shall be happier
in our house.”
For the rest of the evening they thought of nothing but
the house, of how its walls should be made with pine logs,
and its thatch of heather, and of how it should be ornamented
with cones, and have a carved chimney-piece. Hans could
hardly sleep, so full was his mind of this great plan. And
when he fell asleep it was to dream of a little house among
the pine trees.
The next morning, led by Johann, and followed by Kaiser,
and Mein Herr the kitten, they all set out to see the spot
chosen for the house.
It was a little clearing in the pine forest. No place on
the Wunderberg could have been safer or prettier than this,
for a stream ran below it, and there were steep heather-
clothed rocks behind it, and there was just room for a nice
little house with a vegetable garden and a little lawn.
“It must have a porch where you can sit and smoke,
father,” said Hans.
“There must be a little house for the goat,” said Sophia.
“And a rustic bridge across the stream,” said Master
Johann.
“And a rose tree outside the two front windows,” said
Babina.
It was now March, and still rather cold, but the Toymaker
and his son became warm enough in cutting down pine trees
and sawing logs for their house. Sophia, too, busied her-
self in collecting heather for the thatch and cones to ornament
the porch. And Kaiser and Mein Herr Katzchen watched
it all with the greatest interest, for, as they were to live
there, they naturally felt some concern in the matter of the
house.
One fine day it was started, and Sophia carried out the


dinner to Johann and his son, and felt herself very important
and just like the near relation of a real live workman. And
she stood and watched them eating. Hans was very hungry,
but he could hardly leave his work, he was so much interested
in it.
“It's going to be as good as a house in a picture-book,”
he said joyfully, as he took up his hammer again to begin
work.
At dusk they returned to the cave, where Babina had pre
pared their supper.
“We have not done much,” said Johann; “it is a long
work for two pairs of hands.”
Babina stood listening to something. “Isn’t it strange,”
she said, “that I seem to hear hammering, just as though
you and Hans were still working?”
Johann laughed.
“Perhaps,” he suggested, “the gnomes are working for
us. They are the best craftsmen in Germany. And there
are few things they do not know about building or carving,
about metal-work or stone-cutting.”
“And after you have carved so many gnomes, they might
well help you,” said Babina; “you are certainly a friend
of theirs.”
“Well, my grandfather once found a gnome caught in a
trap, and set him free, and I would do the same.”
The next morning Hans was up at daybreak and off to
his work. But in a few minutes he came rushing in, quite
breathless with excitement.
“Oh! father . . . mother,” he cried, “the walls are more
than a yard higher than when we left them last night. Some-
one has been building them, for I found the tools in a different
place, and there was a queer little hammer lying on the grass ;
here itjis.”


Johann took it and looked at it.
“That belonged to a gnome,” he said ; “they are certainly
helping us.”
“ Let’s go and watch them to-night,” Sophia suggested.
“ No, no, they would dislike that. But I will make them
some cakes,” said Babina, “and we will leave them where
they can find them, and a jug of water in case they are
thirsty.”
So again they worked all day and returned at dusk, and
again there was a sound of many hammers, and the next
morning the house had grown a little nearer to being
finished. And all the cakes were gone, but there was a
little card, shaped like a leaf, left on the top of a few
crumbs, and on this was written very, very neatly, “Our
compliments and thanks.”
The same thing happened every day for a fortnight, and
by the end of this time the gnomes had begun the thatching
of the little house. Then one night Sophia determined that
she would at all costs see them at work. So, on the excuse
of shaking the cloth outside the cave door, she went out
into the wood.
At first she was afraid, for in the pale moonlight the hill-
side looked mysterious and strange. The pine trees seemed
like giants standing on tip-toe to peer into heaven, and she
felt like a very little girl in such grand company. But she
could hear the sound of hammering, and curiosity drew her
on towards the place where the little house stood.
She went very softly, and hid behind a big rock. She
heard their hammers plainly now, and the sound of their
voices as they talked and argued. They argued a great
deal, for they like their own opinions, and each one had
slightly different ideas as to what should be done.
Then very softly she crept out, and stood up to watch


them. They were all too busy to notice her, but she
could now see them quite well, for the moon was rising
behind the house, and by its light she saw the whole
company.
A strange company it was too. Some were up on the
roof thatching it with dried heather. Others were making
the porch. A few were decorating the walls with cones.
Two were putting panes into the lattice-windows, and one
was carving a door-knob. All of them were talking, but
no one seemed to be listening (this is a habit not entirely
confined to gnomes). Some wore caps, others had hoods
or little hats ; some had coats, others were in their shirt-
sleeves, and nearly all of them were smoking. Those
who were working at the porch had a squirrel apprentice-
boy to hand them nails or cones as they wanted them.
When they were not looking he nibbled nuts, and threw the
shells at the gnome who was carving door-knockers.
The two glaziers, who were putting panes in the lattice-
windows, were helped by a big frog, who was a clever
fellow with his hands. He was croaking a song to keep
his heart up, for he did not really much care for being a
glazier, he would rather have been a public singer.
Sophia had never seen anything so strange in all her life,
and she stole forward on tip-toe to try and gain a nearer
view. She was watching the squirrel-apprentice, who was
rather a lazy fellow and inclined to dawdle, when she saw
one of the gnomes drop his pipe on the grass. Furtively
the squirrel picked it up and stuck it into his mouth. But
the result was most unhappy for himself, for he swallowed
a mouthful of smoke, and was seized with the most terrible
fit of choking.
All the gnomes rushed to pat him on the back, and some
with little cups in their hands tried to force water between


his teeth. The whole scene was so funny that Sophia for-
got prudence and laughed aloud.
In a moment they had seen her, and there was an in-
dignant shout as they rushed after her, leaving the squirrel
gasping for breath in the porch. As she ran and stumbled
down the hill-side, she heard their angry voices and the
patter of their feet. One flung a hammer that hit her
shoulder sharply, and some threw cones at her. It was
only by a great effort that she reached the cave before
them, and rushed into Johann’s arms.
“Oh ! ” said he, “you’ve been spying on the gnomes.”
“Now,” Hans declared, “they’ll go away in a rage, and
never finish the house.”
“Perhaps,” suggested Babina, “if I bake them more
cakes, and Sophia knits one or two pairs of socks in red
wool, and if we leave them there to-morrow, they may get
over their anger.”
“And I,” said Johann, “intend to carve them two
candlesticks in yew-wood, representing gnomes at work.
They will like those for their Art Gallery under the Wun-
derberg.”
The next morning they found very little work done, for
the gnomes had gone home in anger. But, up in a pine
tree, Sophia espied the lazy squirrel-apprentice, who had
choked so badly the night before. He was watching them
with bright eyes, and he saw the little cakes laid on the
grass, and two little pairs of red socks and a small waist-
coat of flannel made by Babina, and a very small hand-
kerchief hemmed by Sophia. All these things he noticed
from his shelter in the pine tree, and his eyes sparkled.
That night it was late before the hammering began. But
at last they heard it.
“They are working again,” said Babina.


“Yes,” answered the Toymaker, “they are too good
workmen ever to leave anything unfinished. While the
house was incomplete they would not leave it.”
The next morning, when they went to the place, all the
cakes were gone, and so were the socks, the waistcoat, and
the handkerchief. But a little card was stuck with pine
needles to the grass. This was what it said :
Thanks to the good Frau and Fraulein
for their kindness.
Socks and waistcoat most useful.
Handkerchief charming for parties.
Moreover, the house was nearly finished, and Johann
and Hans busied themselves with making shelves and cup-
boards.
“Chairs and tables,” said the Toymaker, “we will make
by degrees. One cannot have everything at once. Already
we have enough to make us very thankful.”
That same day Sophia, going down to the hollow tree,
found Anton Schmidt sitting there with two rose trees on
his knee.
“Here are the rose trees,” he said, “that Mistress
Babina wants. And here comes Gretchen, leading the
goat! Her name is Nanette, and she’s the daughter of
our old goat Lizbeth, who’s a very good goat indeed.”
Anton and Gretchen then told Sophia all the news of
Wunderheim, how Baron von Schly was sending people to
prison if they praised the Prince, her uncle, and how an
order for her own arrest was pasted to the Cathedral
door.
When she had said good-bye to the Schmidts, Sophia


•> -, v • ■ '
‘ afc/.’ "m' A) I" •* ' v --1 vC ' "'i I ' . 'W* ,
It- ; -<0 . . i m\k '■ ti\ V, <* vjJ'* ? -
i %■ •■• :■ V ... \ • - v \y&Cn/' . *
i r / \ '>■ i ji/* «zy \u • } . ,mw} pS^v/'/ «
-..
i‘if f
j
'* !^S > t> '* ■“' v'-- 1 V •
jV *
“ And here comes Gretchen, leading the goat ”


led the goat home, and she and Babina planted the rose
tree outside the window of the new house.
That night the hammering began early, and Sophia,
peeping out at the door of the cave, saw little lanterns
flashing through the forest. The gnomes were very busy,
that was easy to see. Even in the early morning, when
she crept out of the cave, she heard their voices shouting
in argument.
After breakfast, which was all the better for the goat’s milk,
they all went out to see what had been done in the night.
And there, lo and behold ! smoke was coming out of
the chimney, and that showed that a fire was burning in the
kitchen. Unless you had seen it, you could hardly believe
what a delightful little house the gnomes had built. Even
the most beautiful picture could not show it to you just as it
was in the morning sunlight, with the pine trees around it,
and the smooth grass in front, and the little stream running
at the bottom of the lawn.
There was a little path that led to the front door, and the
door had a knocker made like a frog, for gnomes like frogs.
There was also a little bell (it had once been a goat-bell)
that you could pull by a rope. And the porch, which was
thatched with heather and ornamented with cones, had seats
which silently begged you to sit down and rest. On one
of them lay the key, and a little card was tied to it, and on
the card these words : “To Master Johann of the Kirchstrasse,
with the compliments of his friends the Gnomes.”
Hans squeezed Sophia’s hand. The children were too happy
for words, and they waited in breathless excitement for the
opening of the door. Johann turned the key, and they went in.
The door opened into the kitchen, and they saw a bright
fire on the hearth. And the fire sparkled and crackled as
though to say: “Welcome, good friends.”


“They have made the furniture,” Johann exclaimed.
“Yes, and put china on the dresser,” cried Babina.
“And there is a carved settle,” said Hans.
“And shutters to the window,” added Sophia.
Yes, everything was complete. There was a table with
drawers in it, and there were chairs and two little stools and
a spinning-wheel for Babina. And there on the fire sat a
copper kettle with a funny jovial face, of which the spout
was the nose. On the shelves, too, were pots and pans. All
of bright copper, and all with curious faces raised upon them.
The gnomes had not even forgotten a warming-pan for the
beds !
But what delighted the children the most was the china
on the dresser. There was a dinner-set and a tea-set, and
both were hand-painted. The dinner-set was decorated with
little pictures of all the bright and curious toadstools that
grow on the Wunderberg. There was the Fly Agaric and the
Parasol Mushroom, the Lurid Boletus, and the Champignon.
For, you must know, that if a gnome is asked the name of
his favourite flower he always answers “Toadstool.”
The tea-set was decorated with butterflies and grasshoppers,
and the tea-pot was shaped like a rabbit, and the coffee-pot
like a squirrel. Everything was complete, even down to salt-
cellars and salt-spoons.
And in the bedrooms they found just the same neatness and
order. There were wooden beds with white coverlets, and
little chests-of-drawers and wash-hand stands, and rush-
bottomed chairs, and there were one or two pictures of gnomes
upon the walls, and an illuminated motto over each bed.
Sophia blushed when she saw above her bed words of
warning :
“ She is wise
Who never pries.


This was the only sign that they knew she had been watch-
ing them. Behind the house was a wood-shed, full of cones
and logs, and there was a place for Nanette the goat, and
a kennel for Kaiser; they had forgotten nothing, you see.
It was really the most charming little house in the world.
And so the children thought that night as they sat down
to supper round the kitchen table, and used the pretty plates
and cups that had been left them.
But they did not notice that the gnomes had bored a little
eye-hole in the shutters so that they might come and peep
at those within, nor did they know that outside the window
these same gnomes were taking turns to watch them through
this eye-hole, and quarrelling in whispers when any of their
number, delighted with the cheerful sight within, kept his
eye too long at the hole.
Indeed, they had bored holes in all the shutters, for it
amused them very much to see everything that was done
by the Toymaker and his family in the nice little house
they had built.


\
PETERKIN’S
BEER-
GARDEN


Chapter XII
PETERKIN’S BEER-GARDEN
OW of all the
adventures that happened to
Sophia and Hans whilst they lived in the house
that the gnomes built, it is only possible to tell
you a few. Up on the Wunderberg strange
things happen every day, and you are scarcely
out of one adventure before you fall head over
heels into another.
The one I am going to tell you about was due to Sophia’s
carelessness and to her curiosity. To her carelessness, be-
cause Master Johann had advised her to be home by sunset,
and she lingered too long on the far side of the stream ;
and to her curiosity, because But wait, you shall hear
the adventure from the beginning.
It was springtime, and for the first time they had heard
a shout of ‘ i Cuckoo, Cuckoo!” on the hill-side. And it was
springtime because the larches wore their beautiful green
clothes ; and it was springtime, most of all, because the days
were longer and the pine-scented wind was warm.
The children went long rambles through the forest and
down the hill-side, and they learnt many things at these
times ; they learnt about the trees, and the flowers, about
the ants and butterflies, about birds and beasts, and about
the wise ways of Nature.
In the evenings Master Johann would give them some


lessons, but he made these so delightful that they seemed
only another sort of play. And to both Hans and Sophia
these months on the Wunderberg seemed like holidays, and
yet they had never learned so much.
But Hans, as you remember, was ambitious ; and his
ambition was to be as fine a carver as his father. So there
were many hours when he would sit in the porch, his whole
mind intent on his work, with never a word to say to Sophia.
Now it was just at these times that she was inclined to get
into mischief. For although she had always a sock to knit,
or her little round frame of embroidery, these did not quite
occupy her restless mind.
She liked to wander across the little bridge and along the
far bank of the stream to a little grassy place under the
trees, where she was out of sight of the house. There she
would sit, sometimes dreaming or sometimes knitting, or
playing with her wooden animals that Johann or Hans had
carved for her.
It was Johann that had told her that in this part of the
Wunderberg the grey gnomes lived ; and he had warned her
that they were more mischievous than the red gnomes who
had built the house. Sophia had never seen a grey gnome
till this night of which I am telling you, but she had often
wanted to see one.
Now this evening she had just dropped her knitting on
her knees, when she looked up and saw a little grey-hooded
man struggling along with a fat lizard in his arms. The
lizard was kicking and writhing, and hitting the gnome’s
face, but still he held it tightly round the body, and hurried
forward to an opening among the rocks. However, the
struggles of the lizard became so violent that he had at last
to drop it, and it scurried off through the long grass. The
gnome stared around him with a dejected air.


“That’s a great pity,” he said. “I really thought I had
him that time. These lizards are very disobliging fellows.”
“What did you want him for?” asked Sophia, full of
curiosity.
The gnome, who had not seen her before, started violently,
but recovering himself, he came forward and bowed very
low.
“Good evening, gracious young Fraulein,” he said
politely; “and how does your Excellency find your health
to-night ? ”
Sophia stood up and curtsied.
“I am very well, thank you,” she said.
The little man, who had a rosy, jolly face, grinned broadly,
and sat down upon a rock.
“That is the ninth time,” he said, “that I have nearly
caught a lizard, but not quite. One has to be resigned to
such disappointments. It seems hardly kind of them to
struggle so much when they know I want one.”
“But what do you want it for?” Sophia asked.
“I want it for the Beer-garden, gracious Fraulein. One
must always have some new attraction if one keeps a Beer-
garden. It is not enough to have the very best herb-beer
on the Wunderberg, the sweetest pansy wine, the most
sparkling gentian liqueur, one must have something to
amuse the customers.”
“But what would the lizard do?” asked Sophia.
“While he was wild I’d keep him in a cage, gracious
Fraulein ; that would amuse the customers. But when I’d
tamed him he could clean the glasses. I had a mole once.
I thought we could use him as a door-mat or a foot-warmer.
But alas ! he had a bad trick of burrowing, and one day
he made a hole in the middle of the Beer-garden, and
disappeared.”


X VS ’)
v> *%?>>_, \ [Kv
4 i
The little man sat down upon a rock


The gnome sighed heavily, and his jovial face looked sad.
“You might get a squirrel,” said Sophia.
“Oh! no, gracious Fraulein, they are so common. Push-
kin over the way has one to clean the glasses, and several
gnomes employ them as boot-blacks, or butlers, or page-
boys.”
“Who is Pushkin?” Sophia asked.
“Pushkin? What, have you never heard of Pushkin,
gracious Fraulein ? He is my first cousin, for one thing. I
am Peterkin, you know, and Pushkin is my rival. He keeps
a Beer-garden just across the way. He is a clever fellow,
my cousin Pushkin, and he has many attractions for his
customers.”
“What does he do?”
“Oh! what does he not do, this Pushkin? He has a
band of grasshoppers, whom he has trained himself, and
they all chirp together. That is delightful for the customers
when they sit and smoke their pipes. Then he has per-
forming frogs, which he keeps in glass jars, and several tad-
poles besides. And for a small extra charge his customers
may fish for minnows in a washing-tub that he keeps in a
corner of the Beer-garden. You may be sure he is very
popular on account of all these amusements.”
“Oh!” exclaimed Sophia, “I should love to see Push-
kin’s Beer-garden . . . and yours, too,” she added politely.
Peterkin’s eyes sparkled.
“Why not, gracious Fraulein?” he answered, with a bow.
“Nothing could be easier. I will take you myself.”
“Oh! but I have to go back to supper,” she exclaimed.
“There will surely be time before supper. We will hurry,
and if you are a minute late, what matter?”
Sophia looked across the stream. It was sunset now, and
the level light lay warm upon the grass and on the flowers.


Between the trunks of the pine trees long shafts of light
pointed to the sun, which was just sinking behind the
shoulder of the Wunderberg. And far off she could hear
Kaiser barking, and the tinkle, tinkle of Nanette’s bell.
“ I ought to go back,” she said regretfully.
“A few minutes would be enough for the gracious Fraulein
to see everything. She would see our houses and our
winding street and the Beer-gardens at the corner, and she
could hear the grasshopper band, and see the performing
frogs and the squirrel pot-boy.”
“But your gnomes might be angry, and kill me,” she
suggested.
“ No, no. They would welcome the gracious Fraulein.
Besides, they are all at the King’s reception in the Crystal
Hall. We shall meet no one. Come then, before that
busybody of a poodle finds us out.”
In the distance Kaiser had appeared. He was trotting
nose to earth in search of Sophia. He had come to fetch
her home. Kaiser was as strict as a nursery governess.
Peterkin held out his hand, and Sophia took it. In a
moment they were inside the little cave that led to the city
of the grey gnomes.


THE CITY OF THE
GREY GNOMES


Chapter XIII
THE CITY OF THE
GREY GNOMES
F you can picture a quaint old German
town, with the houses but a quarter the
size of ordinary houses, and the streets but
a quarter as wide, and if you can picture
such a town entirely underground, but lit
by Chinese lanterns and countless fairy
lamps, you know just what the city of
the grey gnomes was like. And this was
what Sophia saw as she went hand-in-hand
with Peterkin down the queer winding
street.
And there were shops there, wonderful shops, shining with
jewels, crystal cups, copper flagons and old glass, or full of
carvings and cone ornaments. There were bakers’ shops too,
and tailors’ where fine waistcoats and embroidered coats were
hung, and other windows showed innumerable little boots and
shoes all made to fit gnomes’ feet.
“Oh ! what a lovely little town,” cried Sophia, “and how
pretty the lanterns look. And here is such a funny little house
with a signboard over it. It is called the i Dancing Gnome.’
Now I see it is a Beer-garden, just like those in Wunderheim.”
“Yes, my Fraulein, and I am the master here. Come in,
come in.”
i 129


Peterkin opened the gate, and led her in.
She found herself in a queer little garden set about with
round green tables, chairs, and benches. In one corner was
an arbour overgrown by lichen and fungi. You paid a little
more to sit and smoke there.
A guinea-pig in a white apron was lazily wiping the tables
with a cloth. He seemed half asleep, and Peterkin kicked
him, and told him to hurry.
“The worst of him is,” he told Sophia, “that you can’t
pull his tail because, of course, he’s not got one. And though
he is a novelty down here, he’s such a lazy one that I might
be better without him.”
Sophia sat down at one of the little tables, and Peterkin
ran into his odd little house to fetch her a glass of orchid
wine and a cake. He came out in a few minutes carrying
a little tray, and on it stood an old jewelled goblet full of
sparkling orchid wine, and on a little silver plate lay two nice
little almond cakes.
Now Sophia remembered all the fairy stories in which
princes and princesses and other people have been warned
not to eat or drink lest entire forgetfulness fall upon them.
But she was always imprudent, and the little cakes looked
very nice, and the old goblet was so beautiful that you could
scarcely resist raising it to your lips. And so she did.
Peterkin, who was smoking a long German pipe, watched
her face with deep interest.
“What are you thinking about?” he asked.
Sophia looked puzzled.
“ I forget,” she said.
“Well, that doesn’t matter,” he answered.
“Oh! but it does. I’ve forgotten something important.”
“Perhaps it was your pocket-handkerchief. That s the
important thing one forgets most often.


“ No, it wasn’t that.”
“Well, perhaps it was your manners; one may forget
them sometimes.”
“No,” said Sophia; “I’ve forgotten everything. I’ve
forgotten where I was going when I met you, and where
I live, and \Vhat my name is. It seems very queer. I wish
you’d remind me.”
“I’ll tell you who you are. You are my new maid-servant,
and you are to live here, and to serve my customers with
beer or wine, and to fill their pipes, and to amuse them whilst
they smoke.”
“Am I?” Sophia asked. “Well, I quite forget asking
you for a place. Did I bring a character with me ? ”
“Oh! yes; your last master said you were very
forgetful, so I hope you’ll improve. And you’ll have to
keep the guinea-pig in order ; his name is Fritzkin, and
he needs a lot of slapping. He’ll have to sleep with
you too, for I can’t afford beds for everyone, and I’m
giving you a nice little attic at the top of the house. You’ll
find Fritzkin very quiet, and he’ll do instead of a hot-water
bottle.”
“But,” said Sophia, “I know there’s something I can’t
remember. And I believe I have a home somewhere if I
could only remember the place. It is very strange to have
forgotten everything that I ever did till this minute. Why,
I don’t even know my own name.”
“ Your name is Gentianella. That is a very pretty name,
and you may thank me for giving it to you. However, I
can’t have you idling here ; you may just go into the house,
and rinse the glasses, and polish the silver.”
Sophia went into the gnome’s kitchen, and rinsed the glasses,
and polished the silver, but all the time she was struggling
to remember her past life ; and her tears fell upon the silver


powder because she knew that something was wrong. But
what was it? what was it?
Then she heard the gate creak, and peeping out of the
window she saw two old gnomes coming in. At the same
moment she heard Peterkin slapping the guinea-pig for having
fallen asleep in the arbour. They both came rushing into
the kitchen a minute after.
“ Come, bustle ! ” Peterkin shouted ; “ here are two town
councillors, you must run and serve them.”
Sophia caught up her tray and hurried out to the garden,
where the two old gnomes were seated in the arbour.
“ What shall I bring you, if you please?” she asked.
But they both stared at her with their mouths open.
“ Where did you come from? ” asked one, with a little gasp.
“I don’t know,” said Sophia.
“That’s strange! I never saw a little girl here before.
You are certainly a novelty.”
Peterkin came out carrying a foaming jug of herb-beer
and two tankards. His face was wreathed in smiles. He
bowed three times before the town councillors.
“I hope,” said he, “that the two gracious town coun-
cillors will be pleased to approve the new maid-servant,
Gentianella by name. She is a handy and obliging little
girl, and will do as she is bid.”
“But how did you get her?” asked the first.
Peterkin laid his finger to his nose, which was a silent
way of saying that this was his affair.
Then the town councillors stroked their white beards and
stared at Sophia, after which they raised the lids of their
tankards, and took a long drink. The advantage of gnome-
brewed beer and gnome-made wine is that neither ever
makes anyone drunk. And so the gnomes drink as much
as they like, and feel none the worse.


Sophia danced before the gnomes


“What does she do?” asked the second town councillor,
after he had stared long enough at Sophia.
“Everything,” answered Peterkin boastfully; “she can
sing or dance, repeat poetry, ask riddles, play cat’s cradle,
make shadow-rabbits on the wall, or tell stories. She is
ready to oblige the gracious customers in any fashion.”
“Be pleased to sing a song, my little maiden,” said the
first town councillor.
Now, although Sophia had forgotten all the important
things of her life, her name, her home, Johann and Babina,
yet she remembered all the songs that ever she had learnt,
and she sang two or three to the two old gnomes.
“Why, that is excellent!” they both exclaimed. “You
may now do us a dance,” said one.
So Sophia held out her white apron, and danced before
them, while Peterkin played upon an old fiddle. And she
did tricks with a piece of string, and she played :
“This is the church, and this is the steeple,
Open the door, and you’ll see all the people ”
not to mention :
“ Here is the parson going upstairs,
And here is the parson saying his prayers,”
so that the two old gnome councillors found themselves
very well amused.
“You are certainly an acquisition,” they said to Sophia;
and though she did not understand what an acquisition was,
she felt it must be something good. Then they paid their
account, and went away.
In the silence that followed their going, Sophia could
hear a considerable noise across the way. There was the
lively chirp of grasshoppers, and a buzz of talk.
“Oh, yes,” said Peterkin crossly; “those are the people
at my cousin Pushkin’s—no lack of customers there.”


Sophia clambered on to a chair, and now she could see
across the road and across the opposite hedge right into
Pushkin’s Beer-garden. There all the tables and chairs were
occupied, and the gate kept opening to admit new-comers.
‘‘Wait till to-morrow,” said Peterkin ; “when the news
of my maid-servant has spread through the town, my cousin
Pushkin will not be so popular. However, till then you
and Fritzkin may go to bed. You will find your supper
in the kitchen.”
Sophia went to the kitchen, and she and Fritzkin sat at
either side of the fire, and took their bread and milk in
silence. Then they both yawned, and Sophia picked up
the guinea-pig, and carried him up the stairs to their little
attic under the roof.
From the window she could see down the street, and she
saw all the queer little doors where the gnomes stood
smoking and gossiping with one another. It was all very
strange, and like a dream. But at that moment the lamp-
lighter came down the street, putting out all the lanterns
and lamps, for that is the only way by which the gnomes
know that it is night.
Then Sophia crept to bed, but she was very home-sick,
although she could not remember her home or those who
lived there. But she lay down and cried bitterly, because
she felt that she must have a home and kind friends some-
where, if she could only remember where. She took the
guinea-pig in her arms and kissed him, for she felt very
lonely. But he did not care for that, he was so sleepy.
He laid his head on the pillow and snored loudly, and in
a little while Sophia, too, was asleep.
The next afternoon the two town councillors came again,
and very soon other gnomes strolled in, singly or in couples.
And they all stared at Sophia when she asked what they


would like to drink. It was clear that they had come to see
her, and they begged her to fill their pipes, and then to sing
a song.
So Sophia sang, and the gnomes beat time with their feet
and sang the choruses. Then Peterkin got out his fiddle,
and she danced. That pleased them very much.
New-comers kept arriving until the Beer-garden was quite
full, and the customers at Pushkin’s grew tired of the grass-
hopper band and the performing frogs, and stood on the
gates trying to peer into Peterkin’s to see this new attraction.
Sophia worked very hard. She was really good-natured,
and she liked to amuse the gnomes. So she asked them
riddles, and told them stories, and showed them all sorts
of tricks that were common enough in Wunderheim, but
new down here. And they all sat round her in delight,
and so many came to look at her that Pushkin’s was quite
deserted, for fashion is always fickle.
And at last the Lord Mayor himself came to see her, and
he brought with him the Town Clerk, and Peterkin bowed
so often and so low that he nearly strained his back. And
Sophia had to repeat all her stories, and ask the Lord Mayor
all the riddles ; and as he was a person of importance, the
other gnomes might not prompt him with the answers until
he chose to “give it up.”
“I find you very amiable,” said the Lord Mayor, “and
I’ll ask you to my next banquet if you’ll sing a song, and
make shadow-rabbits on the wall.”
“Oh! but I must go home soon,” said Sophia.
“Where’s your home?” he asked.
Poor Sophia’s eyes filled with tears.
“I’ve forgotten,” she answered.


k%m
“The lamplighter came down the street”


Chapter XIV
KAISER SENDS HIS
MOUSTACHE AS A TOKEN
OW, you remember that Peterkin had run off
with Sophia just as Kaiser, the poodle, appeared
in the distance. Good, trusty Kaiser, running
nose to earth, tracked Sophia to one side of
the stream.
“ She is at the other side,” said a frog.
“ Peterkin the gnome has run off with her,”
cried a lizard. “ I would not go with him, and so he per-
suaded the little Fraulein ; and if she eats gnome food she
will forget everything.”
Kaiser jumped the stream, and tracked Sophia to the cave
where she had disappeared. But he was too late, and he
could not get into the gnomes’ city, for they had rolled big
rocks to the mouth of the cave.
Kaiser growled, and barked, and scratched deep holes with
his fore-paws, and he snorted into them to let the gnomes
know that he was there.
Presently Master Johann and Hans found him out, and
they too knew what had happened, but they could not reach
Sophia, or send her any message, so they had to go back
to Babina, leaving Kaiser on guard.
Now, though the poodle could not get into the gnomes’
city, the gnomes could not come out, and that annoyed them


“ The Mayor and the Town Clerk decided they might take a stroll ”


very much, for they liked to stroll by the side of the stream
whilst they smoked their pipes, and they wanted to hunt for
frogs and lizards for their zoological garden.
“That ugly black poodle is lying with his nose pressed to
the gate,” said one; “let’s light a fire of cones and smoke
him out.”
So they made a cone fire, but the smoke blew the wrong
way and vexed them greatly. That was a pity.
All night Kaiser kept watch, and nearly all the next day.
The Toymaker brought him food and water, and Mein Herr
Katzchen came to visit him.
“You should hide in the bushes, my friend,” said the
kitten, who was nearly a cat by now; “then when a gnome
comes out, pounce, and hold him with your claws. All that
barking and growling and digging is mere waste of time. A
cat would know better.”
Kaiser pooh-poohed the advice at the moment, for he did
not quite like to be guided by a cat, but when Mein Herr
Katzchen was out of sight, he withdrew from the hole, and hid
himself among the bushes. Only a black nose and two brown
eyes could be seen under the bush, and the gnomes really
thought he had gone away. But it was not till sunset that
they ventured to come out. Then the Mayor and the
Town Clerk decided they might safely take a stroll, so out
they came, arm-in-arm, to walk by the stream in the evening
light.
Kaiser waited till they were quite close, then, with a bound,
he was on the Lord Mayor’s back, with his teeth in his little
red coat. The Town Clerk bawled aloud in his terror, but he
was not a coward, for he did not desert the Lord Mayor, but
kicked and punched the poodle, imploring him all the time to
let the Lord Mayor go.
“Not until you bring my Fraulein Sophia,” said Kaiser


between his clenched teeth, for he never let go the gnome’s
jacket.
‘‘She has forgotten you,” answered the Town Clerk.
“She might not come, even if I said you were here.”
“I shall hold on to this jacket until she comes,” declared
the poodle ; “and if she doesn’t come soon I shall drop him
in the stream.”
“Oh! ” shouted the Mayor, “for pity’s sake get the girl,
and free me from this villain of a bloodthirsty, rascally, black-
faced poodle.”
“But if she forgets you,” said the Town Clerk, “she
will not come. I’ll have to show her a token.”
“Cut off my moustache,” commanded the gallant Kaiser.
“It is a great sacrifice, but that will make her remember.
Doubtless you have scissors in your jacket. . . . You have?
that’s right ; well, cut then. . . . Ah ! what a loss ! Now
take it to the little Fraulein and say ‘ Kaiser the poodle
sends you this, and bids you come home.’”
The Town Clerk took the moustache, and hurried off
to Peterkin’s Beer-garden. He sat down at a table, and
accidentally kicked the guinea-pig, which was asleep on the
grass. Then Sophia came out of the house. She was
carrying a tray.
“Fine gnome-weather, Mein Herr Town Clerk,” said she ;
“and will your honour be pleased to drink herb-beer, pansy
wine, gentian liqueur, extract of pine cones, or puff-ball
waters ? ”
The Town Clerk caught her wrist, and laid the moustache
on her outstretched hand. “Kaiser the poodle sends you
that for a token,” he whispered, “and he bids you come
home. You must run with me quickly before Peterkin stops
you. Come ! ”
“Kaiser the poodle ... I don’t know him,” began


Sophia, but the gnome took her hand, and hurried her down
the street. And gradually she began to remember one thing
and another, as people do in a fog when they see this and
that house they know. Yes, she had known a black poodle
once . . . but when and where was it ?
By this time they had reached the gates, and the Town
Clerk pushed her through them, and there they were out
on the grass by the stream, and there was Kaiser with his
fore-paws on the body of the unfortunate Lord Mayor, and
his eyes surveying the scene in quite a meditative fashion.
When Sophia saw him she remembered all, and with a
cry she flung herself upon him, hugging him round the neck,
and kissing his curly head.
“Go,” said Kaiser to the two gnomes, and hand-in-hand
they scurried away to the cave.
Sophia jumped the stream, and rushed home with the
poodle at her heels, and there, with anxious faces, stood
the Toymaker and his wife. Ah ! how pleasant it was to
be at home again with those she loved. And they all forgot
to scold her, they were so glad to have her amongst them.
How glad she was to sleep that night in her own little
bed under her nice warm coverlet! And she thought of
Peterkin’s Beer-garden and Fritzkin the guinea-pig.
“After all, it was a great adventure,” said Hans. “ I wish
I’d been there myself. If you had been at Peterkin’s, and
I had been at Pushkin’s, we should have had rival gardens.
It would have been great fun.”


GATHERING
STRAWBERRIES


Chapter XV
GATHERING WILD
STRAWBERRIES
HAVE never gathered wild strawberries,
said the Story Spinner, but my cousin,
who is, you remember, the Hausgeist of
the Burgomaster, tells me that this is one
of the delights of Germany. He says you
may buy them, too, in little baskets at
the market, but they are better quite
fresh. He has made them into jam at
night when he has the kitchen to himself,
and he has promised to send me a small
pot of this some day, with a packet of
Himmelspeise crumbs, if he can find a trustworthy mes
senger, and that, I fear, will be a difficulty.
But, to continue my story, I must tell you that it was
now wild-strawberry time on the Wunderbefg. And in the
market-place of Wunderheim the market-women sold baskets
of them. It was cherry time, too, and that is the time when
it is very pleasant to be alive and out in the woods.
Perhaps you have never wandered through a pine wood
on a hot summer day, when all the air is scented with the
pines, and when you think that it must be the sunshine
itself that has the scent. And all sorts of little things are
buzzing and humming among the trees, and the ants are


all as busy as ants should be. And in the grass, when you
reach a clearing in the wood, there are big sulphur anemones
and heartsease and forget-me-nots. . Oh! certainly that is
the time to go to the pine woods.
On these summer days Sophia and Hans were out all
day long, and Hans was quite brown and Sophia had
freckles on her nose, just like a certain little girl I know
who has a charmingly freckled little nose. Babina would
give them their dinner in a clean red handkerchief, and off
they would wander together, to climb or to explore, or to
sit on a bank in the sunshine, Sophia knitting all the time
and Hans carving.
By this time they were the fastest of friends, such friends
that neither quite enjoyed anything unless the other shared
it too. And though they quarrelled sometimes, the quarrel
was quite on the surface, and the friendship was deep, deep
underneath, deeper even than they knew, for they never
thought much about themselves. But there it was, and it
was something for which to thank God, for no one who has
a friend can be quite poor or quite unhappy. And if we
read all the wise stories that have been written, we know
how pleasant it is to have a companion in one’s adventures.
For what would have become of Kay, in the Snow Queen ,
had it not been for faithful Gerda ? And who can imagine
Hansel without Gretel, or Tangle, of the Golden Key , with-
out Mossy?
The friendship between Sophia and Hans was just like
these friendships, and that although they were so different
in many respects. For Hans was quiet, and Sophia was as
talkative as a little brook, or as the little girl with freckles
on her nose, who can talk at least twenty-five to the dozen,
as I, who have often listened to her, can testify. And
Hans was careful and Sophia careless, and Hans always


thought of being a carver and toymaker like his father,
whilst Sophia often thought of nothing at all but the birds
in the air and the sunshine among the trees, and the armies
of pine trees around them.
But this was wild-strawberry time, and they each took a
basket and went to a little woodland hollow where the
ground was quite pink with the strawberries. They
gathered for a long while, and then flung themselves down
among the leaves. Kaiser was not with them, he had gone
down the hill with Master Johann. These adventures
always happened when Kaiser was not there.
Now, almost without a sound, two great wolf-hounds
bounded through the trees and stood before them, and after
the wolf-hounds, but much more noisily, came three horse-
men. One was very fat, and he rode on a big grey horse ;
the second was middle-sized, and he wore hunting-dress;
and the third was very thin, and rode on a fiery black
horse. The fat rider was handsomely dressed, and it
was easy to see that he was a great personage, for he wore
an eagle’s feather and a big jewel in his hat, and he had
a gold chain round his neck. He stared at the children
and they stared at him.
“You are too big for the Babes in the Wood,” said he;
“but they might have been like you if they’d grown up.”
He turned to the very thin man with a genial smile.
“What a charming pair,” he exclaimed, “quite a picture!
I am deeply touched.”
The thin man neither smiled nor looked touched. He
only glared.
“Tell me your names, my pretty dears,” said the kind,
fat personage.
“ Sophia.”
“Hans.”


“Ach, so? What could be more delightful? And you
are gathering wild strawberries ? How picturesque, how
primitive, how pagan, how everything that begins with P.
Oscar,” turning to the middle-sized man; “do you not
wish that you were a child once more gathering wild straw-
berries to feed your innocent mouth?”
“Not at all, my lord Baron,” answered the middle-sized
man, and he looked very cross.
“Don’t you, Oscar? Now, that’s strange. I have alto-
gether more sentiment. I could wish that I were a simple
little fellow with a little basket on my arm, gathering straw-
berries with those pretty chicks.”
His eyes filled with tears, and he wiped them with a
large Bandana handkerchief. When he had blown his nose
he said, in a quite decided voice, to the thin man :
“Get down and catch the boy, and put him on your
horse. Oscar must take the girl.”
The thin man dismounted and came towards the children,
but Hans pushed Sophia behind him and drew his pen-knife.
“We won’t go with you,” he said. “We live near here,
and we are not going to be taken away.”
The Baron smiled tenderly.
“What a pretty fellow,” he exclaimed, “as brave as a
robin ! How charming to see such courage ! Oscar, you’d
better help Michael. Don’t hurt them very much, for my
sake, dear Oscar.” The two men made a rush for Hans,
and though he struggled desperately he was easily caught,
and his hands fastened. Sophia, too, had made great re-
sistance, but against these strong men the children could do
nothing, and in a few minutes they were lifted to the horses’
backs, and gripped by the riders they had no chance of
escape. No one but the squirrels heard their shouts as the
horses galloped down the woodland ride.


They went for miles and miles and miles through the
wild country that lay beyond the Wunderberg. But presently
the horses began to toil upwards, scrambling like mountain-
goats along the difficult path. And far above them they
saw a castle like a ravens nest perched among the rocks.
Only a robber could have had a wild castle like that, so
lonely, so remote, so roughly built.
“We are nearly home,” said the Baron, smiling his fat,
dimpled smile at Sophia. “What a beautiful word is home!
It nearly makes me weep to think of the anxiety of your
Papa and your very dear Mama. I wish I had some way
of conveying my sympathy to them ; but, alas ! the penny
post has not even been invented yet, and as for the tele-
phone, it will not be thought of for centuries to come.
And so we must be resigned to our lot.”
Sophia made no reply ; she was too angry. And she was
sore and weary with the long rough ride. They had now
reached the path that led to the castle gate, and they could
see that their coming had been observed, for out rushed a
dozen wild robbers, brandishing knives and hatchets, and
all shouting at once.
The Baron raised his plump hand, which glistened with
rings.
“Gently, boys, gently . . . gently,” he commanded;
“because we are robbers, need we be rude and rough like
a party of mad bulls?”
“What have you brought?” they shouted. “Show us the
booty. What have you got the children for?”
“One question at a time,” said the Baron; “you make
my head ache. Hush . . . boys, if you please, ‘ Manners
maketh man’; how often must I say that? There is not
much booty to-day. We caught three merchants and took
their gold, but I admit that business might be brisker. As


“The horses galloped down the woodland side”


for these charming little strangers, they are my guests, and
I shall keep them as long as I choose.”
“And what then?” asked Oscar gruffly.
“Then, dear Oscar, I shall drop them over the cliff or
into the lake, or take some kind quick measure to get rid
of them. What you don’t want you should always destroy,
that is my motto. It is much tidier than filling up a castle
with people and things one doesn’t really need. Now let
us go into the castle and have supper.”
The horses were led into the big castle yard, and the
gates slammed behind them. Sophia and Hans were un-
bound, and with his hands on their shoulders the Baron
marched them into the big stone hall. A fire was blazing
there, for the castle was so high that a cold wind always
blew about the walls.
Several wolf-hounds rose and came to meet them, snuffing
at the children. But they wagged their tails and let them-
selves be caressed. From the fireside came a very old,
wrinkled woman leaning on a stick. She was the Baron’s
great-aunt, so old, so old that she had lost count of her
age. And she was the only woman in the castle.
“Allow me, dear Aunt Hildegarde,” said the Baron, “to
introduce to you my two young friends, the Fraulein Sophia
and her brother Hans.”
“He’s not my brother,” said Sophia.
“So? His loss, I’m sure! Well, well, he might have
been. So it is all the same. Now, my dear children, as
you are a little dusty and travel-stained, you will like to go
with my Aunt Hildegarde and wash your faces and do
your hair. I must tell you that we don’t dine late, though
I am a Baron. Personally, I prefer high tea. There’s
something simple but satisfactory about high tea, you have
all the dishes on the table at once. That is an advantage.


I get my tea straight from Ceylon. It is cheaper that way.
But go with Aunt Hildegarde. She will get you whatever
you want.”
Aunt Hildegarde hobbled away, and the children followed
her up a little twisting stair and into her bedroom.
It was a nice bedroom, and she had a fire there every
night. You see, the Robber Baron was not altogether bad.
He had this peculiarity, that he was everything that begins
with B. So though he was bold and bad he was also
benevolent and benign ; he was boisterous but buxom, bar-
barous but still bounteous, and that simplified his character
and helped you to understand him.
Aunt Hildegarde’s walls were hung with tapestry, and her
floor was spread with wolf-skins. She had vast wardrobes
and presses, and her jewellery lay about on tables, for she
did not care to wear it.
She sat down before the fire and turned her back upon
them.
“You can wash your faces,” she said; “and you’ll find a
gold-backed brush and comb if you look about.”
Sophia combed her hair for a while, then she went to the
old lady’s side and put her hand upon her knee.
“Oh! can you not help us to escape?” she asked, with
a little sob.
Aunt Hildegarde peered at her, then she touched Sophia’s
hair with a wrinkled finger.
“ My little sister was like you,” she said slowly ; “I could
almost think that lam speaking to her. No, I cannot help
you to escape as yet, but if the worst comes to the worst, I
may see a way to help you. It would be a pity if you were
hurt, for you look a nice little girl.”
She rose stiffly and hobbled to a wardrobe. She opened
it with a golden key and beckoned Sophia to her.


‘‘Here,” she said, “are fine dresses. You had best make
yourself look as fine as possible. That is your best chance.
Look pretty and mind your manners, and you may have
quite a week of life before you.”
From the wardrobe the Baron’s old aunt dragged wonder-
ful embroidered dresses, all sewn with jewels and gold
thread. At last she chose for Sophia a pale green velvet
gown with a fichu of old Brussels lace. And she twined
pearls in her hair, and gave her an emerald brooch to wear in
her lace. She did not mind about Hans, for she was tired
of little boys, having known so many of the robbers when
they were young.
At that moment a big wolf-hound looked in and barked
three times.
“That means that tea is ready,” said Aunt Hildegarde ;
“you had better run downstairs.”


HOW THE
ROBBERS


Chapter XVI
HOW THE ROBBERS
HAD HIGH TEA
LL the robbers came to high tea. They were
expected to wash their hands at the pump
before they came in. If the Baron saw dirty
hands he was much annoyed; and his punish-
ments were so terrible that the robbers dared
not disobey him.
He himself was most particular about his
toilet. He always put on a clean collar before
tea, and he brushed his hair with hair oil, the white sort that
looks like cream. He wore a velvet coat, too, and an
embroidered waistcoat and a diamond scarf-pin. He was
very fond of jewellery. When he saw Sophia beautifully
dressed, with her fair hair combed so nicely, he became
more benevolent than ever. And he placed her at his right,
and squeezed her hand under the tablecloth.
“I am very fond of little girls,” he said softly. “I am
sure we shall all be great friends.”
Then he offered her buttered toast, and he spread it with
strawberry jam, though that, of course, was more generous
than wise. Hans sat among the robbers, and he did not
admire their manners at all; for they began at once upon
the cake, and, as we all know, nicely behaved people begin
tea with bread and butter, and work up to the jam stage,


and finish up with cake. But the robbers began with cake,
so as to be sure they got it, and finished up with cold pork
and apple sauce.
Hans found their conversation very amusing, for they all
talked about desperate adventures. When they shouted too
loud, the Baron tapped the table with his knife-handle, and
said, “Gently, boys ... a little quieter, if you please.” It
was strange that though he spoke so kindly, the robbers all
seemed to hold him in the greatest awe.
Once he looked down the table and called “ Arabert, I
want you.”
A robber with thick black hair and a hooked nose turned
quite pale. But he pushed back his oak chair and came
to the Baron’s side. He was terribly frightened.
“Arabert, my dear fellow,” said the Baron gently, “you
have not cut your nails for a long time, I fear. You have
not even cleaned them. Now, you know the punishment for
that, don’t you, Arabert ? ”
Arabert trembled and his eyes filled with tears.
“You must go to the torture-chamber after tea,” said the
Baron, “and get them cut.”
Sophia was so very sorry for the poor robber that she
cried, “Oh, do forgive him, please.”
The Baron beamed upon her.
“Well, well, as it’s your first night, I’ll forgive him this
once. But if it happens again, I fear Arabert must get his
punishment.”
The robber looked gratefully at Sophia, and went to his
place. And a little while after they rose and left the table.
After tea they all sat round the fire, and the robbers
sharpened their knives on scythe-stones, or dozed, or counted
up their pocket-money. Hans was carving a funny pipe,
and this amused them all, for they could not carve themselves.


Sophia, who had not lost her knitting when they captured
her in the woods, took out her ball and began to knit.
“What could be more charming,” cried the Baron, who
was lolling in a big oak chair, “than to see such industry
in the young? It brings tears to the eyes to observe the
play of the little girl’s needles. Tell me, my pretty dear,
can you knit socks?”
Now Sophia seized upon this as a possible chance in an
hour of danger.
“Oh, yes,” she answered; “and I could knit your Excel-
lency a fine pair of red socks with this new ball of wool, if
you would allow me to do so.”
The Baron clapped his fat hands.
“Charming!” he exclaimed. “I should like them of all
things, and perhaps you could embroider them with purple
and green silk ; I do like embroidered socks.”
“Yes, I could . . . purple flowers and green leaves.”
“Capital! Capital! Begin at once, my pet, and pray
make them wide enough; my foot is a trifle broad.”
He made Sophia sit on a high footstool quite close to him,
where he could see his socks being knitted.
A great silence fell upon them all, for some were sleepy,
and few had much to say, and the Baron began to feel bored.
“It is really a pity,” he said regretfully, “that I killed
my jester yesterday. I saw him looking into the well, and
I thought it would be such a joke to push him in , . . poor,
dear fellow ! He’d made so many jokes at my expense that
I thought I’d make one at his. I always enjoy a practical
joke, don’t you ? ”
Sophia looked doubtful.
“ It just depends,” she said.
“Why, so it does, my pet, so it does. I never knew if
the poor fellow saw the joke, for, of course, he couldn’t tell


“Hans was carving a funny pipe”


me, for his head was at the bottom of the well. He
made such a fine splash as he went in. I like splashes,
don’t you?”
“Well, that depends too,” said Sophia.
“Of course it does . . . how wise you are, you dear little
pet! But now I quite miss the poor fellow, for he told us
stories in the evening, and that passed the time.”
“I can tell you stories too,” said Sophia. “Hans and
I can invent them during the day, and I will tell them at
night. But Hans must help me, so you mustn’t play a
practical joke on him.”
“Oh! very well; we shall love to hear your stories, but
they must have lots of adventure in them . . . and only quite
a little moral. And don’t make any little orphans die in the
snow, for we’re so soft-hearted we can’t bear that. Do begin
—right away, my little friend. We’ll give you till we count
ten to think it out, and then off you go.”
They all counted ten in a loud voice, and then Sophia
began, for she had invented lots of stories before she went
to sleep during those summer nights on the Wunderberg.
The story was full of adventures: there was a buried treasure,
or a shipwreck, or an earthquake, or a fire, or a burglary,
or a mad bull almost every five minutes. But her voice
soothed the robbers so much, and they lived such a tiring
life, that by nine o’clock they were nearly all asleep. Then
Aunt Hildegarde rose and lit a candle; the candlestick was
solid silver embossed with dragons.
“You had better come to bed,” she remarked; “you are
going to sleep with me.”
“Where will Hans sleep?” asked Sophia.
“Oh! he’ll sleep down there by the fire with the rest of
them.”
“ Do they never go to bed ? ”


“ Dear me, no! Why, you don’t think we could afford
clean sheets and pillow-cases for all that lot, do you ? Be-
sides, they’d go to bed in their boots and spurs, and that
would tear the bed-clothes.”
“ Do you promise me that Hans will be safe?”
4 ‘Oh, yes. Your stories have pleased my grand-nephew
very much, and he’ll keep you whilst you can think of
new adventures. The worst is that he tires very soon of all
amusements, and then he starts his little practical jokes ; and
then—well, I can’t answer for your safety.”
Hans got up and kissed Sophia good night. All the
robbers were snoring round the fire. Robbers always do
snore, you know, and that is why they never really hide
under your bed, though you may think they do. For if they
snored, then your father would find them out and give them
over to the police.
Up in Aunt Hildegarde’s room the floor was flooded with
moonlight. Sophia stood on a chair to look out of the narrow
window. Below her lay the moonlit waters of a mountain-
lake. The lake was like a steel shield, so cold and shining.
“Does he ever throw people in there?” asked Sophia, with
bated breath.
“Oh, yes, and one never sees them again. It is so deep
that no plummet can touch the bottom.”
Aunt Hildegarde would not talk any more. She got into
bed and closed her eyes. Then Sophia said her prayers.
And when she prayed for Johann and Babina, and for kind
Kaiser and Mein Herr the cat, tears came trickling down
her cheeks to think of how far she was from those she loved.
Then she heard a rustle at the door, and this terrified her
greatly. She crept to the door and tried to peep through
the keyhole.
“Who’s there?” she whispered.


“Only me,” whispered Hans, and though this was not
good grammar, Sophia did not mind at all.
“ I’m going to sleep at the door and guard you,” whispered
Hans.
“Oh, dear Hans, I do think you’re a nice boy.”
“Stuff!” said Hans.
He had to say that because he was a boy. But perhaps
he was really pleased for all that.


HOW THE
ROBBERS
LISTENED TO
A GHOST STORY


Chapter XVII
HOW THE ROBBERS LISTENED
TO A GHOST STORY
VERY morning the Baron and his robbers
rode out on pillaging expeditions, and Aunt
Hildegarde and the children were left with
Arabert, whose week it was to do the cook-
ing. For the robbers cooked week about.
But they all liked Arabert’s week, for he
mad e such nice rock-cakes. And sometimes
he made them ice-creams with a five-shilling refrigerator
that the Baron had stolen from an earl. It was the kind
that you have to roll about for ages and ages before
what’s inside will freeze. But Hans and Sophia took
turns to roll, and Arabert was very grateful.
All day long the children played about the castle, for they
were never allowed outside the walls. But inside there were
so many stairs and passages, so many strange little rooms,
such queer old chests full of gold and silver, such trunks
of rich clothes that you could enjoy yourself to the full,
whenever you could forget that your life might only last a
few days more.
So the two children played Hide-and-Seek all over the
place, and they acted Charades for Arabert whilst he
peeled the potatoes and whipped the cream. Or some-


times they climbed up to the highest tower and wondered
and wondered how they should escape, and what the Toy-
maker and his wife were doing in the cottage on the
Wunderberg.
In the evening the Baron came home to tea, and afterwards
Sophia told the robbers stories. But if you tell many stories,
and they all have to be very exciting, you sometimes run
short of adventures or you repeat yourself. After some nights
of story-telling this happened to Sophia, and the consequences
were bad.
It was a night when everything seemed to go wrong. The
robbers had brought back six tea-pots which they thought
were silver, and they turned out to be only plated. Then
the ice-cream, instead of being firm, was as liquid as milk.
The truth was that Hans had left the freezer for some time,
and the ice-cream had melted. That is a thing that does
happen sometimes.
The Baron was very angry, and he threatened to cut off
Arabert’s head, but Hans stood up and said it was his fault.
The Baron scowled at him, but he said no more. The next
misfortune was that Sophia took Lobster Mayonnaise, and
that and the hot fire gave her a sick headache, so that she
could not tell her story properly. In fact, it was decidedly
dull in parts.
“ Dear me ! ” yawned the Baron ; “ I wish I had a musical-
box, or a performing monkey, or a parrot who could talk.
One of you dear fellows might try and get me one. It would
brighten us up, wouldn’t it?”
Sophia knew by this that her story was a failure, but try
as she would she could not make it more amusing, for her
head ached very badly.
“ Haven’t you done those socks yet ? ” he asked.
“ Not quite.”


‘‘Well, get them done to-morrow.”
He stared at the fire for some time, then clapped his fat
hands gleefully.
“ Boys,” he said, “ I have an idea. Such a good idea
it is ! You remember how dear Sophia told us about the
shipwreck, and the little boy and girl who got wrecked and
floated in the sea all one night till in the morning the pirates
came and picked them up? Well ! Why shouldn’t we have
a shipwreck on the lake ? ”
“With the leaky boat in which Osbert got drowned last
year?” suggested thin Michael.
“ Exactly, dear Michael, . . . exactly ; how bright you are,
Michael! It would be the very thing, and we could see it all
from the Watch Tower, front places reserved, and no sucking
oranges at the back. That’s just the worst of a real ship-
wreck, you can never see one properly without being in it,
and it always comes when you’d rather not. But ours would
be on the lake just below us, so we’d see quite well. I
declare it would be as good as a pantomime. What do you
say, Sophia ? ”
“It all depends,” said Sophia.
“Exactly, my dear. But I assure you it’ll be as good as
real life. No pretence as in the theatre, no stage trickery ;
you pay your money and you get real value.”
“I suppose,” Sophia suggested, “you’ll have dummies in
the boat and watch them sink.”
“Oh, no, my dear, that’s mere trickery and delusion.
I propose that you and Hans shall be in the boat. That
will be more realistic.”
Sophia turned very pale.
“ But we should be drowned ! ” she cried.
“There! there! don’t distress yourself, pet. Perhaps
you’d float, like the boy and girl in your story.”


“That night she was more grandly dressed than usual”


“Oh, no, we shouldn’t,” Sophia exclaimed; “that was
only pretence.”
But the Baron pretended to be asleep, and it was no use
to plead with him. He was now tired of the children, and he
had determined to get rid of them, and none of the robbers
dared to say a word.
The next day Arabert told them that they had only
one more night, as Saturday being a half-holiday with the
robbers the Baron had decided to have the shipwreck that
day.
Sophia clung to him.
“Oh ! Arabert, I spoke up for you, can’t you help us
now ? ” she sobbed.
“I can’t cross him ,” said Arabert, “and I don’t see how
on earth I can save you when you sink in the lake. But
I tell you what I’ll do, I’ll hide life-belts in the leaky boat,
and I’ll be out in the punt ready to save you if he should
relent at the last moment. If only you could keep alive till
Saturday night, we might all three escape, for I’m tired of
this here business, and if I could get off to Berlin or Cologne
or Frankfort, I’d start life again as a policeman.”
“But why should Sunday be the day?” asked Hans.
“Well, they sleep late that morning, and if I put something
in their tea the night before they’d sleep sounder than usual.
But I feel there’s no hope for you, for the Baron is set on
this shipwreck, and that’s a fact.”
Very sadly the children climbed to the Watch Tower, and
sat there gazing at the lake which was so cold and fathomless
and grey. And now they wondered how would it feel when
the waters closed over their heads, and they went down, down
into the depths. They clasped each other’s hands, but they
said nothing. Olga, the wolf-hound, and her son Ban had
climbed to the tower with them, for neither of them was


allowed to go out with the robbers, and so they loved to be
with the children.
Hans had taught them to “trust,” and to shut the door,
and to carry baskets, and to leap over a pole. And the
dogs followed him everywhere.
Though her hands were idle, Sophia’s mind was very busy.
She was inventing such a ghost story as she had never told
before. It was a story that would make your hair stand on
end, that would make you jump if a mouse squeaked in the
corner.
That night she was more grandly dressed than usual, and
Arabert and Hans had contrived the most splendid tea, with
scones and sally-lunns and crumpets and queencakes and trifle
and meringues, and several other dishes. The Baron was in
a very good temper.
“The wind’s rising!” he said; “I believe we’ll have a
storm on the lake to-morrow,” and he rubbed his soft white
hands together.
After tea Sophia began her story, and it really was so
exciting that the robbers listened with all their ears. They
sat huddled round the fire, and when one of the dogs suddenly
thrust a cold nose into the Baron’s hand he shrieked aloud,
for his nerves were quite overstrung.
And in the midst of them on her stool sat Sophia, the
firelight shining on her face, and at the most creepy parts
her voice grew very low and paused, and then all the
robbers whispered hoarsely: “Go on, go on; what hap-
pened then ? ” The mystery of the story centred round a
secret room, a lonely, spider-haunted room, from which came
cries and shouts. It made them all shudder to hear of it, and
no one either in the story or out of it could imagine what the
secret could be.
At nine o’clock Sophia stopped.


“Go on! ” they cried. “What happened next? what
happened next ? ”
“ I’m going to bed now,” said Sophia
“Oh ! you must finish the story,” shouted the Baron.
“I can’t.”
“Well, I shall hold you here till it’s done.”
“That’s no good, for I haven’t invented any more, so I
can’t tell it.”
They all sighed regretfully.
“When will you finish it?” asked the Baron; “there’s
not much time, you know.”
“That’s just it. I’d have invented the end by to-morrow
night,” said Sophia ; “but now I shall probably not be here,
so it’s no good bothering to think about it.”
“Tell it at breakfast,” cried the robbers.
But Sophia got up and went to bed, and so they could not
hear her answer.
At breakfast the next morning the robbers begged her to
continue, but she told them that she had been asleep and
had not thought of the end yet. And at dinner-time she
said she had been cleaning the silver, and that had put the
story out of her head. Then the robbers begged the Baron
to give her one more night. But though he wanted to hear
the story he would not give way, for he was always obstinate.
After dinner Michael was put in charge of the children,
whilst the Baron and the robbers climbed up to the Watch
Tower and took their places.
“There’s no hope, now,” Hans whispered to Sophia.
“No; oh ! dear Hans, we must at least seem brave.”
“ Yes, I’ll try to swim with you in one arm if I can. But
it’s not likely we’ll ever get to shore. I wish we could
have said good-bye to father and mother.”
“ And now they’ll never know. But at least we’re together.”


Hans squeezed her hand.
“Come on now,” said Michael, “you must follow me to
the boathouse. I can’t keep the audience waiting - .”
In silence they went through a postern gate and down to
the lake-side. By the lake was a little boathouse. Into
this they went, and Michael ran up the sail of the boat.
“The wind will carry you to the middle of the lake,”
he said, “and then the boat will founder. Off you go.
Good-bye.”
The sail swelled in the wind, and the leaky boat went
dipping over the lake towards the deep water.
“ Here are the life-belts,” said Hans ; “ let us put them on.”
So they put them on, and then they said their prayers
and kissed one another.
Now the water was coming in faster and faster, it was
over their feet and up to their ankles. They tried to bale
it out with their hands, but still it leaked in, and the water
rose and the boat sank deeper into the lake. And now they
were far from shore, just where the lake is fathomless. And
the birds screamed above their heads.
“They will drown,” cried the kite, “they will drown.”


¥ WOLF-HOUND
" j/l ™ SAVES SOPHIA
SAVES SOPHIA


Chapter XVIII
OLGA, THE WOLF-HOUND,
SAVES SOPHIA
HE cold lake-water closed over Sophia’s head.
It roared in her ears, and she struggled and
kicked. It was like a nightmare. Hans and
the boat had disappeared, and she seemed to
be alone between the grey sky and the icy
lake-water. But the life-belt saved her from
sinking altogether, and she could keep her
head above the surface. The water was rough with wind,
and little waves broke over her head.
As she bobbed up and down, her heart full of terror and
despair, she saw a grey face coming towards her over the
ripples. Two brown eyes gazed at her intently. Sophia
gave a cry of joy, for it was Olga, the wolf-hound.
Olga seized the front of her dress, and Sophia allowed
herself to float on her back so that the dog could almost push
her through the water, But all the time she was wondering
what had happened to Hans. Was he drowned or was he
safe ?
Suddenly she felt herself seized and pulled out of the lake
by strong arms. It was Arabert dragging her to the punt,
and there, as wet and shivery as he could be, was Hans with
Ban, the young wolf-hound, by his side.
Sophia burst into tears, which were really excusable under


the circumstances, but the two dogs licked her face and gave
her their paws, and that consoled her a great deal.
“ But the Baron will only order us to be thrown in again,”
said Hans.
u No,” Arabert answered; “he enjoyed watching the
rescue, and now he will keep you at least till to-morrow so
that he can hear the end of the story. And to-morrow we
shall try to escape.”
He punted to the shore and, followed by the children, went
to the kitchen, where he dried their clothes before the big fire.
The Baron sent Michael to say, “with his compliments, that
he hoped they’d be none the worse for their little wetting,
and he hoped to see them at tea that night.”
When he had gone Arabert wrapped Sophia in a shawl.
“Go up to Aunt Hildegarde,” said he, “and ask her for
the oil of cloves, say that it is for my tooth. She’ll take you
to the medicine-chest, and, as she is shortsighted, she’ll ask
you to find it for her. You must look for the bottle marked
4 Sleeping Draught,’ and run off with it.”
Sophia did as she was told, and Aunt Hildegarde took her
to the medicine-chest.
“You can look,” she said, “for I can’t see well.” Sophia
found the sleeping draught and ran off with it.
“What shall you do with it?” she asked Arabert
“ I’ll put it in the tea,” Arabert answered ; “so I’ll make
cocoa for you and Hans and myself, and say that after the
chill you needed hot cocoa.”
Accordingly, that night Sophia and Hans took tea as usual
with the Baron, but no one alluded to the shipwreck, for they
thought that might be an awkward subject. And the children
drank cocoa, and so did Arabert.
“ I think I’ll have cocoa to-night,” said thin Michael,
pushing away his tea-cup.


“Gradually the robbers fell asleep”


This was dreadful, for the tea was drugged, but the cocoa
was not.
However, by a skilful movement Arabert poured some
Worcester Sauce into the cocoa, and made it so horrible that
Michael after one mouthful put down the cup in disgust.
“ If that’s the sort of cocoa you make,” said he, “ I’d rather
have tea.”
So he, too, drank his tea, and no one noticed the sleeping
draught, for it had no taste.
After tea they gathered round the fire and Sophia went
on with her story, but she herself could not imagine what was
the terrible mystery of the secret chamber, for after so many
dark hints it was hard to invent anything bad enough. So
she had to spin out the events and put off the moment of
telling the mystery.
But gradually the robbers fell asleep. One by one they
nodded and snored, and they rested their heads on each
other’s shoulders or upon the wolf-hounds’ backs, and thin
Michael put his head on Sophia’s knee and fell fast asleep.
So at last only Arabert was awake.
“Now,” he whispered, “take the keys from the Baron’s
pocket and come.”
Sophia stood up, but she forgot thin Michael’s head, and
it banged against a stool, and that woke him.
“Time to get up?” he asked.
“Oh, no,” said Hans; “it’s nothing, go to sleep again.
Very softly Sophia slipped her fingers into the Baron’s
pocket and drew out the keys, and on tip-toe stole out of the
hall followed by Arabert and Hans. Then they opened
the big gates, and locked them behind them. Arabert had
picketed three horses not far from the castle, and they now
mounted them, and rode off down the hill. It was bright
moonlight, so they could see the path before them, but it was


so steep and rough that one thought the horses must fall at
every step.
They rode together for several miles till they came to cross-
roads.
“Now,” said Arabert, “we must part. And we’d better
send the horses home, or the Baron will track us by the hoof-
marks. I’ll take the road to the right and you go to the left.
And may you both be happy and good.”
They all embraced one another, and at the turn of the road
they waved their handkerchiefs. This is a thing you should
never omit to do, for it shows that you don’t forget your
friends because your back is turned.
The two children went on and on and on, up and down hill
and over rocky places and boggy places. And Sophia, who
had come out in satin shoes, was almost too much tired to
go a step farther.
So they sat down by a little stream and washed their hands
and faces.
“We don’t even know the way,” said Sophia.
“That’s a fact,” answered Hans.
They both would have liked to cry, but as that seemed
foolish they only blew their noses and tried to look cheerful.
“We haven’t said our prayers,” suggested Hans, “and it’s
morning now. I said my night ones on the horse’s back.
But let us say them here, and then who knows what will
happen ? ”
So they said them in the pleasant sunshine, kneeling on
the grass.
“It is Sunday morning,” said Sophia.
“ Yes, and father and mother will be sitting in the porch,
and he will be reading her the Bible and the Morning Service.
And perhaps they are both praying that we may come back.”
At this moment a big thrush hopped between them, and


with bright eyes looked up at them before he burst into a
loud song.
“Look!” whispered Hans, “there’s a feather out of his
tail ; it is the thrush that we fed all the winter and that built
a nest near the house.”
The thrush, having sung his song, flew a few yards’ distance
and waited.
“Let us follow,” said Sophia.
So all the morning they followed the thrush until they
reached the dell where the wild strawberries grew, and now
they knew where they were, and the thrush flew away on his
own business.
By this time it was late in the afternoon, but, weary and
footsore as they were, the children ran hand-in-hand up the
hill-side towards the cottage.
With a joyful shout they crossed the little bridge, for there
in the porch stood Johann the Carver, and near him was
Babina. She had just spread the cloth on a little table on
the grass. For in summer-time they took tea outside. And
she had laid four plates, as though she expected them home.
She had made some cakes, as she always did for Sunday.
And the gnomes’ tea-set was arranged neatly on the table,
and a bunch of sulphur anemones was there to make things
complete.
Mein Herr Katzchen was washing his face in the sunshine,
and Kaiser was head and shoulders in a rabbit-hole. But
when he heard the children’s voices he scrambled out with
a very dirty face, and bounded to meet them.
“They have come home, as I knew they would,” said
Babina, and she ran to clasp them in her arms.


THE
HERMIT WOLF


<.
Chapter XIX
THE HERMIT WOLF
OW I forget exactly how long they all lived in
the little house that the gnomes built. It must
have been some years, for Sophia grew several
inches, if not quite a foot, and she learnt how
to do every sort of embroidery and knitting.
In short, she learnt to use her head and her
fingers.
“That, my dear Margaret,” said the Story Spinner, as he
peered through his glasses at the bed, “is what little girls
and boys are made for. For every boy and girl has ten
obedient workmen, ten fingers, and two of these are the
foremen, the thumbs ; if they’re well trained they’ll be worth
a chest of gold to their master or mistress, but if they’re
idle, then they’ll get into every sort of mischief. So
there’s a moral for you—‘Use your fingers.’” “Or your
flippers, if you happen to have them,” said the clockwork
seal.
The Story Spinner bent towards the fire again. He was
not going to argue the matter further.
As I said, he continued, Sophia grew and Hans grew.
But, of course, they did not become sensible at once. That
would not have been natural, and, as you shall hear, they
were once so imprudent that something very terrible might
have befallen them.


It was at Christmas time, On the Wunderberg winter was
really winter. One day, when you woke in the morning, you
would find wonderful frosty ferns over the window-panes.
And then, when the door was opened, you saw a marvellous
white world all sparkling in the sunshine. And in the white
carpet of the snow there would be little pad-marks of squirrels
and hares, the tracks of birds, and perhaps small strange
footsteps where a gnome had been out in the early morning
over the snow.
And then Christmas on the Wunderberg, that was a
wonderful time, though there were no shops nor parties nor
pantomimes up on the mountain. But in the cottage the
Christmas preparations went on, carving of toys and knitting
of mufflers and gloves, or waistcoats and socks. And there
was cake-making and pudding-making, and they had secrets
of all sorts just as the people in Wunderheim had. Then,
when Christmas Eve came, they stood at the cottage door
and heard the sound of the Cathedral bells ringing out over
the town. In the far distance the sound was like that of
heavenly bells chiming together ; all the church bells rang,
and then the three great old bells boomed out one by one,
first old Wilhelm, then old Peter, then old Paul.
The Toymaker and his family had been making presents, as
you have heard. And who were to receive these presents ?
Their kind friends the gnomes. Yes, cakes and pies, and
socks and mittens, and carvings for their museum were left
outside the cottage door. Then the door was shut, but Hans
and Sophia listened at the keyhole, for they heard whisperings
and the crunching of small boots over the snow. Then there
came a loud rat-tat-tat, and the boots scurried away.
Hans and Sophia pulled open the door. There in the
porch stood a Christmas tree, a most wonderful little
Christmas tree sparkling with frost, shining with candles,


glorious with balls and spangles. And on every little branch
hung queer little gnome presents. Tiny copper pots and
kettles, polished pebbles, letter-weights of crystal, cone
pin-cushions, strange little toys, and boxes of sweets.
No one who does not know the gnomes has seen such a
Christmas tree. So it is really useless to imagine it.
And when the tree was set on the table they stood round
it and sang carols, and they thought of the Christ-Child and
how He had been born on such a night. And they prayed
for everyone who was sad and lonely and homeless and poor.
And then they kissed each other and went to bed.
That was Christmas ; the adventure that happened to them
about this time took place after Christmas, and it came about
through tobogganing.
Have you ever been in a toboggan rushing down a steep
slope at the rate of a mile a minute? It is, if you like the
feeling, the very next best thing to being a bird. It is like
sitting on the back of the wind and rushing over the sea. In
fact, it is beyond description.
On the slope of the Wunderberg were places perfect for
a toboggan, and Master Johann made a big one for himself
and two smaller ones for the children, so that sometimes they
tobogganed separately, or sometimes they all went on the
big one.
Hans called his toboggan “The Swallow,” and Sophia
named hers “The Martin,” and Master Johann’s was “The
Kite.”
Every day they went to the fine slope on the north side of
the hill, and their toboggans rushed downwards, and that was
worth the long trudge up the hill with their toboggans behind
them.
One day Sophia lingered behind the others, though the sun
was setting. But she longed to have just one more rush


downhill. She was standing with her face turned towards
the red evening sky above the slopes of snow when something
crackled among the undergrowth close to where she stood.
At first she was startled, fearing that it might be a wolf.
But out crept a little boy on hands and knees. He stood
up and smiled at her, then nodded at the toboggan.
“ Do take me,” he said, and he had a gruff, queer little voice.
Sophia stood and stared at him. For there were no boys
but Hans on the Wunderberg. And who could this strange
little person be in his rough fur coat and cap ?
“ I can’t think who you can be,” she said at last.
He wriggled, almost as Kaiser did when he was pleased.
“I live near here, Fraulein,” he said, “and I’ve watched
you and your gracious relatives tobogganing here until I have
longed to join you. Please take me.”
“ What is your name ? ” Sophia asked.
“Wolfkin, dear Fraulein.”
“That’s a very funny name for a little boy.”
The boy said nothing, but he grinned and showed his pretty
white teeth.
“Come along, then,” said Sophia ; “you sit behind me and
hold tight.”
Together they sped down the hill. The little boy gave
queer howls of excitement and terror as they shot over the
snow, and he gasped and sneezed behind her. At the
bottom of the hill they rolled together on the snow.
“Thank you, thank you, gracious Fraulein,” said the
boy, and he jumped round her, smiling and wriggling with
pleasure in his queer way.
“Now/’ said he, “I’ll pull the toboggan up the hill.”
But Sophia always took her share of work, so she pulled
too, and together they drew the toboggan to the top of
the hill.


There stood Hans, waiting for Sophia. He had a red
muffler round his neck, and he was jumping about to keep
warm.
“Here’s a little boy,” said Sophia, all in a breath, “and
he says he lives near here, and his name is Wolfkin, and he
watches us tobogganing, so I took him with me.”
Hans stared very hard at their new acquaintance.
“Have you any brothers?” he asked.
“One,” answered the boy
“What’s his name?”
“ Bushy-tail.”
“You do seem to have queer names in your family
What’s your father’s name?”
“ Fleetfoot.”
“That’s not a Christian name. But it sounds nice
enough. Well, we’ve got to go home, but perhaps we’ll
take you out again some time.”
The boy grinned and wriggled ; then he ran off and dis-
appeared among the trees.
That night neither of the children mentioned their
new friend. They liked having little mysteries and se-
crets of their own. And this they determined should be a
secret.
“How the wolves howl to-night,” said Babina, as they
lighted their candles to go to bed.
“There is a full moon,” Johann answered; “strange
things happen when the moon is full, and perhaps the
wolves are holding a concert together.”
The next day Johann went off on his snow-shoes to a
distant village, and Babina busied herself with the baking.
In the evening when the moon was rising, the children, in
their warm coats and mufflers, went off to slide on a frozen
pool in the wood below the cottage.


Again there was a crackling of twigs, and out ran their
friend with a toboggan dragging behind him.
“ Good evening,” said he; “are you thinking of toboggan-
ing to-night by the light of the moon ? ”
“Our toboggans are in the wood-shed,” said Hans, “and
we should be going home.”
“Oh! do let’s go with him,” cried Sophia; “he’s got a
toboggan. Come along, Hans, it’ll be such fun.”
Off they went with the little fur-coated boy to the crest
of the hill. And down they slid—swish over the snow. It
was splendid.
Then another toboggan flashed by, and another. “Who
can those be?” asked Hans, as they rolled in the snow at
the bottom of the run.
“Those are my cousins,” said the boy.
In the dusk it was hard to see the flying forms that came
down the hill.
“How did they get their toboggans ? ” asked Sophia.
“They found them in a shed.”
Up the three climbed again, and still the toboggans
flashed by.
“Why do your cousins howl so?” asked Hans.
“They always howl when they’re excited.”
Without further question they shot down the hill again
and rolled in the snow at the bottom. Then Sophia gave
a cry of dismay.
“Oh!” she cried, “he’s not a boy, he’s a wolf.”
Hans stared.
But Sophia was right. Instead of the little fur-coated
boy, there stood before them a grey wolf, wagging his tail
and looking very friendly.
“A boy by day, a wolf by night,” said he, and he fawned
upon Sophia, who stroked his head and sleeked his ears.


“You shall be quite safe,” said the wolf; “they said you
should, and they asked you to supper. Do come. I’ll pro-
tect you.”
Hans looked up the hill. It was the strangest sight.
Young wolves and old wolves, their ears laid back before
the wind, were tobogganing down the hill. Some only had
bits of wood, and others simply sat on the snow and slid
as best they could. And looking at them over the pine
trees was the great golden moon.
But now all the wolves had reached the bottom of
the hill.
“Oh! I wish we were at home,” said Sophia suddenly.
Wolfkin nuzzled in her hand with his nose.
“I think they’ll be quite friendly,” he said, a little
doubtfully.
But now up ran a big wolf, wagging his tail. He grinned,
showing his big fang-teeth.
“Supper is served in the wood below there,” said he;
“will you be pleased to attend it?”
“Oh! I think we must go home, thank you,” said
Sophia hastily.
Now all the wolves had gathered round them. Their eyes
seemed full of green fire.
“What will there be for supper?” asked Hans.
“There was to have been a fat deer, and someone promised
us two lambs, that was young Wolfkin, your friend ; but some-
how they haven’t arrived, so you’ll have to take pot-luck, as
the saying is.”
Now all the wolves drew closer and licked their lips.
But Wolfkin, the young wolf, having touched Sophia’s hand
with his nose as a sign that she might trust him, disappeared
among the trees.
With a quick movement Hans pushed Sophia behind him


“They always howl when they’re excited”


against the trunk of a tree, and drew out his knife ; it was
a Swedish knife with a strong blade.
“ It depends what’s in the pot,” he answered ; ‘‘and neither
of us cares for meat that isn’t cooked very well, and I don’t
see your pot or your kettle or your kitchen fire.”
“Oh! they don’t matter,” snarled the biggest wolf; “this
is quite an informal affair ; it’s a picnic, as you might say,
and so it’s a pity to be too particular.”
Now the wolves showed their teeth, and drew half a yard
nearer.
“I think it’s time we began supper,” said the big wolf,
and the other wolves growled out, “High time, too.”
Then Hans raised his knife, and it flashed in the moonlight.
“No one has a knife or fork,” he cried, “but I have a
knife, and I shall use it too.”
“Pooh!” said the big wolf; “no one is afraid of that.”
Then Sophia spoke.
“You can’t begin supper till you’ve rung the bell and
said grace,” she remarked in such a decided voice that the
wolves seemed to believe her.
Close by there was an old cow-bell tied to a tree. The
wolves had eaten the cow a year or more ago, but the
bell they kept as a trophy to ring in case of a funeral or
a wedding among themselves.
“That’s easily settled,” said the big wolf; “the youngest
shall ring the bell, and the oldest shall say grace.”
Several wolves rushed to ring the bell. Wolves, you
must know, never observe their birthdays, and so they often
forget how old they are, and now there were at least four
all determined to be the youngest.
“Fight it out,” they growled.
Wolves enjoy a fight as much as a pantomime, so they
made a ring round the two pairs of fighters, and all sat


down to watch. But two of the number kept guard over
the children.
“At least it gives us time,” whispered Hans, ‘‘and Wolf-
kin may find help and save us at the last.”
The two victors in the two fights had then to fight each
other, and that took some time. The one who beat the
other was not the youngest at all, but as he had won the
fight he rang the bell. He rang it for three minutes, for
he thought the noise was charming.
“Now,” said the big wolf, “I shall say grace, for I
intend to be the eldest, whether I am or not.”
But he had no chance to say anything, for down the hill
came a large grey wolf, dressed in a hermit’s gown and
hood. His eyes glared green fire, but he came slowly and
majestically towards them.
“What is this, my brothers, that you do here?” he asked
in a deep rough voice.
“We prepare supper, my Father,” said the wolves very
meekly.
“But where is your supper?” asked the Hermit Wolf.
“The children of the Toymaker, they are for supper,”
answered the wolves ; but they cast their eyes down in shame.
“What? You eat human children, do you, you mis-
creants, you cur-dogs ? ”
He raised his scourge and struck right and left, snarling
savagely.
The wolves fell back before him, slinking off with tails
between their legs.
Then the Hermit Wolf stood facing the children. “Come
with me,” he said, “and I will feed you, and see you
safely home. As for you hungry curs over there, if you
come to the hermitage in a while, I will feed you with
vegetable soup and manchets of bread.”


With Sophia at one side, Hans at the other, he trotted
off down a long path that led to a little tumbled-down hermi-
tage among great rocks.
“Come in,” he commanded.
It was a little bare cell where he lived, but on the hearth
there was a fire, and on the fire a big steaming pot.
Near the fire sat Wolfkin wagging his tail. He jumped
up and came to them.
“They had agreed with me not to eat you,” he explained
eagerly, “but they broke their word because I hadn’t caught
the lamb I promised.”
“ Silentium ! ” said the Hermit Wolf; “lap up your
soup now, and don’t talk, and I will read you a pious
book.”
He loved to read aloud from the old Hermit’s book. But
being a wolf he could not really read ; in fact, to be quite
truthful, he often held the book upside down. But the
wolves did not know that he himself invented the sermon
that he seemed to be reading.
When he read he always wore the Hermit’s horn spectacles,
and this made him look very wise. No one ever dared to
cough or fidget when he was reading, and even the giddy
young wolves did not scratch or lick their pads, lest it
should interrupt him.
“ Let us read what the Fathers say about being home at
night,” the old wolf said in his gruff voice; “ah I here it
is ! That well-known Father . . . Wolfiamus says expressly,
4 Children that be not home by the setting of the sun do
deserve sore beatings from those in authority over them.
Therefore, I say, let every child be home at sundown.
Children must obey their mother, or it may hap that they
fall into the power of ravening wolves, and there may be
none to save them.’”


The wolf closed the book, and looked over his spectacles
at the children.
“Now you see the great evil of disobedience and care-
lessness ! Finish up your soup now, little girl, and you
shall have some more.”
Sophia did not much care for the soup, but she accepted
more to please him.
By this time the other wolves had slunk up to the door,
and ranged themselves in a ring. They licked their lips,
and looked very meek when the Hermit Wolf brought out
his soup pot and put it among them.
“No fighting now,” he said sternly, and he touched the
scourge that hung at his belt. None of the wolves ever
dared to disobey him, for he was the biggest wolf in that
part of Germany. And, besides, he was good, and that
gave him great influence. Not only did he preside at their
weddings, but he doctored them quite free of charge. He
kept a store of healing herbs and leaves, and every morning
sick and wounded wolves came to him to receive advice
and medicine.
And, more than this, he took charge of the dying, lest
they should be worried by the pack. He had gathered a
heap of dried leaves and moss in one corner of his cell,
and this was a comfortable bed, where any poor old wolf
might end his life in peace.
The Hermit Wolf showed Hans and Sophia all his medi-
cines, and he showed them the old Hermit’s hour-glass.
He had never been able to guess what it was, for there had
been no one to tell him. “I suppose,” he said rather
wistfully to Hans, “you don’t know Latin, my son?”
“No, Father, I don’t.”
“That’s a pity. For my great ambition is to learn that
beautiful and sonorous language. The saintly Hermit, whom


I in my horrid wickedness and hunger once devoured, was
a great Latin scholar. I used to hear him singing hymns
in that language. Once, indeed, I invited a pious pilgrim
to stay with me and teach me what he knew. He was a
clever man, and by great study I mastered the two first
declensions. Indeed, I well remember the night we parted
. . . we were sitting by the fire together ; I had tied a
cold-water bandage round my forehead to help me, for I
am, my children, but a poor scholar, having begun late in
life. Ah ! what joy there was in learning the Latin Grammar.
That very night I nearly mastered a verb. I can say it now.
‘ Amo , amaSy amat , amainus , cimatis , amant .’ That alone
is an exquisite sentence. I always pronounce it as a part-
ing blessing at our weddings or funerals.
“ However, that night we parted. He had fallen asleep
as usual. And, maybe, I was over-excited by my lessons.
I remember that I dreamt that I was once more in my
savage, unconverted state. I dreamt, too, that I sprang on
the pious pilgrim with a mad determination to devour him.
‘‘Whether I walked or talked in my sleep I cannot say,
but I awoke to hear the screams of my dear master, and
to see him rushing through the door. I followed, im-
ploring him to be calm, to return to me, but it was useless ;
he fled through the forest, shrieking for help. And lin
sorrow returned to my cell.”
Hans and Sophia were very sorry; Sophia offered to
teach him to knit or crochet or hemstitch, but it was Latin
that he wanted, and nothing else would satisfy him.
Now the wolves had run away, and the Hermit Wolf drew
his cowl over his head and told the children that he would
see them home. Wolfkin trotted behind them as they went
through the woods. Now the moon was high, peeping down
at them as they ran crunch-crunch over the snow.


They were a strange party : the old wolf in his robe and
cowl, with a child at either side of him, and the little wolf
behind them. But the moon sees strange things, as those
who read Hans Andersen know well.
At the door of the cottage he left them, and trotted off
to the woods again. And when the children saw Babina’s
anxious, pale face, they realised what their thoughtlessness
had meant, and felt sincerely sorry.


x \
JOCASTA THE JACKDAW
BRINGS NEWS


Chapter XX
JOGASTA THE JACKDAW
BRINGS NEWS
NE summer day Hans and Sophia were shelling
peas as they sat in the porch of the cottage.
“I’d like to thread them,” said Sophia,
“ and wear them round my neck. They’re
prettier than the pearl necklace I had at the
Wunderhof.”
“Oh ! I’d forgotten that you’re an Arch-
duchess,” Hans exclaimed; “some day, perhaps, you’ll go
back to the Wunderhof and wear your fine clothes. And then
you’ll drive out in a coach-and-six, and we shall all bow, and
cry ‘Hurrah! for the Archduchess Sophia.’ And then,
perhaps, you’ll come to the Kirchstrasse to buy a toy or a
gnome clock, and then you’ll see the two master-carvers of
Wunderheim, for, after father, I shall be the greatest carver
of my day, and I’ll carve a pulpit for the Cathedral as fine
as that one in the Cathedral at Antwerp.”
“Well, certainly you have a good opinion of yourself,”
said Sophia; “but, as for me, I shall be more than just an
Archduchess. I shall spin the finest thread in Germany,
and knit a sock faster than any girl that ever lived, and I
shall make such a Himmelspeise that the Queen of England
will come all the way to Wunderheim just to taste it.”
Hans laughed.
N 193


“You were known as the naughty Archduchess,” he
reminded her, “and that will be put in all the histories of
Wunderheim, and the children will learn about you, and
write essays about your biting the Prince’s leg.”
“That was ages ago,” said Sophia, “and everyone will
have forgotten it by now. Besides, I think we shall always
remain here, and, indeed, I hope so, for we’re so happy.”
Hans smiled at her.
“Yes, I hope so,” he said.
They were silent for a while, then through the still
summer air came the sound of a bell. “It’s old Wilhelm,”
cried Sophia; “something strange must have happened
that they are ringing him.”
Then all the bells in all the towers and spires and turrets
rang together with a great crash of sound.
Babina ran out of the house to listen, and Master Johann
came from his workshop.
“Something has happened in the town,” he said; “that
is certain, but I do not know how we shall hear the
news.”
At this moment three jackdaws alit on the ground before
them and gave three loud caws. Then one waddled for-
ward and bowed her head.
“Greetings,” she squawked, “ to Her Serene Highness the
Archduchess Sophia, to Master Johann the Carver, to his
excellent and honourable wife, and to this young master
here, who, I perceive, is their son.”
“Greetings to your Majesty,” answered Sophia, with a
curtsey. “ Master Johann, this is Queen Jocasta of the
Jackdaws.”
Johann bowed.
“These,” said Jocasta, nodding at the other jackdaws,
“are my Lord Chancellor and Prime Minister.”


Everyone bowed, and the jackdaws winked their eyes,
which was a sign of great politeness and intelligence.
“I have brought news,” said Jocasta, “stirring news
from the Wunderhof. The traitor, Baron von Schly, has
been deposed ; he has fled for his life, no one knows where,
and already our true Prince and Princess are returning with
the Archduke of Schonberg-Hesse, and the young Prince
Fritz, who is, they say, a marvel of beauty and intelligence.
They will pass through the town this evening, and there
will be such incredible festivities that I have made a law
that none of my jackdaws may eat more than three times’
their usual amount without a severe punishment. Already
the royal cooks are at work, and the prisoners have been
brought out of prison in order to clean the silver, the
knives, and the brasses. Flags are fluttering from the win-
dows, arches are erected, and, as you hear, the bells are
ringing.”
“Why did they depose von Schly?” asked Sophia.
“He had reduced wages to enrich himself, and lately, at
a banquet, General von Hegel was given a plated spoon
instead of a silver one. He took this as a deliberate insult,
and raised the army against the usurper. An embassy was
sent to beg our true Prince to return, and he agreed.
Accordingly, orders were given that Baron von Schly should
be executed. But he has escaped, and no one knows where
he may be, but a price is set upon his head.”
The jackdaw, having finished her news, accepted a small
cake, which she divided with her Prime Minister and Lord
Chancellor, and after many compliments and bows and
polite speeches, the birds flew back to the Wunderhof.
Then suddenly Sophia burst into tears.
Master Johann took her on his knee and begged her to
tell him why she was sad.


“Why should you cry, then, on this great day, my
Sophiekin,” he asked, “when your uncle and aunt return,
and the town rejoices ? ”
But Sophia clung to him with loud sobs.
“ I don’t want to go back to the Wunderhof,” she cried;
“ I want to stay always and always with you and Babina
and Hans.”
“But you are an Archduchess, my child, and I am just
a toymaker of the town. It is fitting that you should live
at the palace, and that I should live in my shop.”
“ Nevertheless, you love me, and I would rather stay
with you than live in the palace. Promise me you will
keep me.”
“ I will, until the Prince sends for you. But I must
tell him that you are safe. For he may think you dead.
But whatever happens will be the best, and we must be
brave about it. For by complaint and grumbling we
weaken our characters and sow nettles on our paths. So
dry your tears and let us be as happy as we can. Be
sure that we should miss you as much as you could
miss us.”
That evening they all went down to the foot of the Wunder-
berg and saw the procession pass. First there came the troops
riding on black horses with pennons waving, then came the
Officers of State, and the Lord Mayor and many carriages
full of Town Councillors and all sorts of officials, and then
a guard of honour, and after them the Prince on a big grey
horse, bowing to right and left and smiling very graciously.
After the Prince came an open carriage drawn by six
white ponies, and in that sat the Princess with her two sons
who had been born during the last three years. And she,
too, was bowing and smiling. Then there were more
soldiers, and they were the guard of the Archduke of


Schsnberg-Hesse, and after him, on a white mare, came
Prince Fritz. He was so handsome that one almost gasped
when he rode by. For his hair was like sunshine, and his
eyebrows and eyelashes were black as jet, and his eyes were
the colour of the sea on a clear evening. He was very tall,
too, much taller than Hans could ever hope to be, and in
his blue uniform he looked so beautiful that everyone cheered
and shouted when they caught sight of him. But he did
not bow, for that tired him, and he did not smile, for he
was bored by all this fuss and noise.
‘‘Well,” said Hans, “he’s a fine-looking fellow. And
it’s strangfe that you should not want to be betrothed to
him.”
But Sophia only shook her head. Her eyes and nose were
red with crying, and she did not feel at all happy.
When the procession had passed they climbed up the hill
again to their own peaceful cottage. How pleasant it looked in
the evening light, with the long shadows of the pine trees
across the grass and the heads of the wild flowers lit up by
the sunset light I And now the sound of the bells and the
deep voice of old Wilhelm sounded far away. And the
splash and gurgle of the stream and the whisper of the pines
were pleasanter to Sophia.
So she wandered off by herself, with Kaiser at her heels,
and her way led her close to the cave where first they had
lived when they fled from Wunderheim.
Near the entrance Kaiser stood still, his nose pointed,
his tail stiff. Then he growled savagely and advanced a
little. Sophia stared about her for some time. But
suddenly she saw two eyes staring at her through the
brushwood, and a pale face that glimmered there. With
a cry of terror she turned to rush away, but a ragged,
limping figure sprang from the cave and flung itself before


her, grasping her feet. Kaiser flew at the wretched man,
but Sophia caught the dog by the collar.
“Help, help 1 ” wailed the man, sobbing and writhing
before her; “get me a little food, lam starving. See, I am
all scratched and wounded and worn out. Have pity on
me, gracious little Fraulein.”
“Who are you?” she asked.
“A hunted man, who will be killed if he’s caught.”
He raised a dirty, miserable face to Sophia, but with a
cry she exclaimed, “Why! you are Baron von Schly.”
He stared at her ; his limbs were trembling, for now he
did not expect mercy.
“You are the Archduchess Sophia,” he whispered; “I
thought you were dead.”
“No,” said Sophia; “but I might have been if you’d
had your way.”
There was a sound below them on the hill, and Kaiser
barked.
“Oh!” sobbed von Schly; “they will catch me.”
But Sophia pushed him down, and began piling brush-
wood over him until he was quite concealed, then she sat
down and took out her knitting.
Two soldiers burst through the trees. They saluted
Sophia.
“Has a man passed here?” they asked breathlessly.
“No one has passed me since I sat down here,” said
Sophia; “but one might have gone by that goat-path over
there.”
Without further word the two men rushed off in the direc-
tion she had named. After some time Sophia pulled away
the brushwood and let von Schly get up.
“You are safe for the moment,” she said; “but you had
better go to the cave now till it is dark.”


A ragged figure flung itself before her


“I have had no food to-day,” he repeated.
“I will bring you some to-night,” she said; “ but I had
better not tell anyone that you are here, so you must wait
till we have gone to bed. Then I’ll climb out of my
window, and bring you food and milk, and try to bind up
your wounds, and you must escape as best you can.”
True to her word, that night Sophia took a jug of milk
and all the food she could find and climbed out of her
window, and in spite of the darkness she went to the cave
and gave them to von Schly. And she got water from the
stream and washed and dressed his wounds as best she
could. And she led him over the hill by a lonely way
where he might be safe.
“You are an angel,” said von Schly; “and some day
I will repay you.”
But he never did, as far as I know. For people of that
kind are always more given to promises than to per-
formances. Besides, no one ever knew what became of
him, whether he escaped and repented, or whether he lived
his old bad life in some new place. But we may hope that
he repented.


THE ROYAL COACH
COMES FOR SOPHIA


Chapter XXI
THE ROYAL COACH
GOMES FOR SOPHIA
OW that the Prince had returned to the Wun
derhof, Master Johann could go back in safety
to the shop in the Kirchstrasse. And sorry
as he was to leave the gnomes’ cottage, still
he loved the old Toyshop in Wunderheim,
and his kind neighbours, and all the pleasant
coming and going of the town, the bustle in
the market-place, the services in the Cathedral, and the
interests of the town, and so he decided to return.
“ But in the summer we can come and stay here some-
times,” he said; “so we will leave everything as we found
it, and perhaps the gnomes will put in a caretaker for us.”
When the moment of departure came they were very sorry
to leave the cottage. And Sophia was, perhaps, the saddest.
For who could say what would happen to her now ?
She and Hans went slowly down the hill, turning every
now and again to take a last look at this and that familiar
scene.
Hans was leading Nanette the goat, and Sophia carried
Mein Herr Katzchen, who had grown into a very fat cat.
Kaiser could take care of himself, and so he trotted beside
them. It was a long walk into Wunderheim, and they were
glad to reach the shop in the Kirchstrasse and to find every-


thing made ready for them there by kind Mistress Schmidt,
the baker’s wife.
“Why, how Sophia has grown,” she cried, “she’s quite
a woman I ” and she kissed her on both cheeks.
And there was apple-faced Gretchen, who had grown so
tall and pretty, and there, too, were all the other Schmidts,
who also had grown so that one could hardly recognise
them. And Master Schmidt the Baker clapped everyone on
the back and laughed his jolly laugh, and welcomed them
home in the heartiest way in the world. And it was pleasant
enough to look in at the shop-windows again, and to go
down to the river and sit on the steps where they used to fish.
“But still,” said Sophia, “I wish we were back in the
gnomes’ cottage, for we were so safe among the pine trees,
and everything was quiet and happy.”
“Oh ! but you’ll be happy here too,” Hans answered.
Before Sophia could answer there came down the street
two figures on horseback, and everyone paused to see them
pass, for one was General von Hegel and the other was the
beautiful Prince Fritz.
The youngest little Schmidt was so amazed at the fine
sight that she stood with her thumb in her mouth right in
front of the horses. And Prince Fritz had to swerve aside
so as not to ride over her. His face flushed with anger,
and he cut at the child with his whip.
“Out of my way, you beggar girl!” he shouted, and
galloped off beside the General.
Hans scowled after him.
“I’d like to fight him,” he said.
The next day was market day in the big Cathedral Square.
And this was a charming sight in Wunderheim, for all the
women wore their white starched caps and embroidered
aprons, and sat before their stalls or their baskets, knitting


and gossiping with one another. And you could buy such
things there ! Cherries and cheeses and butter and eggs,
vegetables and fruit and flowers, earthenware pots and cups,
carvings of all sorts, toys, and glass beads of every colour
in the rainbow. There was nothing you could not buy there
for a pound or for a penny, and in the summer sunshine
there was not a more delightful place in all Germany.
On this morning Sophia, in a fine starched cap, was allowed
to take charge of Johann’s stall, for he was busy carving.
And she and Gretchen Schmidt were at neighbouring stalls,
so that they could laugh and talk together. It was Sophia’s
business to show off the toys, the bowing birds and dancing
bears and all the rest of them. And her stall was crowded
with children looking on with wide delighted eyes at what she
showed.
She was so busy that she did not notice that someone
else was watching her until, raising her eyes, she saw Prince
Fritz staring at her.
“Show me ,” he said, “and perhaps I’ll buy some-
thing.”
So Sophia showed all the toys, but she did not laugh
and talk as she had done with the children.
“Why don’t you talk and smile and get me to buy your
toys?” he asked.
“Your Highness must do as you please,” she said, and
wished he would leave her alone.
“You don’t talk like a market woman,” said Fritz. “I
know you’re not.”
He bent forward and stared at her.
“ I know who you are,” he said.
Sophia looked at him with angry brown eyes.
“lama market girl,” she answered.
“So you may seem, but then you’re a peacock in crow’s


i i
ijfef ML
f n a I x
m\ [tlry
* o"^
Raising her eyes she saw Prince Fritz


feathers. I haven’t forgotten the Archduchess Sophia as
easily as that.”
“ What does it matter who I am ? ” she asked. “Go away.”
Fritz laughed his provoking little laugh.
“ There! You’re just as bad-tempered as ever,” he said.
“I believe you’re still ‘ Naughty Sophia.’ It is fun to tease
you. I wish you were at the Palace now. I’m so dull
there, they are all so old and grumpy, and I’m bored to
death.”
“Then go back to Schonberg-Hesse,” suggested Sophia,
none too politely.
She turned to attend to a new customer, and Fritz sauntered
away.
That evening she and Gretchen went home together,
comparing their gains and feeling very happy in the evening
sunlight and in the warm weather.
They turned together into the Kirchstrasse, which seemed
full of a golden mist, for the light shone down between
the houses. And there outside the toyshops in all its
splendour stood the royal coach, outriders, and white horses
and all.
Sophia gasped and clutched Gretchen’s arm, but they
saw Hans coming to meet them.
“Oh! Sophia,” he said, “they’ve come for you. Isn’t
it dreadful? And father says you must go. But if he’d
not said it, I’d have hidden you. For you’re my friend,
and I don’t see why they should take you.”
Sophia was very pale. But she never thought of disobeying
Master Johann, so she went on to the Toyshop and straight
into the little back parlour where they had all been so happy.
There was Babina in tears, and Master Johann was talking
to an officer in splendid uniform.
The fine officer bowed very low, and kissed her hand—


although it was none too clean after long hours in the
market.
“ I have come for your Serene Highness,” he said.
“ Yes, the Prince has sent for you, Sophia, and we must
let you go,” said Master Johann, but he looked very sad.
They wrapped a cloak round Sophia and took her to
the coach. All the little Schmidts were out in the street,
looking on with amazement at the fine horses and outriders.
And then Sophia kissed them all good-bye, and the grand
officer had to wait, twirling his moustache, till everyone had
been kissed.
“I will save you yet,” whispered Hans, “and bring you
back to the Toyshop,” and he pressed into Sophia’s hands
a little gnome he had just carved. That was for a token
between them.
Then Sophia climbed into the carriage, but until they
were out of the Kirchstrasse she kept her head out of the
window, and waved her damp pocket-handkerchief to all
those she loved who were standing there in the sunset light.
She had been sad when she left the Wunderhof, but now
that she returned she was sadder than ever. They passed
through the Cathedral Square and by the Gnomes’ Fountain,
then over the bridge. Oh ! how she loved Wunderheim in
the misty sunset light, with all its spires and towers and
turrets and chimneys dark against the glowing sky.
“ Good-bye,” she whispered as they left the town ; “good-
bye, beautiful Wunderheim.”


5
HOW SOPHIA SPOKE IN
THE COUNCIL CHAMBER


Chapter XXII
HOW SOPHIA SPOKE IN
THE COUNCIL CHAMBER
OPHIA was brought to the Prince and Princess
in their private room. She did not look like
an Archduchess in her homespun dress and
embroidered apron. But they kissed her
kindly enough and said she had grown.
And so she had, to be sure. The fresh
mountain-air of the Wunderhof had made
her so tall and healthy and strong that the Princess looked
pale beside her.
And then Sophia had to see her little cousins, the young
princes, and she liked them, for they were babies, and it was
fun to play with them.
The Princess begged Sophia to make herself as elegant and
charming as possible, and to do her best to please Prince Fritz.
“For,” said she, “we owe our safety to his father, and
the best return we can make is to please his son, who is the
apple of his eye. So do keep your temper with him and
don’t make a scene, for scenes are really more than one can
bear after one is thirty-five.”
Sophia curtsied and retired, and a waiting-maid showed
her to her room, which was not as grand as her former room.
For now the little princes were nearer to the throne than she
was, and so no one minded about her so much.
o 209


The maid remained to dress her and to curl her hair. Sophia
had to wear a dress that belonged to the Princess; it was
shortened for her, but it squeezed her waist, and that is most
uncomfortable.
Now that she was so magnificent she did not feel like
herself; she felt stiff and strange and unable to move freely.
“Well, that is better,” said the waiting-maid, looking at
her through half-shut eyes; “now we see the Archduchess.
The only thing to regret is that the Serene Highness has
freckles on her nose, but perhaps elder-flower water will take
them away.”
“Don’t bother about them,” said Sophia, and she rustled
down the corridor, led by a gorgeous page, who left her
with an usher, who left her with an officer, who conducted
her to another officer, who presented her to a page, who then
opened a door and said all her names and titles in a loud,
clear voice.
In the state-room were the Archduke and Prince Fritz.
When all the formal greetings were over, they trooped down
two and two to the banquet. Of course, Sophia had to go
with Fritz, and as she had promised to behave nicely, she
made herself as agreeable as she possibly could, even to the
extent of making an apple swan and an orange water-lily
at dessert.
“Really,” said Fritz, “you are more amusing than all
these Court ladies. They say silly things to me, and stare
because I’m so handsome; but I find you quite different,
though it’s a pity you look so well, for I prefer to see people
a little pale—it looks more refined.”
“Oh, that’s rubbish!” cried Sophia. “They’re only pale
because they stay in the palace so much and go to bed so
late. Down in Wunderheim we admire people who look
healthy and strong.”


“How
they danced in the country dance! ”


“ Pooh ! don’t talk of the vulgar people in Wunderheim;
who considers what they think ? ”
Sophia’s eyes flashed with anger, but she remembered her
promise and said nothing. They had ices for dinner that
night, and that was, of course, delightful. Sophia had a
Neapolitan ice in three colours. It was wrapped in lacy
paper, and as it was the first of that kind she had tasted,
she found it easier to forget her annoyance with Fritz.
After the banquet there was a ball, and Sophia, who had
not forgotten how to dance, made Fritz exert himself more
than was his custom.
“You make me dizzy,” he said. “It’s a pity you’re so
active. It would be more refined to show a little weariness.”
“You had too much supper,” answered Sophia bluntly,
and she went off to dance with a young officer.
How they danced in the country dance ! Fritz, who had
a sick headache, wondered how Sophia could run and hop
and whirl about so cheerfully and seem none the worse.
But when she had done, he made her sit beside him and
fan him.
He looked quite ill by this time, so she was sorry for him,
and took him to an alcove where he could lie upon a sofa.
And she dipped her handkerchief in iced water and laid it
on his forehead, and then she told him a story until he fell
asleep.
“What a charming couple they make,” said the Archduke,
“and how fitting it is that she should nurse him when he
is ill! The poor, dear boy is not strong, so it’s a comfort
that he has found someone to look after him.”
The Princess was shocked at this. She did not really like
Fritz, but she had to keep that to herself.
After the ball, Sophia was summoned to the private Council
Room. Two officers conducted her there. The Council


Room was panelled with old carved oak; it was very
dark, even though candles gleamed here and there in silver
sconces.
Round the big oak table sat the Prince and the Princess,
the Archduke, the Prime Minister, and the Lord Chancellor.
At one end of the table were two chairs, with gilded crowns
on the backs of them. In one of these, his face very pale
against the dark velvet of the cushions, sat Fritz. The other
was for Sophia.
She sat down there and waited for someone to speak.
The Prince coughed a little and rubbed his eyeglass with
a silk handkerchief.
“You know, my dear Sophia,” he said at last, “how
much we owe the Archduke of Schonberg-Hesse, who has
sheltered us in our time of need and restored us to the
Wunderhof.
“ More than this, he has most kindly consented to forgive
a certain very shocking moment in the past, when you bit
However, we needn’t allude to that again. But, to be
brief, we all feel that nothing could be nicer than a betrothal
between you and our dear Fritz, who is so—er —so accom-
plished and elegant a youth.”
Fritz smirked a little, even though he felt so ill. But
Sophia stared at her uncle with round, horrified eyes.
“Of course,” continued the Prince, “you are too young
to be married for many years yet. But a betrothal is, as
you know, most solemn, and the ceremony will be celebrated
this day next week with the greatest solemnity and splendour.
And you will then promise to marry Fritz, when you are
old enough. And, indeed, you should feel yourself fortunate
to have secured so excellent a match. And we hope that
you will prove yourself kind, obedient, and sweet-tempered,
and worthy of your new position.”


But Sophia rose. Her face was very pale and her hands
trembled.
“Oh I ” she said, “ I cannot be betrothed to Fritz ; I shall
never marry anyone but Hans when I’m grown up.”
“What nonsense is this?” asked the Prince angrily. “If
this Hans is son of the Toymaker, such a match would
never do for an Archduchess.”
“ But an Archduchess may resign her position,” said Sophia.
“I know it is so, for I have read in history that my great-
aunt married a poor flute-player, and wandered about the
country with him, and they could not prevent her. And
Hans will be a Master Carver some day, and I would rather
live in a toyshop than in the Court of Schonberg-Hesse.”
“This is mad talk,” cried the Prince; “you must go
to bed.”
So Sophia was sent to bed, and everyone said how naughty
she was; but the dressmakers sat up half the night embroider-
ing the beautiful dress she was to wear at her betrothal.
The next day heralds on piebald horses rode into the
Town Square and proclaimed to the north and south and
east and west that the Archduchess Sophia Marie-Th6r£se
Amalie Marguerite Hildegarde Brunnhild Gertrude Olga
Frederika Josephine of Wunderheim was to be betrothed to
Prince Friedrich Maximilian Thoma Franz Joseph Johann
Peter Androvsky Boris Paul Oscar Wilhelip Ernst of
Schonberg-Hesse in the following week in Wunderheim
Cathedral.
A notice to this effect was pasted on the Cathedral door,
where all the little Schmidts could read it, and where Hans
read it too.
“That shall never be,” said Hans to himself. Though
how he could prevent it was not easy to say. For Sophia
was guarded by ladies-in-waiting and by attendants of all


sorts, who sat with her and walked with her, and told her
how fortunate she was to be the bride of the beautiful Prince.
And every day Fritz paid her a call, and sometimes he
brought her fine presents, but she did not care for these a
quarter as much as for the little carved gnome that Hans
had given her.
When Fritz came to call he sat with his heels on a satin
chair, for he had no manners when his father was not watch-
ing, and he sucked peppermints all the time, and made Sophia
tell him stories or show him tricks.
“We shall be very happy when we’re married,” he would
say; “for I shall lie in a hammock all day long and suck
sweets, and you shall tell me stories. But you mustn’t knit,
for it tires my eyes to see your fingers go so fast.”
“I shall never marry you, or be betrothed to you,” said
Sophia, “so be assured of that.”
But Fritz only laughed at this.
“They will make you,” he said. “The preparations are
all made; I went down this very morning to taste the
almond icing on the cake. And your dress is ready too.
You should be grateful to marry anyone half as handsome
and grand as I am.”
“ Pooh ! ” was all Sophia said to this.
were only three days now before the betrothal, but
there was no word from Hans. Sophia felt that she must
send some message to him. So she wrote “Do help me”
on a tiny slip of paper, and put it in the mouth of the
carved gnome. Then she asked the friendliest of her waiting-
maids to take it to Hans at the Toyshop. But though the
maid promised, she was really a traitor and she did not mean
to keep her word. So she carried the gnome down to the
Toyshop, but she took the paper from its mouth and threw it
into the river. Then she found Hans and said to him:


“The Archduchess returns you this, for she has such fine
presents that she does not want a thing - like this in her
room. And she says, please not to send her anything - again,
for she has had enough of the Toyshop.”
Hans said nothing, but he did not believe all this, for he
knew Sophia too well, and he knew that she would neither
say nor think such things.
Then the maid went back to Sophia.
“What message have you brought?” Sophia asked.
“Oh!” answered the untruthful girl, “they had hardly
time to speak to me. There was great festivity there, such
rejoicings as you never saw, for the Toymaker’s son has been
betrothed to Gretchen Schmidt, the Baker’s daughter. You
never saw a pair look so happy and so loving. Of course,
they are too young to be married, but they can wait. Anyway,
they were happy enough, and so were the two families.”
“Oh ! ” said Sophia, “how unkind of Hans never to have
told me. For I would have sent presents to him and to
Gretchen, for, of course, I hope they’ll be happy. But did
he send no message ? ”
“Yes, he sent his humble respects to her Serene Highness,
and said how delighted he was to hear of the approaching
betrothal between her and Prince Fritz.”
“That doesn’t sound like Hans,” said Sophia, and she
began to doubt the maid.
So that night she wrote a long message and sent it up
the chimney when no one was looking.
Three hours afterwards, when everyone but Sophia was
asleep, a jackdaw flew in at the open window and lit on her
pillow.
“Now,” said Sophia, “you must whisper, or someone will
wake and hear you, your Majesty.”
But jackdaws cannot whisper, so Sophia had to arrange


the bedclothes in a sort of tent over their heads, so that
they could talk without being heard.
“Serene Highness,” said the jackdaw, “I got your letter,
for I was sitting on the chimney as it flew up. And as you
directed, I went off straight to the Toyshop to inquire the
news. And all was false as false could be ; there was no
betrothal there to-day, and your message was not in the
gnome’s mouth. I had a long talk with Hans, who is clearly
a person worth talking to, and together we have resolved
that you shall never be betrothed to Prince Fritz, who is,
as I have heard from a cousin jackdaw at Schonberg-Hesse,
renowned for his greed, laziness, and unkind ways. Beauti-
ful as he is in face, in character he is a combination of
‘Cruel Frederick,’ ‘Fidgety Phil,’ ‘ Suck-a-thumb,’ and
all the worst characters in history. Therefore I, Jocasta,
Queen of the Jackdaws, have resolved that you shall not be
betrothed to him.”
Sophia kissed the jackdaw and thanked her warmly
“Courage, Serene Highness,” squawked the bird and flew
away.


4
HANS HIDES IN
THE CLOCK


h. -
Chapter XXIII
HANS HIDES IN THE CLOCK
OW, Master Franz was the greatest
in Wunderheim, if not in the world. And
Master Franz had made the wonderful clock that
the town of Wunderheim was to present to the
Archduchess Sophia.
It stood among the other clocks like a giant
among dwarfs. And it told you not only the
time of day, but the day of the month, the month itself,
the year, and the phases of the moon. And the moon had a
face of real gold with diamond eyes. There had never been
anything finer in the workshop. The clock was to go up to
the Wunderhof on the eve of the betrothal. But all the day
before this the people of the town came in to look at it.
Never had they seen such wonders of clock-work and inlaid
wood and beautiful polish. And fat Master Franz was justly
proud, for the clock was almost like a child to him, and that
is how true craftsmen feel.
All day Hans hung about the shop admiring the splendid
clock.
“That boy is wise, ” said Master Franz; “he knows how
to value good work. Some day he will be a Master Carver
like his father.”
There Hans lingered among big clocks and little clocks,
fine old grandfather clocks, and clocks so small that you could
carry them in your pocket And they all told the time and


nothing else, which was a good thing as you shall hear, for
otherwise they might have told a secret.
Now it was not all admiration that kept Hans there—it was
partly a plan. But he could not carry out his plan until
everyone had left the workshop, and that did not come about
for a long while. But at last Master Franz had to go out
to speak to someone at the door, and in that moment Hans
opened the door of the clock-case and got inside. There was
room for him there, because the weights were wound up to
the top. But it was very hot, and he could hardly breathe.
However, one must face these things sometimes.
In a little while workmen came in.
“ Lift it very gently,” said Master Franz, “ and lay it flat
on the cart.”
“ I’ll lock the case and send the key in a jewelled box
to the Mayor, who will present it to the Archduchess,” con-
tinued the clock-maker; “but she needn’t unlock it at all,
for all is going well. But if it should not work properly,
the clock must be returned to me to set it right before it
goes to the Court at Schonberg-Hesse.”
Then the workmen hoisted the clock and carried it to the
cart, and up it went to the Wunderhof. But poor Hans was
so hot and cramped that he nearly cried out that he was
there. But he did not, and that made all the difference.
All the time Sophia, dressed up in velvet and Mechlin
lace, was at a great reception. But she was so tired and
anxious and hot that she found it hard to stifle her yawns.
After the simple, healthy life of the Wunderberg the Court
was very fatiguing.
So Sophia went to an open window just to yawn and cool
her cheeks.
“Caw —caw, greetings, Serene Highness,” said a voice
close to her ear.


“Hans opened the door of the clock-case and got inside”


There was the jackdaw fluttering with excitement.
“ Listen,” said she, “and forget nothing I tell you. This
very day the town of Wunderheim presents you with a clock.
The Mayor will come with it to make a speech, and he will
give you the key.
“ Now, when the clock comes, you must order them to carry
it to your private sitting-room. And at the earliest moment
when you are alone you must open the clock-case with the
key, for Hans is hidden inside.
“Hush! do not interrupt, for I am talking business.
Now, as soon as he is free, Hans will tell you all his plans.
I dare say the whole scheme is wild enough. But never mind,
if it succeeds. I shall keep guard at your sitting-room chim-
ney all to-day. If you need me, kneel by the hearth and
whistle three times. I shall hear you and come.”
She flew away, and Sophia returned to the assembly.
That very evening the clock arrived, and with it the Mayor
in his Sunday clothes and his fine gold chain.
“It must go to my sitting-room,” said Sophia, “for then
I shall hear the chimes when I am in bed, for my bedroom
is next door.”
Fritz raised many objections, as he always did, but Sophia
won the argument, and the clock, heavy as it was, was carried
to her sitting-room. Then everyone admired it, and the
Mayor made a fine speech, a very fine speech indeed. It took
a quarter of an hour to make, but then one has not always
the chance of addressing princes and princesses, and why not
make the best of it when one has ?
But the Mayor said nothing about the key. The truth
was he had forgotten it.
“Isn’t there a key?” Sophia asked, when she had said
“thank you” very suitably and prettily.
“Alas! alas! Serene Highness,” cried the Mayor, “the


key is still on my table. I will send it up with all haste
on my return.”
It was a long while before Sophia was alone, for all the
courtiers had to examine and to praise the marvellous clock.
When at last they had gone, Sophia locked her doors and
with a sob of excitement she went to the clock and spoke
with her mouth to the keyhole.
“Oh! dear Hans,” she called, “are you there?”
But there was no answer. Sophia was sure that Hans
was dead. Remembering that she still had a friend, she went
to the hearth and whistled three times. A minute afterwards
the jackdaw appeared at the open window.
“Oh, great chimneystacks ! ” she exclaimed; “what is
the matter, Serene Highness, that you look so pale?”
“Hans is dead,” said Sophia; “he does not answer when
I speak, and the Mayor has forgotten the key, it’s on his
table. Oh ! dear, your Majesty, do fly and find it, and
let us get poor Hans out of the clock.”
Without a word the jackdaw disappeared. She flew straight
to the Mayor’s house and peeped in at every window until she
saw a table where a little case was lying. But the window
of this room was shut, and that made matters difficult.
However, Jocasta the jackdaw was not easily defeated.
She flew in at the next window where the Mayor’s wife
was doing her knitting.
The Mayor’s wife screamed; but Jocasta did not heed
her. She was already on the Mayor’s table with the key
case in her beak. And like an arrow she sped through the
next room, and out by the open window. Her poor beak
ached with the weight of the key, but she tried not to think
of that. And in a little while she was in Sophia’s room.
Sophia had to take the case from her and close her beak,
for it was nearly dislocated.


With a trembling hand Sophia put the key in the keyhole,
and opened the clock-case.
“Nonsense!” cried the jackdaw; “you are losing your
head. Come! where is your sense? Pull him out and
sprinkle water on his face. He’s only fainted from the
heat and lack of air.”
Sophia was very strong, and she pulled Hans out of the
clock and laid him on the floor. Then she brought water
from her bedroom and sprinkled his face, and Jocasta stood
close to him flapping her wings like a fan.
“Burnt feathers,” said she, “are the regular cure.”
And so saying she pulled three feathers from her breast
and held them to the candle. Then she waved them under
Hans’s nose.
He opened first one eye and then the other.
“Oh! gracious, what a smell of feathers,” he exclaimed.
Sophia hugged him.
“You are alive,” she cried ; “dear, dear Hans, I thought
you were dead. ”
“I thought so too,” said Hans, and he sat up and stared
about him.
“ Pooh ! ” the jackdaw remarked ; “that would be a very
poor adventure.”
But now there was a knock at the door.
“Who is that?” Sophia called.
“It is Ermingarde, Serene Highness, ready to dress you
for the ball to-night.”
“Come back in a quarter of an hour,” Sophia answered.
Then Hans and Sophia sat down on the sofa, and she
gave him chocolates and crystallised cherries until he felt
much better. Jocasta the jackdaw perched on the mirror,
where she could watch them both.
“Now,” said Hans, “the point is that as every door is


guarded you can only escape in the clock. We’ll stop the
clock working, and you must say that it will not go on, and
that Master Franz must send for it to-morrow morning. That
will be just before the betrothal ceremony.
“ You will, of course, go to your room as a bride should.
You will be alone. Then you must hide in the clock and
be carried away by the workmen. You will be very hot
and breathless, but that one cannot help. You must have
the key with you, so that you can lock or unlock it on
the inside.”
“ But if I faint as you did ?
“Well, I will come to the workshop and contrive to
force the lock.”
“How about Master Franz? He will find me there.”
“Try to escape when he is not in. I shall be waiting
near, and I will hide you in the great cupboard in our shop.
I could keep you there for some time. And at the first
chance we’ll escape to the Wunderberg and seek shelter
with the gnomes, or we’ll set off to find our fortunes.”
“And how do you propose to escape, my bold young
friend ? ” asked the jackdaw, when she had a chance to speak.
“There, your Majesty can help me,” said Hans; “for I
must climb up the chimney and go down by another chimney ;
if anyone catches me I shall say I came with the clock,
and lingered in the Palace and so missed my companions.
That is the best I can do.”
“ Bravo ! ” said the jackdaw ; “you have a fine courage.”
So Hans kissed Sophia and told her to keep up her heart,
and he then climbed up the chimney. He cried “Safe!”
when he was at the top. They were very wide chimneys,
and he could scramble from thence to the roof.
Then the maid returned to dress Sophia for the splendid
ball that had been arranged for the eve of the betrothal.


What a ball that was ! Everyone was dressed as a flower,
and the dancers looked as fine as the people in “ Flora’s
Feast.” And there were candles everywhere, and Chinese
lanterns, and the floors were so slippery that only those
trained in deportment could cross them at all. Everything
was splendid, and the crackers at supper contained real
jewellery.
Of course, Sophia had to dance with Fritz, for the world
expected that. Sophia was a sweet pea in pink and white,
and Fritz was a Crown Imperial, all in golden satin, with
a cap of green leaves.
But Fritz was almost as pale as this paper, and his hands
trembled. He seemed greatly upset.
“What has happened to you?” asked Sophia; “I think
you look very ill. Are you afraid of to-morrow?”
“ Hush ! ” said Fritz; “ I will tell you of something
terrible, if you come to this window. To-night in my room
I saw—l saw ”
“Who?” asked Sophia, regardless of the grammar book.
“ Knecht Ruprecht himself.”
Now Knecht Ruprecht is the German bogy-man ; and
at his name Sophia herself grew paler.
“Oh! Fritz, where did he come from?” she asked.
“ He came down the chimney—yes, as I was looking in the
glass in my room I heard a queer noise, and I looked round
and there I saw his feet coming out of the fire-place. And
then —and then —something black came right out and rushed
across the room and disappeared through the door.”
Sophia nearly laughed. For now she remembered that this
must have been Hans who was making his escape.
But they had no chance for further talk, for at this moment
General von Hegel approached them. By the hand he led
his daughter, who to-night made her first appearance at


Court. She was dressed as a wild rose, and when he saw
her Fritz forgot Knecht Ruprecht altogether. For she was
so lovely that everyone looked plain when she came in.
Never in her life had Sophia seen so exquisite a girl.
And it was no wonder that the General looked proud when
he presented her to the Archduchess.
Sophia wanted to say “Oh I ” but Archduchesses never
do say that, even on big occasions, so she stared very
hard instead. When she had gone Fritz turned to Sophia.
“ Oh! how plain you are,” he said rudely. "Now, as
I have to be betrothed to you to-morrow, I shall dance
all to-night with that pretty Fraulein von Hegel, who is
far prettier than you and probably much nicer.”
Sophia only laughed at this, and that annoyed Fritz very
much. He went away at once to dance with lovely Fraulein
von Hegel. But Sophia did not mind at all. She danced
with the younger officers, who were as lively as crickets and
as active as grasshoppers.
“It is a pity,” they said among themselves, “that she
should be betrothed to Fritz of Schonberg-Hesse.”
But they did not know about the clock.


' '' '
'
HOW SOPHIA WENT BACK
TO WUNDERHEIM


Chapter XXIV
HOW SOPHIA WENT BACK
TO WUNDERHEIM
HE next day was the day of the betrothal.
The white horses wore their finest harnesses,
and everything was ready for the journey down
to the Cathedral.
The streets were hung with flags and gar-
lands, and early in the morning the Cathedral
was full, for this was a great sight, and every-
one, being in holiday clothes, wished to see and to be seen
Already the bells rang : only old Wilhelm was silent, for
he waited till the betrothal was over before he boomed out
above the town. Everywhere one saw flowers and smiling
faces and fine clothes. It was a great day in Wunderheim,
and the street hummed with talk, for everyone wanted to
describe the Archduchess Sophia, whether he had seen her
or not. Indeed, few knew what she was like. For Master
Johann had kept Sophia’s rank a secret, and only the little
Schmidts had a notion that she was an Archduchess. So
the townspeople all disagreed about the colour of her eyes,
of her hair, about her height, her complexion, and about
the size she took in shoes. But they were very cheerful
about it, for would they not see her for themselves when
she walked down the long aisle of the Cathedral ?
But Master Franz, the Clockmaker, was in a great state


of fume and fuss about the clock he had made. Hans had
brought him word from the Palace that the clock had
stopped, and would he please send for it on the morning
of the betrothal, because the Archduchess desired that it
should be put right at once, and then sent on to await the
arrival of the royal pair at Schonberg-Hesse.
“She played with the works. That’s why it stopped,”
said Master Franz angrily; “or perhaps the workmen moved
it carelessly. Come, Hans, you are a good clever lad ; will
you go with them to the Palace and see to the removal of
the clock ? I can trust you, for you are a carver, and you
know how to treat delicate work.”
Of course Hans was delighted. This was just what he
had wanted.
“Yes,” he said, “I’ll go.”
So up he went to the Palace in the Clockmaker’s cart with
three workmen.
But here everything was in commotion. Even the sentries
looked excited. Pages were rushing hither and thither,
officers were looking behind chairs and under tables. The
whole Court seemed engaged in a vast game of Hide-and-
seek. Stout generals were crawling about, peeping in
corners and in cupboards, waiting - maids were hunting
behind sofas and ottomans, and no one seemed to have time
to explain anything.
“We’ve come for the clock,” said Hans to a footman.
“Oh! well, you know the way, you must go and get it,”
said the man ; “we have no time to attend to you.”
“Has something been lost?” asked Hans.
“Something been lost! The Archduchess herself is lost,
and the procession starts for the Cathedral in less than an
hour. The whole world is being turned inside out, but
no one can find her. And she cannot have left the Wun-


derhof, for the sentries would have seen her. Never has
such a thing been heard of. There ! don’t keep me talking;
go and get your clock and be off.”
So Hans and the workmen marched upstairs and into
Sophia’s sitting-room. Here the hunt was the hottest. It
was like Hunt-the-thimble. Everyone was peering and
poking about. And there stood the clock in one corner.
But it did not tell its secret.
“Haven’t you looked in the clock?” a workman asked
one of the pages. Hans trembled.
“Well, we might have looked there. But it’s locked, and
that proves that she can’t be there.”
So the clock was lifted and carried downstairs, and no one
minded at all, or even thought about it, for everyone was
looking for the Archduchess.
The cart went slowly down the long hill to the town, and
how the bells rang! Soldiers now lined every street, for
the procession was expected at any moment. And Hans
had hard work to get permission to drive to the Clock-
maker’s.
It was with a sigh of relief that he saw the big clock
lifted from the cart and carried to the workshop. But
he was not pleased when he saw Master Franz waiting
there.
“I thought you’d gone to the Cathedral, Master Franz,”
said Hans.
“No, no, the streets are altogether too crowded. I would
rather stay here with my clocks. Come, give me the key,
and let me see what’s wrong with this one.”
“ I’ve not got the key. They were so busy up there, they
forgot to give it to me.”
Master Franz grew red with anger. He was an impatient
man.


“You oaf!” he shouted; “surely you could have got it
while you were there. Well, maybe I’ll find another.”
Hans trembled with fear as he watched the Clockmaker fit
key after key into the keyhole. What would happen when
he found Sophia? And was she really there? A hundred
questions seemed to race through his brain.
“Ah! that turns,” said the Clockmaker, and he opened
the door.
Yes, there was Sophia. Flushed and hot, and with eyes
round with terror, she stood in the clock confronting
Master Franz.
He for his part started backwards, dropping the key
basket on the floor. For three seconds they stood thus,
then Sophia sprang out of the clock, rushed past Master
Franz, and disappeared through the open door.
“Catch her, catch her!” shouted the Clockmaker; “she
is a thief or a witch.”
“I’ll catch her,” cried Hans, and he followed Sophia into
the street. She was wearing her homespun dress and her
white cap and apron. In her terror she was running down
the street like a hunted hare. But Hans caught her by the
skirt and dragged her up a narrow alley behind an old
church.
“Don’t run like that,” he said, “or everyone will wonder.
If you walk quietly no one will recognise you. They
are all thinking of the procession, and we shall not be
noticed. At present we cannot reach the Kirchstrasse,
for all the people are going the other way. Our only
chance is to go with them to the Town Square, and see
what will happen.”
Sophia was panting.
“Oh! Hans, dare we?” she asked.
“Yes, of course we dare. Come along this way. No


P iciSv .
c_
Running like a hare.


one is thinking of us at all. We are just two people in
a crowd.”
He took Sophia’s hand and drew her down the next
street. They were now in a stream of people pressing to
the Town Square.
“Oh! What will they do when they find out I’m lost?”
whispered Sophia.
“Hush ! no one knows yet.”
The Town Square was crowded on every side, but the
way to the Cathedral was guarded by soldiers.
How late the procession was ! People grumbled at that.
Half an hour late, three-quarters, a whole hour ! But the
sun shone, and they made the best of it.
“The Archduchess,” said one, “is lingering at her glass;
they say she is a vain little puss.”
Hans squeezed Sophia’s finger and laughed.
“No, no,” another answered; “she is saying last words
to her betrothed. I have it from a friend of mine at the
Wunderhof that she adores him.”
“ Perhaps she has had a fainting fit,” said the third
“Or she is curling her hair,” suggested a fourth.
Then the bells rang out louder and louder, guns were
fired, and the soldiers stood at attention. Through the
crowd ran a whisper that the procession had started. Yes ;
the cheering had begun, it was drawing nearer and nearer.
Hans and Sophia stared at each other in blank astonish-
ment. How could there be a betrothal and no Archduchess?
Now everyone stood on tip-toe and craned forward. Sophia
and Hans could see nothing, but they heard what was said.
“It is the young Prince. There he is on a white horse.
He is dressed in white velvet. How handsome he is ! But
he does not smile, he looks pale and tired. I fancy he has
a temper. There is his father ; he is very hot and so


cross-looking. Ah! . . . here comes the coach with the
Archduchess. . . . One cannot see her. ... I fancied I
saw her nose. She has a white veil over her face.
Now they have gone in. We must wait here till they come
out. The ceremony will not be long, and they will drive
away in an open carriage. We shall see her then ! ”
“Oh! Hans, who is in the coach? I cannot make it out,”
whispered Sophia. But Hans only shook his head. He
could not imagine what was going on.
So there they waited in the sunshine for half an hour or
more. Then old Wilhelm began to ring. All by himself
he rang twenty chimes, then old Peter broke in, and then
old Paul.
Now all the people cheered at the top of their voices, for
the betrothed were coming out of church. The bugles were
blown, the drums were banged.
“Oh! How beautiful she is,” said a dozen voices.
Sophia stood on tip-toe, but she could not see. Then a
great burly man behind her lifted her up that she might get
a good view.
“Look your fill at the Archduchess,” he said, “for one
does not see such grandeur every day.”
Now Sophia could see the carriage and the betrothed pair.
“Oh! Hans, Hans,” she exclaimed; “it is General von
Hegel’s daughter that has been betrothed.”
“Yes!” cried others. “It is not the Archduchess; it
is indeed von Hegel’s daughter. How is that? What does
it mean ? ”
No one but Sophia could answer that, and she kept
silence.
Soon the carriage had driven away, and the people turned
homewards, pouring out of the Square north, south, east,
and west.


HOW THE GNOMES
MADE A CAKE


Chapter XXV
HOW THE GNOMES
MADE A CAKE
OW,” said Hans, catching her hand, “come
quick. We must run to the Town gate and
escape to the Wunderberg. For they are sure
to search for you to punish you for running
away.”
No one noticed the two as they hurried
through the crowded streets. And when they
reached the Town gate the sentry only stopped them to ask
about the Archduchess, what she had worn, and how she had
looked, and if she had shed any tears as she came out of
the Cathedral.
Soon they were on the slopes of the Wunderberg, climb-
ing up among the rocks and heather. And now they were
quite happy, for the sun shone, and the heather had a
scent far better than the Court perfumes at the Wunderhof.
They both forgot their anxieties and sang songs together,
and were just as happy as two people should be who are
out of doors on a warm afternoon.
“What shall we do now?” asked Sophia, as they climbed
upwards.
“We’ll go and see the Hermit Wolf,” said Hans; “he
will give us his advice. Then we’ll go to the cottage and
live there ; we shall be quite happy.”


“I’m so afraid they’ll catch me and betroth me to some-
one else now. Oh I it is dreadful to be an Archduchess.
I’d much, much rather be just plain Sophia.”
“ We’re quite safe here,” said Hans, as he threw him-
self down on the heather; 4 ‘we’ll live here till the winter,
and then, perhaps, they’ll have forgotten you, and we can
go back to Wunderheim and live in the Toyshop.”
When they had rested, they got up again and climbed
the mountain-side. All the familiar places they loved so
well came in sight. Presently they reached the cottage.
A gnome-caretaker had been put into it as soon as they
had left. He was now sitting in the porch smoking his
long pipe. He kept a squirrel maid-servant, and she was
cleaning the windows with a wisp of grass.
“We have come back,” said Hans to the gnome-care-
taker, “and we shall want our rooms got ready.”
The squirrel-maid looked frightened, for she always slept
in Sophia’s bed, and she kept her nuts in the dressing-
table drawers, and ate them when she couldn’t sleep.
“Make ready for these gracious ones,” shouted the Care-
taker, “and put the kettle on the fire.” But he himself
went on smoking his pipe just as a caretaker should.
“Now,” said Hans, “we’ll go to the Hermit Wolf and
ask his advice.”
So they ran through the woods till they came to the
cell ; the door was half open, and they stole in softly.
On his bed of leaves the old wolf lay asleep, the horn
spectacles were still on his nose, and the Hermit’s book lay
open beside him. They thought it would be unkind to
wake him, so they sat down and waited. It was very
peaceful there in the heart of the pine woods. There was
no sound at all but the breathing of the wolf and the
droning of a fly.


“Bless us all! who’s here?” he suddenly exclaimed,
starting awake.
“We have come to ask your advice,” said Sophia.
The old wolf jumped up and settled his spectacles firmly
on his nose.
“I wasn’t really asleep,” he said, “I was just meditating
a little. I was up last night attending to some sick cubs,
so I’m a little tired to-night. Now, my children, state
the case as clearly as you can.”
Both Sophia and Hans began to talk at once.
“One at a time,” said the Hermit. So Sophia told the
story, but Sophia spoke so fast that his brain got confused,
and he said that Hans must tell. So Hans told all that
remained of the story.
“Now,” said the wolf, when Hans had done, “I shall
count ten and then I’ll give you my opinion. I believe
that judges always count ten before they give a verdict ;
certainly I do.” When he had counted ten he was ready
to decide.
“It seems to me,” said he, “that you two had better be
betrothed, because, if you are, then, quite clearly, Arch-
duchess or not, Sophia can’t be betrothed to anyone else.
You are certainly young, but that can be remedied by time.
And you seem to me to be sensible and well-brought-up
young people. What do you think yourselves?”
“Very well,” said Hans, “I’m willing, if Sophia is.
“Oh, yes,” said Sophia; “I like Hans much more than
anyone at the Wunderhof. And some day I will keep house
for him, and make Himmelspeise for him.”
“Ah! then your feelings are quite satisfactory,” answered
the wolf, “so we had better perform the ceremony here
before anyone can interrupt us. We shall need two wit-
nesses and two rings. I don’t know where we shall get them.”


“ Perhaps the gnomes could help us,” Hans suggested.
They went to the door of the cell, and, by good luck, an
old gnome was passing at that very moment, wheeling a
barrowful of pine cones. They explained the case to him,
and he went off to consult his fellows.
By and by he returned with several gnomes, squirrels,
rabbits, and birds, who were very anxious to see the
ceremony.
The rays of the evening sun shone through the trees,
throwing patches of light on the ground. It was just
the place for a betrothal. And for witnesses, they had
all the big pine trees, that were so great and solemn.
The wolf lit his candle and opened his book.
Then Sophia and Hans stood before him hand-in-hand,
and they promised to love each other, and to be kind and
polite. And then they kissed and exchanged rings. The
gnomes gave them the rings, for they were deeply interested
in the whole ceremony.
After that a squirrel rang a goat-bell for two minutes.
He enjoyed the noise very much. Then they all sat down
on the pine needles, and the Hermit Wolf preached a
sermon.
There was a very big congregation, for when the news
of the betrothal spread through the woods every gnome
and beast and bird came to see the sight. Even the ants
came, but they were not allowed to fidget, and that vexed
them, for ants hate to sit still ; that is the worst of being
so active.
The Hermit Wolf stood in the midst of them. He looked
very gaunt and big in his old gown with its rope girdle.
I cannot tell you all that he said, for it was a long
sermon, and no one seems to remember it all. The
squirrels went to sleep, and the gnomes wanted to smoke


so badly that they could not attend. There were several
Latin words in the sermon ; they all belonged to the first
or second declension, which you remember the old wolf
had learnt so carefully ; and he wound up with “Amo,
amas , amat , ” which was quite suitable to the occasion.
Then Sophia threw her arms round his neck and kissed
him, even though he was a wolf and a hermit both in one.
And one doesn’t generally kiss either. But, of course, this
was an exceptional case.
“There, there, pretty dear,” said he very kindly, and he
wiped his spectacles and went into his cell. Perhaps he
felt a little lonely and melancholy when they had all gone
away, for solitude is often sad.
Then Hans and Sophia went to the cottage. But, to
their surprise, they saw on the door this notice : “ Engaged
for an hour.”
The door was locked, so they had to sit on the grass
together and talk.
Presently Hans stood up.
“Two people are coming up the hill,” he shouted; “and
there’s Kaiser. Hi! Kaiser ! Kaiser ! ”
Kaiser bounded towards them, barking joyfully. He
licked Sophia’s face, and rolled on his back for sheer delight,
kicking his heels in the air.
“It must be mother and father,” said Hans; “come and
meet them.”
They ran down the hill together; and Sophia was crying
with joy as she hugged the Toymaker and his wife. What
a happy meeting it was after their last sad parting ! And
now they were quite safe and united once more.
“But, ah! my child,” said Babina, with her hands on
Sophia’s shoulders, “do you know what you have lost?
Your patent of nobility has been burnt, and you have


altogether forfeited your rank and fortune as a punishment
for what you have done. There was a notice about it on
the Cathedral door.”
“Oh ! ” said Sophia. Then she laughed and kissed
Babina.
“So I’m not an Archduchess at all?” she asked
“No, you are just our dear little Sophia.”
“She is my Sophia,” said Hans loyally.
“Dear child, can we make up to you for what you have
lost?” the Toymaker asked.
Then Sophia said “Yes” from the bottom of her heart,
and they knew she meant it.
Now the cottage door was opened, and the lamp over the
door was burning, for it was growing dusk. The squirrel-
housemaid had put on a cap and apron. All the candles
were lit, and the beds were nicely made. But the great
surprise was in the kitchen. There the table was spread
with a clean white cloth, and it was laid all ready for
supper. In the middle of the table was a most wonderful
cake. The gnomes had made it themselves. It was iced
with icing like snow, and decorated with cones and sprays
of pine, all made of sugar. And candles burnt round it.
In the centre there were two names written in pink icing—
Sophia and Hans. It was beautifully done. And the
gnomes had made everything else, the bread and cakes
and the jam, and the cowslip wine.
The Toymaker and his family had scarcely sat down to
supper when there was a sharp tapping at the window.
They opened the window at once, and in hopped the Queen
of the Jackdaws. She bowed to each one in turn, and then
took her place at table. But she asked that Mein Herr
Katzchen might be removed, for he stared at her so much
that it made her feel faint. So Sophia shut him up in her


“You have forfeited your rank”


bedroom, where the squirrel-housemaid had gone to sleep.
But she woke up when he came in, and as she, too, disliked
cats, she scrambled out of the window and disappeared. I
believe she very soon married, and now lives comfortably
in a beech tree lower down on the Wunderberg.
The Rat King and the Weingeist had sent their very
kind regards and best wishes, but they were unable to be
present at the supper. But the Weingeist had invited the
Rat King to dine with him, so that they might drink
Sophia’s health together, and sing “Oh wie wohl ist ” in
memory of their little friend.
The very next day Jocasta, the jackdaw, confided her
adventures to a crony of hers, for even queens must con-
fide in someone.
“Ah ! ” said she, “it is no joke to be a royal personage,
and I would gladly resign my rank too, but none of the
jackdaws have my sense, and the jackdaw kingdom would
go to pieces without me.”
She sighed heavily as she spoke. She had filled her
crop so full of cake-crumbs, cheese, and home-made bread
that she found a difficulty in speaking.
“It was all very pleasant,” she said ; “they are an united
family there, and that one does not always see. Besides
conversation we had music. Ido not sing myself, but
I recited that great epic of our race, ‘The Jackdaw of
Rheims.’ I had a place of honour, and was allowed to
hop about the table. Indeed, it made me feel young again
to see so much contentment and good cheer. We were a
merry party, my dear, I can assure you. Indeed, I laughed
so much that I could hardly stand on my claws.
“We drank healths in cowslip wine. No one was for-
gotten, and the gnomes had a torchlight procession through
the woods.


* ' ...II. II.
“Ah! how happy we were, and that is always something
to look back upon.”
Jocasta winked her blue eyes, and looked down at Wunder-
heim.
“We live in a very stirring world,” said she, “and I
flatter myself that I have taken a leading part in the life of
her Serene Highness the Archduchess Sophia of Wunder-
heim.”
As she was the Queen, no one contradicted her, and so she
had the last word, which, being a lady, was only her due.


EPILOGUE
The nursery fire burnt low. The Story Spinner took off
his spectacles and wiped them on his coat-tails. Margaret
had been lying quite still for some time, but now she said
in a very sleepy voice, “So what happened then?” For
that is what one always says when anyone finishes a story,
or even if he pauses for breath in the telling of one.
“So then you went to sleep,” said the Story Spinner.
And that was just what Margaret did. But now the
animals began to talk. For they could only talk when
Margaret was in dreamland.
“Where are they now—the Toyshop people?” asked the
grey-cloth elephant.
“They may be in the Toyshop,” said the Story Spinner.
“ For I hear of them then through the winter months, and
there they sit round the stove and tell stories, and they’re
all as busy as they are happy. And that is saying much.
But in the summer they often go up to the gnomes’ cottage,
and stay there. The gnome-caretaker still lives in the house
to keep it in order. He has another squirrel-maidservant,
246


ft r v
,
V,
and she keeps things very neat. But in the winter she
gets into Sophia’s bed, and nothing will make her get up
—that is the way of squirrels. And she stores her nuts in
the larder. But no one eats them, for that would be unfair.”
“Well,” said the elephant, “I think I like Master Johann
the best.”
“On the contrary I,” quacked the celluloid duck, who
was in a queer, pert, crotchety frame of mind, “like Prince
Fritz much the best. I consider him the hero of the story.”
The pink-velvet pig and the Teddy bear, who, you remem-
ber, had just been married, squeezed each other’s hands.
“We,” they said both together, “prefer the two young
people, for we love to hear anything romantic. We should
have liked if you had told us of their marriage, for that
would remind us of this morning when we were married
under the dining-room table.”
“One cannot tell a story to suit everyone,” said the Story
Spinner ; “that is a thing to which one must be resigned.”
“I,” said the fur rabbit, “fell asleep at once, and I wish
you would tell it all over again now that I am awake.”
But the Story Spinner shook his head.
“No,” he answered, “my story is done; there remains
no word now to be said but
GOOD NIGHT.”








«
s
3 1508 00705840 2


