

Friday, May 3, 1881.
THE BIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF RAVENS WORTH in the
Chair.
NAVAL INTELLIGENCE AND PROTECTION OF COMMERCE
IN WAR.
By Captain J. C. R. COLOME, F.R.G.S., F.S.S.
Having been asked by this Institution to deliver a lecture on the above
subject, I think it my duty to do so. Though sensible of the honour
conferred by repeated invitations, several considerations deterred me
from at once accepting them ; even now lam doubtful as to the wisdom
of compliance. It is a grave question whether so wide a problem can
be adequately treated in one short hour, an 4 whether a matter of the
most serious national concern can be publicly discussed without more
clanger .of directing foreign attention fo our deficiencies and difficulties,
than hope of remedy and removal by ourselves. Public opinion will
not apparently turn out of the current of ever-changing, but now,
always purely military, theories of insular defence requirements, to a
calm, quiet contemplation of the grim realities of modern maritime
war to a people dependent on the sea for daily bread. The rapid and
increasing diversion of English thought out of the great, broad
channels of actual and real national requirements, into little whirlpools
and back eddies of abstract military experiments, is to be deplored ; it
is not, however, to be wondered at. Every volunteer from the Land’s
End to the Orkneys, every militiaman from Dover to Donegal, is the
apostle of a purely insular theory of defence, the practical preacher
of purely military precautions; Russell, from nearly all battle-fields of
modern times; Hosier, from “ the Mountains of Rasselas ; ” Bracken-
bury, from the plains of Italy, and Forbes from the ruins of Sedan,
'have so stirred the. heart of England that her head has well nigh
ceased to regard the influence of water as practically ruling the "whole
principle of her own and that of her Empire’s defence. No eloquent
descriptions of tactical struggles for strategical positions have yet been
dated from “ equatorial crossings,” or from “ off Cape Horn ; ” no great
populations at centres of manufacturing industries in the very heart of
England have been thrown out of work by far distant war operations
against us interfering with the supply lines of raw material; hunger
pangs have not. been felt by multitudes through the capture of grain
vessels, or by that rise in insurance to cover war mks which will
certainly be in direct ratio to the organization, adaptation, and suffi-
ciency of the pre-arranged defence of our sea lines all over the globe.
Every School Board boy in the United Kingdom has some notions,
• . 6


however vague, relative to soldiers and invasion, but millions of
intelligent grown-up Englishmen to-day have no distinct views at all
as to the defence o'f the sea. They dream that that matter was settled
once and for all hy the victory of Trafalgar, if not by the defeat
of the Spanish Armada. Yet, only by methodical, complete, and
Imperial pre-arrangements, can England, in days of steam and huge
commerce, facg maritime war without dread, or hope to emerge from
it without disaster. An Empire having thousands of vessels counting
millions of tons, annually carrying to and from every corner of the
world, its goods in value approaching a thousand millions sterling,
cannot hope to localize her naval wars ; nor can it be for one moment
assumed that a maritime position so constituted and of such extent,
can be defended simply by individual still or even genius of naval
Commanders. War fleets must be separated by long sea intervals ;
however efficient they may be, they are but as flies on the great com-
mercial wheels revolving round the world. They can provide but
small security to sea-lines of thousands upon thousands of miles in
length, unless they act in combination and are subordinated to a
general carefully prepared and preconcerted plan. I shall presently
produce some broad facts which it is to be hoped will sufficiently
establish the absolute necessity for more public attention being directed
to this matter. I shall submit sorrte calculations as to the actual
money value of the various divisions of oceans to England and her
Empire; I shall do so merely to illustrate relatively what is past all
price, viz., the practical, social, and indeed the life and death con-
sequences involved to the English race in the precautions taken for-
securing in war, the safety and freedom of the sea. It is not too much
to say that the loss of a whole British Army on Continental battle-
fields, could not of itself produce the catastrophe sure to follow as a
direct and immediate consequence on the interruption of even one of
our main sea-lines of supply. One would cause mental anguish and a
fall in the Funds, the other would add to these, physical suffering by a
rise in bread. The forcible curtailment of imports of grain and raw
material, and of the exports of manufactured articles, means a cry
from millions, for bread which could not be given, for work which
could not be obtained. No one who hears me or who reads this paper
is without influence. Be it little or great, all have some, and my reason
for coming here to-day is to appeal for the exercise of that influence
to turn attention more towards a true realization of the primary
requirements consequent upon our Empire’s exceptional position, and
to the pre-arrangements necessary for their adequate and complete
fulfilment. The few words I think it desirable to say may, I hope, be
of some slight use to those whose influence cannot be without some
result. That great multitude of Englishmen who sway the defensive _
policy of our Empire, know nothing at all of what England at war
with even one Great Power means in days of steam and gigantic com-
merce,; and while some are enthusiastic about every detail of the fast
military experiment, nearly all seem placidly content to trust to luck
and some powerful ironclads, everything quite safe and easy
for us on the sea.


It seems to me desirable to make these prefatory, if somewhat
personal, remarks, because every year’s consideration of this and
similar subjects, on which I have so often spokfen in this theatre,
increases my sense of its awful importance, and, therefore, of the
grave responsibility incurred in the method in which it is submitted
for discussion and publication. Sixteen years ago I fancied it possible
some good might come of venturing to write and speak on these ques-
tions, differing as I then did, and do now, with the popular view of the
aspects of British defence. Now, finding myself only beginning to
approach the verges of true knowledge of its depth, I fear it is more
likely such slender contributions to the literature of so great a subject
may do more harm than good.
Having thus explained my sense of responsibility, and my reason
for overcoming a disinclination to incur it, I proceed to submit
general observations on the necessity for establishing an organized
and far-reaching system of naval intelligence.
The Scope of Naval Intelligence.
Naval intelligence comprehends within its scope a vast number of
subjects widely different in their nature, but in their several orbits
controlled by one great general consideration, viz., the efficiency and
adaptation of our naval means to the work to be done in war. Now
the two main conditions to be fulfilled by the Naval Service are the
closing up of our enemy’s ports and the protection of our own commerce
on the high seas from depredations. Attacks on the high seas will be
made by hostile cruisers which may elude the vigilance of blockading
fleets, or by vessels purchased, fitted out, and armed in rear of our fleets,
perhaps thousands of miles away from the blockaded coasts. It is to
be observed that while the extent of the enemy’s seaboard, limits the
operations of blockade, the area of operations for the direct protection
of our commerce has, in a geographical sense, practically no limits at
all. While lam speaking, British smoke from British coal burning in
British steamers, carrying foreign food to British mouths, material to
British manufactories, and goods to British warehouses, is blackening
the airs of the.tropic, the temperate, and even of the arctic zones. At
this moment British sails are being blown away in dreary morning
watch kept by British seamen at the antipodes, are idly flapping in the
regions of calms in*both hemispheres, and being frozen stiff in arctic,
and even in antarctic, seas.
As naval operations may be grouped under two great heads, so
naval intelligence may be classified in two divisions—one referring
to blockade, the other to the direct protection of commerce. The
broadest difference between the sort of “ intelligence,” essentially
necessary to success in undertaking either operation, appears, to me to
be this—that in one case what is most required is knowledge of your
enemy’s position ; in the other, knowledge of your own. In both cases
success will relatively depend on knowledge, down to the- smallest
detail, of the work to be done. The operations of blockade are carried
on against a seaboard fixed and invariable, and against naval and
military appliances wielded under one direction, for a distinct and
b 2


settled war purpose. The conditions which determine operations for
the direct defence of sea-commerce are- almost the reverse. The
carrying trade to he protected is not fixed, it varies with circumstances,
both in direction and valuq, and is the visible resultant of many thou-
sand busy minds, working ceaselessly in all parts of the globe by
many thousand processes for individual peaceful objects. These
objects defy the control of war policies and war ministers, for they are
only attainable by obedience to the eternal laws of supply and demand.
These laws have survived the Tyrian, Carthaginian, Venetian, Spanish,
and Dutch sea supremacies, and will survive so long as business in the
world is done. Those who think that the movements of British com-
merce could be made to conform to arrangements for its protection by
convoy war-ships should really picture the scenes “on ’Change ”in
London, Manchester, Liverpool, and hundreds of business centres in
England, to say nothing of Sydney, Montreal, Melbourne, Calcutta,
Cape Town, &c., which would follow the posting up of an Admiralty
notification that “ the Imperial sea-roads were so interrupted that
“ arrangements were under immediate consideration to provide, so far as
“means would permit, convoy protection for eight hundred millions’
“worth of exports and imports, and the entry, clearance, and safepass-
“ age of several million tons of British shipping from and to ports on
“ every sea and ocean in the world.” The figures I offer as a stippling-
in of the background of the pictures, because they are founded on the
official returns for last year. The time would then, I think', have come
for the operations of invasion to be wholly unnecessary for our com-
plete subjugation. Our Volunteer Army would not then nepd a com-
missariat department, because nearly one-half our home Army, as
well as civil population, would have no food. The burning question
which exercises some minds now as to whether our militia shall wear
gold or silver lace would then lose much of its point. It is very desirable
to keep clearly in view the broad issues of great national defence
questions, and I specially allude to the one of convoys, not as a matter
to be settled in a “ ten minutes ” discussion,bat for patient calculation
and serious study. Were naval Officers afforded by the nation, as they
should be, opportunities of studying, as part of their superior profes-
sional training, the directions and variations of that huge commerce,
the safety of which in war will be committed to their keeping, I
confess I think systems of naval intelligence and principles of sea-
strategy would replace more or less, vague national ideas as to con-
voys. But, be it observed, England affords her naval Officers no such
opportunity.
Varieties of Subjects with which Naval Intelligence has to deal. '
A vast number of subjects are embraced under the term “naval
“ intelligence,” some common to both divisions before mentioned, others
specially or more closely connected with one rather than the other. I
can, however, in the time only glance at some of the principal ones.
Those common to both relate to hydrography, meteorology, the naval
policies and arrangements of foreign nations as indicated by the war-
vessels they build or buy, the material resources, active or dormant, of


maritime nations, both, as regards construction, refitment, .and main-
tenance. The- principles and details of construction, armament,
machinery-, appliances, and efficiencies or deficiencies of their war-
ships ; all matters relating to the personnel, .both active and reserve, of
their war navies. These headings sufficiently indicate what may be
considered common to both branches of naval intelligence.
Special to blockade are —topography of coast and river districts, 1
embracing detailed information respecting railway and canal commu-
nications of war and mercantile ports. Railways may afford facilities
for moving fleets of efficient torpedo-boats from one port to another
more rapidly than water permits a blockading force to do, and it is
reasonable to suppose an effort to raise the blockade of a port would
be developed through a ; cloud of torpedo-boats. The relative power of
concentration possessed by the blockaders and the blockaded must
exercise considerable influence on the strategical distribution of the
blockading force. Railway and canal communications may also to
some extent affect the question of fuel supplies of the blockaded. As
my intention is to refer almost exclusively to the direct protection of
commerce on the high seas, I am compelled to refrain from closer
consideration of intelligence having reference to blockade. There are,
however, one or two general reflections worthy of special remark.
As regards hydrographical information, the experience of maritime
nations testifies to the care and completeness exercised by our Admi-
ralty in its collection, so far as oceans or seas are concerned. But it is
doubtful whether we kno-w as much as we ought to know about great
rivers, sq.ch, for example, as the Amur, with its 583,000 square miles
of hydrographic basin. No doubt the Millitary Intelligence Depart-
ment in Pall Mall collects a certain amount of information respecting
these, but military men know nothing of the naval aspects of the great
rivers and their naval resources.
The short story I told in a former paper 2 here of the building and
work done by the little Russian steamer “Aigun,” in 1854, on the
Amur, is a sufficient warning to us not to neglect the' existence or
development of naval resources many hundred miles from the coast
lines. Obviously a naval, not a military, department should collect
such intelligence, and divided responsibility should be avoided.
Respecting the policy, resources, the principles and details of con-
struction, armament, appliances, and personnel, and that great host of
matters and things which go to make up visible naval war power, I,
for one, feel confident that our Admiralty struggles hard to obtain
complete foreign information with the miserably scanty means provided
by the country for collecting it. It is a noteworthy fact that, while
we have a great military “ Intelligence ” Department, and besides
have a military attache at the Courts of the great Powers, we are
quite content that one solitary naval Officer should be charged - with
watching the naval developments and preparations of the whole of
Europe! Yet invasions cannot be attempted, nor can we move even a
1 See valuable paper on “ Tactics of Blockade,” by Captain S. Long, R.N.
1 See “ Russian Development and our Naval and Military Position in the North
“ Pacific,” Journal, vol. xxiii, No. 01.


drummer-boy beyond our shores without a naval operation, great or
small, being the primary step of military movements so far as we are
concerned. Under the heads mentioned there is a great variety of
information respecting foreign navies, which could, with great pro-
priety, and should, I venture to think, be given by our Admiralty to
naval Officers who have now no means whatever of obtaining autho-
ritative information, and who, therefore, will be in war entirely
ignorant of much they ought to know.
As regards seaboard topography, railway and canal communications,
of ports, &c., such intelligence is, I believe, collected by the military
department; but practical experience of war generally proves that
sources of failure are most often found between the chinks of divided
responsibility. The very startling announcement made a few weeks
ago in the House of Commons, “ there could be no doubt the naval
“ guns of England’s fleet are inferior to the new guns on board the
“ German, French, and Russian ships.” 1 has been received by the
country with comfortable complacency. It would be plunged in a
state of excited indignation had it been asserted instead that the rifles
of the Army were, without doubt, inferior to those of the same foreign
Powers; but, as regards naval guns, it neither recognizes the serious-
ness of the fact, nor reflects that it is the natural result of divided
responsibility. When we are at war there will be probably twenty
heavy guns brought into action on the sea for every one on land,
yet the manufacture and preponderating opinion controlling the con-
struction and fittings of naval ordnance is vested in those who cannot
fight them on the sea, and under the direction of a military depart-
ment, knowing nothing practically of sea warfare. The Admiralty,
which is directly responsible to the nation for the efficiency of every-
thing appertaining to the fleet, has not direct control of its own
ordnance. Nor is there any reason why the Admiralty should not
itself collect intelligence in this matter of military seaboard topo-
graphy, having, as it has, qualified Officers available for this service.
Why should Marine Artillery Officers be employed as professors at the
Staff and Military Colleges instructing military students in military
art, while the Admiralty has to rely on the War Office for such topo-
graphical information as is necessary for naval operations on an
enemy’s seaboard P
I mention these things, not because, as all my former writings will
amply testify, I either underrate or undervalue the great and grave
importance of the military arms of England, not because I do not feel
as thoroughly as anyone the necessity for purely military Intelligence
Departments, 2 but because it is my endeavour to look beyond popular
fancies and natural professional leanings, and to state plainly matters
of fact as they appear to me. In dismissing from further examination
naval intelligence in its general aspects or in the special aspects of
blockade, I would submit that it would appear that while advancing
1 Vide speech of the Right Honourable W. H. Smith, M.P., in debate on Navy
Estimates, 1881.
: Besides the department under the War Office at home, there is also one in
India.


science and modern appliances in no way diminish the absolute neces-
sity of blockading an enemy’s seaboard as the first step towards
protecting commerce, they do diminish the probability of making a
blockade effectual and complete; and in proportion as such probability
is reduced so must increased precautions be taken for the direct
defence of commerce on the high seas. It is now to this main portion
of my subject all further remark will exclusively apply.
Naval Intelligence in Relation to the Protection of Commerce.
Under this head the intelligence required is—
-Ist. The general laws, which under normal conditions, govern the
distribution of British sea commerce over the world, both as regards
time, place, and value.
2nd. The particular influences which any particular wars are likely to
produce on the direction and value of British commerce passing
over different sea lines. The blockading of a coast, for example,
would prevent the laws of supply and demand being satisfied by
means of sea communications terminating on that seaboard; the
imports which would otherwise have been absorbed by the ports
blockaded will, to a greater or less degree, according to circumstances,
seek other markets and be diverted into new channels, 1 thus causing
a variation in direction and value of sea-commerce.
3. The careful and continuous observation of the development and
resources of grain-producing lands, the periods of the harvests, and
the visible supplies available for export.
I have so often dwelt on the all-important question of the critical
position of the food supply of the United Kingdom in war, that I
cannot stop now to add very much to what I have previously stated,
except in a general way. We have Mr. John Bright’s authority that
between 1879 and 1880 “ out of every four loaves of bread eaten by
“ the people of the United Kingdom three loaves came from abroad ”; 2
in other words, over the sea. 3 Had we been at war during that period,
therefore, whether the three loaves ever reached the mouths of our
population would have been a matter entirely dependent on our naval
means of protection, and on the accuracy of our naval intelligence.
I would here point out that the geographical position of the source of
our main supply has, within the last few years, shifted several
thousand miles from east to west, from the districts of the Euxine to
1 The war in the United States furnished an example : as the “ Southern States
“ did not draw down the usual suppy of grain from the Northern,” grain had to
seek another market, the result being that it found its way to the United Kingdom,
and to use the phrase of a commercial journal of 1863, “ put out of gear the cycle of
“ high to low prices.” The same journal goes on to say, “ Whatever injury America
“ has inflicted upon this country by the blockade, we must count the enormous sup-
“ plies of grain which she poured into our ports last year as some compensation.”
One eifect of the war was to cause the Northern States to send us a great increase
of bread, and to draw from us a great increase of lead.
2 See his letter dated 18th March, 1881.
3 I give Mr. John Bright’s statement, because his words carry such weight In
this case, however, he has overstated facts as to the proportion of foreign and home
bread consumed. —J. C. R. C.


the Western States of America. 1 The direction, length, and value of
our food lines has recently entirely changed, and that change will
influence our naval arrangements in war. I have often seen discussions
of a purely naval or military character based on the assumption of a
war with the States. I would, however, beg you to look beyond the
professional limits of such a supposition to the great national question
of its present practical impossibility. We are at present dependent on
the States for an enormous proportion of our food, and the British
Empire, possessing grain-producing lands, now lying idle, yet capable,
if populated and developed, of feeding hundreds of millions of human
beings, could hardly resist the will of the States, because misery and
starvation of the masses would reign in England, as a direct con-
sequence of attempting to do so. But there is yet another great
change impending in the sources of food supply. Thanks to the
energy of Canada, with a population rather less than that of London,
the construction of a British Pacific Railway has begun in earnest.
Before long our food supplies may be grown under our own flag. 2 It
would not be difficult to show that in war this railway, with its attend-
ant and possible results, would give our naval position greater strate-
gical security and strength than an extra half dozen “ Inflexibles.”
4. Next comes the collection of information and continuous observa-
tion of the direction of coal exports from England and her colonies,
also from such countries as export coal for steam sea traffic, the average
supply and demand, and the ratio of increase at all British and foreign
coaling places. As a Royal Commission has been sitting for nearly
two years, charged with the special consideration of the state and
defences of our coaling stations, I will not make further reference to
them, and for the first time out of the many I have spoken from this
place, it is satisfactory that such public action in the matter enables
me to do so.
6. Next, the details of construction and speed of every merchant
steamer in the world possessing power and capacity for adaptation
as a war cruiser of attack, should be carefully and continuously
collected. 3 The nature of ordinary peace employment* and the owner-
ship should be known, no matter under what flag she sails. The
transfer of such vessels from one flag to another, is the operation
of minutes only, involving private arrangements, payment of money,
and the signing of names. The Peruvian vessels, for example, were
so transferred the other day by private enterprise, to the flags of
Germany and Russia. The whereabouts and movements from port to
port, of all foreign steamers capable of conversion into efficient
weapons of attack, should be at all times known at our Admiralty, and
so far as is practically possible, by Admirals commanding abroad. It
1 It is remarkable that the Turkish troops at Yolo were the other day supplied
■with bread stuffs from the States.
2 The imports of grain coming as part cargo in steamers from Australia is steadily
increasing, but such supply is but a drop in the great ocean of our food demand.
3 To some this may appear beyond the scope .of what is practically possible. It
should, however, be remembered the enormous interests at stake ; and further, that
there are not so very many steamers under foreign flags suitable for conversion into


is only by the most plodding methodical daily collection and digestion of
such intelligence during peace, that we shall on the outbreak of war
avoid surprises by the issuing from unexpected and unobserved quarters
of cruisers bought at one place, armed and equipped at another,
and destroying our commerce somewhere else. Were our system of
naval intelligence as complete and as far-reaching as the necessities of
our huge commercial interest require, we shuvld be able to prevent
most of such vessels getting to sea on errands hostile to us: either by
our immediate purchase of all such as are suitable for conversion, from
owners who can be tempted to sell or, if outwitted in this by our
enemy’s agents, then by shutting the vessels up in port.
No nation with its direct sea route stopped by blockade, will long
continue to purchase merchant steamers for conversion into armed
cruisers, if the result be that most of them rot in the neutral ports,
owing to the efficiency of a British Naval Intelligence Department
unceasingly but quietly at work, and the careful attention of British
ships of war which, from the very commencement of hostilities, if not
before, dog suspicious characters from port to port. They must have
speed, staying power, and strength enough to do so. We are now
trusting to our material resources, and the mere possession of great
national wealth to save our commerce somehow or other in the hour ot
its peril; but if we do not use our national brains, even to the extent
of recognizing the necessity for establishing a great and far-reaching
system of naval intelligence, that peril when it comes will, I venture
to think, speedily terminate in the ruin of our carrying trade. It is
the very first stage, rather than the closing scenes of maritime war,
which decides the fate of such trade. American war fleets floated trium-
phant on the sea long after the American carrying trade—terrified by
ocean fires kindled by an uncaught “Alabama” —had taken to itself
wings arid fled. 1 Moral effect is the great force to be reckoned with
in considering the protection of commerce. If the first few weeks of
war shakes that ignorance which blindly hopes that our naval
arrangements for war are commensurate with our commercial neces-
sities, the British mercantile marine will probably disappear in a
efficient war cruisers. We own about two-thirds of the steam tonnage of the world,
the total (gross) of which is in round numbers 6,700,000 tons.
The following is a sufficient illustration of its distribution :
Under British flag , 4,200,000 tons.
„ American flag - 630,000 „
„ French „ 420,000 „
„ German 290,000 ~
„ Spanish „ 200,000 „
„ Russian „ 130,000 „
All other 830,000 „
Total 6,700,000 „
These figures include all shapes and sizes of merchant steamers. I may also add
that the best foreign steamers are as a rule built in Great Britain.
1 A practical illustration may.be useful. Taking the June quarter of 1860, two-
thirds of the commerce of New York was carried in American bottoms ; in the same
period of 1863, three-fourths was carried in foreign bottoms.


reaction of panic. l What will happen during these first few weeks,
depends primarily upon the accuracy and extent of our naval intelli-
gence. Peace affords the only opportunity of organizing and
systematizing such intelligence, and maturing our plans. That oppor-
tunity will be gone when many submarine cables are dumb, when
excitement reigns -on British Stock Exchanges, in two hemispheres, and
merchants and. shippers crowd Whitehall clamorous for naval in-
telligence. Are they then to be referred to the Military Intelligence
Department in Pall Mall, to obtain full details as to the roads to
Berlin ?
6. It is also of importance that all particulars concerning the exact
position, nature of bottom, and depth of water in which submarine
cables are laid, should be collected and furnished to naval commanders,
so that they may know where to cut or tap them, or prevent others
from doing so.
7. The necessity for collecting and rapidly disseminating informa-
tion at all times as to the movements of foreign ships of war is so
obvious as to require no explanation. It is to be hoped our method
has been improved during the last twenty-seven years. Facts which I
have come across in the course of my investigations, have astonished me
in the overwhelming testimony they bear to national carelessness in
this matter during the Crimean War. For example, as I have else-
where stated, the officials at a most important naval outpost were left
to learn that England was at war, from chance newspapers, and to the
end of the war no official instructions were sent to them. In another
quarter of the world, though we had steamers on the station, a Russian
frigate rode at anchor in the middle of an English squadron, months
after the Guards had been cheered through the streets of London, on
their way to the East. Seven weeks after her parting com-
pany with the English squadron, she passed on the high seas under
the stern of an English man-of-war. I happen to know the latitude
and longitude where the curious scene occurred of an English vessel
of war dipping her ensign to the frigate of a Power we had been
fighting for months. Had there been any real attempt at the
organization, collection, and communication of naval intelligence
before and during our last war with Russia, disaster and defeat of
British naval forces in the North Pacific would not now stand re-
corded in that same “ Times ” containing the telegraphic news of the
Balaklava Gale, and the official despatch announcing our military
survival at Inkermann. We did not then choose to have systematic
naval intelligence as to the movements of enemy’s ships, and the
nature of fixed naval positions, and naturally we paid dearly for our
neglect with the lives of Englishmen. “ The wild roses and purple-
“ hooded bells nodding,” 2 over long rows of English graves in the
“ green grass valleys ” of Kamtschatka, mutely appeal for better naval
1 In 1860 13,638 tons of shipping were transferred from the American to the
English flag. Month after month the number-of tons transferred increased. In
1863 252,579 tons were so transferred. Between 1860 and 1864 the American ton-
nage was reduced by some 2,000,000-tons.
2 See “.'Bent Life in Siberia.” Kerman.




intelligence. In 1855, we were unsuccessful off the coast of Asiatic
Russia. The whole Russian squadron and garrison evacuated the
position we had made great preparations to attack. It avoided one of
our fleets, and was found by another, but escaped. All this was due
to the absence of organized naval intelligence. Ten years later, and
in the regions where all these scenes occurred, and where Russia is
now wisely accumulating war cruisers, the wrecks of thirty Federal
ships' strewed the shores of Behring’s Straits, testifying to the naval
intelligence possessed by the commander of the “ Shenandoah,” and to
its total absence in Federal naval arrangements. To examine closely
one of the foregoing sub-heads of naval intelligence necessary for
naval efficiency, would require a whole series of lectures, and therefore,
I can now only —by way of illustration —pick out one or two more
prominent features of some for special notice.
As regards value, Table I shows the value of imports and exports of
the United Kingdom from and to ocean districts in one year (1879),
it further distinguishes between the values passing from and to the
foreign and British seaboards in those districts into which I divide
the world, their geographical limits being as follows :
Northern Seas District. —On the west by a line drawn from Dun-
kerque towards the Pole through Dover, the eastern boundary being
the seaboards in the German Ocean and the Baltic Sea.
North-East Atlantic District is bounded on the west by 30° meridian
W., on the south by the Equator, and on the east by the continuous
seaboard from where the Equator strikes the West Coast of Africa to
Dunkerque where it meets the limits of the Northern Seas.
Nortfi- West Atlantic District includes all the North Atlantic Ocean
west of the 30° meridian.
South Atlantic District includes the seaboard of British South
Africa with the Atlantic Ocean lying south of the Equator.
Indian Seas District takes in the water area enclosed by the con-
tinuous coast line from the north-east of British South Africa to
Singapore, thence by a line, including Java, towards the South Pole
and back to Delagoa Bay.
North Pacific District. —All the Pacific north of the Equator
between the Indian Seas District and the American Continent.
South Pacific District. —All the Pacific south of the Equator
between these limits.
The chief lesson to be learnt from Table I is the great disproportion
between the value of exports and the value o£ imports from and to the
foreign seaboards in districts where there are both foreign and British
seaboards, while they nearly balance in the case of the seaboards which
in these districts are British.
Where, therefore, the import or “ homeward ” route and the export
or “ outward ” routes are not from physical causes geographically
identical, there is a difference in the financial value to us between the
lines to and the lines from foreign seaboards, while in the case of
those to or from British seaboards, there is practically none. It is
1 Whjmper saw them, vide his “ Alaska.”


this sort of fact and many others which underlie it, of which naval
intelligence should constantly be investigating and taking cogni-
zance of.
Table IT gives the number of steam and sailing British ships,
which, ’in one year (1879) entered and cleared the United Kingdom
from and to seaboards in the several ocean districts with cargoes,
while Table 111 gives in the same manner British ships in ballast.
These figures, including as they necessarily do repeated voyages, are not
the actual number of individual ships, but relatively they are strictly
accurate. It is necessary to remind you, I am, in order to avoid con-
fusion, at present confining my observations and figures to the trade
and shipping of the United Kingdom only ; presently I shall refer to
the trade of the Empire.
Now, there are several lessons conveyed by these Tables II and' 111,
I can, however, only refer to one or two selected for the purpose of
giving continuity to these general illustrations, leaving those who
choose to study them, to find out the others. As regards vessels carry-
ing. cargoes, it appears from Table II that the arrival and departure of
sailing ships from and to foreign ports nearly balances, while the
clearance of steamers with cargoes was about one-fourth greater than
the arrivals ; on the other hand, in the case of British ports abroad,
while the sailing ships also about balance, the steamers carrying cargo
from the United Kingdom to those ports were more than double the
number of those arriving.
Reference to Table 111 shows that out of 7,000 representing the
steamers which came to or left our shores empty, only 73 entered and
cleared empty from ports of our Empire. Further, out of over 4,000
empty ships which entered and cleared, but 456 came from or went to
British possessions. Where, therefore, the sea lines to foreign ports
do not geographically coincide with those to our possessions, the
empty British ships will almost exclusively be found on the foreign
sea lines. Here, again, we have a fact it should be the duty of naval
intelligence to watch and digest, for sea commerce is not constant in
its operation. The last columns of Table II teach a still more
important lesson, showing as they do the variation in the proportion
of steam to s&iling British tonnage employed in the trade of the
several ocean districts. Tn the North Seas District, the proportion is
about 12 steam tons to 1 sailing; in the North-East Atlantic District,
Bto I; in the North-West Atlantic District, sto 2; and in the South
Atlantic, 7 to 5 only; the conditions as regards Indian Seas are
reversed, there being more sailing than steam tonnage employed; in
the North Pacific, there are 3 tons sailing to 1 steam; and in the
South Pacific, 5 tons sail to 1 steam. These facts are important in
many ways. It is impossible, however, to dwell now upon more than
one or two considerations they suggest. The limits of danger to
merchant ships in war as regards operations on the high seas lie
between the port of departure and arrival, and as’ steamers traverse
this area of danger at a greater speed than sailers, they are exposed
'to danger, in proportion to their speed, for‘a less time. If, over a
threatened sea line a steamer can pass in six weeks while the sailer on


the same line takes three months, the risk to the sailer is double that
of the steamer. Again, the steamer can, in proportion to her power,
vary her route, while the sailing ship is forced,.by atmospheric and
other influences, into certain beaten tracks. The steamer can avoid a
menaced area, the sailer cannot. I am only dealing with strategical
matters, and therefore do not allude to the obvious tactical helpless-
ness of a sailing merchant ship when in sight of an eriemy’s steam
cruiser, while the position of a merchant steamer in the same situation
may not be one of danger if her speed be greater than that of her
vulture opponent. Under these circumstances, to push enquiry no
further, it may be said that the danger to which our sea commerce is
exposed in any ocean district is proportionable to the preponderance
of steam or sail tonnage. Taking the Table (I) of value with
Table (II) of shipping together, it may, by way of general illustra-
tion, be assumed that, other things equal, though the total value to
the United Kingdom of the North Seas District is three times that of
the South Pacific, the danger to which the United Kingdom com-
merce in the South Pacific would be exposed in war is five-fol 4 as
compared with the North Seas. We have here, again, matters
requiring vigilant and constant observation at the hands of naval
intelligence, for the proportion of steam to sailing tonnage is never
the same, it is steadily increasing, l but not uniformly in all trade
directions. Every ton of steam substituted for sail tonnage is a gain
to the strength of our naval position in war, provided our naval in-
telligence and arrangements are sufficient to prevent its being
frightened under a foreign flag by failure to protect our commerce at
the commencement of hostilities.
The first line of Table IY gives, in round numbers, the total values
of ocean districts to the United Kingdom already given in full in
Table I. The second line gives the values of ocean districts to India
and the colonies, exclusive of their trade with the mother country.
Had these two islands been sunk beneath the sea, or otherwise dis-
appeared from the map of the world during the year 1879, the figures
on the second line of Table 1Y would still have represented the
values of surviving British exports and imports during that year, the
aggregate being nearly 200,000,000 Z. The third line adds together
the figures on the first two, thus giving the Imperial values of the
several ocean districts. Thus, it will be seen that the total value of
British commerce to be protected in war is about 800,000,000 Z. : more
than one-fourth the sea trade of the whole world, British Empire
included. It has been estimated that some 70 per cent, of the sea
trade of the world is carried in British ships, and that the value of
1 The number of steam and sailing vessels (British) .engaged in foreign trade in
1869, as compared with 1879, illustrates the above statement: —
1869 810 steamers, 6,963 sailing.
1879—2,027 „ 4,832 „
2,183 decrease.
During the years 1877-80 'the number of British steamers increased 22£ per cent.,
of French 25 per cent., German I7i per cent.


British shipping is some 100,000,0002. I should here remind you of
the consequent enormous number of British ships employed carrying
goods from foreign ports to foreign ports of which we have no
account, but which will equally require protection in war. To con-
clude remarks on the simple values of ocean districts and shipping, it
is desirable to observe that while the annual value of British sea trade
is some 800,000,000 Z., and though the value of British shipping on
the oceans and seas is worth some IOfhOOOjOOOZ. I more, we are without
any organized system of naval intelligence necessary for its safety in
war, and the popular national idea seems to be that were the
“ Inflexible’s ” sides only made thick enough, her guns big enough,
and the Admiralty worked cheap enough, she should almost single-
handed provide safety for such gigantic trade.
But the simple values of ocean districts already given does not
represent the real value of British commerce which passed over them
in one year. There is a process of accumulation due to the move-
ments of commerce over the area of some ocean districts in passage to
or from others. Table V shows the oceanic accumulations resulting
from the movements of British commerce in 1879, from hemisphere to
hemisphere only. There are other and minor accumulating processes
which must here be passed by, I compute the value to British com-
merce of the great passes from hemisphere to hemisphere as follows:
Via Suez Canal £82,600,000
„ Cape of Good Hope 50,000,000
„ „ Horn 33,400,000
It will be seen from this table that while the simple value, for ex-
ample, of the South Atlantic district is but 28,700,000 Z., the volume of
trade passing via the Horn and Cape raises that value to 112,200,000 Z.;
and, in like manner, there is an increase of simple values, as shown by
the table, in the case of the South Pacific and the Indian Seas districts.
As regards the North-East Atlantic it is obvious that, as the southern
and western seaboards of the United Kingdom are situated in that
district, and as the United Kingdom trade with all districts, except
the North Seas, is 449,600,0002., these figures represent the accumu-
lated value of the North-East Atlantic to the mother country only;
but as the rest of the Empire has a trade in this North-East Atlantic
district of 26,900,000 Z., and also a North Sea trade passing over it of
1,400,0()0Z., the Imperial accumulated value of this North-East Atlantic
district is 477,000,000 Z. The actual value of the waters of the United
Kingdom is,,of course, represented by its total trade with all districts,
viz., 600,000,0002, odd. I cannot say more on the variations of values as
regards place, but must pass on to illustrate variations as regards
time. Accumulations are not simultaneous, and it would be the func-
tion of naval intelligence always to know not only where the major
and minor accumulations are taking plape, but also when and how. As
the movement of the protecting force must be ruled by the movements
of commerce, to be without such intelligence kept up to date is, to
1 The value of British goods, &c., on the sea in each year exceeds our total
National Debt!


my mind, to court terrible national disasters on the outbreak of war.
At Lloyd’s it is daily known where British ships are 1 in certain dis-
tricts, and probably on the declaration of war that association would
telegraph telling merchant ships where our war vessels were when
last heard of. But these war vessels will change positions ; perhaps
they may be looking for enemy’s cruizers whilst our merchant ships
are looking for them, as did Federal war vessels which never caught
the “Alabama” until she was driven into Cherbourg by need of
repairs. The system at Lloyd’s is perfectly adapted to Lloyd’s business-
insurance for the protection of individuals directly concerned against
the risks of the sea: it could daily furnish much valuable data neces-
sary to naval intelligence required for the protection in war of our
greatest national interests. #
The diagram headed “ Imports ” illustrates in a simple manner the
increase and diminution of volume varying with the seasons of the
year. It is not necessary to point out the original causes producing
the results here exhibited. Every one knows that the harvests of the
world are not simultaneous, and that when in one hemisphere they
are reaping in the other they are sowing. But there is another in-
fluence which determines the period of the year at which the crop
reaches us, the sea distance it has to cover before it reaches us. For
example, the wheat which comes to us from the North Pacific States
of America is grown within a comparatively short distance from that
which finds its way via the North-West Atlantic, from the neighbouring
districts of the United States; but from the date of “export” from
those seaboards respectively until the date of its arrival here there is
a difference of three and a half months. A grain vessel leaving Port-
land Oregon, for the United Kingdom will, as regards time, be in war
exposed to risk of capture for four and a half months, while the gram
vessel simply crossing the North Atlantic will only be so exposed for
one. North Pacific wheat will be accumulating in the South Pacific
in the last quarter of the year, and more Australian wheat exposed to
capture “ off the Horn ” when the trees are budding in Hyde Park
than at any other time. The dates and extent of maximum accumu-
lations of our wheat, raw cotton, and wool at various points in the
ocean can be broadly arrived at from this diagram. I shall merely
draw attention, however, to three general facts. From a successful
attack on our commerce in the North-West Atlantic in the autumn
we should suffer most as regards food. If that attack was delivered
1 Through the kindness of the Secretary of Lloyd’s, I am informed of the follow-
ing facts showing progress of our mercantile marine and Lloyd’s system
Number of Reports of Sailing Arrivals, Sfc., Lloyd's Lists, 1860 and 1880.
Sailings. Arrivals. Speakings.
1860 33,899 158,921 11,507
1880 288,919 373,822 24,258


two or three months later the hands in Manchester cotton mills would
suffer the heaviest blow; if, however, in the spring of the year our
commerce passing over the South Atlantic was interfered with, York-
shire operatives would be the greatest victims. The export diagram
shows how the flow of precious metals is to some ocean districts con-
stant, and to others variable as the seasons change. An import
diagram of gold and silver would show a different distribution, but
about the same amount coming as going; the South Pacific column
would not he a blank, as on an average some five millions a year comes
from Australia. The coal diagram shows the tremendous absorption
of British coal by seaboards in the North Seas and North-East Atlantic
districts, which are, with small exceptions, foreign not British. It
will be seen from this that on the outbreak of hostilities there would
not be much difficulty in the supply of British coal to enemy’s cruisers,
it can be easily trans-shipped at neutral ports and sent in foreign
bottoms where needed. On an average, 1,800 British and 1,100
foreign coal-laden ships leave our shores in each month for the several
ocean according to their demands. Whether in war our
enemy’s cruisers get British coals to enable them to operate against
British commerce will entirely depend on British naval intelligence.
The commander of a cruiser knowing his business would be fully
aware at what points out of sight .of neutral seaboards he could calcu-
late on capturing from one to perhaps fifteen British coal ships per
week; while a British naval commander, perhaps in search of him,
and with coal bunkers half empty, might be on a main route, say 100
miles outside, and not know where to find coal on the sea, because he
has never had an opportunity of learning, and no naval intelligence is
organized to put in war, complete instructions on this and other
matters into his hands with his sailing orders. It may be asked, how
is the hostile cruiser’s Captain to know where to go to ? The answer is
simple. The interest of trade necessitates the publication of complete
information for its own purposes. The operation of enemy's cruisers
, and the instructions to their commanders will unquestionably be care-
fully calculated and prepared from information collected long before
and up to date from voluminous papers and returns —some official and
others non-official—daily published in England, that great centre of
the world’s trade and great national defaulter in this matter of
organized naval intelligence for war.
I would here take the opportunity of expressing my obligations to
Mr. Woods, the editor of “ Dornbusch’s Lists Mr. Turner, of the
“ Mark Lane Express Messrs. Gooch and Cousins, of the great wool
warehouses; to the editor of “ Brown’s Export List,” and others too
numerous to mention, who have enabled me to accumulate more facts
than I could possibly make use of in a single paper here. lam also
greatly indebted to the Peninsular and Oriental, the Royal Mai], the
Anchor and the Pacific Navigation, and other companies, for much
information kindly and readily afforded. In order to give some idea
of the importance of our sailing trade, and for reasons which will
presently appear, I have made out Table VI, which shows roughly the
average number of grain and wool laden sailing ships on passage per


week in each quarter of the year to the United Kingdom from three
ocean districts. I have omitted the wool trade of the South Atlantic,
because the larger proportion of Cape wools comes as part cargoes in
regular steamships; also the North-East Atlantic, because the grain
and wool from the Euxine and Egyptian seaboards comes also in
steamers as a rule; last year, for example, the average number of
grain-laden sailing ships passing Constantinople for the United
Kingdom was about eight per month, while the average number of
steamers so passing with parcels of grain as part cargoes, was twenty-
two per month. With reference to the shifting of the sources of our
food supply from the east of Europe to the Western States of America,
I may incidentally state that over 1,400 British ships (to say nothing
of foreign) carried grain to us from the single port of New York last
year. This sailing ship table is compiled from the best trade sources
of information; but at best the figures can only be an approximation
very far short of the actual numbers, and are only produced here for
the sake of rough illustration.
I would observe that the diagrams and the table of sailing ships on
passage represent the averages not for one year, but of a series ; in the
case of the diagrams the last six, in that of the table the last three
years. Time compels me to abstain from further illustration, or from
following up the complication of lessons those so rudely drawn, teach.
A great variety of very important matter I am obliged to leave
wholly unnoticed. With the facts and figures herein offered I put in
juxtaposition an extract from the speech of a most able naval admi-
nistrator of our own time. “ When,” said the Duke of Somerset in the
House of Lords, “ I was at the Admiralty, the little squabble about the
“ ‘ Trent ’ question happened. One of the Lords asked me what would
“be done in case of war. I replied, ‘ I can tell you one thing I shall
“ ‘ (j 0 —y 0U w iU have to sleep on the Admiralty Board table, for I won’t
“ ‘ let you away.’ In full view of even the outline of facts I have
produced, and with this statement staring us in the face, I would ask,
should not the unfortunate Naval Lord on the table—sleepless with work
and crushed with an Atlas burden of responsibility —have at least the
assistance of an organized and far-reaching system of naval intelli-
gence ? As regards information concerning the naval means and
preparations of foreign Powers, I have no wish to raise a discussion
as to whether a separate department of the Admiralty should be
created for this special purpose, because the subjects for digestion are
so various and so essentially different, that most probably it would be
better for each branch, such, for example, as the construction or gun-
nery branch, to collect information relating to.its own peculiar functions,
rather than endeavour to lump every description of information in one
single department. It is, in short, a purely departmental question,
which those acquainted with the internal working of the Admiralty
are alone competent to discuss. I do, however, venture to maintain
that our huge sea commerce requires a special and distinct Intelligence
Department so constituted as to be in a position to ensure that the
1 Vide “ Times,” February 17, 1871.


Admiralty shall at'all times have at its comruand the fullest and most
complete information respecting the positions of our commerce on the
sea, and the best possible intelligence relative to all those special
matters to which I have referred. Further, I submit that such a
department to be really efficient must absorb in itself the active,
practical co-operation of the representatives of the great commercial
interests to be protected on the sea in war. I may briefly outline my idea
as to its constitution evolved by many years’ consideration. I should
wish to see established a Commercial Intelligence Council. The Pre-
sident to be an Admiral with a seat at the Board of Admiralty, but
whose sole time should be devoted to the collection, organization, and
digestion of intelligence necessary for the direct defence of sea com-
merce; he should have no other duties, for assuredly he would have more
than enough to do. The members of the council of which this Admiral
would be president, should all be representatives of the greatest ship-
ping and chief export and import interests, and the position and
emoluments of these members should be such as to secure the services
of those who have the fullest confidence, and the most intimate know-
ledge of the interests they represent, so that a seat on this council should
be deemed to be of importance to the nation and a high honour to the
individual. The Admiral would then be in direct communication with
the best sources of information, and his naval knowledge and experience
would enable him to sift and lay information before the Board of Admi-
ralty in a form available for practical application. There must, how-
ever, be subordinate departments in our great colonies, presided over by
naval Officers of superior rank, and civilian members chosen on similar
principles, for there is nearly 200,0f)0,000Z. of British commerce on
the sea which finds neither source nor destination in the United
Kingdom. These minor councils must work on the same lines as that
at headquarters, and supply the Admirals on the station with all
information. It may be exclaimed that this would involve expense. My
reply is, most certainly ; but surely a Power having 100,000,000 Z. worth
of shipping and 800,000,000 Z. worth of goods on the sea in each year,
and which freely spends some 6,600 Z. a-year on “ Military Intelligence,”
cannot grudge 15,000 Z. or 20,000 Z. a-year for the purpose of collecting
and organizing intelligence necessary for the safety of such wealth.
The trade and shipping interest in Parliament is doubtless able to
ensure the passing of a vote for the purpose so deeply concerning
itself. .
But even assuming that these centres of naval intelligence are
established, one great question still presents itself for consideration.
How is it to be communicated in war to naval commanders stationed
perhaps in mid-ocean and merchant ships on passage ? It is hardly
within the bounds of possibility that we can spare swift vessels to run
about the world with no other object but communicating orders and
intelligence to fleets, squadrons, and ships. I cannot close without
some brief remarks upon this most important branch of my subject.
In the first place, it appears to me that in the direct protection of
commerce, two main conditions have to be fulfilled: Ist, the protection
of the main ocean routes ; 2nd, the pi’otection of the water areas




lying between the main ocean routes and the trading seaboards.
We have, therefore, in maritime war to provide for three great naval
operations, each having special circumstances peculiar to itself: Ist,
the .blockade of the enemy’s coast; 2nd, the securing of the ocean
routes of the world; 3rd, coast covering operations off neutral sea-
boards to provide safety for our commerce on passage between such
seaboards and the. ocean routes. I must confine my remarks efntirely
to intelligence on the ocean routes. .Reference to the sketch map I
have prepared of the Atlantic Ocean very roughly indicates the main
routes. I take this water district of the world for example, because
it is, as we have seen, the area of greatest accumulation, and, further,
because it is in a strategical sense the simplest to deal with. The
shaded portions indicate what may be termed the “ dead water areas ”
where they appear in mid-sea, and “ coast covering areas ” where
.they have land for one or more boundaries. The unshaded channels
represent roughly the sailing waters, the arrow heads indicate
the direction of the route, and the circles indicate the junc-
tions of one or*more of these routes, the black lines crossing the
shaded parts of the Atlantic Ocean are certain steam lines. To
shorten and simplify my illustrations so as to save time, I shall
only allude now to the southern portion of this sketch. I must, how-
ever, remind you that the areas enclosed by these circles must be held
secure; that while their strategic value in a geographical sense does
not change, the pressure of commerce, so to speak, varies in some cases
with the seasons of the year ; that there are in this one section of the
ocean six circles, and each would require a considerable squadron to
provide adequate safety, and that there is over and above all, this one
great main route across the Worth Atlantic with its own special peculi-
arities and naval needs. I might remark also that the diameters of
these circles are not all equal; nor is the value of commerce passing
over them the same; nor will the greatest periodic accumulations of
commerce within these areas take place simultaneously; nor will the
distribution of the squadrons protecting the areas be uniformly the
same, as each has its own peculiarities of physical circumstances. I may
call attention in passing to the fact that, as Table V indicates, some
hundred millions’ worth of our commerce annually passes over that
part of the Equator enclosed by the circle on the sketch ; in extent it
is some 600 miles, and, therefore a 12-knot steamer would take over
two days simply to go from one end to the other, a considerable squadron
would therefore be required for the adequate protection of this most
important position. But, as also shown on the sketch map the great
steam track to the Cape crosses the Equ&tor a long way to the east of
this circle, and as a general rule on every ocean in proportion to the
power and endurance of the steamers' employed, so do their routes
vary and diverge from the sailing trade, for the more independent
are they of these influences which rule, the direction of the sailing
trade. Now also in proportion to endurance and power are steamers
efficient as weapons of war, and unless in war all the great steam lines
are compelled to conform as far as possible to the sailing routes, we
shall waste force, leave our position weaker than it need be, and debar
c 2


naval intelligence from being passed with rapidity and certainty
along our lines. It is useless to hold the fixed positions and “ stra-
“ tegic areas ” of the sea, however securely, unless the intervals
•between them are efficiently patrolled; it is absolutely necessary
to do both, so that a cruiser will be driven to seek the waifs and
strays of our commerce in “ dead water areas where her game
will not be worth the candle, or rather the coal, or have to seek
her quarry off coasts where she should be dealt with by the coast
covering force. Unless the Admiral in command of an ocean
fleet is kept constantly informed of the probable dates of accu-
mulations of commerce over the various positions in his district, he
must more or less be working in the dark. For example, the weekly
average of grain ships due to arrive here from the South Pacific
during last August was thirty. It is known in the City what number
of vessels and what quantity of food stuffs are on passage and from
whence and when these ships are due to arrive at our ports. These
South Pacific grain ships would have been due to arrive within the
limits of the equatorial circle in July, and a naval commander there
might have known even the names of the vessels and all particulars
about them six weeks before they came within the limits of his com-
mand. More than this, if the great steam lines conform to the sailing
routes in war, each steamer would not only bring intelligence from
squadron to squadron on the line, but would collect by observation a
great deal of information as to the commerce en route, and communi-
cate it to the squadron in passing. No cruizer could appear at any
point of the routes without its being thus very soon known even to
Admirals hundreds of miles away and in mid-ocean. Now it appears
to be assumed that the best of our merchant steamers are to be armed,
not for the purpose of continuing to follow their ordinary avocations
in defiance of “ Alabamas,” but for general service here, there, and
everywhere, supplementing our regular squadrons or carrying military
expeditions. I would, therefore, submit for discussion very brief
observation on this matter. To avoid any misapprehension, I must
first say my conviction as to arming merchant ships is this, —that the
exigencies of maritime war will necessitate our arming not merely a
careful selection of the best, but every ocean-going British steamer.
We must prepare in peace to give them at home and abroad arma-
ments and trained instructors, on the declaration of war and then bid
them follow their avocations and let our enemy’s know we mean to
carry on our sea trade “ in spite of their teeth,” under the banner, if
you like, of “ Defence not Defiance.” I see no reason why, for
example, the Peninsular and Oriental Comany, with its twenty steamers
a fortnight on the oceans, could not answer for the patrol and intelli-
gence duties on Indian and certain Australian routes without any very
serious interference with the ordinary duties of their trade, provided the
trained gunnery instructors, guns, fittings, and magazines be forthcom-
ing at once, when wanted at points along the lines. Now, if on the other
hand, the best of this Company’s steamers are taken off the line in war
and attached to the Royal Navy for general service, the gold and silver
so constant in its flow as shown on the diagram must be carried in


inferior vessels, less capable of fighting or even running away from an
enemy’s cruiser, you thereby increase the chance of capture, and every
capture will frighten so many merchant ships under a foreign flag.
To an Empire unconsolidated for purposes of common defence, mari--
time war may prove a severe strain; it is largely through colonial
subsidies, the vessels employed in the Imperial Mail Service are so
efficient, so capable of adaptation as weapons of war. Will their removal
off the line in the hour of colonial peril, produce that confidence essential
to willing co-operation P As Sir Alexander Galt pointed oht the
other day, the colonies take more of our manufactures than *all
Europe; by removing the best of the regular colonial steamers, you
force a considerable proportion of some fifty millions worth of exports
to the colonies and India, into the holds of the lame ducks of steam
companies’ fleets, and thus deliberately increase the chances of
capture.
I submit such views to the examination of those who think that for
general service the Royal Navy can be largely supplemented with the
best of our merchant steamers, and, therefore, conclude that the defi-
ciency in strength of the Royal Navy can be made good in a hurry by
drafts on the steam mercantile marine. I venture to think that the full
gravity of the problem of protection of our commerce is not even faintly
realized by the country, and that what its solution involves, is not in
the smallest degree understood. It is a matter with which national
ignorance likes to fiddle, but which national intelligence apparently
fears to face. It would be very desirable that some practical experiment
m order to rouse national attention should be tried. We have had
manoeuvres to test our readiness for invasion, why not test our readiness
to guard the people’s food ? Such an experiment would cost but little
and might thus be carried out. , Take the “ Hecla,” or hire a merchant
steamer, give her a roving commission, such armament as she can
carry, and a plentiful supply of red or white paint. Let her put to
sea and disappear. Give notice to the Admirals abroad, and -allow
them ample time to make their arrangements to protect commerce
from this pretended hostile cruiser, which, instead of capturing and
burning, might be authorized to paint on the side of any Eritish vessel
boarded at discretion, either a large C for capture, or B for burnt.
Of course, if brought within range of a war ship of superior gun
power, the experiment must terminate, as the cruiser’s career may be
presumed to have finished, but by all means let her go on marking
British ships until that happens, even though C’s and B’s crowd our
ports. This experiment would be of more value than a hundred papers
such as this to determine the question whether systematic organized
naval intelligence is or is not a great national necessity.
c 3


grouped t‘, e oii7nLZ d BXt Tf t0 an if rom f* United Kingdom only, from and.io Seaboards of tire World.
(1879) ' “ iS ° foreign from British Seaboard
Designation of Districts.
From and to Foreign Countries in
District.
From and to British Possessions in
District.
Total value Imports
and Exports grouped
in Ocean Districts.
Value of Imports.
Value of Exports.
Value of Imports,
Value of Exports.
Northern Seas District
N.E. Atlantic „ ,
*f.W. Atlantic „
South Atlantic , „
Indian Seas .,
North Pacific „
South Pacific
.£
78,420,941
78,277,323
93,521,458
6,041,890
2,040,116
17,646,906
8,100,603
£
72,082,722
55,215,551
31,544,755
9,229,204
2,449,796
9,266,247
2,486,116
£
Nil. 1
801,010
17,718,615
4,682,409
21,681,286
1,357,085
21,964,440
£
Nil. 1
2,540,074
9,140,023
6,417,921
26,429,791
3,208,227
17,959,705
£
150,503,663
136,833,958
151,924,851
26,371,424
52,600,989
31,478,465
50,510,864
284,049,237
182*274,391
68,204,845
65,695,741
600,224,214
1 It is to be observed that Heligoland and the Channel Islands are excluded from these Tables, being considered as parts of
the United Kingdom. •


Table II. — Number of British Vessels Entered to and Cleared from United Kingdom (including repeated Voyages') with
CAEGOES from, and to Seaboards of the World, grouped by Ocean Districts and in one Year only (1879), distinguishing
Foreign from British Seaboard Commerce in Districts, and also Steamers from Sailers ; and showing Aggregate
Total Tonnage of all.
Ocean Districts.
«
Prom and to District Foreign
Ports.
From and to District British
Ports.
Total entered
and cleared
to all Ports.
Tonnage entered and
cleared to all
Ports.
Entered.
Cleared.
Entered.
Cleared.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Northern Sea District.
N.E. Atlantic „
N.W. Atlantic „
South Atlantic „
Indian Sea „ ■
N. Pacific „
S. Pacific „
Total
6,547
8,342
1,455
162
2
84
25
2,025
2,903
1,628
231
52
210
259
8,262
10,476
1,174-
220
16
3
24
2,193
4,266
648
586
72
78
254
i_ _
35
270
73 .
235
1
24
<
29
1,639
67
486
14
300
>
538
330
91
488
38
<
59
1,013
286
648
22
458
14,809
19,391
3,229
546
741
88
111
4,218
7.257
4,928
1,170
1.258
324
1,271
7,275,364
8,529,765
5,562,524
712,620
1,090,282
134,162
234,557
659,931
1,147,509
2,991,519
,503,785
1,394,647
315,745
1,087,629
16,617
7,308
20,175
8,097
638
2,535
1,485
2,486
38,915 2
20,426
23,539,274
8,100,765
1 It is to be observed that Heligoland and the Channel Islands are excluded from these Tables, being considered as parts of the
United Kingdom.
2 1,444 British vessels passed through Suez Canal. ,r


able III. dumber of British Vessels Entered to and Cleared from the United Kingdom (including repeated Voyages ) in
ballast , front and to Seaboards of the World grouped by Ocean Districts , and in one Year only (1879), distinguishing
hoi eign from British Seaboard Commerce in those Districts, and also Steamers from Sailors : and showing Aggregate
Total Tonnage of. all. ,* t * * * -
* ■
Ocean Districts.
From and to District Foreign
Ports.
From and to District British
Ports.
Total entered
and cleared
to all Ports.
Total Aggregate
Tonnage entered and
cleared to all Ports.
Entered.
Cleared.
Entered.
Cleared.
Steam.
Sad.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail.
Steam.
Sail
Steam.
Sail.
Northern Seas Districts
N.E. Atlantic „
N.W. Atlantic „
South Atlantic „
Indian Seas „
North Pacific „
South Pacific „
Total
2,526
3,084
678
1,701
1
1
1
346
842
204
9
1
7
4
335
599
711
7
i _
10
8
2
2
i # #
*2
24
14
7
6
1
3
443
3
4
i
2,872
3,938
228
31
10
7
10
1,013
2,305
1,155
11
5
1
1,711,827
1,588,165
275,426
53,963
6,055
3,706
3,864
296,232
388,486
870,882
5,163
4,655
' 714
5,610
2,382
1,413
1,652
20
2
53
454
7,096
4,490
3,643,006
1,566,132
1 It is to be observed that Heligoland and the Channel Islands are excluded from these Tables, being considered as parts of the
United Kingdom!


Table IV. Value of Trade of United, Kingdom by Ocean District; also the Value of Indian and Colonial
Trade (exclusive of that with United Kingdom) ; and further the Imperial Value of the Ocean District.
North Seas.
North-west
Atlantic.
North
Pacific.
South' •
Pacific.
Indian Seas.
South
Atlantic.
North-east
Atlantic.
Totals.
United Kingdom trade
{vide Table I) ....
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
150,500,000
151,900,000
31,400,000
50,500,000
52,600,000
26,300,000
136,800,000
600,000,000
Indian and Colonial
• (exclusive of that
with United King-
dom)
1,400,000
22,200,000
22,400,000
38,400,000
77,100,000
2,400,000
26,900,000
190,000,000
I MPEEIAL VALUE ....
151,900,000
174,100,000
53,800,000
88,900,000
129,700,000
28,700,000
163,700,000
790,000,000
Iable V. fehoiving Oceanic Accumulations caused hy Movements of Commerce between the Hemispheres during Year 1879.
•
South
Pacific.
Indian Seas.
South
Atlantic.
North-east
Atlantic.
Imperial value; ( vide Table IY)
£
88 goo non
£
1 99 'TOO ono
£
98 voo non
£
From and to North Pacific in transit, via Horn
biooo’ooo
» » „ „ Cape and Canal
„ South Pacific „ „ ►.
26.400.000
23.500.000
,, North and South Pacific ih transit, via Horn
33,500,000
50,000,000
,, .North and South Pacific and Indian Seas in transit, vid Cape....
>> »• » » ,, Canal...
••
82,600,000
Accumulated values caused by transit between hemispheres
93,900,000
179,600,000
112,200,000
9A(\ 3 on non


Table VI.
Weekly Number of Grain and Wool Sailing Ships on Passage to United Kingdom from three Ocean
Distficts in each Quarter of the Year.
* ‘
From
North east Atlantic.
Fr<5m
North Pacific.
From
South Pacific.
Grand Total
Weekly
Average
N umber of
Ships.
o
•a
c5
•N
S3
O
-43
o3
pS
S3
-43
o3
©
S3
o
o
£
-43
E
+3
E
s
49
• rH
£
Total.
M
42
E
Total.
£
-43
E
S
cs
£
E
lotal.
■
.
1st Quarter of Year
26
30
A
163
66
138
204
429
2nd „
42
42
8
92
91
12
103
149
156
308
50.3
3
3rd „
*
7!
78
48
123
58
185
387
/
4
4th „
66
66
4
85
4
78
167
380 .
o7
1 For the three years 1878-9-80.
