





NEBUCHADNEZZAR
OR
THIS GREAT BABYLON
The only portrait of the Great King (supposed). A Cameo
engraved by a Greek in the Royal service. It reads; “To Marduk,
his lord, Nebuchadnezzar. King of Babylon, for his life this made.”
A SPECTACULAR, HISTORICAL
DRAMA.


Nebuchadnezzar
or
THIS GREAT BABYLON.
A SPECTACULAR HISTORICAL DRAMA.
Played in the Garrick Theatre, Melbourne,
(Copyright).
By Dr. A. LAW.
(Author of plays, “The Message of Hope” and “Job, and Mr. Job-
of Australia”).
ACT I. WARRIOR AND BUILDER.
Scene 1. Camp at Riblah, Palestine. The Sword.
2. Palace Corridor, Babylon. The Youths.
3. The Audience Chamber, The Dictation.
ACT 11. THE DREAMER.
Scene 1. Audience Chamber. The Forgotten Dream.
2. Audience Chamber. The Story of the Furnace.
3. Audience Chamber. The Tree cut down,
4. Audience Chamber (a year later). The Mad-
ness of the Dreamer.
ACT 111. THE GREAT.
Scene 1. Corridor. A marvellous Inter-regnum.
2. The Throne Room. The Great King.
About the year 712 B,C. the Prophet Isaiah fulminated against
Babylon, one of the great world powers, and his nation’s enemy.
He foretold its destruction. The Assyrians, a northern rival to
Babylon, despoiled Palestine, taking captive large portions of the
Northern Tribes, known as Israel. Nebuchadnezzar, the Great, son
of the King of that name, reigned from 604 to 561 B.C. He led a
series of expeditions. Jerusalem was twice taken. On the second
time, 586 B.C. circ., King Zedekiah was blinded and taken away,
and the city destroyed. For 70 years the Jews, who were taken
captive, with the Tribe of Benjamin, dwelt in Babylon, this being
the King’s policy in breaking resistance. (On its reversal by Cyrus,
later on, some of the Jews returned, and re-built Jerusalem). Nebu-
chadnezzar defeated Amasis, King of Egypt, and overran that land.
He finished a reign of 43 years, broken by a remarkable absence,
which both the Bible and Archaeology record. It must be noted
how much individuality was necessary to hold a throne. The theory
of the Play is that Belteshazzar contributed to this. Slight record
of warlike achievement has been found, but a great deal of building
i S on escr *k o * n the brick records. The magnificence of the city, even
0 years later, caused Herodotus, the Greek historian, to say he
I eared he would not be credited. Xenophon, some 50 years later


still, reports further facts. To-day vast heaps of ruined brickwork
in a desert mark what was one of the loveliest and grandest of
cities, silent witness to the work of Nebuchadnezzar the Great.
This Play was inspired first by reading what archaeology wit-
nesses to the character of Nebuchadnezzar. The Bible, for the most
part, presents the King in a less attractive way, which was entailed
by his destruction of Jerusalem.
The period dealt with was one of the most eventful in human
history, and particularly in the realm of thought. It has been termed
“The Coming of Age of Mankind.” About then not only were
Nebuchadnezzar and his Great Babylon, but it was the age of Hie
Great Hebrew Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc., and of the
Greek Sages, and it was the time of the birth of Rome. Also, about
then came Gautama the Buddha, with his wondrous philosophy
(which, by the way, provided subject for a play by the author). Con-
fucius was born 551.
The Bible story is to be read in Daniel, ch. 1-4; 11. Kings 24 and
25; Isaiah 13, 14, 17; Jeremiah 24, 25, 29, 32, 34, 39, 50; Rev. 21.
CHARACTERS.
MUTABIL, the King’s Armourer.
ZARADAN, Captain of the Guard.
NEBUCHADNEZZAR 11., King of Babylon.
ARIOCH, the King’s Captain,
KING ZEDEKIAH (silent part) and Two Sons.
ETANA, chief of the Chaldean Seers.
SECOND and THIRD SEERS.
ASHPENAZ, the King’s Steward, Chief of the
Eunuchs.
SUMALIYA, Daughter of the King.
AMUHIA, Wife of the King.
HERALD.
BELTESHAZZAR (silent part). (Daniel).
Some characters, with words and acts, have been invented to
assist the story, which has been gathered from the Holy Bible and
Archaeological reports. Little liberty has been taken with any his-
toric fact, except that, instead of introducing the person of Daniel
as a speaker (which would have subordinated him), interviews with
the King are presented in an indirect manner, that is, through an
intermediary.
Nebuchadnezzar’s name is more correctly, but less generally,
known as Nebuchadrezzar.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were the names given
Ananias, Azarias, and Misael. (See the Benedicite in Morning
Prayer).
Zaradan’s full name, Nebuzaradan, means “Nebo has given a
seed.”
Tiamut was the Goddess of Darkness, whom Marduk, the
supreme God, drove out with his thunderbolts.
Satrap signifies lieutenant, a governor over a whole province.
Belteshazzar, the name given Daniel in Babylon, means, perhaps,
“the prince whom Bel favours.”
(The medium in composition is a free use of “heroic verse”
with its “iambic pentameter,” giving stress on every second Word.


ACT I.
SCENE I.—CAMP AT RIBLAH, PALESTINE.
THE SWORD OF THE KING.
Armourer —singing to himself —“Nebuchadnezzar, the
King of the Jews,” etc., as he sharpens and
polishes the King’s great sword.
Enter Zaradan and Soldiers.
Zaradan:
Not ready yet? And, why that foolish song?
To be the King of Babylon were more
Than rule in Jewry o’er a scum of slaves,
’Tis true they caused us loss of time and men,
And twice has our Great King beseiged the place
So falsely named as Salem, House of Peace!
’Tis worse than Tyre, which thirteen years, upon
Its rocky point, defied our utmost strength.
Two years have passed since first we circled round
Jerusalem. At length we hold it fast.
We’ll make that upstart crowd once more eat dirt.
(Trumpet).
But stay! Here comes the King. Ho, Guard, fall in!
Enter Guards, forming in order. Enter King and Suite.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Those captives that I ordered you to take—
Seven thousand men of War; One thousand men
All skilled in crafts, and tested well by you.
Parade them now, and I’ll decide their fate.
(Exit Arioch).
Now show the Tablets. Quick. I want the best
Of this mad Tribe—the Nobles with their King.
For if we take their leaders, then the rest
Will docile stay and till the land in peace,
And dress their vines, and toil as husbandmen.
Nor shall I bother with them all, but take
Enough to Babylon to grace my court,
Or, maybe, swell the ranks of Chaldean Seers.
For these same Jews have occult power,
Excel in Prophets, who have speech with gods.
And, those that I refuse to take, may stay—
Yes, very still upon this Judean soil!
Their blood I’ll mingle with the dust to make
An increased harvest for the remnant left.
Zaradan;
Most excellent, O King, in that thy skill
Shall force these stubborn Jews to do thy will
Nebuchadnezzar.
And, Zedekiah, King? (spits) That thrice false
Knave ?


1 hardly know what I should do with him
And those base whelps, his sons, that he doth prize
I’ll wait until he comes, and then I’ll show
Him sight that never from his eye shall fade.
’Tis three and ten long years since I
Did plant him on his throne, and took his oath,
By all his gods, to faithful serve as King,
The King of Babylon.
Zaradan:
And Jeremiah,
That Prophet of Jehovah whom they serve,
Hath counselled all the Jews to keep that oath.
Call’st thou thyself the servant of their god.
And, wherefore do I fear that they may harm
The one who speaks against the people’s will.
Nebuchadnezzar:
See due protection be accorded him.
Zaradan:
’Tis very strange, that he should find a place
Within his law, for us, an alien race.
,That he, or other, should acclaim our hosts
As Servants of his God —as whips to scourge
His people when they err, as they have done,
Alleging that this deadly stroke hath come
Because of sin, when King Manasseh reigned.
Nebuchadnezzar: (sits)
Now tell me else of what thou did’st within
The city of the Jews to teach them sense.
Zaradan:
At thy august command, O King, I wrought
As thou did’st wish, to make them feel thy wrath,
That those who yet stay there bemoan their grief
At having seen the end of all their pomp.
I burned up Jehovah’s House of Gold—
Yet their Jehovah made no angry sign.
King Zedekiah’s House I also burnt,
And all the Houses of the place I burnt,
Both small and great, and brake down all the walls
Which Solomon their Greatest King had built,
Nebuchadnezzar:
Ah! That is good. In what plight were the men
Oppress’d by rigours of the two years siege?
Zaradan:
The famine sore within the city walls
Had wrought such havoc, the defenders stood
All weak and helpless there within our sight,
And scarce could lift a spear to hinder our attack.
At length we made a breach upon the walls,
And stormed the city, as their David did.


Their men of war then fled by night in feat,
And, taking Zedekiah, reached the plain
Of Jericho, by way of Arabah.
I overtook them there without delay,
And quickly brought them here to wait thy will.
Nebuchadnezzar: (rises)
Thou hast done well, thou trusty Zaradan,
And when we reach again our Babylon,
Ask thou of me the best of Satrap’s realm,
As due reward for faithful service done.
Go, bring this recreant King and all his herd.
(Exit Zaradan).
Before they come inspection I must make
Of our brave host, and implements of war,
That all may ready be for further fray.
(Enter Arioch).
Ho, Arioch! Show now the list you made
Of every loss, of warriors, gone, alas!
To feast with Merodach and all the gods.
Arioch:
O King, for ever live. May every foe
Be as these Jews beneath thy sandals trod.
But yet, I do deplore our many slain.
The cursed Jews are stubborn in defence,
Believing that Jehovah fights for them.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Where is Jehovah now? Their god hath fled.
His arm is shortened that it cannot save.
Arioch:
Such desp’rate valour I have never seen,
And that is why our most courageous men
Fell in assault, the siege prolonged .two years.
Our batt’ring engines pounded night and day,
And our new catapults flung heated stones
Upon the house-tops, setting them alight.
But naught availed to overcome the place,
Until it seem’d apparent to their minds
That Bel was greater than the god they served.
Jehovah left them since they scorned His word.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Had they but kept their faith their city stood,
But now we know by this that Bel is Lord.
I’ll take the golden vessels and rich robes
Found in the Temple of the god who failed!
And offer them to mighty Merodach.
But come, let’s see this Zedekiah, Beast! (Exeunt).
Armourer (alone —humming as before, and polishing) :
Ah, thou bright sword, the King of Babylon’s
True friend. ’Tis thee he always wields in fight.
And thou art like thy King and he like thee.


For all things near a person do assume
The hue and character of him or her
Who owns and uses them. Thus we create
Unconsciously our likes and hates of things,
And thou, good sword, I love, for thou art his.
And Great as he is great. Thou tell’st of him,
As now, so quiet in reflective mood
I see my features in thy polished face,
As his mind calm sees more than seers can.
Anon, in his strong hands, thee drawing forth
(Flashes sword).
He twists and turns, and cuts, and stabs, and slays,
Thy sharpened tongue then speaks his burning rage.
Enter Zaradan.
Zaradan:
Ah! Trying if ’tis fit for sudden use?
Methinks you are as keen as is that blade
To cut off heads—
Mutabil:
’Tis sharp enough by now.
Indeed I wish that I could dip it deep
In blood of hateful Jew, but yet poor dolts,
They’re hardly worth the trouble that you took.
Zaradan:
You should have been with us throughout the siege
Instead of here at Riblah with the King.
You then might better judge their fighting pow’r.
Mutabil:
The world will very well be rid of them,
For nevermore shall Jew lift up his head.
Zaradan:
You never know what hap to them may be—
The Jew’s endowed with weird vitality.
Mutabil:
But shall not Babylon outlast all else—
Jerusalem, and ev’ry city great,
And ev’ry realm, and ev’ry throne and state?
Zaradan:
May-be, while strong sword weilded by the strong
Defy the serried ranks of alien foe,
And such as our Great King suppress all base
And sordid scheming ’gainst the throne at home.
If he should cease to rule—who else could cope
With influences working underground?
Mutabil:
Ah! Let the sword the Great King weilds, now speak.
To utter sharp and vehement rebuke,
And cause his foes to shrink away in fear.
I caught a Jew in flight from your attack,


Or thought—thought often quarrels with the fact—
I ran to take him, but he slipp’d away.
Zaradan:
You have to be alert to catch a Jew.
Lest, in the end, you find that he gets you.
Mutabil:
You read my mind. He turned and stood aside,
And as I pass’d he trip’d me up, and smiled,
Seeing my sword fly from my hand to earth.
He lifted me upon my feet, and said.
“How stupid, blunting sword upon a Jew,
For never people prosper who hurt them.”
Zaradan:
But you were not ensnared by pliant talk?
Mutabil:
I never thought to act as I did then,
For by Great Bel, what do you think I did?
Zaradan:
You stuck him through, or let him go, you fool?
Mutabil:
I neither did. I hid him in my tent,
Though what to do with him I cannot tell.
Zaradan:
You’re not the first one puzzled by a Jew,
Nor shall be last to question what to do,
To let him go, or send him to his doom.
The Jew’s the chief enigma of the world.
Enter Nebuchadnezzar, etc. Zedekiah and two sons
sons bound. Irons in brazier near side.
Nebuchadnezzar:
My sword at once. I think to kill thee now,
Thou base and perjured coward, once a King,
Become another trophy to my might.
(Hands back sword).
But I have worse than Death for thee to taste.
Thou shalt go forth with me to Babylon,
And yet, that wondrous place shall never see.
Can’st solve the riddle? See, the sons thou lov’st,
Whom thou hast rear’d in devious ways of craft.
Thou dotest on them? Look! Drink in the sight—
That sight the last thy blasted eyes shall see—
Is those two boys, as they beheaded fall.
At once those red-hot irons there prepared
Shall scorch thine eyes till blinded they become.
How lik’st my Tender mercy? Suits you well.
Now, Armocrer, be quick.
(Armourer rushes off flashing his sword.
Zedekiah is turned to see).
And, Guards, well done.


(As Zedekiah is thrown down, and irons
taken to eyes).
My triumph o’er the Jew has now begun.
ACT I.
SCENE 2.—CORRIDOR IN PALACE AT BABYLON.
THE CAPTIVE YOUTHS.
Ashpenaz:
From what a pretty mess of dirty Jews
I had to pick the best to come with us,
To train them for the court, perchance as Seers!
The others perished by the sword they took.
Etana:
Your choice was difficult. Did’st thou consult
Their Horoscope, or read their fate in stars?
Ashpenaz:
Oh, they saw stars enough when they were struck.
But that was slight. My trouble now is worse
With some who came upon a former time.
Etana:
What? Are they rebels? Do they sulk and scowl?
I overheard some by the river-side
Who chanted dirge which ended in a threat—
“By waters Babylonian we sat down
And wept when we remembered thee, O Zion”
And, “Blessed shall he be that takes their babes r
And dashes them against the stones, O God.”
I fear me, lest they try such tricks on me.
Ashpenaz:
Oh, calm thy mind, and do not fear their hate.
Not all think so, some turn the words about,
Interpreting symbolically words
And make them spell a meaning good to us.
At least, the four I have do so, I know,
For kinder, abler men I seldom meet.
Thereby my trouble grows, apd presses sore.
Etana:
But wherefore hast thou come to me to learn
What is the way to bend them to thy will?
Ashpenaz:
The trouble is of diet and of drink.
Etana:
I never found that diet troubled me.
Ashpenaz:
Nor drink, except you could not get enough?
The King demandeth men about his Throne
Of fine appearance, and well-filled in face.
Etana:
Ah! men like me. I praise his cheerful taste.


Ashpenaz:
Aye, men like you, some day to take your place.
For when you fail to read a dream, they will.
Etana:
Then feed them well, and they’ll no secrets tell.
Ashpenaz:
And that is where you slip. They blank refuse
To eat rich portions from the King’s own board,
But plead with me for pulse and poorer stuff.
Etana:
Oh, stay that whim, lest should the King approve,
Then we might lose our food, and starved become.
Ashpenaz:
Do you not fast? I hear of rig’rous ways.
Etana:
(Nudging him) Most folk, my friend, can juggle
with a fast.
Ashpenaz:
I see. But these four Jews have conscience strict.
Etana:
Then are they fools, and do not wish to please,
Nor stand before the King, promotion gain,
Nor prosp’rous be in this their new made home.
Ashpenaz:
Oh, they don’t care a rap, except to do
What they think right.
Etana:
How very queer, indeed.
That bright young people any scruples own.
I thought all that was out of date by now.
Ashpenaz:
And our great King demands “Of royal seed,”
“Of nobles,” “bring me youths without a fault,”
“Them teach the learning of Chaldean art,”
And, “Give therfl daily portions of my meat.”
How can I do all this'if they refuse?
Etana:
Cut off their heads.
Ashpenaz:
I daren’t without command.
Etana:
Then threaten them or flog them till they eat.
Ashpenaz:
Small care have they for that. To please their god
Is all that matters to them and their kind.
Etana:
You won’t find many like that in our Babylon.


Ashpenaz:
But can’t you help me? They request ten days
In which to try how poorer meals would serve.
Etana:
By all means run the risk. But as for me,
I think that I should faint, and lose my wits,
If 1 were starved like that for half the time.
And if the King should train these Jewish youths,
And, like most Jews, too crafty should they prove,
Why what becomes of him? Does he not think
It most unwise that near his throne should be
Such clever men lest they outshine the King?
(Enter Arioch).
Arioch:
A weakling thus proclaims the weakling’s rule.
Well, Ashpenaz, how fare your charges now?
Have you more relish for your nice young men?
Ashpenaz:
I like them well enough. But mention not
That word of relish. They will taste of naught
Like Spice, or flav’ring herbs, or sweetest wines.
Etana:
Oh, what a lot of joy they miss in life.
Arioch:
Perhaps they also miss some pains of yours.
How goes the gout? And that unpleasant head?
Etana:
Men can’t have every kind of joy at once.
Ashpenaz:
I think from what I see that eating gets
Far more attention from the mind of man
Than knotty problems and affairs of State.
Etana:
What would you have, my friend, in this sad world?
Let’s eat and drink, for we to-morrow die.
Arioch:
But where is room for teaching of the gods,
Their judgment sure, their quick exactions, too?
Etana:
I do not fancy that the gods much care
As long as they from mortals get their share.
So send into our Temples happy men;
Nor frown at entrance of the gentler sex,
With touch of red upon the cheek and lips,
That cunning art which every age provides
For woman who would fain defy her age.
Arioch:
I’d rather that more colour was within,
And less outside to dry and spoil the skin.


Etana:
We know in what direction lies your hope.
(Exit Arioch).
Ashpenaz:
Well, anyhow, the daughter of the King
Has mind which brightens in her face.
Her conversation, too, denotes her birth—
A worthy daughter of such gifted King.
Etana:
She shares with him our awful mystic skill
Which bridges ages, and events foretells.
Ashpenaz:
Yes. I’ll agree that those young men may try
For ten full days to come, how simpler food
Re-acts upon their bodies and their minds.
The King has evidently set his mind
On further schemes of building and of State,
I somehow think he will presume and force
Reforms within the order of you Seers. (Exit).
Etana:
But that is not his sphere, and we must plot
To keep the Throne subservient to us.
A world-wide rule—no battle ever lost.
Such vast achievement tempts the jealous gods.
On dizzy height oft forms a frantic fear
In mind forseeing the resultant crash.
The anger of the gods we soon shall mark,
As his vast ego tends to madness stark.
But lo! the Princess comes. She speaks as Seers,
And may rebuke the impious words of Kings. (Exit).
Enter Sumaliya (speaking as if in trance).
Sumaliya:
And Babel, Gate of God, its meaning turns
To babble with confusion, in a din
Of tongues, confounding sense of ear.
Her Towers arise no more to act as guides
To scattered travellers o’er the wide-spread plain.
For Bel hath seen your unity is wrong.
A City’s faults are great as she is great.
An evil lies in cent’ring interests here.
For much that’s aimed at hides a sordid mind.
And slaves must grind through weary, dreary toil.
And there are sins which flourish in a crowd,
Since men are very different in the mass,
Consenting then to things they each abhor.
And culture lessens with the growth of ease.
Cheap gingerbread delights the thoughtless mob.
Some day to come magnificence and pomp
Shall flee before the riot of the street,


And blood will flow, destruction dire shall fall
On every Babylon forgetting God.
Away to wider vistas should we hie,
If we would saner live and nobler die.
ACT I.
SCENE 3.—AUDIENCE CHAMBER. DICTATION.
N ebuchadnezzar:
Ho! Zaradan. How look those Jewish youths?
Have they fed well upon our regal fare?
I’ll warrant they have never had such food.
And are they fit to stand before my court?
And will they undertake the courses of the schools,
Including lessons in the Chaldean arts?
Zaradan (aside to King) :
I have examined them and find them all
That you, O King, will need in ev’ry way.
But what I fear I hesitate to state
Before these grave and much revered seers.
King (aside) :
Speak out, my man, these Seers have pleased me less
Of late. ’Twill do them good to have new blood,
And challenge of their powers and boasted art.
Zaradan.
The Jewish youths in this short time appear
Advanced in looks, in carriage, and in speech.
Their wisdom is apparent unto all.
I much misdoubt that there be any here
With them to make compare, despite their youth.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Thou’st found some marvel then, or made mistake
Unusual in your keen regard for things
Committed to your charge and oversight.
We’ll speak to them anon. Meanwhile prepare.
(Exeunt King, etc., except Seers).
Etana:
It’s we who must prepare for these young men,
And, if they trouble us too much, must scheme
To throw discredit on their nascent powers,
But scarcely need we fear these striplings yet,
For they have much to learn of occult art,
Of magic whereby miracles are wrought,
Perchance to walk through fire, and lions withstand.
Second Seer:
Our colleges will mould their plastic minds
Until they echo naught but what we teach.


Etana:
Here come the Dancing girls, and we shall have
Delight to ear and eye. Oh, what poor fools
Put question to such joy from rapt’rous step?
(Enter Girls, dancing).
Enter King while dancing on. Stop, waves “go on.”
Nebuchadnezzar:
Enough, bring in that scribe I called
To write with care on clay as I dictate,
That there may be for future age to read
What I have done, my vict’ries, and my works.
And help me now in this, that nought be missed.
(Enter Slave with tablets).
Thou Zaradan of War, and thou Chaldean,
Of this Great Babylon that I have built. (Dictates).
“Neb-u-chad-nezzar, I, ere placed on throne,
At Carchemish fought Pharaoh Necho, freed
All Western Asia from Egyptian grip,
And Palestine I ravaged several times.”
O Zaradan, thou knowest days and years.
Zaradan:
0 Thou great King, in militant array,
Thou often wentest forth to bloody fray,
And seized thy trusty sword—
Nebuchadnezzar:
Write you this word (to scribe),
“I, Neb -u-chad-see thou spell it right—
Nebuchadrezzar, first year on my throne.”
Zaradan:
Aye write it clear, for this will prove to be
The Book of Books, perus’d by ev’ry eye
Throughout the ages still to be on earth.
Etana:
No other Book of which I ever heard
Shall vie with what the Great King now dictates.
(King resumes dictation).
Sumaliya:
My father’s busy now. Thou must not speak,
But I am sure he’ll grant the boon you crave,
Which joins our fortunes, and will you advance
When you return a conqueror from the wars.
He tnen will bid our marriage rites proceed.
Arioch:
That I shall try, but what I fear more now
Lies in the task I’m set with these four youths.
Sumaliya:
1 thought that they progressed so rapidly
That they outstripp’d our very learned men.


Arioch:
Aye, that’s exactly where the trouble is
For Seers are ever a most jealous clique,
Upholding their descent from earliest days;
And tracing their succession through the age
They look askance upon such unfledged youths.
Sumaliya:
They then are more concerned with state than truths.
Nebuchadnezzar:
“I took my sword against Assyria,
Reducing every city to a heap,
Provided Picks and Spades and moulds for brick
Of Ivory and Cedar and the wood
Of Magan, and I caused Arahtu stream
To flow with pitch to bind the bricks I burnt.”
Zaradan:
And thou did’st then erect strong bulls of bronze,
And serpents terrible about to strike.
Sumaliya to Arioch:
I fear me greatly lest at times it be
That I should helpless stand before such beasts.
Arioch:
I thee will shield thou fair and lovely one,
Whose teeth are like a flock of sheep new shorn,
Thy lips, too, like a thread of scarlet bright.
Sumaliya:
0 Arioch, I deemed you only spake
As Warrior rough and not well used to Courts.
Arioch:
There is no better training than yourself
In what to say as fitting to my mind.
Sumaliya:
1 rather have suspicion that you read
All that in Jewish Book of which I’ve heard—
A lovely love song which they sang back there.
Arioch:
How could you know? You have net read their
Books?
Sumaliya:
It pays a girl to know whence men derive
The pretty flatteries which blind the heart.
N ebuchadnez zar:
“At Upper Tower, and by Ishtar’s Gate,
A fortress did I build of mortar and of brick.
I made the Ziggurat of Babylon
Seven stories high of brilliant colourings
And cedars did I fetch from Lebanon.”,


Zaradan:
And water like the floods of seas surround
The walls of Babylon on ev’ry side,
To bid defiance to invader’s raids.
Nebuchadnezzar.
“To honour Marduk, Nebo, his strong son,
Procession made along the great canal,
In beauteous barque adorned with wealthiest cloth
And filled with luxuries ’neath braided tents,
On pompous journey, spectacle for men.”
Sumaliya:
How long he goes? His text by no means spent.
Arioch:
And yet there will be those who shall esteem
It all too small a record of our times.
Could I but write in brick what now I feel
I’m sure that countless people would admire.
At least, the taste I have, if not my style.
For you do now dictate choice writing here.
Sumaliya:
They might not praise your choice nor think it wise
That warrior should seek to mate with one
Who dabbles in the mystic arts, and knows
The evils which must come upon the world.
Arioch:
It’ll do no good despairing, or through fear
Abandoning the daily common task.
Adversity, the Warrior’s ancient foe,
Should nerve our hands that they more keenly grasp
The sword of life, and thus I look to thee.
Nebuchadnezzar:
“Neb-u-chadnezzar, King of Babylon,
Exalted prince in worship of Marduk
The Lord supreme, beloved of Nebo god,
Unwearied prince in judgment at the Gate,
Restorer of the Temple Sagili.”
Sumaliya:
I like that better than the tales of War.
And often do I question if it be
A pleasure to the gods to shed man’s blood.
For if there be a God supreme above
Then why these endless Wars down here on earth?
Arioch:
Our Belteshazzar says his God ordains
Such things until men learn that He is God.
No other way can Nations that God know,
Unless they follow what the Jew can show.
Nebuchadnezzar:
“And Images I set, which never King
My predecessors made. And quays with ditch


Of bitumen and brick I raised up
To summits like to mountains rearing high.”
Amuhia (to King) :
They say the chariots along the streets
Make rush and noise confusing to the ear,
And cause the passer-by to hesitate
And fear, for life itself is jeopardised.
(Aside) I rather like to see how quick the throng
Do skurry from the wheels like frighten’d sheep.
Arioch:
I’ll place some men upon the streets, and stop
The heedless jostling of the chariots.
Amuhia:
But then you won’t do all, for men pretend
Like children, that the noise and speed are life.
But now, O King, the time is due to go
Within the Temple of the God Marduk,
That mid the mystic shadows, and in awe,
You follow ev’ry priestly act and spell,
Till, when the word sounds out, you forward step
To grasp the right hand of the God’s in yours,
In yearly confirmation of your rule.
Etana (aside) :
And if some craft, or dire mishap, should fall
To hinder, or prevent that annual act,
His rule in his Great Babylon would cease.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Ah! That is done. My state and fame assured.
O God, the King of Marad, Lord of War,
So bless the work my happy hands have made.
Give joyful favour, fix my throne, and make
My length of rule eternal for my sake.
DANCING GIRLS.
ACT II.
SCENE I.—AUDIENCE CHAMBER.
THE FORGOTTEN DREAM.
Etana:
Yes. That is why we have been called so soon,
For yesterday the King demanded this,
That we should show him of a dream he had,
Of which he had forgotten all its parts.
Second Seer:
Men all have dreams that could be well forgot,
Third Seer:
Ye gods! Can we unguided read his mind?
Replace what it has lost? And so restore
The figments of disordered wanderings?


Second Seer.
Of late the King has most unsettled been,
And now forgotten dreams would fain recall.
Etana:
Let’s try once more by skilful questioning,
Evoking latent sparks of memory,
To catch some hints of what has gone before,
From which we’ll build a semblance of a dream.
Insisting that it must have been as we portray.
And when he comes, then let our minds unite
And concentrate in one great test of will,
And make the King complaisant by our skill.
Ashpenaz;
No doubt it was of women, fair to view.
The King has many beauteous women near
To gaze upon, and fill his leisure time.
Etana:
More likely it was something that did spring
From character—the Ego of his mind.
He’s greatly taken up with his exploits.
Perhaps it was a city that he saw?
We must direct his mind towards Babylon,
Suggest that greater buildings rise to shed
More lustre on his name, and so distract
His mind, that he will quick forget to ask
Of dreams forgotten.
Third Seer:
Maybe ’twas some wrong
That he has done, which he would fain conceal,
For outward grandeur often hides a shame.
Ashpenaz:
You have a nasty mind it seems. Is that
What pious studies lead you to, my friend?
(King enters).
Nebuchadnezzar:
Speak now, O Seers, have you advanced at all?
And are you able to recount my dream?
Etana:
Alas, my Lord.
Second Seer:
What Seers were ever asked
To do such thing as now the King demands?
Nebuchadnezzar:
Now mark you well. If you can not restore my
dream
Your lives shall forfeit be, and all your homes
Be made a dunghill, and your children slain.
Third Seer:
There’s not a man upon the earth can show
The matter to the King.


Etana;
And rare indeed
Is what the King requireth of us now.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Begone! I sent to Belteshazzar, having heard
That he has skill exceeding yours by far,
And Arioch now comes from that young Jew.
It may be he can tell us of the dream,
Which Chaldeans and Magicians fail to do.
(Exeunt Etana and Seers, Enter Arioch).
Arioch:
0 King, for ever live. Thy dream is told.
For those four pious Jews asked time to pray,
Asserting that their god would then reveal
The hidden dream, for dreams they say are his.
Nebuchadnezzar:
1 like that thought, that Bel controls the mind.
What was my dream?
Arioch;
The dream thou had’st, O King,
Was of an image high. But first would Bel-
Teshazzar intercede for those poor Seers,
That penalty may not fall hard on them,
For failure here where only God can help.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Let pass. Poor fools, pretending what they knew
Right well they could not do, so made false claims.
But tell me now at once some further parts.
Arioch:
Then Belteshazzar said that God in Heaven
Revealeth secrets, and in vision showed
To him what dream was sent unto the King.
God changeth times and seasons, and He quick
Removeth Kings to set up other ones.
He giveth wisdom to the wise, to them
That know He addeth understanding too.
He telleth what shall be in latter days.
Nebuchadnezzar;
No matter that, so much as tell me of the dream.
Arioch:
Thou saw’st, O King, in dream an image great,
With brightness excellent, and terrible
In form. Its head of finest gold shone forth,
His breast and arms of silver brightly gleamed,
His belly and his thighs of Brass were strong,
And legs of iron, but the feet were made
In part of iron and in part of clay.
Nebuchadnezzar;
And was that all the dream that I did see ?


Arioch;
Thou saw’st until a stone was cut and shaped
Though never human hands accomplished this.
It smote the image on his feet right sore,
And then the Iron and the clay and brass
The silver and the gold were broken up,
Became as chaff upon the threshing floor
In summer. Then winds carried them away.
No place at all was found for them again.
The stone that smote the image grew, until
A mountain it became and filled the earth.
Nebuchadnezzar:
It sounds a pretty tale. And as I think
Upon it more, I recognise its true
To what I saw in vision in the night.
But I could not recall one single point.
The meaning of my dream did he set forth?
Arioch:
I fear to tell what he did boldly say—
Interpretation unto God belongs,
And thou, 0 King, art King of Kings, for God
Of Heaven, He gave thee kingdom, power and
strength,
And glory, thou art like this Head of Gold!
Nebuchadnezzar. "
And said he so? That all my power shall fall?
Go on. What happens else? Those other realms?
Arioch:
And after thee shall other kingdoms rise,
Inferior to thee—and yet a third
Of Brass, shall rule throughout the earth.
The fourth shall be as strong as iron is,
To brake in pieces, and subdue, and bruise.
But that great realm shall be divided up
In ten divisions, which like iron and clay,
Shall not cleave well to one another’s cause.
Nebuchadnezzar:
Oh, what destructive cataclysm that!
Does nothing then remain of ordered realms?
How can affairs of men be carried on
Unless some Kingdom sure protect the state?
Arioch;
But in these days already, does his God
Set up the greatest kingdom of them all,
Which never shall destroyed be by foe.
It breaks in pieces all that it withstands,
But IT shall stand for evermore in strength.
Nebuchadnezzar:
O Gods above us all, what does this mean?
I’ll see this Belteshazzar now within,


Run quickly and command him to be there.
(Arioch exit).
It seems that all the Kings must toppling fall,
Till scarce a state remains upon its base.
Just like so many dolls in children’s sport.
And sport we are of gods and powers that be.
But Babylon? Shall Babylon not stand?
Yet is he right in that I had such dream,
Exactly, point by point. How could he tell?
If so, his meaning must be right as well. (Exeunt).
ACT II.
SCENE 2.—AUDIENCE CHAMBER.
THE STORY OF THE FURNACE.
Amuhia;
You heard the proclamation, did you not?
Then tell me now the tenor of its words.
The din of music and the shout arose
Of all the herd gone mad about a god.
They always love a new religious cult.
Etana:
Yea, Lady, fear you well the meaning known
By all men of the Image that the King
Set up within the Square of Dura there
Surrounded by the houses and the tiers
Of Bel’s great Temple, now despoil’d and shamed.
’Twas all of gold, and sixty cubits high
With breadth of six, and height of tallest men.
The Satraps, and the Deputies, were there.
The Governors, the Chief Sooth-sayers, with
The Treasurers, and Counsellors, as well.
The Lawyers and Provincial Rulers, too.
Amuhia:
But tell me first the Proclamation’s words.
Etana (reading) :
“To you commandment is, O people mine,
And nations, languages, through my domain,
That when ye hear the sound of Music made
By Cornet, and the Flute, or Pipe, and Harp,
The Sackbut (like a Trumpet with a slide),
The Psaltery (or Lute, with wailing note),
The Dulcimer (or Bag-pipe, shrieking loud).
Ye fall and worship low upon the ground
The Golden Image that the King sets up.
And who so falleth not upon his face
And worshippeth, the same hour shall be cast
Within the midst of burning fiery flame.”


Amuhia:
Now that should please the King, and that should
strike
Upon those Jewish men who think themselves
Much smarter than the rest of all the world.
I warrant that the gold would dazzle them.
Etana:
By no means Queen, for shortly it was found
By some of us Chaldeans, that the Jews
Set over Babylon’s affairs, did not
Obeisance make according to decree.
Instead, three times a day they knelt to pray,
With faces tow’rds Jerusalem, their home,
Which now a heap of rubbish has become.
Amuhia:
What happened next? Did then the King relent?
Etana:
Indeed the contrary, for fury filled his face.
He raging cried to bring them forth to him,
And then he said: Is this thing true indeed,
That Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, too,
Refuse to serve my gods, nor worship give
To Golden Image I have now set up?
For if ye worship not, at that same hour
Shall ye be cast to burning fiery flame.
And who is any god in whom ye trust
That can deliver you from out my hands?
Amuhia;
Did that afright them? Did they quail at that?
Those furnaces for baking brick are good
For other uses, burning out such dross.
Etana:
Amazing folly. No, they answered straight—
We are not careful to reply to thee.
Our God is able to deliver us.
Amuhia:
0 fatuous fools. What said the King to that?
Etana:
But still they dared to speak on to the King.
They even said that if their God did not
Appear to rescue them—
Amuhia:
As if one could.
Etana:
Then be it known to thee, 0 King, that we—
Amuhia:
What! Dared they make such arrogant reply?
Etana:
That even so we will not worship gods
That thou set’st up.


Amuhia:
And how then took he that?
Etana:
Renewed in fury, and his visage changed,
The King at once gave urgent word to make
The furnace seven times more its usual heat—
The mightiest men in all his host to bind
Those three, and cast them forthwith to the flames.
Amuhia:
How splendid. How I wish I had been there.
I almost see them burn. But tell me more,
Etana:
Alas! For I then left to guard the shrine,
Because I feared attack from frenzied mob
Now drunken with the worship of the god
The King had newly made.
Amuhia:
What was it like?
Etana:
It seemed to me to represent his dream,
The which he tried to realise in fact,
And make sublime, the Golden Image seen,
As told to him.
Amuhia:
Perhaps it was a lie.
Etana:
No doubt. The King had quite forgot his dream.
But still he said it was as he had dreamt,
And so he set to work to make it real.
Amuhia:
The Image meant himself, and his rich rule,
For all men worship Gold, and make it serve
As standard of exchange, and life itself,
Is made to hang on gold instead of God.
Etana;
You speak as did those Jews.
Amuhia:
Well, probably,
There’s something in their words, though I despise
Such base-born rulers in our Babylon.
But who comes here?
Etana:
The Armourer of the King. (Enter Mutabil).
Amuhia:
How hot he seems.
Etana:
From hottest place he comes,
Mutabil:
0 Queen, I never in my days have heard—
For I was not so near that I could see,


Yet far too much I saw—a horrid sight.
My Comrades so intrepid in the siege,
My mates with whom I served through long cam-
paigns,
Most trusted of the Great King’s armed host,
Selected they for desperate attach,
Who never blanched, nor drew back empty sword,
Now chosen by the King to cast those men (spits)
To flames which flung their fury forth for yards,
And scorched the eyes so I could dimly see
That as they cast, why—they themselves were
caught,
Enveloped in the burning tongues of flame,
. And ev’ry one of them reduced to ash.
Alas! Alas! That I was not with them
To end my days in warrior’s comradeship.
Amuhia:
Assured was the end of those three Jews.
They must have perish’d in a moment’s flash.
Etana:
They scarce could hope to reach the fire alive.
Amuhia:
We’ll see no more of them, nor troubled be
By plans to shape the city to their minds.
Mutabil:
My lady, not so happened things it seems,
A certain Seer informed me of the thing—
That our Great King arose at once in haste,
Astonished to his councillors exclaimed:
“Did not we cast in three men to the fire
Securely bound? I now see FOUR men there
And walking in the midst unhurt. And 10,
The fourth is like a son of the Great God.”
Amuhia:
Ye gods! But you saw naught? And others naught
Who thronged the place? Continue quick your tale.
Mutabil.
And then he, frenzied, cried: “Come forth, ye three.
Ye servants of the God Most High, come here.
And, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, and
Of Meshach, Abednego, and these Jews.
There is no other god than can like this
Deliver those who trust in Him to save.”
Amuhia:
And, what had he then seen? That they came forth?
Some cunning trick was played upon the King.
Mutabil:
No more I heard, for then I turned and fled.
I fear no mortal foe, but I do dread
The gods, their jealousy and angry spite.


Etana:
I always said the King should work with us,
And lead the Chaldean Seers, for he sees things
Denied to mortal eyes. That mystic gift
Controls his mind and gives him second sight.
Mutabil:
And so he made decree: that Blessed be
The God of Jews—whoever he may be—
That all the Peoples, Nations, Languages,
Should speak no word against this God,
But worship him.
Amuhia:
They’re welcome to such god.
Decrees do not make gods when lacks the will.
This god and this decree can not last long,
But like his dreams will dissipate in air.
Another dream might change the whole affair.
(Exit).
ACT II.
SCENE 3.—AUDIENCE CHAMBER
THE TREE CUT DOWN.
Mutabil (enter hurriedly).
Whatever is the cause of such upset?
The Court is agitated and dismayed.
The Slaves cast apprehensive looks around.
The soldiers glance with furtive eager eye
As if expecting that at any hour
They may be called upon to draw their swords.
I tire throughout these days of dismal peace.
Ashpenaz:
Fear not, Old Warrior, that Wars will cease
For many centuries upon this earth.
The distant ages will acclaim the name
The prowess, courage and the skill of him
Whose sword thou bearest, and whose guard thou
art.
But what portends this stir I cannot tell.
Like you I wait to learn. ’Tis something grave
Affecting King and State and everyone.
But here comes Arioch, and he will know.
(Enter Arioch).
Arioch:
You’ve heard the news?
Ashpenaz:
Not yet. It cannot be
Another dream the King has had, which thus
Fills all the place with dread and deep alarm?


Arioch:
It is as you have guessed—another dream.
But here Etana is, who knows of dreams.
(Enter Etana).
Etana:
Yea, much, and far too much, of this dread dream.
I hope it is the last, for it portends
No happiness for me, unless I can
Arrange security from threat’ning ills.
Ashpenaz:
What was it then? Now tell us straitly all.
Arioch:
The King had called Magicians and Chaldeans,
Astrologers and Soothsayers, to tell
To them the Dream, which he had seen last night.
And made him much afraid, and troubled him.
Etana:
He knew, remember’d this time what he saw.
Arioch:
Which you knew no interpretation of.
Delay there was till Belteshazzar came;
For him the King next summon’d to his aid.
To him he said: O Belteshazzar, Chief
Art thou of my Magicians and my Seers.
So tell me now the visions of my dream,
And add interpretation of its points.
Ashpenaz:
If this time was the dream still fresh to him
Why could he not have guessed its meaning then?
Arioch:
Because the fantasy was strangely real,
And yet remote from ordinary things.
He thus went on to tell the simple tale.
“I saw a Tree, of which the height was great.
Its fruit was good for all flesh fed therefrom.
Behold a Watcher cried: Hew down that Tree,
And cut his branches off, but leave the stump,
With band of iron and of brass to stand
Amid the tender grass. Let it be wet
With dew of Heav’n, and let his heart be changed.
From man’s and let a Beast’s be given him,
Till seven times have passed above his head.”
Ashpenaz:
I can’t make aught of that. What does it mean?
Arioch:
For one whole hour sat Belteshazzar dumb,
As stricken with astonishment and dread,
Until the King demanded that he speak.
Etana:
Afraid at last?


Arioch:
' But not for self afraid,
For then he said: The dream should be, my Lord,
To them that hate thee, and thine enemies.
The Tree thou sawest was thyself, O King.
Thy greatness reacheth through the earth, and thy
Dominion stretcheth to the utmost parts.
They soon shall drive thee from the haunts of men.
Thy dwelling then shall be with beasts in fields.
And thou shalt eat the grass as oxen do,
And wet shall be thy skin with dews of Heav’n.
Until that thou shalt know the Most High rules
In kingdoms here, and gives to whom he will.
Ashpenaz:
Did he not interrupt, rebuking quick
Such foolish and absurd interpreting?
Whoever heard of nonsense quite like that?
Arioch:
But Belteshazzar quietly went on
As if he wished to soothe the angered King..
Thy Kingdom shall be surely kept for thee.
So let me counsel thee. Break off thy sins.
Show mercy to the poor, and it may be
Thy days shall lengthen in tranquility.
Ashpenaz:
What said the King to that plain sort of talk?
Etana:
I thought it was presumptuous, and deserved
A castigation quick and merciless,
Arioch:
You don’t know Belteshazzar’s virile mind.
Need not that he should cringe as Chaldeans do.
The King said naught, but straitway left the room.
Etana:
I warrant that the mood will not last long.
He never was a vegetarian.
Arioch:
And there is nothing else to add, except to say
That Belteshazzar is the calmest man this day.
(Exit Arioch).
Ashpenaz;
Now here comes one who seems not sad with us.
Elated almost as his brisk step shows,
Perhaps he sees in this some omen good.
(Enter Mutabiiy.
Mutabil:
I’ve heard that War must be, and shortly too.
For if this gets about that I have heard—
A rumour that the King will soon vacate
His high estate, why all the captive Jews


And those of other race, will raise revolt.
Well, let them try it on. I shall be glad.
And if the King, be he the greatest King
That Babylon or any city knew,
If that same King did for one moment show
The slightest likelihood of failing force,
I’d get me right away and seek to serve
Whoever greater than the King did seem.
For this my arm, and this my sword are his,
Who stands for might and glory and for rule,
Above all powers, and lords, and kings, and gods.
It is because the King is greatest in the world
That I will serve and follow him to death,
For death itself, or loathsome Tiamut,
No terror holds for the Great King, or those
Who live to fight for him and Babylon.
But here he comes. He looks as Kings should look
Who brave all perils from the gods or men.
Enter Nebuchadnezzar.
Nebuchadnezzar:
My sword! My sword ! Oh, what remains for me
If such atrocious evils are at hand?
And if the gods cannot defend their own
What little hope have we henceforth in life?
Then this shall be my god which me protects.
’Twere well to fall upon its sharpen’d point,
And end a conflict which cannot be won.
But yet, ’tis cowards who do so, or those
Who feel that they have erred beyond recall.
Has any man so far from Heav’n ere strayed
That he could not assume in anxious days
The attitude of victor o’er his fate?
So, let me take this sword to wield in fight
Against unnumbered foes in fierce attack.
I’ll not go down. I’ll not give way. I’ll fight
’Gainst all the gods, and aught that they may say.
For who is god, when many gods and lords
Do rival each to shape man’s destiny?
I’m done with gods. ’Tis naught that they have
wrought
To make my fame and state. ’Twas this right hand
And this good sword, which I again salute.
And name me now a god who can compare
With this my sword when its unsheathed by me,
With this my Babylon which I have built,
With me, aye me, who stands and rules alone!
“May Neb defend the right” my name doth mean.
But now I solemnly renounce that name.
I curse it. And great Nebo, too, I curse,
Ho, Slaves, bring in the wine. Ho, Minstrels, tune


Your harps, and Dancers come and banish gloom,
The King of Babylon defies the Tomb.
Silence, then crash of Music and Whirl of Dancers, &c.
Curtain.
ACT II.
SCENE 4.—AUDIENCE CHAMBER. “THIS GREAT
BABYLON.”
THE MADNESS OF THE DREAMER.
N ebuchadnez zar.
Let’s talk of Babylon, this Babylon.
Sennacherib, Assyria’s King, destroyed
The ancient Babylon, which I rebuilt,
O’er wider stretch of land, in greater strength,
With added stateliness and finer style,
Till Marvellous they term this city great.
Thou, Arioch, bid slaves at once bring bricks,
Of such as have been chosen for the Street
Which I must build, Procession Street, a grand
Imposing entrance to the City’s heart.
Amuhia:
I once did drive its five and fifty miles around,
To view its hundred gates of beauteous bronze.
I love the streets which angles make, so square.
Nebuchadnezzar:
See thou that every brick is branded with my name,
That, in the age to be, when puny men
Shall gaze in endless wonder on these walls,
My might, my works, proclaim my fame.
Stay, Arioch, add this unto thy quest,
That I would fain refresh me with some figs
Of luscious growth from my famed orchard there
Astride the banks of wide Euphrates, where
In fifteen days, for thee, O Amuhia, I built
That Hanging Garden; perch’d high upon tiers,.
To simulate the mountains of your home,
With screws to raise the water to the top.
For you did fret; you made me cognisant
Of failure, and of weakness, and of want,
So out of love for you I piled my bricks
To show what I could do in Babylon.
Amuhia:
Aye, Arioch, I pray you, add some grass,
Such as the cattle munch as dews of Heaven
Fall gently to enrich the earth when dry.
For we do like to grasp it in our hands—
I sometimes wish that we could eat it, too.
(Exit Arioch) _


Nebuchadnezzar:
Ah, Babylon, ah, Babylon, so great!
Thy river floweth through with limpid sweep
Which filleth up the eye with keen delight.
Thy banks are richly green with trees and grass,
Thy palaces arise and glisten in the sun,
Eight stories high to Heaven thy lofty towers
With coloured tiers do fascinate the eye.
Etana:
Exceeded by the Temples thou did’st build
In gratitude for vict’ries in the wars.
N ebuchadnezzar:
And high upon thy walls, four chariots abreast
Can pass as one—
Etana:
Such other walls are not.
Nebuchadnezzar:
And Two there are which fortify the place.
And Imgar Bel I named the first great wall,
Nimitti Bel I named the next as great.
And round them all I dug a moat full wide,
Thus Babylon is strongly fortified—
Well nigh impregnable, except to craft
Of which I have no fear while still I rule
In this great Babylon which I have built.
Amuhia:
A million of your subject citizens enjoy
As much delight as Kings were wont to boast.
Their houses of three stories high in brick,
The rooms enclosing shaded courtyards cool,
With fresh Euphrates water run to each,
A cleansing stream to keep the city pure.
All rubbish cleared away, and not allowed,
As with the “beastly Amorite” of yore,
Who cast his household refuse through the door,
Till Israel was sent to cut him off.
Etana:
And think, O King, of all that thou has wrought
To further knowledge of mysterious things
To mortals hidden—save a few of us
Pescended from the readers of the skies.
Amuhia.
True, libraries there are, where such as read
May borrow books, or write their thoughts, and know
How permanent the record is on clay,
Baked in yon furnace, hard as any stone.
Etana:
Which, ages after, men shall find and read,
And marvel that so great a King did live.


N ebuchadnez zar:
This palace new I reared to lofty height,
Built these most sumptuous rooms for my
And filled them full with trophies of the chase
And plunder from my conquests o’er the world.
But list, O Amuhia, have I no right to boast?
Has any city been, can any be
As wonderful, as fine as Babylon?
This Babylon that I have built?
Amuhia:
There is no other King, no other man
Hath done such marvels as thy workings here.
Ah, here is Arioch, with bricks and figs.
(Enter Arioch and Slaves with bricks, etc.).
Nebuchadnezzar:
Hist thou, O Arioch, who know’st so well
That everyone of those ten million bricks
Is branded with my name—the name of Neb-
Chadnezzar—Why do I make a slip at that?
My name? Than all the gods ’tis greater far
For they will pass, and long forgotten be
Ere men shall cease to marvel at my name.
Arioch:
O King, to thee be honour, praise and might,
And as for me, I think with thee that Bel,
And all the gods, are much the same indeed.
It matters little which you worship now.
Your own right arm is, after all, your strength
And Kings are as divine in name and right,
And none so great as he of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar:
But hush, I heard a Voice—’twas small and still—
Arioch;
None spoke, excepting one of these perchance.
Nebuchadnezzar:
But yes, ’twas Belteshazzar! Where is he?
Amuhia:
O, that poor thing, who spurns your gifts, O King,
He journeys far upon your errands sent.
Nebuchadnezzar:
’Twas he! ’Twas not! ’Twas Bel! Who spoke
again ?
Go, get you forth. I audience give alone
To him who speaks to the great King of Kings.
(Exeunt others).
(Arioch, aside, whispers with Amuhia).
Amuhia.
Oh, Arioch, I fear he’s ill indeed.
Arioch:
Perchance a little sickness soon to pass.


Amuhia:
I fear me much the anger of the gods
On that defiance of their will and might.
Arioch:
I'll watch behind this curtain and report.
(Exeunt).
Nebuchadnezzar:
Ah, what comes over me? Ido not feel myself,
And yet I AM the King of Babylon?
What say’st that voice of portent terrible?
“O King, thy kingdom is departed now,
And Babylon shall be destroyed ere long.
Its matchless buildings razed to the ground?
The jackals lift their nightly howl about
Its arid wastes? And shepherds pass in haste,
Whose flocks scant herbage mid its ruins seek?
And wandering tribes shall flee in terror far,
And fear to camp within the city’s range?”
Ah, no! Such cannot, shall not, be, I swear!
But what is that you say? The furnace hot,
Which seven times heated at my strict command,
Slew all my men without, and singed not those
Within—those three—those four—l shuddered then.
Did I acknowledge God? I must be mad
To think of such a thing. There is no god.
Some secret science made them each immune,
And safe from fire. And yet—and yet—l hear
Another Voice, which tells of other place—
Of greater City far than Babylon,
Resplendent, more than any city known,
And far excelling Salem of the Jews.
A new Jerusalem I seem to see.
But no, it cannot rival Babylon.
And yet another speaks of distant land,
Of islands set in Western Sea,
Of Kingdom never conquered in the Wars,
Of King who never lifts a sword to lead.
For this I’m bid prepare ? By this last one
Stone Kingdom that excels all other States
Is Babylon destroyed? Must I erase
My name from every brick I have set up?
(Takes a brick and rubs it. Takes another).
Ha! here is one without my name. What slave
Hath bungled in his task? Bring him to me,
I’ll have him flayed alive. But no, I’ll go
And work with him till every brick is bare.
For that last age I must myself prepare.
Nebuchadnezzar, I, I built it all
Is not this great Baby—great Bab—Great Ba—
(Lights down).


(Lights up. The King has thrown off his rqbes—
is crawling on ground—one hand lifts a brick, other puts
grass to mouth. He gazes at audience—says “Is not this
great . . . .” shakes his head, falls on all fours and crawls
across stage. CURTAIN).
ACT III.
SCENE I.—CORRIDOR. A MARVELLOUS
INTER-REGNUM.
Etana:
The King, yes, seven years ago, did set
This Belteshazzar high upon his seat,
Established in the Gate, the chiefest place,
And made him Ruler of our Babylon,
As well as Chief of us, the Chaldean Seers,
As if an upstart, such as he, could be
At all made competent to stand with us!
And now these seven years he keeps the Throne
Secure for that poor idiotic thing,
Who munches grass like any beast of earth,
Such contrast to the fine parade of pomp
And grandeur which our great King fondly loved.
I wonder if the time has not come now
To strike a blow for some more worthy King,
And raise revolt? For lam much disturbed
By rumours running through the Court to-day
That very soon the King may mend in mind
Resuming both his health and kingly state,
In which event I should have little part,
For Belteshazzar would remain in power.
How does the King?
(Enter Ashpenaz and Zaradan).
Zaradan:
Oh, I’ve heard to-day.
The same as usual, I suppose, poor King.
But what a tribute to his noble rule
That still through all these vacant years his throne
Remains his own, as if his kingly orb
Was seen at Court, and his strong sword abroad
Still swept to keep the subject nations his.
Etana:
And how do you account for that? There must
Be cause for such unusual effect.
Ashpenaz:
Of course, if Belteshazzar had not been
A Belteshazzar, but of other kin
The history of Babylon had changed.
And even now he might, if he did will.
Assume the throne which he upholds so well.


Etana:
It seems quite strange that he has little wish
To seize so promising and easy prize.
Zaradan:
But you must know that I have been told off
To watch insipient revolt, and if
I hear one word against the throne, or him
Who stands beside it day by day—
-0 wondrous sight—that vacant throne in there.
Which we all bow before, I know my cue.
I’ll not delay to smite. Be careful, you. Exit.
(Enter Sumaliya).
Ashpenaz:
Ah, gracious Lady, Princess of our land,
What is the news of your august and much
Loved Father, King?
Sumaliya:
Alas! that no news comes.
And I am filled with trembling and with fear,
Because of rumours of uprisings near,
Among our own, as well as with the Jews.
Ashpenaz:
Ido not fear. They have all well in hand.
Sumaliya:
But this is what I heard a Hebrew youth
Declare that he had read of Prophet’s words,
Of one, Isaiah, Son of Amos, who,
A hundred years ago, proclaimed the fate
Of Babylon, now high in wealth and might.
Ashpenaz:
But what’s the good of troubling with the past?
Sumaliya:
The Burden, he did cry, of Babylon,
That everyone shall be thrust through with sword—
Their little children dashed before their eyes—
Their houses rifled, wives dishonour’d. Oh!
Behold I stir up Medes to come and fight,
Etana (aside) :
But who would heed the rant of such a Seer?
Those Jewish Prophets will be soon forgot,
Or all their words be read as idle tales,
While Ishtar, Queen of Heaven, and of Love,
In almost ev’ry Cult in varied Style,
Through ev’ry Land, will still enslave men’s hearts.
Sumaliya:
And Babylon, the glory of all realms,
The beauty of Chaldean excellence,
Shall be as Sodom and Gomorrah, waste.


Shall never be inhabited, nor shall
Arabian pitch his tent, nor shepherd make
There fold for sheep to rest throughout the night.
Wild beast shall lie in wait, and owls shall hoot
And Satyrs dance in weird array; so cry
Against the King of Babylon and say:
How hath the Oppressor ceased, and with his might
The Golden city, too, shall cease. Alas,
For Babylon is fallen, fallen down.
The graven images are broke in twain.
Ashpenaz:
Did ever gentle lady lift such harsh
And bitter tongue against this Babylon?
I wonder if she understands it all,
Or, like some other women I could name,
Goes babbling on ne’er waiting on the sense,
Sumaliya:
Thus saith the Lord; that Cyrus of the Medes
Is shepherd whose right hand I hold in mine.
My city and my temple he shall aid
For Jacob’s sake, and Israel mine elect.
Etana:
Your Father won the Persians to his side
To overthrow Assyria, when he,
Away from mountain home thy Mother took,
The Daughter of the Ruler of the Medes.
Sumaliya.
Bel stoopeth down, and Nebo, too, shall stoop.
Come down and sit in dust thou virgin child,
Thou. Chaldean daughter, Babylon’s delight,
No more great lady, then in widow’s plight. Exit.
Etana:
Enough. That suits us well. Now Ashpenaz,
What steps should we next take to gain by this?
Ashpenaz:
Hold off. I understand its strength and drift,
It’s not for our own day that we should fear.
Besides, I think that Seers should keep without
And in State affairs to interfere,
For countless ills ensue when pious men
Turn from their trade and copy tricks of court.
(Exeunt all but Etana).
(Enter Amuhia and slave girls).
Amuhia:
How think you now, Etana, go your plans?
And have you sent your servants through the land?
And are you sure the people will arise?
Etana:
Oh, yes, my Lady, we have all the folk
Upon our side, at least, the most worth while.


Amuhia;
But he who places trust in popularity
May disillusioned be by change of mind,
Which common herds oft make in sudden whim.
The people do not always know the people’s good
Though thinking that their voice is voice of gods.
Etana:
But we can overawe the stupid crowd.
Amuhia:
If you intoxicate them at the Feast
With sensuous delights, until they fall
Blind victims in the orgies of Ishtar,
Or sacrifice themselves in awful rites.
Perchance, then so, they might be managed well,
Etana:
0 trust me—
Amuhia:
But could this be ascertained —
What place the King might choose to grant to her—
The Pearl, he termed her, of Egyptian Court,
That spite, Nitocris, still his second wife.
Etana:
But you remain supreme throughout the state.
Amuhia:
Yes. Thank the Gods, that Queens are not as slaves
In Babylonia. Some power and state
Are compensations such as women crave.
Etana:
Well. Why not now advance your claim? .
Amuhia:
Could but the King be kept confined a while
Until this plan mature to make it safe
To seize the throne. But Ah. I fear ’tis vain.
1 would that I were sure what best to do.
And now Etana let us read again
The King’s own Horoscope of future days.
(Etana hands tablet to Queen>
See! There and there. How Stars relate his fate,
According to position at this date.
The Sun-god, Shamash, burns his way by day,
And through the Zodiac he falters not,
He throws out quick’ning ray to bless the sod,
For half the year arising, then declines.
Etana:
Thus twice a year he cuts across the path
To mark the fate of children of his life.
Amuhia:
But can you say for certain all that’s writ?
And, if that Book of Fate is firmly fix’d,


What then the good of struggle or of will?
And are you never wrong in what you read ?
The common crowd, the foolish, and the vain,
Who flatter’d are by loud pretentious speech,
Imagining life fated by the Stars,
Relinquish all their wills, their power to act,
Their whole intelligence they sacrifice,
Till even sanity becomes suspect.
Etana:
But we who know how far to go or stay,
Can with a wink, put word with double sense,
And mystify, yet satisfy, the fools.
Amuhia:
But what read you in truth of this our day?
And if the King shall gain once more his throne?
I tremble at the fear of misplaced plan.
I see his course right through the Ram and Twins!
He scarce escapes the claws of Scorpion.
Etana:
From which I read that he succeeds to gain
His throne once more. But only for a space
Can he maintain his life, or even, place.
Amuhia:
But has the time not come to view the sight
Of Maidens marshall’d in the God’s own house,
Within a rope enclosed, his brides to be,
Who else through life must pine in maidenhood,
Despis’d as undesir’d and disgrac’d.
Etana:
Such is our ancient custom, such is done
In sacrifice to Ishtar and her love,
Her symbol in the stars on high, the Dove.
Amuhia* (Exit Etana as Ashpenaz enters).
And, Ashpenaz, have you arranged the youths
And Maidens fair all ready for parade?
See you their dresses quite befit the day
Which now draws nigh, and set a beauteous show.
Ashpenaz:
Your Majesty shall find each one bedeck’d
According to the proper style and tone.
And as they, tripping through the palace square,
Shew off their ankles and their ev’ry charm,
With that unspoken yet insistent call
For admiration, and possession, too,
I hope your Grace will say—
Amuhia:
Too much from you.
Now if it had Etana been who spoke
In such wise of the gentler ones’ appeal
I could have better grasp’d what men may feel.


Ashpenaz:
And may not I, with any man, admire
The Beauty and the Charm of that sweet life?
Most Beautiful and Charming when denied.
For I can’t help regretting these young things
Consigned to serve the God Marduk that way.
Amuhia:
So long as they get husbands what care they?
O spare your sighs for cause that matters more,
And tell us of the gossip of the Court,
And of the folk without, about affairs.
Still loyal, think you, to the absent King?
Ashpenaz:
0 lady, what is gossip, but the spume
Which ocean casts upon the endless beach?
Much noise we hear, much movement also see,
But little diff’rence happens in an age.
Amuhia:
And yet to know the gossip is of use.
Ashpenaz:
It mostly falls from chatt’ring women’s tongues.
Amuhia:
Some men I know lag little in the race.
Ashpenaz:
1 grant you lady that some men are worse.
I see them gather’d by the hour in groups—
Amuhia:
They term it “bus’ness” to their wives, no doubt?
Ashpenaz:
The loudest speaker in the centre stands
As though delivering an oracle.
Anon they whisper as if message dread
Had hushed their voices. But I somehow guess
’Tis rumour of a choice and spicy kind.
Amuhia:
And why judge you they scandal love so much?
Ashpenaz:
Perhaps they close association crave
With evil act, yet fearful to offend,
Find their enjoyment gloating over sins
Which others do.
Amuhia:
How righteous they appear!
Ashpenaz:
To such as know them not.
Amuhia:
They proxies are.
Ashpenaz:
The cheapest kind of sinning they can find.


Amuhia:
Still tell me if the gossip of the Court
Is fav’rable to holding long the throne
For him, the King? For marvellous it is,
Beyond compare, that all these years they wait.
Would that be loyalty, or Love, or Fear,
Dictating patience?
Ashpenaz:
It is hard to say
It may be love of good in years gone by,
As well as Fear of what the future holds.
Amuhia:
I do not think the common crowd look far
Beyond the present need. Give them enough,
And promise more, for they’ll support the King.
Whoever he may be, who feecls them best.
Ashpenaz:
Not much unlike the dwellers at the Court?
I saw a fisherman reverse his art.
He tumbled all his catch into the stream!
Amuhia:
Why laugh ?
Ashpenaz:
To see the Seers had lost the Tax
They fatten on. Their Tax went swimming off.
He should have thrown the Seers in there instead.
Amuhia:
Tell Belteshazzar!
Ashpenaz:
He will then be taxed
In other way to set the Taxes right.
Yon Seers are Fishers? Fishing? Fishy? Quite.
(Exit. Enter Etana opposite).
Etana:
But is your Ladyship agreed? Will you
Assent to steps I placed before your Grace?
Amuhia:
I do not think so much of them just now,
For Zaradan has come with word again
From Belteshazzar—
Etana;
Curse that man, ye gods!
I know if I had only half his chance
But little care I’d waste on one who crawls
Like beast upon the grassland moans aloud.
Amuhia:
I quite agree, but yet we must take care.
Be chary, lest we forfeit all our lives. (Enter Arioch).
Good Arioch, whence come you now, my friend?


Etana l
How does the King?
AriocH:
Report has just come through
From Belteshazzar, that the King at last had speech
With him.
Etana:
Why him again?
Amuhia:
I am surpris’d the King recover’d is.
That deadness of the mind, which fails to tell
The limbs how they should move in normal way,
That curse, to grope as beast upon the earth,
Can these be shaken off to leave him free
And able to resume control of realms,
Of his own mind, chief kingdom of them all,
And of this land and peoples now so vast?
What said he then of Throne or State or Us?
Arioch:
His words were few, invoking help from Heav’n.
And utterance was difficult. But now
His mind is clear. The King will soon appear.
ACT III.
SCENE 2.—THE THRONE ROOM.
THE GREAT KING.
Guard near Throne—and Herald.
Enter Soldiers, Courtiers, Seers, Women, Dancing Girls,
Slaves. Enter Nebuchadnezzar.
Herald reads:
“Nebuchadnezzar, King, I now proclaim
To all the People, Nations, Languages,
That dwell in all the earth. Be multiplied
That Peace, and true contentment giving wealth.
Mine understanding hath returned to me.
I praise and honour Him who lives for aye,
And whose dominion everlasting is.
From generation stands His Kingdom, on
To generation. All inhabitants
Of earth do lack repute, are things of naught,
He doeth as He will with Heaven’s Host,
And none can stay His hand or question Him.
At that same time my reason was restored to me.
The glory of my kingdom, honour, too,
The brightness of my throne, returned to me,
My counsellors and Lords sought audience,
My seat was stablished in my kingdom well,
And majesty in excellence was mine.”


Nebuchadnezzar:
And now it’s time that some account were heard
From those who served me well when I was sent
Away from haunts of men and dead became
To all this glory, and this State and place.
Oh, Amuhia, I am sure that you,
When easy showed the chance to seize the throne,
Proved ever constant through those darken’d days.
Amuhia.
All’s well, my Lord, thy throne is still secure.
Nebuchadnezzar:
And you, Etana, ever deep in thought.
Did thy deep thought ere guess the meaning why,
Despite disaster, yet my throne remained?
Etana:
0 King, thy name is great, as these years show.
Nebuchadnezzar:
And you, my children, I am glad to find
That though my benediction was not said
Sweet union of two kindred hearts was made.
' I bless you both, as though I had been here
When you were wed. For blessings bide not time
To link the past and present into one.
Sumaliya:
1 knew that we should have your blessing dear.
Arioch:
And I can vouch for many more besides
Who waited eagerly for thy return.
Mutabil:
Farewell, good Sword! Farewell to War’s alarms—
Its grand adventure and its triumphs rare!
My best companion, tried, unfailing friend,
No longer thou victoriously shalt sweep
Thy vaunting enemies before thy face.
No more comes call for thee, if now the world
Shall be embrac’d in universal peace,
When swords shall be recast to ploughshare shape,
And spears, to .pruning hooks to dress the vine.
Or sickles made to reap the standing corn.
Thou then so dull’d and blunted and outworn!
As I shall be, the vet’ran of the host,
Who finds the day has come to set thee by.
For I? What can I do? No better craft
I know, nor can I, late in life, learn new.
Thus I at length forego all right to be.
There needeth not the warrior, except
Where other War may rage, and armies march,
Midst flaming stars, which in their courses fight,
And do direct affairs of men on earth.
Another sword I’ll draw in grander War.
And thus I lay thee down. Farewell, good Sword!
(Kneels and takes the King’s hand).


Nebuchadnezzar:
I owe the most to Belteshazzar, Lord,
Of Babylon, and Seers, and all this realm.
I now confirm him in his high estate.
Emoluments refused, he only takes
That gift which blesses most the one who gives—
The heart’s affection and the mind’s respect.
And when the after ages do assess
The values of the lives we live to-day,
They’ll place the higher price upon the man,
Who made another great, and not himself.
(The King takes off Crown and lowers Sceptre).
Nebuchadnezzar:
Nebuchadnezzar, I, do praise, extol
And honour Him, the King of Heaven above,
Whose works are truth, with judgment in His ways.
All those that walk in pride He will abase.
0, Bel, and God of Jewry, Thou art one
To me, in might and tender rule of men.
So now, O Scribes, immediately erase
Each record of my wars and deeds of blood.
Such acts do ill accord with what I now
Desire to be remember’d of my name.
Though yet I know full well that deeds once done
Can never cancell’d be by mortal one.
Ashpenaz:
’Tis thus affairs of men most aptly end—
At best in pleasant dream of fancy’s world.
For gold, or land, or fame, or pow’r, when grasp’d
Dissolves in shadow, while our dreams outlast.
Have we been dreaming through these acts and
scenes?
Or shall we dream anon when we depart?
And which the real, and which the dream, I ask?
Sumaliya:
Thou, Belteshazzar, taught me this to say,
Of all great cities that aspire to lead
As types of earthly dignity and grace.
The New Jerusalem, that city fair.
How men have longed for it to come on earth,
And poets shall write, and singers lift their lay.
And through the ages shall the vision stir,
At thought of one fond home of love and joy,
With never fear of foe, or darkness drear.
A City that no longer causes Tears
To flow all down the Master Builder’s Face,
Or Lips reluctantly to frame a woe.


Zaradan:
And then the best of Babylon may rise,
Emerging from the dust of centuries,
And purified and made ideally fair,
Enriching the supreme metropolis,
Which guarded by the powers unseen above,
Needs not a sword except the sword of love.
Sumaliya:
Thy walls as great and high as Babylon’s,
Of amethyst and pearl, and gates as rich,
And river flowing through with living wave,
Far better than our wide Euphrates’ flood.
The Tree of Life adorns and shades the banks,
The great street’s covered o’er with golden floor
No night is there, no candle light they need;
The good God gives them light for evermore,
Diffused in myriad points at every turn.
And no abomination enters there,
Nor any lies besmirch the city’s shield.
And all the nations bring their glory in,
And every King doth his obeisance make.
I saw no Temple, since it needed none,
For all the citizens loud welcome sing
To Him they serve in love—they see their King.
“GOD SAVE THE KING.”


COMMENTS.
“THE HERALD,” Melbourne.—“ Something outstanding.”
“THE SUN.”—“Stirring.”
“THE AGE,” Melbourne.—“ The dialogue, though consistently
stately .... is not without many human and even humorous touches. ”
“THE GRAPHIC,” Melbourne.—“An excellent play.”
“THE ARGUS,” Melbourne.—“ Well chosen episodes” , . . „
“sufficient humour to heighten the dramatic effect.”
Mr. GREGAN McMAHON, of the Garrick Theatre,'Melbourne,
writes: “I have read with great interest your new play. I consider
it an achievement both from a literary and dramatic point of view.
In construction and characterisation it is entirely satisfying. You
should have a great success in its production.”
Dr. FELIX MEYER, of Melbourne.—“ The play moves with a
dignified rhythm, and the interest is sustained throughout .... a
play of outstanding quality. . . . The King is an arresting figure, great
in his megalomania. In a play which is eminently 'actable,’ in lines,
which flow rhythmically, and with dignity, in impressive speeches,
which truly relate the characters to their thought and action, Dr.
Law has visualised for us a very moving and living chapter of Bib-
lical history. I have read the play three times. The more I look
into it the better I like it.”
Fraser & Morphet. Printers, Prahran.


fflehudjadnezzar
or Wdis sreat SSahylon ”
i[\t ■Heb. (Br. fa
xV^
Kw
5®
V
Ifi
•+
¥
js
V
i.
\\
&
(The only supposed portrait of the Great King. A Cameo engraved by a Greek
in the Royal service. It reads: “To Marduk, his lord, Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon,
for his lift this made.”)
(Bnxxxck Wywixt, |Jrmc£s ( Mtihonxnt
1934
a nh
programme is supplied bg ilje Courtesy o£
®fye Ofos fflnmpang
bu
X 96 JlJlinbers J&treet
'Mtibtnxxm, 01.1
J
The programme is designed to form a sorer to enclose the book of words of the play.


GAS FIRES
For
CLEAN, CONSTANT, EFFORTLESS WARMTH.
See them at The Gas Company’s Showrooms.
THE STORY
This Play was inspired first by reading what archaeology
witnesses to the character of Nebuchadnezzar. The Bible, for
the most part, presents the King in a less attractive way, which
was entailed by his destruction of Jerusalem.
Biblical, or church, plays differ from certain other plays in
being generally more educative, and conveying moral or re-
ligious lessons. By this means many people are doubtless reached
who may not often attend church. Certainly, many persons read
the Bible with renewed interest, besides which, historical research
is stimulated. The detailed knowledge needed to produce such
a play leads to illustration of the story in a very graphic and
correct manner, which must long be remembered. This entails
greater cost in production than an ordinary play needs, for a
high standard is merited and is demanded, by the subject matter
alone. Thus also is justified the added expense of professional
treatment; and the Author wishes to speak here of the intense
enthusiasm of the Producer in all this undertaking, in which he
has been so finely supported by everybody concerned. It has
been a most happy affair all through.
The period dealt with was one of the most eventful in
human history, and particularly in the realm of thought. It
has been termed “The Coming of Age of Mankind." About
then not only were Nebuchadnezzar and his Great Babylon, but
it was the age of the Great Hebrew Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, etc., and of the Greek Sages, and it was the time of the
birth of Rome. Also, about then came Gautama the Buddha,
with his wondrous philosophy, which, by the way, provided a
play in this theatre years ago.
The Bible story is to be read in Daniel, ch, 1-4; 11. Kings
24 and 25: Isaiah 13, 14, 17; Jeremiah 24, 25, 29, 32, 34, 39,
50; Rev. 21.


USE
GAS FOR HEAT
Wherever heat is needed !
COMMENTS
A CENTENARY PLAY.—Perhaps it should be ex-
plained why there is an alternative title to the Play. The first
name is quite obvious. The second part, “This Great Babylon,’’
is adopted to mark the indirect but real references to the Cen-
tenary of Melbourne. Every large city may be compared with
Babylon, and the allusions in the text of the play to Babylon
may readily be seen to have reference to Melbourne.
The pronunciation chosen for certain proper names is that
most customary. The pedantic, and, in some instances only,
the more correct way is discarded. Zaradan, so spelled above,
is shortened from Nebuzaradan. Captain of the Guard is
equivalent to General of the Forces. Ashpenaz was also the
Chief of the Eunuchs.
The ditty with which the King’s Armourer opens the
play is the well-known nursery rhyme:
“Nebuchadnezzar, the King of the Jews,
Sold his wife for a pair of shoes.
When the shoes began to wear
Nebuchadnezzar began to swear.’’
Needless to say there is no historic foundation for this rhyme.
A Canon, once well-known in Melbourne, was reading in
church the lesson from Daniel in which the several musical
instruments are listed more than once. When he came to a
repetition of the terms he rather amused the congregation by
saying in his broad Irish accent, “The barnd as bafour.” The
Parish Clerk, of the times when such sat in the West end of the
church and sonorously led in the responses, was also the lesson
reader on occasion. He, in week-days, was employed as a
lawyer’s clerk. He found the names of the three Jewish youths
rather difficult to pronounce. He stumbled, as his betters have,
through “Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.’’ When again they
presented themselves, further on in the chapter, he avoided
difficulty by calmly saying, “the aforesaid gentlemen.”
“Nebuchadnezzar, what a subject,” cried out a student of
the French Academy. Me. Tabois afterwards wrote a fine work
in 1931, partly historic and in part a romance, of the life of the
great king.


FOR BOILING WATER AT KITCHEN SINK
INSTAL A
“BRIAR”
AUTOMATIC GAS
WATER-HEATER
NEBUCHADNEZZAR
OR THIS GREAT BABYLON ”
CHARACTERS (In order of appearance)
MUTABIL, the King’s Armourer ALTON LILLIE
ZARADAN, Captain of the Guard H. J. HODGES
NEBUCHADNEZZAR lE, King of Babylon
NORMAN WISTER
ARIOCH, the King’s Captain .... ELLIOTT H. CAIRNES
KING ZEDEKIAH . . .. CLIVE WATERS
SONS of ZEDEKIAH , , TOM RICE U FRANK ELLIOTT
ETANA, Chief of the Chaldean Seers FREDERICK FRENCH
SECOND SEER .. SAM RICE
THIRD SEER .. CLIVE WATERS
FOURTH SEER TOM RICE
ASHPENAZ, the King's Steward .. ALFRED BRISTOWE
SUMALIYA, Daughter of the King .. THELMA THOMAS
AMUHIA. Wife of the King BETTY TAIT
NITOCRIS (Daughter of the King of Egypt), the second wife
JEAN PARETT
A SCRIBE .. t . .. FRANK ELLIOTT
ATTENDANTS .. MAVIS MARSH, MILDRED DRIVER
BELTESHAZZAR (Daniel, the Prophet) .. D. DAWTREY
SLAVES . . Pearl James, Peggy Loftus, Hazel McCrea, Nan
Shoreham, Lily Marsh
DANCING GIRLS ~ Betty Battle, Beatrice Lynch, Joan
Battle, Ivy Coleman, Jessis Youngman, Alison Farrell,
Rosie Levens, Jessie Burnett, Win Sare, Ethel Sare, Mar-
jorie Melville, Thelma George
SOLDIER.S . , .. Jack Dudfield, Rod Greening, Stan Terry,
William Dalziel, lan Coflass, Jim Austin, Sam Rice,
Arthur Tempany
ENTIRE PRODUCTION BY NORMAN WISTER
Head Mechanist J. Guild
Electrician .V. Hobbs
Stage Manager Alfred Bristowe
Assistant Stage Manager . . .... . v ... Jack Holly


COOK WITH GAS
—and Bank the Savings!
SYNOPSIS OF SCENES
ACT I.—WARRIOR AND BUILDER
Scene I.—The King's Tents at Riblah, Palestine (The Sword)
2-—Corridor in the Palace at Babylon (The Youths)
3.—The Audience Chamber (The Dictation)
INTERVAL—(IO Minutes)
ACT II.—THE DREAMER
Scene I.—The same as Scene 3, Act 1 (The Forgotten Dream)
2. —The same (The Story of the Furnace)
3. —The same (The Tree Cut Down)
4. —The same (The Madness of the Dreamer)
INTERV AL~{7 Minutes )
ACT III.—THE GREAT
Scene I.—Corridor (A Marvellous Inter-regnum)
2.—The Throne Room (The Great King)
The action of the Play begins in 586 and ends in 561 B.C.
The Orchestra, arranged by Miss Joy Tulloh, will play
the incidental music including Sibellius' new work, “Belshaz-
zar’s Feast.’’
The Dances are arranged by Miss Thelma George.
Costumes designed by Miss Thelma Thomas, assisted by
Mrs. Law, Mrs. Lambe, Miss Wilkie, etc.
Scenery by J. C. Williamson Ltd.


GAS doesn’t cost —
It PAYS!
Napoleon was much annoyed at St. Helena by being
compared to Nebuchadnezzar, specially in suggestion of mad-
ness, and that he was walking about like an ox “on all fours.’’
There was no foundation for the aspersion. But as a ruler and
a general there are proper points of comparison.
Megalomania, or excessive self-importance leading to
lunacy, may have been Nebuchadnezzar’s complaint. Some
authorities think he merely suffered from a form of neuras-
thenia, or mental exhaustion. “Ataxia’’ is a term describing
the failure of the brain to get its orders obeyed, or even to want
to make exertion. It is possible that what is known as lycan-
thropy (like a wolf, or like any other animal) was his terrible
affliction.
£ 800 has been raised for church and charities by three
plays. “Job’’ contributed to this £ 200. It is hoped that
“Neb,’’ as it is termed for brevity, may add a good contribution.
The first evening is for the Vicar’s Parish Trust Fund, the
second evening for the Home Mission Fund, for poor parishes
in Melbourne, the third evening is for the Unemployed and
Aged Actors Relief Funds. Saturday will be divided between
the three causes. As a church gesture towards people, who so
often gratuitously help church efforts, and who provide so
largely towards our amusement in general, it is right that a
part of the proceeds of this play should be given to Actors’
Relief.
“Mr. Job of Australia,’’ was written with the financial
depression in mind. It led to the comfort of some distressed
people. A very fine letter from a N.S.W. squatter recently came
to hand to this effect.
The production has been greatly helped by Mrs. G. J.
Coles and Mr. Roy Chandler, in providing two evenings
towards costs, and by St. Catherine’s School and Mrs. Eric
Harrison, respectively, for lending rooms.
COMMENTS (Continued)


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Author wishes to make personal acknowledgments to
the many kind people whose efforts have so materially contrL
buted to the success of this play. Those mentioned herein are
only a portion to whom he is indebted.
THE METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY has gener-
ously provided this programme.
Mr. NORMAN WISTER and all the CAST, whether
honorary or not, for their enthusiasm and abilities.
MESSRS. J. C. WILLIAMSON LTD., for scenery and
properties.
MISS JOY TULLOH, and her capable orchestra,
MR. WELSFORD SMITHERS, for score, ordered by
cable from London, of Sibellius's “Belshazzar's Feast," now
first played in Melbourne.
MISS M. D. VANCE for assiduous canvass whereby more
than 300 seats were booked.
MISS THELMA GEORGE for her voluntary work, and
that also of her pupils in providing such excellent dancing,
MRS. LAW’S VICARAGE WORKING PARTY, for
many arduous hours.
DR. FELIX MEYER, for his continuous encouragements.
MR. GREGAN MACMAHON, for commendation.
THE PRESS, for their many courtesies in providing space.
THE ADVERTISERS on handbills and tickets.
MISS IVY BALL for publicity.
MR. BAZELEY for help with properties.
THE CAPITOL HOUSE, which, through the kind offices
of Councillor Raynes W. Dickson, repeated a loan of valuable
properties.
Let GAS help on Wash-days
Instal a GAS Wash-Copper
A GAS Iron finishes the good work of a Gas Copper
s. B. Waters. Print., 205 Bridge Road. Richmond


T
iL-.
h
/Mr. (7. A. SERVICE
on "Ready Hot Water,"
“Now bathtime’s
any time
tIOT water at any time! Not
only for hot baths, washing
and shaving, but for the count-
less household jobs as well.
That's HOT WATER COM-
FORT as enjoyed in the home
where there is an
AUTOMATIC
CAS HOT-WATER SERVICE
«
/ There is a Gas Water-heater to suit every kind of dwelling,
to meet, instantly and always, the needs of every home.
WATER HEATING BY GAS IS WATER-HEATING
AT IT’S BEST. Quick . . . Simple .. . Certain . . .
And the cost is within the reach of every householder.
Ask for full particulars at the Showroom
The Metropolitan Gas Company
196 FLINDERS STREET, MELBOURNE
