

NECESSITY
OF
THE EUCHARIST
AS A MEANS OF
SALVATION
Being Thesis XLIX of Mysterium F’idei
of M. de la Taille, S.J.
Translated into English by
Very Rev. J. CARROLL, P.P., B.A.,
Hay, N.S.W.
■jjlfUjgnm & (tto. 3Ct&.


NEC ESSIT Y
OF
THE EUCHARIST
AS A MEANS OF
SALVATION
Being Thesis XLIX of Mysterium Fidei
of M. de la Taille, S.J.
Translated into English by
Very Rev. J. CARROLL, P.P., B.A.,
Hay. N.S.W.
JWhgritti $t Cttn. Htb,
543 George St., 240 Elizabeth St., 370 Queen St.,
Sydney. Melbourne. Brisbane.
63 Flinders St., 68 Gawler Place, 776 Hay St.,
Townsville. Adelaide. Perth.


—4
ST. PATRICK’S COU-0^,^ANL V |
LIBRARY.-' |
ACC. No.
■*
J %
PRICE I
DATE by, t j
CALL ;
i
Imprimatur:
« THOMAS MARTINUS FOX, D.D.
Epus de Wilcannia Forbes.
Nihil obstat:
VINCENTIUS CUMMINS, D.D.
Censor deputatus.
Broken Hill,
die 20a Julii, 1937.
Wholly let up and printed in Australia by
JMlegritti & fflo. Uti,
52* Kent Street, Sydney.


CONTENTS
Page
Foreword V.
Necessity of the Eucharist as a Means of Salvation 1
Direct Testimony of the Fathers 5
Indirect Testimony in Respect of Our Fellowship with
Christ 22
Indirect Testimony in Respect of Our Fellowship with the
Church 26
The Authority of St. Thomas 29
Intrinsic Reason of the Necessity 35
Objections Answered 36
Intrinsic Reasons 41
Testimonies of the Fathers 44
Different Application of the Merits of the Cross 48




FOREWORD.
The present Thesis dealing with the Eucharist as a sacra-
ment is from the end of Pere de la Taille’s great work, as
the former, the Eucharist as a sacrifice is from the begin-
ning of the book. Apart from the importance of the sub-
ject—the need of the Eucharist for salvation—what ap-
pealed most in selecting this specimen, was the beauty and
the terseness of the language and the aptness of the chosen
quotations from the Fathers. The author follows the
method adopted throughout, beginning from the early days
of Christianity, through the middle ages down to the present
day. The gem from Cahasilas is probably the rttost pre-
cious. To carry out the work in its entirety would have
been impossible for the translator without the great help
and encouragement given by many, and first of all by His
Grace Dr. Sheehan. The kindly, patient care of the Arch-
bishop guided me through all the pitfalls, imperfections and
crudeness of the translation in its earlier stages. One
diesis, the Victim in the Mass, the most difficult of all, is
due entirely to him. Others, too, have kindly revised the
translation of several theses; among them I must mention
Father de Courcey, C.SS.R-, and Dr. Leonard. The hand
of Father P. J. Dalton, S.J., is seen in practically every page
of the work since its inception some twelve years ago. Not
only has he constantly encouraged me over all this time, and
freely offered suggestions when asked, but he has now re-
vised the work from the first to the last thesis. This revision
was done very carefully and thoroughly, and every sug-
gested correction and change has been incorporated in the
translation. It is thought that if a favourable reception is
given to this thesis, the publication of the whole work may
be proceeded with, in the hope to secure a sufficient market
in English-speaking countries to justify the expense.




The Mystery of Faith, Thesis XLIX.—Necessity of the Eucharist
CHAPTER III.
NECESSITY OF THE EUCHARIST AS A MEANS OF
SALVATION.
THESIS XLIX.
THE EUCHARIST, RECEIVED ACTUALLY OR IN
DESIRE, IS NECESSARY AS A MEANS OF SALVATION
FOR ALL MEN.
Universal necessity of the Eucharist for life.—The ancients
vivified by spiritual partaking of the Eucharist. —Without the
Eucharist no one is incorporated with Christ.—The Eucharist
necessary for communion with the Church.—St. Thomas and the
necessity for the Eucharist. —The necessity of the Eucharist
proved.—Repeated reception necessary for perseverance. —The
merits of the Cross applied by the sacrifice and the sacrament.
Amen, amen, I say unto you : unless you eat of the flesh
of the Son of Mm, and drink of his blood, you shall not have
life in you (St. John VI. 54). These words show very clearly,
that in some way it is necessary to eat the Eucharist. Rut the
question is: how we are to understand this necessity. Is it
necessary merely by precept, so that a person by a general
abstention from the Eucharist is guilty of a violation of the
divine law, just as a person who abstains from communion
during the paschal season, is guilty of a violation of a law of
the Church. Or, is it necessary as a means of salvation, as
happens in the case of sanctifying grace, to die without which
brings the penalty of eternal death, and to die possessed of it
brings the reward of eternal life; or as is the case with
any other thing without the use of which, in the present economy,
a necessary cause for sufficient grace for salvation is wanting;
as is the case with baptism for all men, and penance for all who
have fallen into actual sin. l
A large number of more recent theologians admitted no
necessity but that of precept in the case of the Eucharist, as
one can see by a reference to the “Salamanca Theologians”
(Salamanticenses, disp. 3, dub. 1, parag. 4, n. 16). This,
“'Grace is a sufficient cause of glory: hence anything without which
grace can be had, is not of necessity for salvation.” (4 D. 9,1, 1,2).


however, is by no means the unanimous teaching even of the
later theologians, as one can see by further reference to the
Salamanticenses (ibid, parag. 3, n. 10) who give a list of those
holding the opposite view, with which they themselves agree.
In the past the Armenians were reputed to hold the extreme
opposite teaching; holding as they did that baptism was not
fully constituted until sacramental partaking of the Eucharist
was added to the matter and form of Baptism (D. 542) ‘
The holy Synod of Trent has condemned the teaching of
those who assert that the administration of the Eucharist is
necessary for baptized infants (D. 933 and 937), 3 and censured
* In our time, Antonio Rosmini-Serbati thought that those who die
with baptism only (either baptism of desire, water or blood), received
the Eucharist in the future life, at the actual moment of death: “If
then he who does not eat of the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink
of His Blood, has not life in him, and at the same time he who dies
with the baptism of water or blood, or desire, is certain to attain to
eternal life, we must say that this partaking of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, which was not made in the present life, WILL BE ADMINIS-
TERED TO HIM IN THE FUTURE, AT THE VERY MOMENT
OF HIS DEATH, and thus he will have eternal life in himself ....
In this way also as regards the saints of the Old Testament, when
Christ descended into Limbo, Christ could have communicated Himself
under the form of bread and wine, and thus freed them from the state
of darkness and sleep in which they were; and, by making them 'par-
takers of the Eucharistic life, render them capable of the vision of
God; the faith with which they died was for them the title of a right
to the reality (ad rem), which was then rendered effective by Christ,
when He gave them possession of the things in which they hoped,
whence it became for them a right in actual possession (in re) . . . •
The same may be said of those Christians who die, though baptized and
cleansed from actual sin, but without having actually received the
Eucharist in the present life, as happens to many infants.” (L’intro-
duzione al Vangelio secondo Giovanni commentata, Lez. 74, Turin, 1882,
p. 238, 239). Compare the condemned proposition of Rosmini, 32 (D.
1922). It would have been better if the author had been satisfied with
what he had already stated, and which escaped the condemnation (Lez.
72, p. 234) : “It must be said then that this faith in Christ brings
with it by natural consequence the desire of baptism and the other
sacraments, which desire, when it cannot be satisfied, suffices man for
eternal salvation.”
•That the early Church sanctioned the custom of infants receiving
the Eucharist, may well cause surprise. Seeing that the subject has
not been fully explored, may I submit the following explanation, merely
as a help to further investigation, and not as settling the question.
The practice of giving the Eucharist to infants, without at the same
time insisting on its necessity, may very well have arisen out of the
words of our Lord in St. John VI, 54. Moreover, if it were the custom
with the pagans to allow children to partake of the sacrifices of the
idols, this might be at least an additional incentive reason. _ For Eucha-
ristic communion was the very ANTITHESIS of communion with the


those who imputed this error to the early Fathers (D. 931). 1
Moreover, it is also absolutely certain that even adults, who
without their own fault, have not received sacramental com-
munion before death, are not thereby outside of salvation. 2
sacrifices of the idols. Hence if the latter were a prevalent pagan
custom, it would be quite an appropriate reason BY CONTRAST for
the Christians to desire the initiation of their children to the God-given
Victim.
Now we may easily believe that this custom did exist among the
early pagans, in view of the Decree of Maximinus Daius (A.D. 306:
to children at the breast, Eusebius, De maxtyribns Palestinae, 9. P.G.
20, 1492), and also the Decree of Decius (A.D. 249, compare H. Le-
clercq, Les certificats de sacrifice pdien sous Dice, en 250, Paris, 1914,
p. 4 and 36, and 12 and 14; coll Cyprian., De lapsis, 25. P.L. 4, 484-
485), in which this communion with the sacrifices of the idols was ap-
pointed for all, both adults and children of the whole Roman Empire,
on a stated day. For, in the first place, it is not at all likely a priori
that the Caesars would enjoin on the whole world an absolutely un-
heard of and unaccustomed rite. Secondly (o posteriori), we see that
no surprise whatever was expressed at this particular feature of the
Decree, I mean the initiation of infants. It is more than likely then,
that the communion of children with the sacrifice of the idols was
customary at that time.
Moreover (as I am advised by Dom. H. Leclercq), the general
tendency was for infants, according to their capacity, to partake of
the domestic funeral libations, seeing that they concerned the whole
family. Apparently, too, there was no actual law enjoining abstinence
from them in the case of infants below a certain age, nor are there
any documents to indicate a custom forbidding them so to partake.
Hence it would appear, under the cricumstances in those days, as if
the children of the Christians were deprived of something, if they did
not enjoy the privilege of Eucharistic communion, and especially so
at any rate in the early days of Christianity were they deprived of par-
ticipation in the domestic agape.
1 Maldonatus has not sufficiently kept in mind this second condem-
nation, when, dealing with sacramental communion, he writes: “I
reject the opinion of Augustine and Innocent 1., which was in force
in the Church for about 600 years, that the Eucharist is necessary
for infants also.” (In Joannem VI. 54, parag. 116). For here Mal-
donatus is evidently speaking of the actual reception of the sacrament.
Claudius de Sainctes, Bishop of York, had to a certain extent already
anticipated Maldonatus in this matter. De rebus eucharisticis, sexta
repetitio, c. 7. Paris, 1675, fol. 238 a.
2 That in Africa, Gaul and the Orient, the Eucharist was sometimes
administered to the dead, is probably due to some error among the unin-
structed. The superstition was condemned at the Council of Carthage
(A.D. 397) can. 6; in the Council of Auxerre (between A.D. 573 and
603), can. 12; and in the sixth oecumenical Council, can. 83, and else
where (compare H. Moureau, art. Communion eucharistique, doctrine
generate, in D. T. C, col. 495) ; we must not confuse this with the
other, by no means superstitious custom, of burying the Eucharist with
the dead. On this see Menardus, not. 680 on the Sacramentarium sancti
Gregorii (P.L. 78, 473), and H. Leclercq, art. Ampoules de sang, in
D. A. C., 1, 1758, 1759. Corblet may also be read Hist du
sacr. de I’Euch., 1885, 1, p. 339 and 535.


Hence no absolute and universal necessity of corporally receiv-
ing the Eucharist can be admitted. But there is still the ques-
tion, is not the Eucharist nevertheless a necessary means of
salvation, in such manner that at least in desire, it is absolutely
necessary to partake of it, and moreover, if possible, must not
the adult receive it actually.
This matter has already been touched upon in our treat-
ment of the relation between baptism and the Eucharist; now,
however, we are to deal with it at its source. 3
“Emil. Springer has lately dealt with this question in his fine
treatises: Die hi. Kommunion, das notwendige Mittel zur Bewahrung
der heilgmachenden Gnade, 1911; Die Eucharistie .... die notwen-
dige Nahrung der Seek, 1912; Unsere Einverleibung in Christ us durch
die Eucharistie (in Theologie und Glaube, 1913, Heft 1) ; Hat der hi.
Augustinus geirrt inbetreff der Noiwendigkeit der Kommunion? (Son-
derabdruck baus Pastor bonus, s. a.). In these little works, he proves
from the authority of the Fathers and Doctors the necessity of the
Eucharist (either actually, when possible, or at least in desire) for the
CONSERVATION of grace. But in respect of the first ACQUISI-
TION of grace, he does not think that the desire of the Eucharist is
necessary, except in so far as the Eucharist is the principle of perse-
verance. Because a person who wishes to be justified, has the inten-
tion of remaining in justice; he has therefore the intention of making
use of the means necessary for perseverance, which is the Eucharist;
therefore it is impossible for one to be justified, unless he has an im-
plicit desire of receiving the Eucharist.
Just as this explanation affirms nothing but what is true about the
Eucharist, so in the fact that it is exclusive, it fails to satisfy the
authorities to be cited directly, on the necessity of the Eucharist, it also
fails to satisfy the authorities quoted above on the nature of sacra-
mental baptism. It is an absolute certainty, according to these authori-
ties, that our theologians look upon the Eucharist, not only as the cause
of the conservation of grace, but also as the origin, in respect of our
whole divine life; and accordingly that we are not only justified WITH
the desire of the Eucharist, but THROUGH the desire of the Eucha-
rist, as some kind of disposition to the form of grace. Moreover, on
careful study, it will be seen that the Eucharist is conditioned to the
conservation of grace, in the very same way as it is conditioned to the
origin of grace; that is as the principle of incorporation. For, indeed,
the first acquisition of grace is the beginning of incorporation, just as
the continuation of incorporation is the conserving of grace. Since,
however, as Emil Springer says, the Eucharist is the principle of in-
corporation, it follows that both the origin and the conservation of
grace are immediately, directly and of themselves, related to the Eucha-
rist, and, so to speak, on equal terms.


Paragraph 1: Universal Necessity in order to Life and
Salvation.
SECTION I. DIRECT TESTIMONY OF THE FATHERS.
Let us now see what is the teaching of the Fathers and
Doctors in this matter. 1 Here it is important to keep in mind
the teaching of the Fathers already referred to (XXXVIII and
XXII), who declare that incorruptibility, immortality and the
resurrection is possible for man only by the Eucharist. The
special question of the resurrection has already been disposed
of. Now we are to review the statements of those Fathers who
hold that unto life and salvation, the Eucharist is simply neces-
sary for all. We shall first weigh the testimonies of the Eastern
Church, and then pass on to the more ancient and more numerous
Latin Fathers.
Leaving aside the writings of Chrysostom {ln Joann, hom.
47, 1. P.G. 59, and De Sacerdotio, 3, 5. P.G. 48, 643), whose
documents are undoubtedly valuable, but not quite conclusive,
we certainly have tire undoubted support of Cyril of Alexandria,
who writes; “By the partaking of the Body and the precious
blood of Christ, He is really made one in us, and we in turn are
made one in Him. For what is in its very nature corruptible,
CANNOT BE VIVIFIED OTHERWISE than by being made
corporally one with the Body of Him, who in His very nature
is life, that is the Only-Begotten. If my words do not convince
you, pay heed in faith to the words of Christ, who says, Amen,
amen I say to you, unless you eat of the flesh of the Son of
man and drink of his blood, you shall not have life in you ....
You hear Him plainly teach, that, if we do not eat of His Flesh
and drink of His Blood, we shall not have life in us, that is,
we will not have eternal life in our own flesh.” {ln Joan.,
lib. 10, app. 2. P.G. 74, 341-344).
I This thesis in its entirety (as well as XLVII. above) was written
before the publication of the works of P. L. Nicolussi S.S.S.: (Die
Notwendigkeit der hi. Eucharistie, Bausani, 1917, and Die Wirkmgen
der hi. Eucharistie. He met with a formidable opponent in O. Lutz, in
Zeitschrift fur katholiscke Theologie, 1919, 11. ( Die Notwendigkeit der
hi. Eucharistie, p. 235-268), and 1920 111. and IV. (Ueber die Wir-
kungen und die Notwendigkeit der hi. Eucharistie, p. 398-420 and 605-
537. Nicolussi in these essays claims for the sacrament of the Eucharist
a necessity as a means, and a universal efficacy of grace. Now, though
I would hardly agree with one and all of the opinions or arguments
of Nicolussi, at the same time I find nothing in the counter-arguments
of Lutz, which would alter or weaken the arguments which I shall pre-
sently submit. To my mind, there is little to justify the reasoning of
Nicolussi being branded as “grandes passus extra viam.” For the most
part his process of argument is on the right lines, in his endeavour to
understand the mystery, so that to contradict him more often than not
leads one into error.


Again: “The Son as Man is really within us corporally,
mingled with us and made one by the mystic eulogy (Eucharist)
. . . FOR a nature subject to corruption CANNOT BE UP-
LIFTED TO INCORRUPTIBILITY, unless a nature beyond
all corruption and change comes down on it, raising to its own
good estate (bonum) what is utterly cast down, and there and
then by the communion and commingling with itself, salvaging
it from the condition of created things, and transforming into
itself what of itself is not such (tale).” {ln Joann., 1, 11, c.
12. P.G. 74, 564; compare ibid., 1. 4, c. 2 throughout. P.G. 73,
particularly col. 565, 577, 581. De adoratione in spiritu et
veritate, 1, 17. P.G. 68, 1076; etc.) Whatever may be the force
of the argument constantly advanced by Cyril, and at times also
by St. Gregory of Nyssa, at least it cannot be questioned, that
he was convinced, that the Eucharist is necessary as the proper
and proximate cause of that life, of which together with Christ
we are all sharers; so much so that it is only by the power and
the efficacy of the Eucharist that life is engendered in us.
Ammonius Alexandrinus gives the same teaching in a nut-
shell: “Those will not be sharers of eternal life, who do not by
partaking of the mysteries, receive Jesus, who by nature is life.”
(In Joann., VI. 54. P.G. 85, 1440).
The following words are attributed to St. Nilus the Abbott:
“It is impossible for any one of the faithful to obtain salvation,
to receive pardon for sin, to reach the kingdom of heaven, other-
wise than by partaking in fear and desire of the mystic and
sinless Body and Blood of Christ God.” {Epistolarum, lib. 3,
280, P.G. 79, 521). In these words the very grace of justifica-
tion appears as derived above and beyond all else from the
Eucharist. (Compare ibid., 1,1, 44 and 3, 39. col. 104 and 405).
4
In explaining Exodus XII. 6, Procopius Gazaeus says the
same in pithy fashion: “We have not life, if we do not eat of His
Flesh and drink of His Blood.” (P.G. 87, 564.)
Theophylactus follows on the footsteps of the early Catholic
Fathers, where he writes; “It is most necessary, LIFE
CANNOT BE HAD OTHERWISE It behoves us then,
when we hear the words: Unless you eat, etc., in partaking
of the divine mysteries, to have unwavering faith, we must
not ask: How? For animal man .... is not capable of what
is above nature and spiritual; and hence he does not understand
the spiritual alimony of the Flesh of the Lord: those who do
not partake of it, will not be sharers in eternal life, NOT
HAVING RECEIVED JESUS WHO IS ETERNAL LIFE.”
{ln Joann., VI. 53-56. P.G. 123, 1309).


Very many theologians were halting in their interpretation
of the pronouncements of St. Augustine, they thought that the
necessity, stated in St. John VI. 54, was interpreted by
Augustine as incorporation indeed with Christ, but not as to be
understood as arising from the Eucharist; that this incorporation
is really to be attributed to baptism, regarded in itself, prior in
concept to any desire whatsoever of the Eucharist; and that it
is called indeed the spiritual eating of the Body and drinking
of the Blood, but without any relation of dependence on the
sacrament of the Eucharist, either actually or in desire. How-
ever, their interpretation appears to be forced, 1 because in every
one of these passages 2 St. Augustine shows that he is speaking
of the very sacrament of the Eucharist.
l Even in his time Rupert of Dietz rejected this interpretation,
either of the statements of St. Augustine or of the words of our Lord
(.In Joan., 6, P.L. 169, 469-470) : “He that eateth my flesh and drinketh
my blood, abideth in me, and lin him. THERE ARE SOME, HEED-
LESS OF THE PRINCIPLES OF FAITH, who invert this saying of
the Lord IN THE FOLLOWING MANNER: He who abideth in me,
and lin him, that man eateth my flesh and, drinketh my blood. Being
preoccupied by the opinion that, to remain in the unity of faith, is the
same thing as to eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ, THEY
THINK that corporal communion of the table of the Lord IS NOT
NECESSARY FOR SALVATION. What if every one were to teach
and to believe this? Is it not making the gift of God vain, reducing
it to nothing, making it unnecessary to follow the manner of eating and
of drinking, appointed by the Lord, with His own lips on the threshold
of His Passion? FAR THEN FROM THE HUMAN HEART BE
THE MEANING WHICH THIS SENSELESS DISTORTION CON-
VEYS. Clearly Christ did not prescribe it, for He says: He that eateth
my flesh and drinketh my blood, that is to say in the manner in which
I will give it, believing in his heart unto justice, and with his lips
eating and drinking salvation, that man abideth in me and I in him,, so
that now they are not two, but one flesh. FOR THE EATING AND
THE DRINKING IS THE EFFICIENT CAUSE, AND THE EF-
FECT IS, THAT HE abideth in me, and I in him (comp. col. 482).
* Though our thesis could not be clearly proved, still it could not
be disproved from St. Augustine’s Tractatus in Joannem, 26, 6, 15-17
(P.L. 36, 1613-1614), where the eating and the drinking of the Flesh
of Christ, which is necessary, is represented as incorporation with
Christ in the Church; the sacrament of which is the Eucharist. If this
were the only passage at our disposal, one might possibly doubt what
was the teaching of St. Augustine on the sacrament itself —is it, or is it
not, necessary. His line of argument is; Man is not vivified by the
mere sacramental partaking, as our Lord’s promise affects those only
who receive worthily, that is, the pure, who, together with the symbol
of unity, also partake of unity (comp, ibid., n. 18). Hence the eating
which is necessary, which is alone salutary, is that which reaches out
to incorporation. This teaching of St. Augustine is very true. The
conclusion, however, that according to this statement of Augustine in-
corporation without the sacrament is possible to all, would be very
hasty indeed, as there are other passages which we shall consider pre-
sently directly in opposition to such a conclusion.


To begin with, we select a passage from the first book De
peccatorum mentis et remissione, (20, 26-27. P.L. 44, 123-124),
where from “the sacrament of the laver” he explicitly sets apart
the “sacrament of the holy table,” that is, distinguishes baptism
from the Eucharist, for which baptism is a preparation. Here,
as in other places generally, the universal necessity of the one
sacrament (i.e. baptism) is demonstrated from the universal
necessity of the other (i.e. the Eucharist). The Pelagians made
a distinction between the “life” which they claimed for children
who died without baptism, and the “kingdom” into, which alone
they admitted those who were deprived of baptism. Augustine
enters the lists in this way: “[The Pelagians] take refuge in £
shelter, where they may lie free from attack, because the Lord
does not say: Unless a man he born again of life and the Holy
Spirit, he will not have life; but He says: he will not enter into
the kingdom of God. For had He said: he will not have life,
then there would be no possible room for doubt. Therefore
let us remove their doubt; let us listen to the Lord, and not to
the hesitant doubts and conjectures of men. I repeat, let us
listen to the Lord, and here He is not speaking of the laver,
He is speaking of the sacrament OF HIS HOLY TABLE, TO
WHICH ONLY THE BAPTIZED MAN APPROACHES,
when He Says: Unless you eat of my flesh, and drink of my.
blood, you shall not have life in you. What more do we want?
What answer can be made to this, unless obstinacy stretches
forth the hand of battle against the fortress of self-evident
truth? Will any one dare further and say: THAT THESE
WORDS DO NOT REFER TO CHILDREN, and that without
partaking of this Body and Blood, they can have life in them-
selves; because speaking of the Eucharist, He does not say:
he who does not eat, while speaking of baptism He says: he who
is not born again; but of the Eucharist, He says; Unless you
eat, addressing those who could hear and understand, a thing
obviously impossible for the little ones? But one who says this,
does not consider, that IF THIS SENTENCE DOES NOT
BIND ALL, so that without the Body and Blood of Christ they
cannot have life, EVEN THOSE OF A GREATER AG£
ATTEND TO IT TO NO PURPOSE.”
Augustine is here undoubtedly speaking of the Eucharist;
he undoubtedly declares its universal necessity, and he un-
doubtedly says that it is not a necessity of mere precept. For
in the first place, a necessity of precept can never apply to
children. Only a sin of disobedience implies a necessity of pre-
cept, and before the age of reason no one is guilty of sin.
Secondly, if it were a necessity of precept, the expression, that
what does not bind children, is observed to no advantage at a


greater age, has no sense. Indeed there are many duties which
bind adults and do not bind children. He is not therefore
inculcating the necessity of the Eucharist as a duty, but the
necessity of the Eucharist as a means; it extends to all, even
to children. Hence the love of our Lord and the virtue of the
Eucharist is much more forcefully commended to us, than if we
were bound by precept to something not intrinsically necessary,
under the threat of the penalty of eternal damnation.
Augustine proposes this teaching as apostolic, and not
merely as his own: “The Christians of Carthage give to baptism
itself no other name than salvation, and to THE SACRAMENT
OF THE BODY OF CHRIST no other name than life.
Whence is this, unless from the ancient tradition, and to my
mind, from the tradition of the apostles, they maintain as an
engrafted belief of the Church of Christ, that apart from bap-
tism and the PARTAKING OF THE TABLE OF THE
LORD, NO ONE CAN REACH NOT ONLY THE KING-
DOM OF GOD, BUT CAN REACH ETERNAL LIFE? For,
as we said above, Holy Scripture bears witness to this. For
what else do they, who give to baptism the name of salvation,
hold, than what was said: He saved us by the laver of the
resurrection, and what Peter says: being Lord of the like form,
now saveth you also? And what else do they, who give the
name of life to the sacrament of the table of the Lord, hold,
than what was said: I am the living bread, who came down
from heaven; and The bread which I shall give is my flesh for
the life of the world and Unless you eat of the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink of his blood, you shall not have life in you?
If then as such great witnesses agree, NO ONE MAY HOPE
FOR SALVATION OR ETERNAL LIFE, without baptism
AND THE BODY AND BLOOD OF THE LORD, in vain
without these is it promised to infants.” {lbid., 24, 34, col.
128-129).
Here we have indicated clearly by Augustine two different
sacraments, baptism and the Eucharist; and the necessity of the
Eucharist is traced back to the apostolic tradition of the Church,
as absolutely in its own way universal.
St. Augustine lays no claim to his own authorship of this
prescription against the Pelagians, seeing that more 'than once he
appeals to the authority of Innocent I. {Bpist. ad Patres Concil.
Milev., n. 5, among the Epistles of Augustine, ep. 182. P.L. 33,
785): “Is not he [lnnocent] quite openly,” says Augustine,
“speaking of little ones? For these are his words: The teaching
of your Fraternity, that these little ones can receive the rewards
of eternal life without the grace of baptism, is most fatuous .


For unless they eat of the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink
of His Blood they shall not have life in them. Those who
maintain this for them without regeneration, appear to me to
endeavour to make void baptism itself, seeing that they declare
that children possess, what we believe to be conferred on them
by baptism alone. Thus Innocent of happy memory says, that
children have not life without the baptism of Christ, AND with-
out partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ.” (Contra duos
epistolas Pelagianorum, 2,4, 7. P.L. 44, 576). Again: “See what
answer you can give to St. Innocent, who quite definitely
declared, that children cannot have life unless they eat of the
Flesh of the Son of Man. Answer him if you can; nay, answer
the Lord Himself, whose words that bishop repeats.” (Contra
Julianum, 1, 4. P.L. 44, 648).
The Epistola ad Paulinum Nolanum (Ep. 186, 8, 29. P.L.)
has the very same meaning: “If [the Pelagians] submit to the
Apostolic See, or rather TO THE VERY MASTER AND
LORD OF THE APOSTLES, who says that they will not have
eternal life in themselves, unless they eat of the Flesh of the
Son of man, and drink of His Blood, WHICH THE BAP-
TIZED ALONE CAN DO; surely a time will come when they
will admit, that unbaptized children cannot have eternal life,
and therefore though their state be more endurable than that of
those who themselves commit sin, they are nevertheless punished
with eternal death.”
Here, just as in the excerpts cited above, he is dealing with
the actual Eucharist, as something the very concept of which
makes baptism necessary for the ritual partaking of it, and
here too, he is speaking of its universal necessity, binding even
the little ones; and here also he is speaking of this dogma as
resting on the authority of the apostles, indeed of our Lord
Himself. 1
1 The writings of St. Augustine are replete with such examples.
Thus in the first book Contra Julianum, 3, 44, P.L. 45, 1268: “In very
truth Christ is the Saviour of children; in very truth they will perish
unless redeemed by Him; for they cannot have life without His Flesh
and Blood.”
Again in the Opus imperfectum contra Julianum, 3, 44, P.L. 45,
1268, who, saying that original sin is not in the souls of infants, dares
to represent God as speaking: “It is most iniquitous and stujjid that
my creation, my image, should be laden down with the sins of others.”
Augustine replies; “Why not represent God as also saying: It is most
iniquitous and stupid that, what is my image, my creation, should die
without baptism, through the neglect of parents or others, or for any
cause whatever, and not be admitted into my kingdom; THAT IT
SHOULD not live the life, because it did not eat of my Flesh, or
drink of my Blood? Will you also dispute and cavil against this pro-
nouncement of Christ; without any doubt, you say, even if he does


Supposing that this eating of the Body and drinking of the
Blood were, in the mind of Augustine and Innocent, merely some
kind of fellowship with Christ, apart altogether from the sacra-
ment of His Body and Blood, would the argument against the
Pelagians be effective at all? Could not the Pelagians, con-
sistently with their own principles, easily retort: these children,
as they had not sinned, even before baptism, had fellowship with
Christ in peace, and therefore in that purely metaphorical sense
they ate of the Body and Blood of Christ. If, on the other hand,
this incorporation were the result of the virtue proper to the
Eucharist, the Pelagians were there and then proved to be in
error; since it was quite clear and a matter of common know-
ledge, that the door to the Eucharist was open only by baptism.
Meantime, however, we must insist that it is absolutely certain
that by this teaching St. Augustine (and Innocent) did not
exclude from salvation children dying with baptism only. 1
We must note, too, that those are greatly in error who think
that it was the controversy with the Pelagians on the necessity
of receiving the Eucharist that first gave occasion to arguing
backward from that to the proof of the necessity of receiving
baptism. For it is plain that in Book 3of the Testimonia . . . .
ad Quirinum (c. 25. together with c. 26 ed. Hartel. p. 140-141)
Cyprian uses this very argument. For here, defending the
necessity of baptism, he quotes St. John VI. 54 in a manner that
makes the reference to the Eucharist obvious, as is evident also
from the immediately subjoined title of chapter twenty-six. The
twenty-fifth chapter is devoted to the proof of the following
not eat of the Flesh of Christ, or drink of His Blood, he shall live the
life? WHOSE IS THIS VOICE BUT THE VOICE OF ANTI-
CHRIST? Go you and preach those things, teach those things: let
Christian men and Christian women hear you, let the immoral and
the renegade to the faith listen to you; let them hear you; cherish you,
clothe and honour you, following you in your abandonment, let them
be abandoned themselves! But the Lord knows His own.”
Similarly in the first book Contra duos epistolas Pelagianorum,
22, 40, P.L. 44, 570 ; “For you give them [the little ones] a place of
salvation and eternal life outside the kingdom of God, even if they
are not baptised .... It does not enter into your mind that without
the Body and Blood of Christ they cannot have eternal life, for the
Lord Himself says; Unless you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink of His Blood, you shall not have life in you."
1 Although there are those even to-day who impute to Augustine
this exclusion; for example, J. Tixeront ( Histoire des Dogmes, 3,2,
419) and P. Batiffol ( Eucharistie, 5, 449-450) ; wrongly, however, as
we saw in Thesis XLVI. As a matter of fact if this error is to be
attributed to Augustine, to be just we must also impute it to Cyprian,
Innocent, Gelasius, etc. And then it will be difficult to escape the cen-
sure of the Council of Trent (D., 933).


thesis: “Unless a man is baptized and bom again, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.” The proof is as follows: “In
the Gospel according to John: Unless a man is born again, etc.,
.... There, likewise, we read: Unless you eat of the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink of his blood, you shall not have life
in you. And the inscription of chapter twenty-six immediately
after chapter 25, is as follows: “It is vain to be baptized AND
to receive the Eucharist, unless one advance in deeds and good
works”—What makes it all the more certain that he is speaking
of the Eucharist here, is that the union of charity with Christ
cannot be separated from good works.
After the time of St. Augustine, we have the weighty and
incontestable authority of Pope Gelasius, who writes to all the
bishops of Picenum as follows: The Lord Jesus Christ Himself
says: Unless a man eat of the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
of his blood, he shall not have life in him: NO ONE IS
EXCEPTED, AND NO ONE HAS DARED TO SAY, THAT
AN INFANT CAN ATTAIN TO ETERNAL LIFE WITH-
OUT THIS SACRAMENT OF SALVATION; there is no
doubt, that deprived of that life, he will be in eternal death ....
The Lord, as we have said above, says (and this is possible for
the baptized alone) : He that does not eat of the flesh of the
Son of man .... will not have life in himself .... There is no
doubt that this was said of eternal life, because it is plain that
many do not eat this sacrament, and yet have this present life.
Those therefore who say that infants not born again are only
incapable of entering into the kingdom of heaven, but yet are
not punished with eternal damnation, are speaking nonsense:
since without baptism they (the infants) are incapable of eating
the Body or drinking the Blood of Christ, and without THIS
they cannot have eternal life in themselves, and without life
there can be nothing but death for them in the future.” (P.L.
59, 37-38). Could words be more explicit than these regarding
the eating and drinking of the sacrament (“many do not eat
of this sacrament”) of the Eucharist, of which only the bap-
tized are capable, and without which there is no life? Suppose
then, that Augustine and Gelasius meant by eucharistic eating
and drinking just a union with Christ by charity, and in no way
emanating from the Eucharist, what would be the purport of
their argument? Merely this: without baptism infants have
not life, because Christ (St. John VI. 54) said, no one can
attain to life unless he be united to Him by charity. Could not
the heretics immediately retort: Yes, but they could obtain this
union with Christ without baptism. We admit, indeed we main-
tain, that there is no life without union to Christ. But what
we hold as a dogma is precisely this: that such union, charity,


justice, and so on, is also possible without baptism. And this
is what you undertook to refute. When you assert that this
teaching of ours is false, are you yourselves not begging the
question?—How meet the heretics with such argumentation?
Are not the Fathers inconsistent on this supposition? The
Fathers, however, replied to the heretics with a more powerful
argument. They declared that the Eucharist conferred its benefit
on the baptized alone, as everyone agreed. But, according to
the words of our Lord (St. John VI. 54), no one has life
without the Eucharist. Therefore, children dying without bap-
tism were deprived of life: which was what had to be proved.
The heretics were silenced, accepting as they did the words of
our Lord; Unless you eat etc. Nor did the heretics deny that
the words referred to the Eucharist, they simply said that the
implication of the words was restricted to adults. The Fathers
replied by insisting that for adults and children alike, the reason
was the same. We have already seen in St. Fulgentius, how the
Fathers reconciled the sufficiency of baptism with the necessity
of the Eucharist.
Practically at the same time as Gelasius, the author of the
oft-quoted homily De corpore et sanguine Christi, 7 (P.L. 30,
274), appeals, like St. Augustine, to the same testimony of the
Gospel, in defence of the necessity of baptism in children: “What
further knowledge you must seek, regarding THIS TWOFOLD
SPECIES [the liquid and the solid of the Eucharist], learn
from the Lord Himself: Unless, He says, you eat of the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink of his blood, you shall not ha-ife
life in you. This is a most forceful and most evident witness
against the blasphemies of Pelagius, who in his impious frenzy,
dares to assert, that baptism should not be given to children to
give them life, but to give them the kingdom of heaven. For
beneath the implication of these words of God: You shall not
have life in you, written by the Evangelist, it must be clearly
understood, that every soul deprived of the gift of baptism, is
not only deprived of glory but also of life.”
The Bpistola ad Senarium of John the Deacon probably
belongs to the same period. Of the neophytes leaving the bap-
tismal font it is said: “Let them realize that it is not others,
but they only who are made partakers of the Body and Blood
of the Lord that will attain to the land of promise.” (n. 12.
P.L. 59, 405).
Coming down to a later period, the intrinsic necessity of
the Eucharist was equally insisted on. Examples could be
quoted indefinitely, showing the necessity of the Eucharist, and
making no restriction whatever, such as the testimony of Leid


radus of Lyons: “Those who have been renovated by baptism
must be led to the table of the Lord .... For He who said:
Unless a man is born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he
will not enter into the kingdom of heaven; said: Unless you eat
of the flesh of the Son of man, and drink of his blood, you shall
not have life in you. THIS PRONOUNCEMENT BINDS
ALL, without the Body of Christ they cannot have life ....
The Flesh of Christ is given for the life of man, unless man
partakes of it, he will not have eternal life.” (De sacramento
baptismi,{c. 9. P.L. 99, 866).
To obviate any equivocation whatever, we now select testi-
monies where the intrinsic necessity is more definitely insisted
on. 1
Eastern theologians who denied the validity of the con-
secration in unleavened bread, were answered by Dominicus
Gradensis, with the argument of the intrinsic necessity of the
Eucharist. If the consecration in unleavened bread is invalid,
the whole Western Church is deprived of the life which comes
from the Eucharist. For a Christian this is unthinkable: “In
vain did the blessed Peter and Paul preach in Italy, if the
Western Church IS DEPRIVED OF THE FELICITY OF
ETERNAL LIFE, which only a partaker of the Body and Blood
of Christ attains to, as He Himself has said: Unless you eat
of the flesh, etc.? If then, the offering of unleavened bread is
not the Body of Christ, we are all cut off from life.” ( Bpistola
ad Petrum Antiochenum, n. 4. P.G. 120, 753-756).
Cardinal Bona, in Res Liturgicae, book 2, c. 19, takes to task
Radulphus Ardens, a celebrated preacher of those days, accusing
him of making sacramental communion absolutely necessary for
infants. Radulphus did, indeed, write: “It is decreed that the
Eucharist, at least under the species of wine, be given to
CHILDREN recently baptized, lest they die without the
NECESSARY sacrament.” (Horn. 51, in die Paschae, P.L.
155, 1850.) But unfortunately the words immediately following
escaped the notice of that very eminent writer. They show clearly
that Radulphus was simply following the traditional teaching:
that for us the Eucharist is a necessary principle of life. For
1 1 would not like to omit, at this place, the synodal declaration of
Gerardus I of Cambrai: “The Lord invites us to this mystic and divine
banquet, He points out to us the necessity of receiving this nutriment,
it is such that we cannot have life in us, otherwise than by eating His
Flesh and drinking His Blood .... True, here below, man can have
the temporal life without this food; but he cannot have eternal life,
which is promised to the faithful alone, who worthily partake of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ.” (Acta Synodi Atrebatensis, P.L. 142,
1279).


Radulphus continues: "And what if death does overtake them?
Will they be damned? No, my brethren, they will be saved in
the faith, not indeed in their own, but in the faith of the
sponsors. For there are two ways of partaking of the Body of
Christ, the sacramental and the spiritual. ... A good man
receives the Body of Christ spiritually, if though not at any
time receiving it sacramentally, he nevertheless is in the Body
of Christ in faith and charity .... All the same, my brethren,
all Christians who have the time and the opportunity, must also
receive sacramentally.” Ibid., 1850-1851.)“
This same doctrine on the power of the Eucharist gave
occasion to the following admonition of William of St. Theo-
doric, (De sacramento altaris, c. 8. P.L. 180, 354) : “Enough
has been said, I think, on the spiritual eating of the spiritual
[i.e. Eucharistic and actually lifegiving, compare c. 6 and 7]
Flesh of Christ, which is nothing else than SETTING YOUR
HEART ON THE VIRTUE OF IT [i.e. of the Eucharistic
Flesh], and manifesting this action [i.e. living a life worthy of
the sacrament]; but now it is in order to say a few words on
the corporal [i.e. the sacramental] eating. Corporal eating is
corporal partaking of the Body of the Lord, worthily or un-
worthily: unto life or into death. For although that [spiritual
3 Bona also Suspects (ibid) Walterius Aurelianensis of error. This
is another surprise; for Walterius had simply said: “Let the
priest have the Eucharist always ready, so that, should a person fall
ill, or a CHILD become sick, he may communicate him immediately,
lest he die without the Viaticum” ( Capitula . 7. P.L. 119, 734-735). I
think that every canonist knows that this was a well-known ordinance
of the mediaeval Church, as we see in the Capitularia Caroli M. ah
Ansegiso colie eta, 185 (P.L. 119, 707), and the Capitida of Rodulphus
Bituricensis (P.L. 119, 707), which follow the same trend, except that the
word communion is used instead of viaticum. Thence it passed on to the
decretists like Burchardus Deer., 6, 10, P.L. 140, 754; Ivo Carnotensis,
Deer., 2, 20, P.L. 161, 165. But as Bona has unjustly censured these
two writers, I shall add a third, who flourished between the times of
Walterius and Radulphus, Bernoldus Constantiensis, or whoever may
be the author of the treatise De sacramentis morientium infantum,
Not only does he insist on the Eucharist being given to children re-
cently baptised, but also that it be repeated in the case of the same
children in danger of death. His words are: “It should be known that
there are some who say that the viaticum is not necessary for dying
children, notwithstanding the words of the Lord to His followers gen-
erally: "Unless you eat, etc. Whence the Blessed Augustine says:
Will anyone dare to assert that these words do not apply to children,
and that they can have eternal life without partaking of this Body and,
Bloodf And a little further on: If they do not eat of the Flesh of the
Son of man, they also will not have life. Hence the Roman Ordo pre-
scribes that communion be given them immediately after baptism; how
much more so in their final need, when they are about to depart from
this world?” (De Sacramentis morientium infantum, 2, P.L. 148, 1273).


eating] may suffice, if inevitable necessity compels it, never-
theless this [corporal eating] must not be omitted.”
He explains the sufficiency of spiritual communion, in the
unavoidable deprivation of the sacramental in the words of
Fulgentius already quoted above; he then illustrates the virtue
of the Eucharist by the words of Hilary, likewise quoted above.
Ido not think that Guibert of Nogent ( De pignoribus sanc-
torum, 1, 1. P.L. 156, 613), is opposed to the teaching of his
contemporaries. 1 He holds that one can be a Christian with
baptism, though without the Eucharist: such were, he says, the
many martyrs who never received the Eucharist, and hermits
who received only “once or very rarely.” What he says here
is a matter of common knowledge to every Catholic; meantime,
he adds that though they did not partake corporally, they were
nevertheless spiritually incorporated with the Eucharist. “Con-
tinually INCORPORATING THEMSELVES WITH IT [i.e.
the Eucharist],” by the belief in it “in which they constantly
remain,” as of a thing “most highly” necessary, and thus pre-
cisely “they are sanctified in a lifelong solitude.”
The teaching of Guibert is, in my opinion, the same as the
explicit teaching of Rupert which we now submit. Rupert
brushes aside all metaphorical interpretation, and says that the
words of our Lord: Unless you eat, etc., mean the real Eucharistic
Body of Christ, and yet he holds that infants carried away by
death after baptism, and martyrs prevented by the persecutor,
communicated (spiritually) of the real sacramental Body.
“Apart from the vagueness of any figure or similitude what-
ever, we believe most firmly, that it is not any body you may
select, that it is not the body of Christ which is the Church,
but that it is the very Body of the Lord, which was given for
us, that we eat, and the very Blood which was shed for us unto
the remission of sins, which we drink .... and that what He
Himself did, the same thing we know and well know that we
do, in commemoration of Him, that is eat His Flesh and drink
His Blood .... Therefore unless you eat of my flesh, He says,
and drink of my blood, doing this precisely that I command you
to do, in commemoration of me, you shall not have life in you.
True, there are infants who die very young, before they can
eat or drink, or those who are prevented by time, as some
confessors, whom the pressure of persecution and death deprived
even of baptism by water. They are not prejudiced by this
I To the contrary read Emil Springer Die heilige Kommumion, das
notwendige Mittel zur Bewahrung der heiligmachenden Gnade, 1911,
p. 54.


pronouncement of the truth. God only condemns those as not
having eaten, who were unwilling to eat, or who were careless
or disregarded the command. We believe then that children,
who because of their age could not eat, and who died immediately
after baptism, are sharers in eternal life; we have no doubt
that the holy confessors who were overtaken by persecution and
who died in their own blood, partook of the Body of the Lord,
as far as it is profitable for eternal life.” ( In Joannem, 1,6,
P.E 169, 483-484).
Later, in his third book, De Spiritu Sancto, c. 25 (P.L. 167,
1665-1666), 1 he expressly raises the question, now that baptism
is sufficient for salvation, why is the Eucharist necessary to
attain to eternal life, and he replies, consistently with the
quotations from him above (XLVI), that this is so, because
by baptism, man, damaged by original sin, is prepared and
ordained for the Eucharist, from whence alone life and salvation
flow:
'‘Why is each sacrament necessary for salvation, first of
all to be baptized, and then to partake of this sacrament? Why,
you say, after having received baptism unto the remission of
sins, must we partake of the food unto the remission of sins?
In fact, when any one of these sacraments is received, why is
the other necessary for salvation? .... Because of what He says:
He who believes and is baptized, will be saved. It is just as if a
physician were to say to the man wounded and left half dead
by the robbers: if he will allow himself to be taken to my inn,
he will be healed: for I will give him food and drink, the virtue
of which is so great, that it will immediately restore him to
perfect health. So then, when He says: He who believes and is
baptized, he will be saved : His meaning must be; for I will give
him my Body in food and my Blood in drink, or I have pre-
pared for him that refreshed with which without any doubt he
will be saved.” Undoubtedly then Rupert, like the other Fathers
above, attributes to the Eucharist the fruit of salvation in every
one of the faithful.
Following in the footsteps of the earlier Fathers and
Augustine, the great Alger separates the two eatings of the
Body of Christ, one —the corporal which is done “with the lips,”
the other—the spiritual, which is either joined with the corporal,
or not joined with the corporal, but “done with the heart,” and
'Meantime in the* first chapter of the same book, he had said
briefly: “These two are the greatest of the sacraments, that is baptism
and the life-giving table of His Body and Blood, which without any
doubt are necessary for our salvation, so much so that without them
NO ONE can enter into life, or reach the kingdom of God.”


then adds words not sufficiently familiar to theologians of our
time: “Although the spiritual eating of the Body of Christ is
prior to, and more excellent than the corporal, seeing that the
spiritual life is for the good only, and the corporal both for the
good and the bad; nevertheless, since each act IS NECESSARY
FOR SALVATION, AND TRUE PARTAKING, IN RE-
SPECT OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE BODY OF
CHRIST: clearly we must inquire why St. Augustine said,
that then alone will the Body of Christ be life to all, if He is
spiritually eaten in real truth; as if it were not corporally eaten
in real truth, and as if sinners also, who merely eat of the Body
of Christ sacramentally, do not eat it really because they do not
spiritually partake of it.” {De sacram. corp. et sang, dom., 1. 1,
cap. 21. P.L. 180, 798 compare cap. 20, col. 797.) We have
here two remarkable statements; (1) Not only the spiritual, but
also the corporal eating, is said to be necessary for salvation.
(2) Not only the corporal eating, but also the spiritual, is said
to have its own reality in respect of the actual Body of the
Lord.’
The teaching of Peter the Venerable is very definite. He
says that the Eucharist is universally necessary for all men,
unto salvation, without any exception whatever. Man was saved
only by the spiritual eating of this sacrament, not only in the
New Testament but also in the Old: “Christ openly gives His
Flesh and Blood to man not only to be honoured and adored,
but also to be eaten and to be drunk; so much so that just as
no mortal man can live this mortal and miserable life without
food and drink, so also WE BELIEVE THAT NO ONE CAN
ATTAIN TO THAT IMMORTAL AND BLESSED LIFE
WITHOUT THAT SPIRITUAL FOOD AND DRINK ....
In the eating man learns that He is the eternal life of men.
In the often mentioned SACRAMENT He gave spiritual food
and spiritual drink, that is His Body and Blood, spiritually
conferring life on men. SO GREAT WAS ITS VIRTUE,
spiritually, however, that not only the faithful who lived after
the time of Christ, but also those who lived from the beginning
of the world (just as all did eat the same spiritual food, and all
drank the same spiritual drink, that is with the same effect unto
salvation, as Christians after Christ), all these obtained the
same effect from Body and Blood of Christ. Hence, as has
’That he is speaking of the individual Body of Christ, and not of
the ecclesiastical body only, i.e., the Church as the mystic body of
Christ, is clear, not only from the subject matter, but also from the
drift of the words which are a reply to the question proposed; “We
shall lay down this truth; that is to say, the truth whereby we believe
that the good really and truly partake of the Body of Christ; THE
BAD TRULY partake of the Body IN ITS SUBSTANCE, but do not
truly partake of it as effective to grace” (ibid.).


been already said, all—those who lived before Christ, just as
well as those who lived after, who belong to the body of Christ
and to the mystery of eternal salvation, all those too drank the
same spiritual drink.” (Tractatus contra Petrobrusianos, P.L-
----189, 816-818.)
Unquestionably, if we believe the Eucharist to be the one
principle of life for man fallen in Adam, all those preordained
to life, and who lived before Christ, must have partaken of it
in some manner in the centuries before the time of Christ.
The Fathers and writers of the Church have plainly declared
that this was so. Thus very material support is added to the
authority of our teaching.
In the first place we have the classic words of St. Augustine:
“This is the bread which came down from heaven. The manna
was a symbol of this bread. Those things both were sacraments:
they are different in the symbols, they are alike in the reality
which is signified. For attend to the words of the Apostle:
For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that our Fathers
were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all
did eat of the same spiritual food. The spiritual food they ate
was the same as ours, but not the corporal food, for they ate
the manna, we something else; the spiritual food alone was the
same .... They drank, he says, of the spiritual rock that
followed them : and the rock was Christ. From the one source
comes the bread and the drink. This THEREFORE is the
bread that cometh down from heaven, that if any man eat of it
he may not die. But it is so in what pertains to the virtue of
the sacrament, not in what pertains to the mere visible element
of the sacrament; and true of one who eats it interiorly, not
outwardly; of him who eats it in his heart, not of him who
crushes it with his teeth.” (In Joann., tr. 26. c. 6, n. 12. P.L-
----35, 1612.)
Before Augustine, of the Eastern Fathers Ephraem had no
hesitation in saying: “The unleavened bread is a figure of the
bread of life, THE ANCIENTS ATE THE NEW SACRA-
MENT.” (Hymni azymorum, 17, str. 5, ed. Lamy, t. 1. p. 618.)
And again: “Moses concealed IN THE UNLEAVENED
BREAD the sacrament of the Son, as the MEDICINE OF
LIFE.” (Hymn. 18, str. 15, p. 621.) 1
l On or about the XL century a Syrian says practically the same
of Adam: “In the very moment that Adam tasted the first fruit, he
tasted death; he also tasted life, when he ate of the tree of life, through!
the Cross. In tasting the fruit, he received the promise of death; and
HE RECEIVED THE PROMISE OF THE RESURRECTION IN
TASTING OF THE BODY AND BLOOD.” (Expositio officiorum Ec-
clesiae, by an anonymous writer, popularly attributed to Gregorius
Arbelensis, tr. R. H. Connolly, C.5.C.0., 91, 70). That is to say he
tastes life from the tree of life, Christ from the Cross, in no other way
than in the sacrament, tasted by faith.


St. Ephraem’s own people, the Syro-Maronites of to-day,
have in their Mass: “He gave His glorious mysteries to His
Church .... in order that she may eat of His Body in an
inscrutable manner, beyond our understanding, and without
scandal drink of His Blood! THE JUST PROPHETS HAD
LOOKED LONGINGLY FORWARD TO THIS MYSTERY,
and behold now He dwells in the Church for the forgiveness
of the people redeemed! Moses and Aaron clearly prefigured
the mystery of our Lord. Noah, Abraham, Melchisedech, Seth,
Enos, symbolized the mystery of the Son of God, THEY BE-
LIEVED IN THE MYSTERY WHICH WAS PREPARED
IN THE PAST, and which came to us sinners who are not
worthy of it.” (Max Saxoniae, Missa Syro-Maronitica, p. 23.)
In the West, after the time of Augustine, our theologians
have constantly insisted on the same thing: the ancients ate
spiritually of the Eucharist, in the belief of a Redeemer to come,
and in the desire of the bread to be sent down from heaven.
Thus Paschasius Radbertus: “The food was indeed the
same, because, for those spiritually partaking of it, the manna
was a type of the food of the Body of Christ, and the water
which flowed from the rock, was drink and a figure of the
Blood .... Clearly, although the Apostle speaks of them as
the same food and the same drink, there is also at the same
time a great difference between them, for they are not the same
real things, but only the same in semblance and in the symbolism,
in which was the promise of truth: from this spiritual knowledge
and THE SACRAMENTS OF THE FAITH (though future)
WERE IMPARTED TO THEM, so that even they were not
deprived in spirit OF WHAT THEY ALREADY MIGHT
DRINK IN HOPE.” (Lib. de corp. et sang. Dom., 5, 1-3.
P.L. 120, 1280-1281.)
>
Similar are the words of Hugo of St. Victor, or whoever
is the author of the Quaestiones et decisiones in Hpistolas Pauli,
80. P.L. 175, 529: “Nevertheless there are some sacraments of
the Old Testament, which have their virtue and efficacy from
the sacraments of the New Testament: there is, for instance,
the manna eaten by the faithful people, which HAD ITS
VIRTUE FROM THE BODY OF CHRIST, WHICH IS
THE SACRAMENT.”
Hervaeus Burgidolensis in the same sense (in h. 1. P.L.
181, 908) : “In the manna they ate the same food of the Body
of Christ, which we eat in the bread, in the rock they drank of
the same drink of the Blood of Christ, which we drink in the
chalice.”


Robert Puller commences his treatise on the Eucharist in
these words: “It pleased the Lord to bring salvation to the
faithful by the foolishness of faith, and to confound the proud:
to bring back the world to His Father, by the regeneration of
baptism, and by the nutriment of His Body and Blood. True,
He could have accomplished this in other ways; but He chose
this way in order to teach humility, for where the human mind
sees foolishness, faith points the way to salvation.”
“The eating of the manna symbolized the eating of the
Body of Christ. THEREFORE THE SACRAMENTS OF
THE BODY AND BLOOD OF THE LORD went before with
the people of old, they also availed THE SAME to believers
(AS AUTHORS ADMIT) 1 .... How did they avail the same
for believers? What does avail the same for believers mean,
except that the faith in the reality to come availed the same
for those of old, just as faith in the reality present avails for
us? ... . For without faith, neither the figure nor the reality
avails anything; and faith cannot exist without fruit.” {Sen-
tentiarum liber octavus, c. 1. P.L. 186, 960-961.)
Cardinal Jacobus de Vitriaco, speaking of the Eucharist:
“This is the food of which St. Paul speaks: our Fathers all did
eat the same spiritual food.” (Sermo 2, In coena Domini,
Antwerp. 1575, p. 337.)*
Possibly it may appear strange, to some absurd even, that
before the institution of the Eucharist, man was saved by faith
and by the desire of the Eucharist. But bear in mind that the
Eucharist is the sacrificial banquet of the Cross, by which alone
man is made partaker of that one sacrifice, by means of which
we are redeemed. For just as it was necessary for man to live
in the (implicit) hope of the true Victim to God, which was to
arrive, 1 so too, it was necessary to live in the desire of the same
1 Note carefully the phrase as authors admit. In the same compari-
son Hugo Victorinus has a similar expression: as they maintain. Such
formulae go to show how well known the teaching was.
•All these authors appeal to the passage from St. Paul, I. Cor., X.
3-4, cited above by St. Augustine. All the earlier commentators and
exegetes whom I have had access to, unanimously agree that this pas-
sage is typically Eucharistic. See Chrysostom, in h.l. P.G. 61, 191;
Ambrose De mysteriis, c. 9, n. 68. P.L. 16, 408; Ambrosiaster, in h.l.
P.L. 17, 234; Pelagius and the Ps. Primasius, in hi. P.L. 30, 746, and
68, 629; Remigius of Auxerre, or possibly Haymo of Halberstadt, in
hi. P.L. 117, 558-559; Rupert Tuitiensis, In Exod., 1, 3, c. 8; De Spiritu
Sancto, 1, 3, c. 19-20. P.L. 167, 795 and 1661; etc., etc.
1 Man lived in the implicit hope of the sacrifice of the Lord, by
living in the hope of the Redemption; for the Redemption to come was
only in the sacrifice. The explanation of the manner in which they
lived in this hope, at least implicit, of redemption, pertains to another
treatise.


Victim. Because the fruit of the sacrifice in the proper sense
is only gathered by receiving the Victim of the sacrifice, as we
have often said.
By their faith in Christ the Redeemer to come, therefore,
the ancients attained to salvation by virtue of the Eucharist:
a virtue here not indeed properly causal or efficient, 2 but final
or intentional. For what is not yet in existence has no efficient
activity, i.e. does not actually produce; though if it is intended
by way of end, it will even now elicit and perfect the desire,
and accordingly will enhance its worth. Keeping this distinction
in mind, it will be an easy matter to reconcile the theologians
of the middle ages, who attributed the virtue to these figures,
as derived from the Eucharist, with St. Thomas, who said that
the Eucharist was not spiritually eaten by the ancient people:
“The ancient Fathers did not eat this sacrament spiritually,
because it was not yet instituted” (4 D. 9,1, 2,4, 2m). That
is to say, they did not eat spiritually in the same manner as
we do, who are spiritually nourished efficiently by this sacra-
ment, now instituted. Nevertheless, in their own way they did
partake of the Eucharist spiritually, as St. Thomas admits in
another passage (3 S. 80, 1,3 m), when they realized that in
the manna, the Eucharist was to be DESIRED in symbol.
Hence in the Commentarius super primam ad Corinthios : All
did eat the same spiritual food, tfet is the Body of Christ,
spiritually understood in symbol. . . . The food and the drink
was to be desired, because it was sufficient, hence he says: All
did eat; and it was all-sufficing, because for all it was the same.
SECTION II. INDIRECT TESTIMONY IN RESPECT OF
OUR FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST.
The oft repeated statement that the Eucharist is a necessary
means of our incorporation with Christ, our adoptive filiation
with Him, and such like, indirectly expresses the same doctrine
that we have found in the Fathers and Doctors, cited above.
St. Hilary leads the way: “Why did He expose to us a
certain degree and order of union to be consummated, were it
not that, just as He was by nature in the Father, we should
believe that we on the other hand were in Him by birth in human
form, and He in turn was in us by the mystery of the sacraments?
He Himself testifies how natural this oneness is to us: He that
eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I
2 However, although in respect of the Eucharist (not yet in exist-
ence) there could be no actual efficiency in respect of the Hebrews
(or for those of the Gentiles who feared God), nevertheless they de-
sired this efficiency, and accordingly they obtained it in voto or in
desire.


in him. FOR NO ONE WIRE BE IN HIM, BUT ONE IN
WHOM HE HIMSEEF IS: as He ONLY has assumed in
HIMSELF, the flesh of one who has assumed His flesh . .
{De Trinitate, 8, 17. P.L. 10, 248). 8
Theodulphus of Orleans in the middle ages: “To His
faithful followers He gave His Flesh to be eaten, when He
said: Unless you eat of the flesh, etc., you shall not have life in
you. In order to reach this life, we are baptized, and we also
eat of His Flesh and drink of His Blood, because IT IS
ABSOLUTELY IMPOSSIBLE TO BE IN HIS BODY,
UNLESS WE ARE IMBUED WITH HIS SACRAMENTS.”
{Liber de ordine baptismi, c. 17-18. P.L. 105, 239). In the
traditional teaching of the Eastern Fathers, Nicholas Cabasilas
{De vita in Christo, 1, 4. P.G. 150), is by far the most eloquent.
In the first place he says that we are incorporated in Christ
by this one sacrament: “For seeing that we could not ascend
to be sharers of His benefits, He came down to us in order to
be sharer in our nature; so wonderfully did He make one with
Him the human nature which He assumed, that He gave Him-
self to be partaken of by us, in those very things which, assumed
from us, he now offers us, that consisting as we do of human
flesh and blood, we should receive God Himself into our souls —
the Body, Blood, Soul, Will of God no less than Man .... BY
THIS SOLE MYSTERY we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone” (col. 593).
Secondly, he says that together with incorporation we reach
divine filiation by this one sacrament: “Just as, in order to
become our Father, and to be able to give utterance to the
words: Behold I and my children which God hath given to me,
He Himself became sharer with us in flesh and blood; so IT
WAS NECESSARY, that in order to be made His children, we
also should be made partakers of those things which are His.
And in this way BY MEANS OF THE SACRAMENT, not
only are we made members of Him, but we are also made child-
ren .... This is the economy of our glorious adoption as
children, not merely consisting in the giving of a name, which
to that extent would only raise us in dignity, as is the way in
human affairs. For with men, adopted children participate only
in the family name, and only thus far is the father com-
municated to them, not by generation or birth; here on the other
hand there is real generation, union with the Only-Begotten is
not merely union in name, but in real things: a union of body,
blood and life.”
’ln Thesis XXXVI. above one finds much more having the same
trend from Hilary. This particularly: “THIS therefore is the CAUSE
of our life, that we have Christ BY HIS OWN FLESH abiding in us
who are fleshly.” By means of the Eucharist obviously.


Not only is that divine filiation through the Eucharist truer
than human adoption, but it also transcends the condition of
human generation; “And why do I speak of this human adop-
tion, seeing that our divine filiation effects a closer propinquity
and kinship than does human generation, and thus the offspring
are more the children of God than the children of their parents?
.... For what is true parentage with us? That we have our
flesh from their flesh, and our life is imparted to us from their
blood. So also it is with the Saviour; for we are flesh of His
Flesh, and bone of His bone. But there is a vast difference
between each of these unions. Because in natural parentage,
what is now the blood of the children, is no longer the blood
of the parents, it was the blood of the parents before being the
blood of the children. For this is the way in natural offspring
that what was at one time the blood of the parents is now the
blood of the children. But the efficacy of the sacrament is this:
that the blood whereby we live is now the Blood of Christ, and
the Flesh which the mysteries present to us, is now the Flesh
of Christ, the members are common to us, the life is common.
This is also true communion between two, when the same is
present in both at the same time. For if either of the two have
this thing, but now this one has it, now the other, we have
division, not union. For there is no bond when the same thing
is not identically present in both, buf either one or the other
possesses it alone .... in such a case there is merely a sem-
blance of communion. But between ourselves and Christ there
is true communion, because with Him we always have a common
body, blood, members, and all such things. Now if this makes
children, communication that is of flesh and blood, it explains
that our kinship with Christ received from the sacred table
is closer than the kinship with our parents by nature.” In other
words, Christ is not the author of life in us, by a kind of
cutting off, or a separation of a part, as our parents are. He
is even now the Author of life, by the communication of His
Flesh, and the imparting of His Blood. Hence it follows that
He is not only the cause of our life in the making of it (in
fieri), but He is also the cause of our life in the being of it
{in esse) : for He is present with us conserving it as well as
originating it.
“Again, He does not, as our parents do, leave us, after
having been the author of our life and form (formatio) ; He
does not leave us, as our parents do; He is ever present, and
cleaves to us. By His very presence He originates and informs
our life. Separate from our parents, life continues on; separate
from Christ there is only death. Shall I say more? Children
do not exist in themselves, unless they are separated from their


parents; indeed this separation brings it about that the parents
are one set, the children another: but the filiation which is
founded on the mysteries, actually consists in conjunction and
union, and the dissolution of that union means no further exist-
ence of filiation. Therefore, if the word kinship signifies com-
munion at all, and if it indicates, as I think, those who are made
one in the communion of blood, then in very truth, the only
communion of blood, the only kinship and filiation, is that ac-
cording to which we communicate with Christ. For this reason
also it causes our natural filiation to be quite obscured, seeing that
both filiations concur in the same man. For as many as received
him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God. And this
although they were born, and their parents were of the flesh,
and this former generation preceded the latter. But so far did
the second generation surpass the first, that neither the vestige
of it nor the name of it survives. And so the sacred bread,
leading in the new man, completely drives out the old. For
this also is the work of the sacred table; for as many as received
him, are not born of blood. And when do we receive him?
Let us take heed to the word, and to the occasion of the mystery
at which the word was said, the word is: Take ye. For we
know that by the word we are summoned to the Supper, wherein
we also receive Christ with our hands, and partake of Him
with our lips, take Him into our souls, make one with Him in
our body, and mingle with Him in our blood” (ibid., col. 597-
601). I believe no more beautiful or truer words have ever
been uttered of the Eucharist. Notice our divine filiation inter-
woven with Eucharistic communion, and this filiation depending
on Eucharistic communion. That union is due to the table, due
to the Supper, by its presence we live, failing it we die. It is,
I repeat, due to the Supper, whereby we are made one with the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, that we are children; just as He
by the Incarnation communicated with our flesh and blood, in
order to make us children. Call to mind Hilary, call to mind
the number and the authority of the Fathers who have said the
same thing in different words, and you will affirm with Pontanus
(P.G. 150, 491) that this little work of Cabasilas is “learned and
pious” and “wonderfully adapted to inflame souls with the love
of God” (ibid.) and the words of praise spoken on another work
of his 1 in the past, by Gentianus Hervetus were well deserved:
“Such is the character of this book 2 that nothing more pious
or more Christian could be said.” Little wonder that a man
so holy, entangled a little though he was by the errors of his
1 Expositio Liturgiae.
’True, with the solitary exception of the false dogma on the
necessity and efficacy of the epiclesis.


people and of his time, should write: “THE VIRTUE OF
THE SACRED TABLE SENDS OUT TO US A STREAM
OF TRUE LIFE FROM THAT BLESSED HEART [of
Christ]” Well indeed may we add these words, a remarkable
Eastern testimony to the anthology of witnesses regarding the
early cult of the Most Sacred Heart.
SECTION III. INDIRECT TESTIMONIES IN RESPECT
OF OUR FELLOWSHIP WITH THE CHURCH.
Considered under another aspect, as the sacrament of
ecclesiastical unity, that is of the unity of the Church, the neces-
sity of this sacrament is equally apparent. For outside the
Church there is no salvation; so that if, through no fault of
ours, we are without the bond of social (i.e. visible) union with
the body of the Church, it is certain that at the very least an
implicit desire of this union and bond is necessary for our
salvation. Seeing that the Eucharist is the sacrament proper
of the unity of the body of the Church, as has been shown
above, 8 it follows, that at least we must have an implicit desire
for the Eucharist if we are to be saved, for no one can honestly
desire an effect without desiring the cause. On this point we
can appeal to many of the Fathers and theologians cited above
in Th. XXXVII; to Hilary in the early Fathers,
and to Honorius of Autun from the Fathers of the middle ages.
We may refer also to the words of Alanus de Podio, who dis-
'Bear in mind our remarks above in Th. XXXVIL, on the reciprocal
relation between ecclesiastical communion and Eucharistic communion.
The desire of communion with the Body of Christ goes hand in hand with
the desire of communion with the body of the Church. The latter is
contained in the former; man cannot be saved, therefore, without at
least an implicit desire of belonging to the Church. Besides those
who actually belong to the Church visibly, there are others who are
enrolled only invisibly or spiritually in this same visible body of the
Church. Hence the axiom Outside the Church there is no salvation,
namely, there is no salvation outside the actual body of the Church
occupied or possessed by one visibly, or at least invisibly (namely by
those who through no fault of their own are outside the visible society
of the Church). Later writers termed this spiritual possession of the
ecclesiastical body, the soul of the Church. The term, unknown to
early theologians, is fairly appropriate, always providing that the soul
is not contrasted with the body, in such manner that one may be re-
garded as belonging to the soul, apart from any relation whatever to
the body; since, as a matter of fact, no one is animated with the life
of the Church, without in some way being within the body of the
Church. In matters of this kind, it is well to be on our guard against
ambiguity and carelessness, and keep to the reasonable meaning of
words; otherwise a road is easily made open for latitudinarianism, and
indeed to naturalism. See an opportune dissertation by J. V. Bainvel,
Hors de VEglise pas de salut. Dogme et Theologie, in Etudes, t. 132,
p. viii.-62, Paris, 1913.


covers in the Eucharist itself the communion of saints, which we
profess in the Creeds: “Nevertheless we can say that in the
Apostles Creed there is mention of the Eucharist, where the
communion of saints is spokn of: for the saints communicate
spiritually in receiving the Body of Christ, not only sacra-
mentally but also spiritually.” (At the end of the ancient Paris
edition, 1512, Adversus Haereticos et Valdenses qui fostea
Albigenses dicti, p. 139-140. Compare P.E- 210, 363, De fide
catholica, contra haeriticos sui temporis, 1. 1, c. 59, where the
reading is not so trustworthy).
Thomas Walden, brilliant champion of the Eucharist, wrote
against Wycliffe, the “enemy of the Sacred Host,” in his Doc-
trinale (t. 2, De Sacramentis, c. 95, incun., fol. 157) ; “There-
fore let the enemy of the Sacred Host know, that the belief
in all its mysteries is contained in the Creed, where the
Apostles say: I believe in the communion of saints, for
if the principal communication of Christians is the com-
munication of the sacraments, how can communion, the greatest
of all of them, be excluded from their number?”
A truly great authority is that of the Roman Catechism
(1. 9, 25), 1 where the communion of saints is understood as the
communion of all the members of the Church in the fruit of the
sancta, that is, OF THE SACRED THINGS, 2 amongst which
1 The Roman Catechism had already remarked c. 24: “WOULD
THAT BISHOPS OF THE CHURCHES IN THEIR INSTRUCTIONS
ON THIS ARTICLE IMITATED THE DILIGENCE of Paul and
the other Apostles. Every detail of this matter should be deeply
studied and understood, in order that we may gain admission to this
ever-increasing and happy company of the Saints, and once admitted
persevere unswervingly.”
• That such was the usual interpretation in mediaeval writers like
Ivo Carnotensis, Abelard, Alexander of Hales, St. Thomas, to whom
may be added St. Martin of Liege, Serm. 34 In Festo S. Trinitatis (P.L.
208, 1330) as can be seen by consulting P. Bernard, in D.T.C., art. Com-
munion des Saints, col. 444-446. Some time previously F. Kattenbusch
(Das Apostolische Symbol, t. 2, 1900, p. 930-940), thought to distin-
guish a double interpretation of this article, as between the German
and the Roman people: “It seems to me that the sacramental accepta-
tion of this article was in a special way native to Roman countries.
In German lands the personal acceptation has been the familiar one.”
(p. 949). Note, however, that in the sacramental, as the prior inter-
pretation, there is also involved the personal interpretation as conse-
quent.
While writing these notes, I came across an exhaustive explana-
tion of the Sanctorum Commwnio as an article of The Creed, by F. J-
Braddock (J.T.S. Jan., 1920, p. 106-126), wherein, having studied the
question from all the earliest sources, he quite definitely concludes:
that in the most ancient symbols the communion of saints stood for the
communication, or the partnership, or the fellowship of the sacraments,
both of baptism and particularly of the Eucharist. There is no matter
for surprise, therefore, that the Fathers were silent in the Symbols
regarding the mystery of faith. They were not silent regarding it, rather
they declared it in a form understood by all who possessed the knowledge
of what the Sancta meant.


the Eucharist occupies the principal place, as being effective of
that communion; “That by this communion of saints, must be
interpreted the communion of the sacraments, the Fathers
signify in the words I confess one baptism. For baptism is
followed by the Eucharist first of all, and then by the other
sacraments: for although this phrase [communion of saints]
is applicable to all the sacraments .... it is more proper to the
Eucharist, WHICH EFFECTS THIS COMMUNION.” 1
Before this, Hincmar of Rheims, treating baptism and the
Eucharist under one head, had written: “No one ENTERS
THE CHURCH UNLESS HE IS IMBUED WITH THE
SACRAMENTS OF THE PASSION OF THE FORD.”
{Explanatio in Ferculum Salomonis. P.E. 125, 827). 5 And as
a matter of fact, how can one who is not associated with the
Eucharist, live in the Church? “Because the Eucharist in the
body of the Church holds the place of the human heart in man”
(Petrus Cellensis, De discipline claustrali, c. 25. P.E. 202, 1136-
1137). For there is no member of the body not ruled by the
influence of the heart. No one, therefore, is a member of the
Church unless set in activity by the Eucharist.
In his book De Sacramento eucharistiae (dist. 6, tr. 4, c. 3),
Blessed Albert the Great deals “usefully,” as he says himself,
with this triple necessity of the Eucharist, and in the first place
with our incorporation to Christ. “The"fall of the angels is
repaired by this sacrament: because it is repaired only in those
who are incorporated to Christ, in His own words: And no man
hath ascended into heaven, but he that descended from heaven,
the Son of man who is in heaven. Now if no man ascends but
the Son of man, NO MAN IS INCORPORATED WITH
THE MYSTIC BODY, EXCEPT THROUGH THE TRUE
BODY 8 AND THE PARTAKING OF IT. The fall of the
angels, therefore, is necessarily repaired through the Body of
1 Compare 2,4, 52, where the following reason is adduced as proof
of the necessity of desire for the Eucharist: “FOR IT IS THE SYM-
BOL OF ECCLESIASTICAL UNITY AND FELLOWSHIP; OUT-
SIDE THE CHURCH NO ONE CAN ATTAIN TO GRACE.”
“In proof of this, for baptism, he cites the words: Unless a man is
born again, etc.; and, for the Eucharist, following the earlier writers:
Unless you eat, etc.
8 Pay careful attention to some of the previous remarks of the
Doctor Illuminatus (dist. 3, tr. 1, c. 5) ; “For no reason can be
assigned why the Church is called and is, the body of Christ, except
in the very manner in which we have said, by the giving of His body to
her. He also changes her into Himself, that she may be made His
body, and that each one of us may be His members.” Again (ibid.) :
“This reason is simply the communion of the Body and Blood of the
natural and true Christ, because when it is imparted to the Church, He
changes the whole Church into Himself, and .... He makes the
Church His own spiritual and mystic body.”


Christ.” (Dist. 3, tr. 4, c. 2.) Secondly, as regards communion
with the Church: “By communion with Christ also, we com-
municate in every grace with all His saints, translated into the
kingdom of all His saints, by the fact that we communicate in His
Body and Blood; because the oneness of His members with the
heart and the head, and the one partaking of the Spirit of Christ
in all His natural members, is the sign and the cause of the com-
munication of the whole mystic body and the communication of
the Holy Spirit.” And in the third place finally, regarding the
attainment to life; “He desired to be in us in this manner of
communion, verifying His words: My delights are to be with
the children of men. FOR THUS WE ARE SHARERS OF
HIS LIFE AND OF HIS SUBSTANCE AND OF HIS
GRACE, AND HE WHO DOES NOT COMMUNICATE
IS DEPRIVED OF ALL THIS. Amen, amen I say unto you,
unless you eat of the flesh of the Son of man, and drink of his
blood, you shall not have life in you.” (Dist. 6, tr. 1, c. 4.)
On the other hand, like every other Catholic theologian,
Albert knows that, though spiritual partaking suffices if corporal
partaking is impossible, still spiritual partaking does not do
away with the necessity of the sacrament, on the contrary, it
insists on it, implying as it does affection of devotion towards
the sacrament; “God did not attach grace to His sacraments in
such way that He does not work His own sacramental grace,
even without the sacraments, IN THOSE WHO HAVE
FAITH AND DEVOTION TO THE SACRAMENT. And
this is called the spiritual partaking of the sacrament .... Just
as a person who is deprived of baptism, not through any con-
tempt of religion, but because of pressing necessity, is not
deprived of the fruit of baptism” {ibid., dist. 6, tr. 2, c. 1).
The great Albert could have penned nothing truer.
SECTION IV. THE AUTHORITY OF ST. THOMAS.
The teaching of St. Thomas on the present question merits
particular attention, and in the first place, besides our quota-
tion above (Th. XLVH) from 3 S. 79, 1, Im, which has a very
effective bearing on this matter, the saint himself asks and
answers the question we are here considering in 3 S. 73, 3:
"Is the Eucharist necessary for salvation,” where he deals with
both the reception of the Eucharist in desire, and actually.
Speaking of the actual reception of the Eucharist, he says:
“Reception of baptism is necessary in order to commence the
spiritual life; RECEPTION OF THE EUCHARIST IS
NECESSARY IN ORDER TO PERFECT IT, but not to be
IN POSSESSION OF IT SIMPLY.” 1
1 Similarly in 4 D. 1. 1,2: “Anything without which grace can be
had, is not necessary for salvation. Now this sacrament presupposes
grace, because it presupposes baptism, wherein grace is given.”


In the following three passages he speaks of receiving the
Eucharist in desire.
(a) “Before [actually] receiving this sacrament, man CAN
ATTAIN TO SALVATION FROM THE DESIRE OF
RECEIVING THIS SACRAMENT, just as in baptism also,
from the desire of baptism.”
(b) “[To be in possession of life simply] it is sufficient
to have it in desire.”
(c) “From the intention of the Church [children] desire
the Eucharist, AND CONSEQUENTLY they receive the
underlying reality of it.”
These words very clearly show the functions of the
Eucharist in the economy of salvation, that in fact our salvation
depends on the desire of the Eucharist.
Secondly in 3 S. 79, 1, Im, St. Thomas says distinctly, that
not even first grace is imparted to us, except by virtue of this
sacrament, by the desire of it; “No one possesses grace before
receiving this sacrament, except from some desire of it.”
Thirdly in 3 S. 79, 3c, he likewise declares that man obtains
the remission of sins from the same source by the same way:
“The virtue of this sacrament can be considered in two ways:
one way in itself; and thus this sacrament has the power of
remitting every sin.”
In another way, he continues, by comparison to the person
who receives it: should he know that he is turned away from God
by mortal sin, he is defiled rather than justified, in the sacra-
mental partaking of it: “Nevertheless this sacrament can be
effective unto the remission of sins .... not received actually,
but in desire, as WHEN ONE IS PREVIOUSLY JUSTIFIED
FROM SIN.”
Fourthly, resuming all this, so to speak, he makes the four
following distinct statements: (1) Incorporation with Christ
is necessary to man for salvation; (2) For this reason the
spiritual partaking of the Eucharist is necessary. (3) There-
fore the desire of actually receiving the sacrament must be
necessary. (4) For these reasons, the sacramental partaking
of the Eucharist, where it is possible, is necessary to salvation
for all men: “As was said above, there are two ways of receiving
this sacrament, namely the spiritual and the sacramental. Now
it is evident that every one is bound to eat at least spiritually,
because this is incorporation with Christ, as was said above.
BUT SPIRITUAL EATING EMBRACES THE WILL OR
THE DESIRE OF RECEIVING THIS SACRAMENT, as
was said above. AND THEREFORE THERE CAN BE NO
SALVATION FOR MAN WITHOUT THE DESIRE OF


RECEIVING THIS SACRAMENT. BUT SUCH A DESIRE
WOULD BE VAIN IF IT WERE NOT FULFILLED
WHEN OPPORTUNITY PRESENTED ITSELF.”
Note how St. Thomas not only speaks of the spiritual
eating of Christ, but of the spiritual eating of the sacrament
(“the spiritual way of receiving .... this sacrament”). It
would be possible to regard the former eating (of Christ) as
having no intrinsic relation to the sacrament of the Eucharist;
but not so the second (of the sacrament). Hence St. Thomas
remarks, when speaking of the angels, that it is possible only to
speak of the spiritual eating of Christ by them; but when speak-
ing of man, he insists that here there is question of the spiritual
eating of the actual sacrament, which includes the desire of
sacramentally partaking of the Eucharist: “Therefore the
eating of Christ Himself spiritually has place in two ways; in
one way as He is in His proper species, and in this way the
angels spiritually eat Christ Himself, in that they are united to
Him in the fruition of perfect charity and in the manifest
vision (which bread we look forward to in paradise). 1 But
there is another way of eating of Christ spiritually, that is AS
HE IS UNDER THE SPECIES OF THIS SACRAMENT;
and this is not only to eat Christ spiritually, but also to eat the
sacrament spiritually” (3 S. 80, 2, c.; compare 4 D. 9,1, 2,5).
Moreover, according to St. Thomas, sufficient though re-
ceiving in desire may be, it by no means excludes the necessity
of receiving the sacrament actually. On the contrary, spiritual
eating would avail nothing without the sacramental eating, when
the sacramental eating is possible (“the desire would be vain”):
just as baptism of desire would be null in one who objects to
baptismal water. And therefore sacramental communion is
indispensable for one who has the use of reason and has the
1 St. Thomas very truly says, that the spiritual eating of Christ,
such as is competent to the angels by perfect fruition in manifest vision,
will be ours hereafter. It will certainly be the same as theirs in the
perfection of fruition and the clarity of vision. But, considered from
another aspect, it will not be the same: because the angelic eating ex-
cluding, as it does, the desire of the Eucharist, is a result of the virtue
of the Eucharist indirectly only, in as much as Christ by means of the
sacrament, offered Himself as the Victim of the eternal sacrifice, where-
by the angels are sanctified (see above XLVI.). But our heavenly
eating of Christ, though excluding in heaven the desire of any sacra-
ment whatever, is nevertheless the proper fruit of the Eucharist: in so
far as in the Eucharist alone the Victim of the Cross went before
the Victim to be set before us as sacrificial banquet. And by this ban-
quet aldhe the life of God, the sanctity of grace and glory, was to be
begotten in man redeemed. Our heavenly partaking of Christ, therefore,
will retain some relation to the sacrament of the Eucharist, just as one
lives of his garden who eats the fruit of his garden, and he feasts of
every tree sweet to taste, who picks from the tree its fruit in season.


opportunity of receiving the sacrament, so much so that without
it, the spiritual communion entered into in baptism is thereby
nullified: as the desire by which alone man was linked up with
the fundamental and vital virtue of the Eucharist, fails through
insincerity. So that the first sacramental communion is in itself
a kind of ratification of baptism! Strictly speaking, therefore,
a little one arrived at the use of reason, is bound to receive the
Eucharist as a necessary means; neglecting the Eucharist, he
cannot have life in him, unless he is in invincible ignorance of
the relation of his own life to the vital Eucharistic principle.
If his ignorance is invincible, the sincerity of the (implicit)
desire to receive is not affected by the delay of the sacrament.
As a rule, however, pastors do not foster such excusing
ignorance in the faithful, on the contrary it is their natural duty
to dispel this ignorance in all charity and prudence, obedient
to Him who said to His apostles: Go ye therefore, teach all
nations .... teaching them TO OBSERVE ALL THINGS
whatsoever I have commanded you. Hence, with perfect justice,
Pius X wrote to the Archbishop of Cologne: “You intimate that
you [the bishops of Germany], in obedience to our Decree,
Quam singulare, have decided to issue a joint letter, teaching
and advising the faithful what is to be done in general,
that children should partake of the Eucharist in their
earliest age. In this matter it is our desire that the faithful
should clearly understand that here there is not so fnuch question
of obedience to the command of the Roman Pontiff, as of fulfil-
ment of a duty which naturally springs from THE VERY
TEACHING OF THE GOSPEL, so that the ancient and
constant custom of the Church, where interrupted, should be
restored.” (Dec., 31, 1910, Acta Apostolicae Sedis, 1911, p.
18). 1
Likewise it may not be said, that according to St. Thomas,
though the sacramental eating of the Eucharist is necessary
when the opportunity arises, meanwhile, until the opportunity
occurs, one is in possession of, and retains grace without the
causal influence of the Eucharist. For St. Thomas himself , had
already stated; “It is by the EFFICACY OF ITS VIRTUE
[the Eucharist] that one attains to grace even from the desire
of it” (3 S. 79, 1,1 m). For this food, as spiritual food, can
1 Pastors certainly cannot excuse themselves from warning and ex-
horting children, on the grounds that the children themselves have
examples of Christian faith and piety, neither in their homes nor in
public life; “Unless one will maintain that he is not an unworthy
minister, who withdraws ministrations which are necessary to piety, pre-
cisely when they are most necessary,” as St. Augustine (Epist. 228, n.
7, P.L. 33, 1016) says on the actual ministration of the Eucharist, in
a case not very different from the present.


exert its efficacy even on the person who eats it spiritually only,
that is, on one who is hungry for it. Thou dost replenish THE
HUNGRY with good things, sending away the proud rich
empty. (Office in the feast of Corpus Christi).
Nor finally may it be objected, that other sacraments, bap-
tism and penance for instance, are considered by St. Thomas
as more necessary than the Eucharist, saying, so to speak, that
the Eucharist by comparison to them, is not necessary.
St. Thomas marks this very great difference between
baptism and the Eucharist, that though it suffices for infants
to receive the Eucharist in desire, in the act of baptism, baptism
on the other hand can in no wise be received in desire by infants,
it must be received actually. “By the very fact of children
being baptized, they are destined by the Church for the Eucharist:
and just as they believe from the faith of the Church, so too,
they desire the Eucharist from the intention of the Church, and
consequently they receive the underlying reality of it. But they
are not destined for baptism by another antecedent sacrament,
and hence, before receiving baptism, children have no baptism in
desire at all; only adults have this; hence children cannot receive
the underlying reality of the sacrament of baptism without
receiving the sacrament itself. And therefore this sacrament
[of the Eucharist] is not necessary for salvation IN THE WAY
THAT baptism is” (3 S. 73, 3, c.). St. Thomas does not deny
by any means that the Eucharist is necessary for salvation, what
he does deny is, that the Eucharist is necessary in this special
way (“hoc modo”) in which baptism is necessary; that is to
say as regards the sacramental ministration in children.’ This
distinction in fact only refers to children, and to the mode of
receiving. For children, in the case of baptism, the manner of
receiving is one, in the Eucharist the manner of receiving is
twofold.’
In adults, however, it may be said that both actual baptism
and sacramental absolution are more necessary than the sacra-
mental eating of the Eucharist, in so far as an adult with
attrition only, will not as a rule be justified* before actually
receiving baptism, or sacramental absolution, though he may well
’ Note how St. Thomas in another place again explains this matter
(3 S. 80, 11, 2m) : “This sacrament (Eucharist) is said to be not neces-
sary for children in the same way that baptism is; children can obtain
salvation without this sacrament (Eucharist), but not without the sacra-
ment of baptism.” He is speaking here of corporal reception of the
sacraments, of Eucharist and baptism.
•Compare Toletus, to be cited below.
* I say as a rule, because it is well known, and is also noted by St.
Thomas (3 S. 79, 3, c) that a person with attrition can sometimes be
justified by the sacramental reception of the Eucharist.


be justified only from the desire of the Eucharist, and accord-
ingly from the virtue of the sacrament itself, as has been said
above. And this is how we interpret 3 S. 65, 4, c and 2m, where
in respect of sacramental reception, a more urgent necessity is
insisted on in the case of baptism and penance than in the case
of the Eucharist ....
The Roman Catechism gives in a compendious form the
same teaching as St. Thomas: “When it is said that grace is
given in the Eucharist .... the meaning is, that even FIRST
GRACE (which all must have before daring to approach the
Eucharist, lest they eat and drink judgment to themselves) is
not given to any one, unless one receives THIS SACRAMENT
ITSELF in desire and will.” (2-4, 51-52; compare 57).
Toletus (in 3 S. 73, 3) a faithful interpreter of St. Thomas
in Eucharistic theology, recapitulates the whole teaching in four
conclusions. “First conclusion: As far as the reality signified
is concerned, the Eucharist is necessary for salvation. Second
conclusion: This reality signified can be had not only by the
real partaking of the Eucharist, but also by partaking of it in
voto (in desire). Third conclusion: The Eucharist is not neces-
sary for salvation in the same way as baptism is. Fourth con-
clusion : The Eucharist can be received in ''more ways than
baptism.” These last two conclusions he explains in this way:
baptism can only be received in two ways, either actually or in
an elicited (though implicit) desire; the Eucharist can be re-
ceived in three ways: either actually or in elicited desire, or in
the desire implied by baptism sacramentally received. Hence he
rightly adds: “Therefore not only the REALITY SIGNIFIED
but also the Eucharist ITSELF is a necessary and indispensable
means for salvation; but not in the same way as baptism, which
can be received in two ways, while the Eucharist can be received
in three. But reception OF EACH OF THEM is quite neces-
sary, either in one way or the other.” 1
Lest you should think that this is merely a dispute about
words, and not about realities, Toletus admits that there are
two great followers of St. Thomas in opposition to him: “This,
he says, is the opinion of St. Thomas, not that which Cajetan
and Soto give.” Very truly said.
1 Shortly after Toletus, Fagundez, SJ., wrote: “The second opinion
affirms that real partaking of the Eucharist is a necessary means and
remedy (medium ac remedium) for salvation. That opinion IS COM-
MON TO-DAY, though it does not appeal to a number of the followers
of Suarez in Portugal; if these judiciously examined the virtue, the
reason and the principle of it, they would easily see and acknowledge
the truth.” ( Tractaius in quinque Ecclesiae precepta. 3m Eccl. precep.
1,1, c. 3, n. 4. Lyons, 1632, p. 658. Compare de parvulis, ibid., c. 4,
n. 6, p. 662).


SECTION V. INTRINSIC REASON OF THE NECESSITY.
If now, after examining the authorities enumerated, we seek
to discover the intrinsic reason of this necessity, we find that,
throughout the whole field of patristic theology, one and the
same reason is given, though expressed in different ways. It is
this: In the Eucharist is contained the principle of life to which
we must adhere, and with which we must be made one, that
is to say, the Flesh of Christ which suffered on the Cross, and
which gives life; that very Flesh immolated in the destruction
of death, and given to us to restore life; at once the price of
our Redemption, and the principle of our sanctification. For
Christ was a propitiation for our sins by His death, and that
death He offered in the sacrament of His death. He is life-
giver by the Body of His Resurrection, given back to us by
God from the Cross, as celestial banquet. That life-giving Flesh
is given to us to be partakers of It in the Eucharist only, where
lies hidden the Victim of salvation, bread both living and life-
giving.
The ancient writers well understood this complexus of all
the divine munificence, where, in hundreds of passages, cited
in the course of this work, we have heard them proclaim that
the whole economy of our Redemption and salvation is derived
from the sacrifice of Christ, the Victim of the Redemption: they
well understood that propitiation came to us only through the
sacrifice of the one true Victim, and that we are given life
and sanctified only by the Victim of the one true sacrifice.
“For this Victim, AND THIS VICTIM AFONE, saves
the soul from eternal destruction, renewing for us by the mystery
that death of the Only-Begotten ... Its Flesh ... is truly dis-
tributed for the salvation of souls,’’ as after St. Gregory {Dial.
5, 48), every writer of the middle ages agrees.
For they did not vainly imagine that the Eucharistic
Flesh of Christ, the Victim of our sacrifice, was not also for-
mally and at the same time the Victim of the very sacrifice of
our Ford Himself. Who ever will see a repugnance in this, that
the sacrament of the Eucharist, seeing that it is one from the
Supper to the end of time, one Theothyte (or victim offered to
the true God), the one immolated Flesh, the one bread of heaven,
should be also our one source and fountain of every blessing,
purchased by the one indivisible sacrifice of Christ? Who will
ever consider that it is contrary to the truth to say that the
Famb, who was slain to redeem us, the Famb now living and
given in entirety, to be distributed as food to all mankind for
all time, through Himself imparts to us the life which He ha f


purchased for Himself as Head, and for us as members, made
one with Him by the spiritual fellowship of His one spiritual
body P 1
Since that spiritual food, I mean the glorified Victim of the
Cross, although a real body, yet exists by way of vital principle,
to infuse spiritual life into our souls, is it to be wondered at that
even when corporal partaking is lacking, it still may invisibly
nourish the hungry soul, truly imparting to it all the necessary
marrow of divine sanctity and grace? For anything endowed
with a spiritual condition, can spiritually produce its own
spiritual effect on a spiritual substance. Now the Body of
Christ (wholly translated into a divine state) become food in
the Eucharist for man redeemed, is endowed with such con-
dition. Therefore by the power of our desire for it, this food
from heaven can even now impart life to our souls, to be later
perfected by corporal partaking. It is for this reason that the
Lamb, who gave His life for men, lies Victim of the eternal
sacrifice on the table of the altar, so that man partaking in holy
desire of the Theothyte Flesh (i.e., Flesh offered as Victim to
God) may have life, and when feasted of it corporally, may have
more abundant life.
SECTION VI. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
I. The principal objection to the teaching so far advanced
is this: that the Eucharist must not be given to those who are
in the state of mortal sin. They must be justified by another
sacrament, that is either by baptism or penance. Consequently
first grace is not only not usually imparted by the. Eucharist, but
actually it cannot be so imparted. But first grace is sufficient
for salvation. Therefore the Eucharist is not necessary. Here-
in it is very different from baptism. For, although baptism can
be administered to persons already justified by charity, which
contains the desire of it, at the same time the primary object
of baptism in itself, is to bestow first grace on those who are
still in Sin; it is a sacrament of the dead, whereas the Eucharist
is a sacrament of the living only.
I reply in the first place that it certainly would be a con-
tradiction were we to assert that the actual corporal receiving
of the Eucharist is required to give the first grace, that it can
as a rule give first grace. We have never said this, on the con-
trary we have constantly denied it. But it is no contradiction
whatever to say that the spiritual partaking of the Eucharist,
such as is contained in the desire, is required for that end, that
is the acquisition of first grace.
1 We are here interpreting the spiritual Body with St. Paul and the
Fathers, as glorified and giving life, and made, too, in the sacrament
a living oracle expressive of the divine decree.


I reply secondly: the truth underlying the objection is
not opposed to our teaching, rather it supports it; when we study
the formal significance both of baptism and of the Eucharist,
it actually follows from it.
And in the first place, it can quite easily be seen that the
Eucharist as significative of our incorporation to Christ, the
New Adam, is incompatible in one who is still incorporated to
the old Adam by original sin. For no one can be incorporated
to both at the same time. It is necessary then, that the old incor-
poration should be abolished by baptism, by which is signified the
destruction of the former life in which we lived in sin, that
is were dead to God: and in this sense baptism is the sacra-
ment of the dead, for it presupposes in us the death to which
we are to die. But, as we said, baptism gives life to the dead
only through its relation to the Eucharist. It is only by the
virtue of and from the desire of the Eucharist, which is itself
and precisely of itself the principle of life, that baptism incor-
porates to Christ those who are cut off from Adam. 2 And thus
the Eucharist, though it is a sacrament of the living, not of the
dead, does not cease nevertheless to be the source of life for
all who are deprived of life. Indeed, because it originates that
life which is incorporation to Christ, it cannot, for this very
reason, be a sacrament of the dead, who are incorporated to
Adam. Hence no contradiction whatever is involved in the
two following statements; the Eucharist is the source of our
whole life; and the Eucharist can only be given to those who
are reborn by baptism. Both these statements are so closely
inter-related, that the one cannot be sustained without the other.
For penance the reasoning is similar. Because the Eucha-
rist is the sacrament of union with Christ, and such union is
by friendship or charity, it would be inconsistent for the recipient
to be at enmity with Christ. It would be hypocritical for one
to say that he is united with Christ, or that AT LEAST THERE
IS NO HINDRANCE TO UNION, when in his conscience he
cleaves to sin, being thereby at enmity with God, and therefore
alienated from the friendship of Christ, as St. Thomas explains
(4 D. 9,1, 3; 3S. 79, 3 and 80, 4). Necessarily, therefore,
sin, the bar to friendship, must be removed before the Eucharist
is received. This preparation is made by the sacrament of pen-
ance; but, as we have already said, the formal signification of
penance implies re-admission to the Eucharist: and in this way
2 Call to mind here here our remarks above (XLVL), on the two-
fold order in things, regarded by way of accomplishment or generation,
or by way of intention or desire; which two ways are inverse.


life is restored to him, that life which had gone before, obtained
either from the actual reception of the Eucharist, or from the
desire of it.
There is no suspicion of falsity in a person laden with sin
approaching the sacrament of baptism or penance, provided
only he is resolved to rise again from sin (not indeed having,
but seeking a good conscience towards God. I. Peter 111., 21;
compare XL,VI above); for one who says that he dies to the
life of sin, thereby admits that he has, sin, to which he dies;
similarly, one who says that he seeks pardon for sin, admits
thereby that he has incurred a debt which he would condone.
Hence sinners can receive these sacraments of baptism and
penance - worthily, while on the other hand the sinner eats and
drinks the Eucharist unworthily, not discerning the Body of the
Lord: for by virtue of the Eucharist life is given to him who
has not life, but nevertheless in such manner that That Thing
whereby life is given must be given only to him who has life.
11. Another objection is: no desire is necessary, except
for some actual thing which is necessary. Now once first grace
is obtained, nothing further is necessary. Therefore the
Eucharist in actual reception is not necessary. Therefore the
desire of it is not necessary.
I reply: the desire of the Eucharist would not be neces-
sary, did the Eucharist, partaken of in desire, not contribute
anything to the possession of first grace. For in that case the
same argument would rightly hold, as holds against the abso-
lute necessity of any desire whatever in respect of either the
sacrament of Confirmation or Extreme Unction. But in the
Eucharist it is different, as has been said. For once in posses-
sion of first grace, obtained only by the desire of receiving the
Eucharist in act, it is further required that the Eucharist be
really received in act. There is no evidence of this desire, if
corporal partaking does not follow, when opportunity occurs.
Therefore the Eucharist received in act is necessary for all'who
are capable of receiving it. Hence there is no reason why it
should not be necessary in desire for all simply. For the desire
of a necessary reality can be absolutely necessary for all who
are able to partake of it: as in baptism is evident.
111. A third objection is: if a person is justified only from
the desine of the Eucharist, then corporal partaking of the
Eucharist is necessary, not only after baptism, but also after
sin is forgiven in the sacrament of penance. This is inconsis-
tent. For it is possible for a person, having once received the
Viaticum on the point of death, to fall into sin again, and re-
ceive absolution without the desire of receiving the Viaticum a


second time. In such case he is justified without the desire of
receiving the Eucharist (thus practically, Suarez, disp. 40, 2,
14).
In the first place, a question arises, whether one who has
lapsed into sin after the Viaticum, is bound as a rule to reqeive
the VIATICUM again. To this question one may very well
answer in the affirmative, with Ballerini-Palmieri {Op. Theol.
Mor., De eucharistia, 207), against Suarez, Lugo and St.
Liguori.
But, passing over this question, I reply in general, that,
although the desire of receiving the Eucharist is contained in
the sacrament of penance, nevertheless in general there is no
necessity which binds one to receive the Eucharist immediately
after absolution, it binds in its own time, whenever that may
be, provided only that it is to be in the future. Hence in the
case under consideration we must say that this sinner is not
justified without the desire of receiving the Eucharist a second
time (when the proper time comes), although possibly he is
justified without the desire of receiving the VIATICUM a
sfecond time, that is of receiving communion immediately. 1
IV. Many other objections may be imagined, all of which
can be advanced with equal force against baptism and penance.
First, for example; one might say that in the case of a person
who has never heard of the Eucharist, the desire for the Eucha-
rist is merely fictitious, unreal.
I reply: this also applies, if it applies at all, to the implicit
desire of baptism and penance. But the real answer to the
objection is that for this desire to be real and not fictitious, it
is sufficient that it be contained in another desire; just as in
general the desire of the means is contained in the sincere and
absolute desire of the end, or the desire of the cause in the
desire of the effect. Bear in mind our remarks above (XLVI.)
on desires of this kind.
Secondly, it can be objected; grace is not derived from the
Eucharist just by any kind of desire for the Eucharist, but only
by a desire of It informed by charity. Such desire, however,
comes from grace; therefore this desire does not so much bring
1 A lesser difficulty may be advanced: that according to the Roman
Ritual the viaticum is to be administered before Extreme Unction.
Morally speaking, however, both sacraments are received at the same
time; moreover in the past the custom of giving Extreme Unction
before the viaticum prevailed for nearly ten centuries. Compare Mar-
tene, De antiquis Ecclesiae ritibus, lib. X, can. 7, art. 2, n. 3, Rouen,
1700, t. 2, p. 106-107). But, furthermore, and particularly, the Eucha-
rist may again be received, even after Extreme Unction, if life is
prolonged.


life, but presupposes life. Therefore the Eucharist even in
desire does not contribute anything to the possession of first
grace.
I reply: the same objection avails, if it avails at all, against
the efficacy of baptism or penance received in desire. For, out-
side the actual conferring of baptism or penance, no desire of
either justifies, except with formed charity. Nevertheless, ac-
cording to Catholic teaching, we are justified by the desire either
of baptism or penance. The reason is that such desire must
be accounted among the perfect dispositions for grace, the char-
acteristic of which is that, under one aspect, they are regarded
as antecedent to grace, and under another, as consequent of it,
or as resulting from grace (1-2 S. 113, 8,2 m). Now, on the
one hand, the difficulty of the desire of the Eucharist is ho
greater than that of the desire for baptism or penance. On the
other hand, the efficacy of the Eucharist in desire is much more
easily explained than the efficacy of baptism or penance in desire;
indeed, the efficacy of these latter consists only in the efficacy
of the former (where alone the desire actually intervenes).
For neither baptism nor penance is at any time or place foimd
as a permanent sacrament, whose efficacy I can claim for myself.
The Eucharist, oh the other hand, is the Victim of the sacri-
fice of our Lord prepared as banquet for us. It is one and
the same sacrifice, existing from the beginning of Christianity
until the end of time, in itself, outside of me, integral and com-
plete. For what we term the sacramental receiving of the sac-
rament, and to which the earlier theologians gave the truer
name of corporal receiving, pertains in no way to the constitu-
tion of the sacrament, it is something which comes to the sacra-
ment, already constituted, just as the act of eating is something
which comes to food, something which in no wise enters into
the constitution of food. It is indeed easier for us to conceive
the virtue of a permanently existing sacrament as flowing to us
from the desire of it, by the spiritual taking and partaking of
it, so to speak, than in the case of a sacrament which is not per-
manent. And, as a matter of fact, no virtue is properly imparted
to me, by the baptism which I desire and have not received;
because this baptism does not exist; it only would exist were I
actually baptized. Baptism, therefore, does not impart any-
thing to me by the desire of it. But, while this is true, still I
can mentally consider baptism as exerting an influence, in so
far as it is understood as the initiation to the Eucharist, the
virtue of which naturally passes into me through baptism; in
fact, the virtue of the Eucharist is not operative, except with the
corresponding desire of baptism; in so far as no one rightly
desires to live to Christ, unless he is ready to die to Adam.


And so it is that the virtue of the Eucharist passes to me
through the desire of baptism. Strictly speaking, therefore, one
experiences the efficacy of the Eucharist in desire, far more
truly than the efficacy of baptism or penance by desire; and
the Eucharist contributes far more truly to the possession of
first grace than baptism or penance, in those who are deprived
of sacramental remission of sin by these two sacraments; for the
Eucharist itself is the origin of the desire which disposes to
grace, and of the grace from which the desire proceeds.
Paragraph 2.—Repeated Partaking of the Eucharist
Necessary for Salvation.
Having once received the Eucharist sacramentally, and no
further grave sin committed, does there arise any further in-
trinsic necessity of again sacramentally receiving the Eucharist,
in order to secure eternal life. This question is now to be
examined. There are many convincing reasons for an affirma-
tive reply.
SECTION I INTRINSIC REASONS.
The first reason is based on the INSTITUTION of the
Eucharist. It is this: The Eucharist, as all theologians have
constantly noted, was instituted under the appearance of the
ordinary food, bread and wine, which one had to take often.
Hence the sacramental symbol chosen (bread and wine) seems
to indicate repeated partaking of the Eucharist. Now, as we
have already said, man cannot attain to first grace without the
desire of the Eucharist. But the Eucharist must be desired
precisely as instituted by Christ. But from its native condition
it is food to be partaken of in the same way as our own every-
day food. Therefore man is justified by the desire of receiving
the Eucharist over and over again, and not merely once. This
desire is wanting in sincerity and efficacy, if, whenever the op-
portunity is given, man does not partake of the same Eucharist
corporally, as St. Thomas argues (3 S. 80, 11, c) on this very
question at issue. Therefore one who ceases to partake loses
his spiritual and perfect incorporation with Christ, as well as
the vital communion with the Church. Hence the phrase, quite
common in the north of England, to designate a person who has
neglected his Easter duty as living outside the Church. “He
is out of his Church.”
What our Lord taught in Eucharistic symbol, He also
taught in words, when He commanded us to ask for the Eucha-
rist under the name of our daily bread. The Fathers and Doc


tors of the Church 1 have declared constantly and with over-
whelming unanimity that this portion of the Lord’s Prayer has
this meaning. Of late years the Sacred Congregation of the
Council in its Decree Sancta Tridentina Synodus (Dec. 20,
1905) declared that the words of our Lord refer to the daily
reception of the Most Holy Eucharist; to this the approval of
Pius X. was added. Another intrinsic reason is drawn from
its UTILITY. For both first grace and the increase of grace
comes from this same source. We have seen that all our sanc-
tifying grace, which is the grace of union with Christ, emanates
from the Eucharist as from its own particular cause. If then
constant advance in grace is indispensable to man, frequent
communion is also indispensable.
Now for a twofold reason is advance in grace necessary to
man; first as man, secondly as fallen man.
In the first place, advance in grace is necessary to man,
as man.
For man is not like the angel, perfect from the beginning,
in nature and grace. By divine disposition he must tend tdK'
wards his own perfection, step by step, the reason being that
his intellect is not simple, but discursive. Now no one can
DELIBERATELY deflect from this law of his human condi-
tion, without thereby falling from grace; because in doing this
he becomes an assailant and a rebel against God’s nafurally
established order. Hence St. Francis de Sales, dealing with
this neal and particular obligation, incumbent on every one of
the faithful, of striving towards perfection, very wisely says:
“The words of our Lord exhorting us to strive after and claim
perfection as our proper end, are so forcible and so insistent
that we cannot conceal from ourselves our own obligation to
carry out this design; Be ye holy, He says, because I am holy.
He who is holy, let him be holier still; he who is just, let him
be still more just. Also, be ye perfect, because your heavenly
Father is perfect .... In respect of spiritual goods, he does
not possess what is sufficient of these for himself, who is con-
tent with a mere sufficiency; sufficiency is not in this case suf-
ficing, because the real sufficiency in things divine partly con-
sists in the desire of affluence.” {De I’amour de Dieu, 1,8, c.
8; compare c. 9). 1 For sincere love, not yet holding complete
1 Compare Cardinal Vives, Expositio in oratinem juxta traditionem
patristicam et theologicam disposita (1903) ; J. B. Bock, Die Brodbitte
des Vaterunsers (1911) ; Emil Springer, Unser tagliches Brot gib uns
heute (1912).
1 The argument of St. Francis is this: man is bound to aspire to
the perfection of the commands; but in our present state it is impos-
sible to reach the perfection of the commands, without SOME endea-
vour to reach the perfection of the counsels, so that, sometimes at least,
when occasion presents itself, he may follow them. And as a matter
of fact they are not true counsels, unless they are adapted to achieve
the perfection of the commands.


sway over our affections, or the complete direction of our
powers, consists for the most part in the desire of a larger love,
until finally it arrives at the love of God, with the whole heart,
and with the whole soql, with the whole mind and strength:
as is commanded. Therefore, he who fails in the desire for a
larger love, fails also in the beginning of love. Hence when
man loses the desire of further love, he necessarily almost must
fall from love, in the words of St. Augustine ( Sermo , 169, cap.
15, n. 18. P.L. 38, 926): “IF YOU SAY: IT IS ENOUGH,
YOU ARE LOST.”
Secondly, advance in grace is necessary to fallen man.
Fallen man cannot persevere in grace without surmounting
difficulties, for the overcoming of which his charity must be
aroused, increased and advanced, by the inspirations of the
Holy Spirit.’ The reason is not because, with the lapse of time
grater temptations will certainly have to be encountered; but
t,t, owing to the infirmity of our nature wounded by original
, the moral strength, indispensable to us in our fight against
temptation, has become spent from very use, or is weakened, or
at least grows weary in the struggle. For how difficult and
arduous is constancy of purpose! Wherefore greater grace is
ever more and more required to supplement the weakened
power of the soul by the intensity of charity. The life there-
fore is maintained in fallen man by an increase of charity and
grace.*
* The author of the Epistula prioris S. dementis de Virginitate (c.
6. F.P. 2,4) quite properly referred to the Eucharist the victory over
these difficulties: “If then you desire all this, conquer the body, con-
quer the desires of the flesh, conquer the world in the Spirit of God;
conquer the vanities of this life. They pass away, they crumble into
dust, they are reduced to corruption and come to an end; conquer the
dragon, conquer the Hon, conquer the serpent, CONQUER Satan
THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, WHO WILL GIVE YOU STRENGTH
IN THE HEARING OF THE WORD AND IN THE DIVINE
EUCHARIST.” That is, you will conquer with the help of Christ, to
be eaten of spiritually by faith, and sacramentally by the corporal par-
taking of the Eucharist.
3. Albert the Great ( Lib de sacram. euchar. dist. 3, tr. X c. 4)
beautifully illustrates the necessity of the Eucharist from this aspect:
“The Eucharist is likewise the medicine of health, giving back the
health which has been lost in the substance and vigour of the spirit; it
brings back lost health and restores strength: And he nourished them,
and all his father’s house, allowing food to everyone (Gen., XLVII. 12).
So Christ nourishes us and the whole house, that is the Church, which
is the house of the Father, allowing food to everyone in the sacrament
of spiritual food, wherein is the medicine of perfect health, whereby is
restored all that has been lost, by our fasting in the time of famine
now past.” (Compare ibid., dist. 6, tr. 1 c. 2).


From either point of view, then, grace is necessary for
man. For, under the first title: if man does not strive to ad-
vance, he cannot have grace. And under the second: if a man
does not actually advance, he cannot persevere in grace.
All this therefore shows that man needs the Eucharist in
two ways, not only to increase life, but even to sustain it. The
Council of Trent, directing attention to this twofold profit of
the Eucharist says: “He desired this sacrament to be received
as the spiritual food of souls, by which they should be nour-
ished and strengthened [increase of life] and as an anti-
dote whereby .... we should be preserved from mortal sins”
[conservation of life] (D. 875).
To sum up, the Eucharist is in its own way the sacrament
of perseverance, because it is the sacrament of progress. For
in so far as it is the principle of due increase, in so far is it the
indispensable remedy for decrease of vitality, especially provided
against the natural waste of our spiritual strength.
Meantime, note the obvious fact, that, just as first com-
munion can be supplied by desire, so too can later communions,
if the opportunity does not arise for actual communion, be sup-
plied by desire, and this in respect of every necessary effect of
life and spiritual health. 1
SECTION II. TESTIMONIES OF THE FATHERS.
The Fathers have often asserted the necessity of repeated
partaking, to maintain the state of grace. Thus St. John Chry-
sostom, exhorting generally those of the faithful who nave been
already initiated for some time; “I say this, not that we may
not approach, but that we may not approach rashly. For, just
as to approach rashly is dangerous, so IT IS FAMINE AND
DEATH not to communicate in these mystic suppers” (In I.
Cor., hom. 24, n. 5, P.G. 61, 204-205).
St. Cyril of Alexandria (In Joann., VI. 35. P.G. 72, 521)
more explicitly: “If the baptized and those who have tasted of
the divine grace, rarely if ever go to the churches, IF THEY
CEASE TO FREQUENT THE SACRED EULOGY
(EUCHARIST), WHICH IS THROUGH CHRIST, FOR A
LONG TIME, and allege as an excuse a baneful reverence,
because they do not wish this mystic communion (ei mystice
communicare), let them clearly understand that when they re-
fuse to be vivified, they cut themselves off from eternal life.”
1 Hence Guntherus Cisterciensis (De oratione, jejunto et eleemosyna,
1,9, c. 12, P.L. 212, 187) very truly writes: “Evidently there are times
when a poor woman hiding in the corner of the church, or even A
LABOURER WORKING IN THE FIELD, partakes of this bread more
truly and better, than a priest or bishop assisting at the sacred altar.”


St. Augustine, in pregnant words, warns pastors never even
at risk of their own lives to neglect the wants of the faithful
in this matter: “For the wolf will come, he says, not a man,
but the devil, who MANY A TIME WON OVER THE
FAITHFUL TO APOSTASY, WHEN THEY WERE DE-
PRIVED OF THE MINISTRY OF THE BODY OF THE
LORD.” ( Bpist . 228, n. 6 P.L. 33, 1016. Compare Possidius,
Vita S. Augustini, c. 30. P.L. 32, 62).
Alger in the middle ages speaks as follows: “The words
of the saints clearly show us the great need of good works,
lest partaking unworthily of the Body of the Lord, we eat judg-
ment, or BY CEASING TO PARTAKE OF IT, ALSO
ALIENATED IN THIS WAY FROM LIFE, we may none
the less incur the danger of death. For, to be protected from
the destroying angel, we must of necessity partake of the
Lamb.” (De sacram. corp. et sang. Dom., 1, 22, P.L. 180,
804).'
Alanus ab Insulis {De articulis catholicae fidei, 1,4, c. 3.
P.L. 210. 613-614) : “Man rising from sin was in need of an
effective remedy, WHICH WOULD CONFER THE GRACE
OF PERSEVERANCE IN GOOD. But none was more effec-
tive than the Flesh of Christ. It was necessary for man, there-
fore, to communicate of the Flesh of Christ.” Elsewhere, too,
in this special sense and for the same reason, to judge from the
context, he says that the Eucharist is necessary for adults:
“The Eucharist is a sacrament of necessity for adults.” {Theo-
logicae Regulae, 110, P.L. 210, 679).
St. Thomas we have seen above. From the Greeks of a
later period, we select Nicholas Cabasilas: “It would be im-
possible for us to live AND BE IMMUNE FROM DEAD
WORKS, if we did not at all times frequently partake of the
Supper.” {De vita in Christo, 1, 4. P.G. 150, 597).
Finally, we have the ecclesiastical authority of the Cate-
chismus Romanus (Roman Catechism), of Leo XIII. and Pius
X. The Catechismus Romanus says: “It will be the duty of the
parish priest to remind the faithful frequently, that just as they
consider every-day food necessary for the nutriment of the
body, so also they must not neglect the daily care and nutriment
of the soul in this sacrament, for it is clear that the soul requires
spiritual food, just as the body requires natural food.” (Part 2,
c. 4, n. 60).
a Innocent 111. made these words his own, not mentioning Alger’s
name (De sacr. altaris myst. 1, 4, c. 42, P.L. 21, 883).


Leo XIII.: “For as the body needs its own food often, so
too does the soul; the holy Eucharist supplies to us the food
which is above all life-giving.” (Eit. Encyc. Mirae Caritatis,
28. May, 1902).
Pius X. to children: “Every day we pray to God for the
bread which is to sustain our body; we have also need of the
heavenly bread which gives life to our soul.” ( Acta Aposto-
licae Sedis, 1912, p. 264). The words of St. Augustine ad-
dressed centuries before this to the catechumens ready for
baptism (competentes) are similar: “The faithful also, who
are about to receive it from the altar of God, know this spiritual
food, and you too will know it; that bread will be your DAILY
bread also, NECESSARY FOR THIS LIFE.” (Sermo 57,
7. P.L. 38, 389).
But how often the partaking of the Eucharist is necessary
for each one, cannot be fixed definitely once and for all: no
more than can be determined the amount of corporal food neces-
sary for the individual. At the same time it can be said infal-
libly of spiritual food, as it can also be said of corporal food,
in the words of our Lord, that it is beneficial daily, for all who
approach it worthily. 1
See how, in this spiritual paradise of the Church, the
Eucharist supplies the place of what, in the former paradise,
would have been the proper fruit of the tree of life; as
theologians have often told us, Paschasius Radbertus {Lib. de
corp. et sang. Dom., c. 7, n. 2 and c. 9, n. 3. P.L. 120, 1285 and
1295), Alger ( De sacram. corp. et sang, mni, 2, 3, P.L. 180,
822), etc. See, too, how it is an antidote to that other tree of
knowledge of good and evil, cleansing us from the worldly ex-
perience of concupiscence and sin, and filling us with the living
sense of faith and with the taste of a happy immortality. Rupert
often speaks of this: “Just as the experienced physician, accord-
ing to the nature of the disease which be detects, mixes an
1 Certainly nothing but daily communion fully answers as a rule, to
the persevering and, so to speak, unwearying importunity of God. “HE
PRESENTS HIMSELF TO US WITH UNWEARIED INSISTENCE
(pene improbum), waiting for His fellow-guests all day long, and
practically in every church. He even invites us to eat with vehement
avidity, commanding us in these words: Eat, O friends, and drink, and
he inebriated, my dearly beloved. He wills even that those who said
[al. thought] that His wonderful, saving, sanctifying banquet should
be rejected, be struck with the sword of excommunication; finally He
would add the sword of eternal damnation. For in no wise must He
be believed to refuse us even the smallest drop of His grace, who so
clearly lays open to us, and so insistently offers us, the whole fountain
of grace.” (William of Paris, De sacram. euchar., c. 7, Op. t. 1, p.
449).


antidote, and says to the sick man: because you have drunk this
poison, eaten this herb, or this harmful thing, if you do not
take this to counteract it, you cannot live; so, too, when the
Author of life says: Unless you eat of the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink of his blood, you will not have life in you, He
warns us in strict justice, that, just as man believed a lie, so he
must believe the truth; just as in proud presumption he believed
deception, so in humble subjection he must believe the Re-
deemer; he must eat of the bread and drink of the chalice of
Christ, with a faith as great as was his infidelity, when he ate
of the fruit of the forbidden tree; he must believe more of the
bread and of the chalice of the Lord, than he can see, who
believed more of the fruit than he did see, and who on no rea-
sonable ground, believed more than could be.” ( In Joann., 1,
6, P.L. 169, 455). “The tempter said: You will he as gods.
Hence by the dictates of justice, it is fitting that another food
which would be the food of life, should be given to counteract
that food which was the food of death; and that after a similar
fashion, too, the mind should believe that there is in it, what
the eye does not see; that it should believe it to be food and
drink really effective of communication with the divinity, the
Flesh and Blood of Christ. The senses of flesh and blood can-
not see this. By this faith God judges that man has given satis-
faction to Him, believing Him now, no less than he believed
the devil before.” ( De victoria Verbi Dei, 1, 12, 13. P.L. 169,
1473 j. 1 So that our salvation, to be attained by the unique and
eternal sacrifice of the Last Supper or the never-ending Mass,
is really a mystery of faith, if we describe it so by its most
striking characteristic (per antonomasiam). 2
Therefore the great Cardinal Hosius, one-time president
of the Council of Trent, did not deflect from early tradition,
when he taught his own people of Poland the following prin-
ciples of faith: “Since our first parent by eating the forbidden
fruit, was condemned to death, which together with sin is trans-
I Compare In Exod., 1,3, c. 12; De S. Spiritu, X, 3, c. 18 and 24,
P.L. 167, 662-663; 1659; 1665. In Matthaeum, 1, 10, P.L. 168, col. 1547
and 1651-1552; etc., etc.
2 Just as a woman was for us the temptress in the faithlessness of
old, so, too, there came to the assistance of the whole human race, the
new Eve, the Virgin Mary, as exemplar and teacher of faith, of whom
it has been said; “O Lord, the woman whom thou gavest us, gave us
of the tree of life, and we ate and we have received life.” (Card.
Jacobus de Vitriaco, Sermones in Epistolas, etc., Sermo 25, after the
octave of Pentecost, Antwerp, 1675, p. 603). She gave by faith. For
He whom by believing she bore, by believing she also offered to God as
the Lamb, and by believing gave to us as the bread from heaven.


milled in heritage to the whole human race, Christ in the Last
Supper gave Himself to the faithful in food, BY MEANS OF
WHICH THEY MIGHT RISE AGAIN TO LIFE AND
RECOVER WHAT WAS LOST; that, just as we were
wounded unto death by the forbidden food, so by this food,
commanded to us, we would be healed . . . Of the tasting
of that other food it is said: On what day soever thou
shalt eat of it, thou shalt die the death. Of this food, on the
other hand: He that eateth this bread, shall live forever ..
Therefore this sacrament gives us this first of all'. THAT WE
MAY LIVE.” ( Confessio christianae catholicae fidei, ch. 42*
de effectu sacramenti eucharistiae. Opera omnia, Cologne, 1584,
tom. 1, p. 137). This food gives life in such a way that it not
only helps to maintain life, like the fruit of the tree of life, but
also, unlike the tree of knowledge, it leads from death to life*
that is in its own way it imparts justification and first grace.
EPILOGUE.
Different Application of the Merits of the Cross.
We know that the virtue of the sacrifice of the Cross is.
applied through the sacrifice of the Mass, as the Council of
Trent (sess. 22, cap. 1) teaches; we also know that it is applied
through the sacraments, in which the grace drawn from the
side of Christ flows to us. We have therefore the application
of the same virtue in both, though effective in a different man-
ner. For, in the Mass, the appropriation of the saving sacri-
ficial action of Christ IS ACTIVE APPROPRIATION. In
the sacraments it is a PASSIVE receiving of the goods given
back to us by God through Christ in return for the sacrifice.
In the sacrifice the virtue whereby Christ makes intercession
to the Father, is applied to us; in the sacraments, the virtue
whereby Christ gives life to us. Further, He makes interces-
sion by His Victim, and He gives life by His Victim. Satis-
faction is presented by His immolative Flesh, grace is imparted
by His immolated Flesh. BY THE VIRTUE OF HIS CROSS*
Christ is our Advocate propitiating God for us, and the Holy
One of God incorporating us with Himself and sanctifying us.
All this is accomplished BY THE EUCHARIST. It is our
unique sacrifice and principal sacrament, wherein the other sac-
raments are quickened and are perfected. The Eucharist is.
therefore the embodiment of the whole saving virtue derived
from the Cross. By the Eucharist we buy back the life, which


in the Eucharist is given back to us. Offered to God, and con-
ferred on man, the divine sacrament encompasses in itself all
that pertains to the crucified Christ, who brings salvation from
heaven; in whom all things are.
No wonder then that this heavenly food is indispensable
to us for salvation, for in it is contained all the good which
originated in the Cross, and outside of it there is no salvation
for man.
