

.4LFRED’J. ISAACS 4 SOiSS. 16. sTkKET. M.


liuPERIaJj REYIEf. N 0.6- January, 1882 .
The/ Imperial/Heview./ / Ho. 6,-January, 1882 ,/ /
Contents./ hour Numbers’ Subscription 7s.6dincluding postage
anywhere,/-* / Melbourne;/ Alex,: 'Kinley A Co.,Printers, 61
Street./
Bvo. Pink Paper covers. Pp. Bo. Colophon - Alex. l'Kinley and
Go.,Printers,Melbourne.
Copies. E,M.Christie.
Contains an interesting precis of the evidence taken before
the Police hoard in connection with the "Kelly Gang" pp. 42-5


2- ■-




NED KELLY:
THE
IRONCLAD AUSTRALIAN
BUSHRANGER.
COMPLETE.
LONDON:
ALFRED J ISAACS & SONS, 16, CAMOMILE STREET, E.C.
1881






NED KELLY,
THE
AUSTRALIAN IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
BY ONE OF HIS CAPTORS.
CHAPTER L
A GROG-SIIANTY AT FOREST CREEK.
Forest Creek was the place to make your pile, otherwise
your fortune, in the year of gold, 1852; and where twelve-
months previously the blackfellow, the emu, and the
kangaroo bad it all to themselves, hundreds of tents
dotted the thinly-timbered bush, interspersed with wooden
stores and grog-shanties every hero and there, whilst down
by the water’s side the cradles were rocking all day long ;
not the cradles that add to a man’s responsibilities, but
the rough, wooden machines in whicn he washed the refuse
away from his gold.
But away with all thought of such labour for the present,
for it is knock-off hour, and so the holes are empty and
the grog-shanties are full and driving a roaring trade, for
a hot wind has been blowing all day, withering the grass,
curling up the leaves on the trees, and filling the diggers’
eyes and throats with burning dust, so thfct most of them
now feel as though they could drain an ocean dry.
This is why the grog-shops are doing such a roaring trade.
Let us look in at the Emu , better known as “ Mother
Maloney’s.” It is a rickety calico shanty of the shabbiest
class, but it is big, and it is furthermore the fashion;
perhaps by reason that Mrs. Maloney is a buxom widow
and is reputed to have been left remarkably well off by “ the
late lamented,” as she invariably called her defunct spouse.
Anyhow, the qualities of her wares could not have been
the draw, for her wines might have been labelled
VINEGAR, her spirits VITRIOL; and as to her Stringy
Bark , otherwise Colonial Ale, why, Russian Quass diluted
with bilge-water would have been nectar to it.
However, whether because she was fat, fair, and forty,
or because bachelor diggers thought she would be a catch
in a monetary point of view, her shanty was at all events
all the go; and now behold it tolerably full of weary -
limbed but light-hearted miners, clad in blue or red
woollen shirts, worn en blouse over moleskin or corduroy
pants, and girt at the waist by a belt or a smart sash of
Chinese silk, but covered from the soles of their thick
blucher boots to the crowns of their wide-awake or two-
guinea cabbage-tree hats, with the clay and mud amongst
they have been working.
Some are sitting on the hard-beaten mud floor, with
pewter pots between their legs and their backs propped
up ngainst a post of the tent, and others have turned a
tmcket upside down for a chair, or are balancing themselves
on the iron ends of their picks, the handle forming the
support.
Picks, shovels, and billies are tossed here and there and
everywhere, the confusion is that of Babel, and chaff is
flying hither and thither in company with oaths and
blasphemy; uttered, however, without malice, but as
simple interjections and notes of admiration.
The conversation of most of them would have been as
unintelligible as Low Dutch to the freshly arrived out
from England.
“ AVhere are you going to mark out your next claim,
mate?"
“Guess how many pennyweights I’m making to the
tub?”
“ I say, Bill Tomkins nas had his hole jumped! ”
“Is it (rue that California Jim has sloped to Ballarat
with Ned Fletcher’s missus? ”
“ Yes, they did; may I never speak another word if they
didn’t get thirty pounds weight of gold in less than two
days, out of a patch of gravel not more than six inches
deep.”
“ Better luck, that, than happened lad week to an old
chum o’ mine, who paid fifty pounds tor a salted claim,
and found it a shyser. It’ll be murder, I reckon, if he comes
across the cove who slewed him! ”
This was the kind of talk that went round and round,
varied sometimes by a compliment hurled like a cannon-
ball at Mother Maloney, as with a face as red as her cap-
ribbon*, she served her thirsty customers.
Suddenly there enters the shanty a tall, slim individual
in seedy black, with a battered bell-topper hat crushed
down over his brow. His clothes have evidently seen
Regent-street, perhaps even have been constructed by the
redoubtable Poole; but they are now in a scarecrow
condition, and he looks not unlike a scarecrow inside
them, so spare and angular is he, whilst his long
dreary whiskers are full of dust and sand, and his
countenance is the colour of a wax-work figure in a
Whitechapel or New-Cut penny exhibition-
This strange-looking being threaded his way mincingly
between the groups of diggers, until, reaching the bar, he
cast a languishing glance at Mother Maloney, and running
his long taper fingers through his whiskers, said in
drawling accents:—
“ Will you ewedit me with a nobbier of rum, my dear,
good, kind, ewetshur, until I get my wemittances from
England to-morrow ? ”
“It’s indade an’ I can’t, Misthcr Norfolk Howard,
with some folks to-morrow’s niver to-day. An’ besides,
it’s entirely agin my rules, credit is ! ”
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when soma
cs.e struck up:—


of Gold don't earn an ouoce 7
Loa'er se»“dv loafer. O!
Cat who can come r oo he bjuncel
Loafer, seedy loafer, 01
Who can cut it jolly fat.
Without a mag on rtai’arat.
Wear an old bell-iopper hat?
Loafer, seedy loafer. O! ”
Koars of laughter greeted this sally, whose butt was
evidently the seedy individual who had addressed himself
to Mrs. Maloney's fond, but not trusting nature, in vain.
lie did not seem, however, to be a whit disconcerted
thereby ; perhaps he was accustomed to such treatment.
“Haw, vewy good!’’ said he, languidly clapping his
hands. “Vewy good for you; that is to say, I wish I’d
such a voice, Ido indeed! ”
“What would you do w r ith it if you had?” demanded
the pleased singer.
“Why, my dear fwiend, I’d take it round and lend it
out to the diggers to sharpen their tools on. Grindstones
w r ould be nothing to it.”
“ Oh, you go and be hanged. You’ve brought your
jokes to the wrong shop.”
“Just exactly what you’ve done with your voice. My
dear fwiend, you would be -worth a lob of gold a day to
stand on the summit of Mount Alexander and shout out
‘Joey!’ to the diggers for twelve miles round when you
saw the traps coming. 1 think you owe me a shout for
the idea.”
“ I’ll make you shout in another way if you don’t dry
up.”
“ It’s because I’m so vewy dwied up that I wequire to be
wetted down.”
“ Pitch us a better stave than that ere one we’ve just had
a werse on, and I’ll shout till yer blue in the face, mate,”
cried a digger, who was hugging a black billy to his rough,
hairy breast as affectionately as a young mother could have
done her first child, said billy being in truth a quarter full
of nuggets and gold-dust.
The loafer didn’t require any pressing. He knew that he
had a fine voice, and he also knew that a comic song, well
sung, was always good for at least a shout in any shanty on
the diggings.
“I’ll delight your ears with a truly celestial subject,”
said he. “The words are my own, and I’ve set them to
an easy tune, so that there may be no excuse for not joining
in coal box. ‘ The Fate,’ to the old air of the
‘Mistletoe Bough,’ gentEmen. Here goes.
“The cradles were rocking one flivs trammer's diy.
And the diggers were busily puddling away;
The Chiueea were running about in shoila.
Ilutatlng the heading that comes from the hole*,
ohow Ohow his bands with glee did rub.
Cause be’d washed out a halfpenny weight to the tub;
And an old Chinee fossiker to h a mates did say,
‘I g;ttee more gold dan you will to day I ’
“ Now then for the chorus, boys:
“Oh, what a sad tale—Crikey, oh, what a sad talet
“i~e took up his pick an 1 be shouldered his epada^
Cat before he went eff to his mates, ho said,
‘Cook a ni ',e bow-wow. and, mind yen, don't fall
To save me some fa r tee from sucky pig’s tail.'
The dinner was cooked, but h j wasn’t there,
So another old Chinaman ate up his share ;
And he wasn’t forthcoming at damper and tea.
So that all bis mates wondered where Sing-Ui could feet
u Chorus again, boys:
“ Ch, what a sad talc—Crikay, oh, what a sad tale.
“They sought him that night and they sought him next day.
And he didn’t torn up when a week passed away ;
Thty looked in the guMoy they poked n the creek,
Yet still be stopped mi.slng for many a week;
They talked of his absence whilst having their grab,
And also when puddling away at the tub;
Till oue of i is mates gave a hint that Si-'g-Hi
Had made his blessed pile and sloped home on the sly.
“ New, then, chorus again :
“ Oh, what a sad tale—Crikey, oh, what a sad tale.
Two diggers one day out ca Kangaroo Flat,
Whilst driving an oid bole came on a queer hat;
A' d there they fou d, buried r'gh' unner ft e diri,
Some mouldy oil bones a id a rotten blm shin
Poor Sing HiM worked there, hut he'd put up no prop.
And the top of 'he r.rive had com- down rn him wbopj
So when hit mates beatd tha he’d turned up h's toes,
Toey sighed ‘Poor, Sing- Q'! and appartioiud hia cloihen
“ Chorus for the last time, boys;
“Oh what a sad tale—Crikey, oh, what a sad tale v
Loud were the plaudits that greeted this strange OlUj
on its conclusion ; and the ragged new chum scarecrow was
all at once converted into the lion of the rowdy assemblage.
Every one wanted to “shout” (colonial for stand tre t).
and everyone was just as anxious to got another song out
of him.
Not much difficulty was there about that. Mr. Norfolk
E'fwa'-d seemed every whit as ready to treat them to song
afi*r scng as they were to treathim t* nobbier after nobH ;
but at length the drink he had imbibed seemed to affeot him
all at once ; his words came thick, memory failed him, ha
merged into another tune, hiccoughed, staggered, and finally
subsided between two casks, where he came to auchoi
doubled up, with his chin on his knees, and appeared to
subside into a state of unconsciousness.
When the diggers discovered that flicking small sub-
stances at him, and tickling his nostrils a. i ears W’th a strew
or the end of a tobacco-pipe had no effect in ai >usin g a <>■
from the bestial drunken sleep into which lie seemed to nave
fallen, one of them crushed his hat down over his eyes with
a blow from his open palm, and five minutes later the very
existence of the poor druukeu loafer seemed to be for-
gotten.
With the reader’s leave we will keep a sharper eye
him.
Suddenly, when nobody is looking, he lifts his shagj.j
hat-brim a couple of inches. Surely those sharp, beady, rat-
black eyes that shine so keenly from underneath the
and nearly closed lids, are never those of an intoxicated
man ? They take in everything that passes around, and
they twinkle when any miner blows that he has not paidh'u
license.
By-and-by an expression of uneasiness comes into tlit u.
however, and he mutters, or rather soliloquises to himself—
“ I thought he would have been here by now. Was my
information incorrect, 1 wonder? Curse my ill-fortune if I
am to be done this time. If 1 could cop the three thousand
pounds that are offered for Ned Kelly the Ironclad Bush-
ranger’s capture, I’d ask M'Phcrson for his pretty daughter
Lily in marriage at once. Ha! who is this, I wonder? ”
CHAPTER 11.
MORE VISITORS TO THE “EMU.”
At this juncture of affairs two more diggers came Into th*.
shanty, shouldering their tools in true workmanlike fashion,
that is to say, with the pick-handle passed through the-
handle of the shovel, and grasped firmly in the left hand,
thus allowing the latter implement to hang pendulous down
the back. Over their left arms they carried their upper
shirts, that the stifling, breathless heat had caused them to
take off, and in their right hands they bore their black billies.
Their faces were wreathed in such broad grins that it
seemed to be no easy matter to keep their short black pipes
in their moutha
“ Hullo, matcys I blessed if you don’t seem in luck,"
shouted some one.
“ In luck enough to shout for the whole d lot of
you, at all events,” rejoined the elder of these new arrivals.
“ Now, mother Maloney, its fizz and nothing less this time,
so out with your boys with the white night-caps on. Twenty
bottles of chum, my blooming old Venus. Hang drawing
the corks. Off with their heads and pour the contents of


their jolly fat bellies into a clean bucket, so that each lad
can dip bis pannikin in and help himself. That’s the way
to do business, old girl”
“ Sure, an that’s right enough, masther, more especial
when the price ov the good liquor is paid down first.
Twinty bottles ov fizz will be just twinty golden sovereigns,
me honey, divil a stiver less.”
“ Put in a thumb and pull out a plum, ray charmer. Not
too big an one though, or you won’t get it. Now, then,
eyes shut, and fancy that you are feeling for walnuts, not
apples,” and the speaker took the lid off his billy and held
it over the counter towards the buxom hostess.
She dived in her hand, and gave a perceptible gasp as it
rame in contact with the old tin saucepan’s contents. Fain
would it have lingered there, had not the digger ex-
claimed :
“ None of your little games, now; take only one and
don’t be greedy about the size, or I’ll have it back, and
take my custom elsewhere.”
Thereupon the fair and flushed widow heaved a little sigh
and took out of the billy a solid nuggetof about the size of
a plum.
“Now marm, I suppose you’ll own the price of your
liquor is paid for?”
“Be the powers yes, an’l’m much obliged to ye, Misther
Dawson.”
A few minutes later a bucket, two-thirds full of seething
and hissing champagne (N.B. As good can be purchased in
England at two-and-six a bottle) was handed over the bar
and placed in the middle of the floor, and tin pannikins
being at the same time distributed, the fun commenced in
earnest.
The champagne, however, didn’t give unqualified satisfac-
tion, and the giver of the treat, presently, himself declared
that it was “rotgut,” and that three or four bottles of
brandy would make it far finer swizzle.
So the brandy was added, and then for the first time lips
were smacked with keen appreciation.
“ Yes, gentlemen,” said the lucky digger then, “we’ve
just made our piles, me an my mate has. We’ve got seven
pint pots full of gold out ov our hole in three days, an that’s
worth more’n three thousand pounds, or I’m a sinner.
We’re going on the loose a bit now, down to Mel-
tourne, to see life an look at the gals, and whoever’!! bid
highest for the claim shall hev it, though there’s whole
fortins to be made there yot.
“ What’s that fool blowing about ?” asked one of three
new diggers who had just entered the shanty unnoticed,
owing to the undivided interest of the assembly being cen-
tered on the two miners who had made their pile.
“ Whoever he is we won’t leave him much gold to spend
on the Melbourne girls if he and his mate leave this quit
alone,” retorted the taller of the three new arrivals in a
whisper. “ Hist! let us squat ourselves down amongst the
rest so as not to attract attention or suspicion. Somebody
will let slip presently the day fixed on for the gold-escort
to start. The authorities are keeping it precious close, but
must leak out.”
So the three last comers seated themselves amongst the
diggers, whom they closely resembled in all essential
Ispects, and began to help themselves to the brandy-forti-
ed fizz. They thought that they were unnoticed, and so
tey were, by all save one n?an, and that was the scarecrow
Lew-chum.
“ Very well go 'i up,” muttered he to himself, “ but if you
three disguised coves aren’t Ned Kelly and his mates Lanky
Jim and Lardy Bill, then I’m not Tom Conquest of the
Mounted Police. I’ll have you, my lads, and what’s more
I’ll take you single-handed, for I can’t afford to share the
reward. Big as it is I fear it will hardly win me Lily
McPherson.”
CHAPTER lIL
TREATS OF SELLING AND BEING SOU>.
How could the cleverly-disguised detective have spotted
those three men ? Their low-toned mutterings he could
not have caught from the spot where he squatted hunched
up so grotesquely ; and their outward appearance was that
of nine-tenths of the individuals by whom they were sur-
rounded ; for their soft felt billycock hats were slouched
well over their brows, and up to their very eyes they were
all hair. They were almost as much like gorillas as men.
True, the stature of the middle man was somewhat re-
markable, for he was at least six-feet-three in height, and
of commanding build as well. He who squatted on his
left, sitting on his heels like a Gloucestershire collier, was
fat and gross, with a nose that looked as though it had
been broken in some grog-shanty, or beer-shop row with
a pewter pint-pot; and he who balanced himself on the
round of his pick to the right, had a nose of the Napier
type, shaped like the hooked beak of some monstrous bird
of prey, a nose that you might fancy capable of smelling
blood at any distance. This man’s form must have been
that of a skeleton by the way that his clothes hung about
him. He looked like a being who could be twisted and
turned into the shape of any grotesque capital letter, from
A to Z.
Whilst we have been endeavouring to describe three in-
dividuals who are destined to play an important and con-
spicuous part in this our “ ower true tale,” Dawson, the
lucky digger and giver of the feast, continued to blow
about his hole, and what he intended to do with the wealth
he had got out of it, with asseverations which his mate
backed up with such curt observations as, “ Bully for you,”
“ Right you are, old man,” “ That’s the time of day,” and
so on.
“ What a duffer you must be to leave such a good thing
not half worked out,” suddenly exclaimed a digger with
rather more gumption than the rest.
“ Not a bit ov it,” retorted Dawson. “ I aren’t a mean,
selfish beast as wants to keep every good thing for hisself.
1 wouldn’t be shouting in the way that I am if I was that;
nary a bit ov it Turn and turn about, I say ; added to
which, I knows of a place as’ll turn out betterer even nor
this one. I aren’t quite a green ’un; and perhaps I knows
as much about prospecting as Mr. Hargreaves.”
“ Whereabouts may this new Tom Tiddler's ground b©
situated?” asked some one.
“ Aye, aye, that’s tellings, that is. Tis a secret as dear
to me as my very life’s blood. My matey here is the only
man as’ll be let into that knowledge. And for why ? Be-
cause he once saved my life at the risk ov his own, an’ I’ve
a ’art as is stuffed as chock full ov gratitude as ever was a
calves’ with sage and onions. However, this hain’t busi-
ness, gentlemen. Who’ll bid for Dick Dawson’s claim an’
a sartain fortune ? Ned, just show the old billy round, an'
listen to how their very eyeballs will jingle as they lights
on the treasure in it. There’s no need for any one to
handle the nuggets, Ned, for they’re like quicksilver,
an’U run down a cove’s sleeve before he knows what
they’re about.”
A loud laugh was produced by this elegant way of hint-
ing that the assembled company might not all be as honest
as they should be, and it had hardly subsided when Ned
began to show the old tin billy round. -
Face after face bent over it, and ejaculations of surprise
and admiration came thick and fast.
Sometimes a dirty and grimy hand would involuntarily
shoot out, but Ned, with some such ironical observation
as “No, you don’t I’’would jerk the billy out of reach,
at the same time giving its contents a rattle that sounded
like sweetest music to the ears of the listeners.


‘ And now for a bidding, gents,” said Dick Dawson,
«(i<;n he had once more got his treasure between his legs,
winch crooked round it as though they had been those of
an ape. “ Come, take it aisy, don’t all speak at once;
the hole won’t run away, and the gold escort don’t start
till the day after to-morrow.”
At this the tall man gave hi* fat and hi* thin friend a
nudge apiece.
Even that slight action did not escape the notice of the
now loudly-snoring new chum. Ho saw it between his
knees, that now covered his face.
“ How do you know the gold escort leaves the day after
to-morrow ? ”
It was neither of the three new arrivals who put the
question ; they were far too fly. It was a queer little
digger on the opposite side of the circle.
“ How do I know ? ” retorted Dick Dawson, in tones of
withering contempt. “ Don't it strike you werry forcibly
that fellows who’ve got this vast amount ov gold to send
down (and here he tapped the outside of his billy signi-
ficantly) would put themselves to the trouble to enquire
and find out ? ”
“ Aye, like enough; but the authorities have kept it
T ,<ecious dark, on account of Ned Kelly and bis lambs not
meddling with it on the way.”
“ They’ve not kept it dark from known honest men like
your most humble servant, Dick Dawson. The gold escort
leaves the commissioner’s tent at six o’clock on Monday
morning, and travels down to Melbourne by the Black
Forest route. And I can tell ’ee something more nor
that, which is, that a dozen troopers will guard it this
time, instead ov a paltry half-dozen ; so if Ned Kelly and
his gang do show up, they’ll find theirselves in Queer-
street.”
Again the tall man nudged his companions slightly, and
there ensued a queer sound half-way down the flat-nosed
man’s throat that sounded very like a death-rattle, though
it was in reality nothing worse than a chuckle.
“Now that I’ve shut up Master Canimosity, let’s return
to business, mates,”continued Dick Dawson. “Look here,
I’ve half a mind to give the claim away. D ee, I’d do
it, but tor the fact that a free gift is never vallied. No,
what folks git for nothing, they vallies at nothing; so I
puts the hole up to auction, an’ whatever it brings I hands
over to the ’orspital an’ the horphan asylum, directly I
gets to Melbourne, save, perhaps, a handful for a pretty
wench or two.”
“ Hear! hear ! ” shouted every one. “Now that’s what
I cabs ’andsome,’' added somebody.
The bids were started and ran up actively, brandied
champagne being a fine stimulant to spirited enter-
prise.
At last, when they reached a sum that caused some of
£he more sober to whistle, Dick Dawson said—
“ That’s enough, mates, let it stand at that; I wants a
fair price, not a hexorbitant one. Fair play’s a jewel, an’
’andsome is as ’andsome does. I won’t take a pennyweight
more, for it’s honest Dick Dawson’s boast that no one
ever made a bargain with him an’ lived to regret it. Now,
mate, you as made that last offer, tell me ycr name an’
where yer hangs out ? ”
“ Jack Hartley. My tent’s close down by Brown’s store.
If you an’ your mate don’t mind seeing me home I’ll give
you the price of the claim now. I’ve got it snugly planted.
We can borrow a pair of scales at Brown’s on the way.”
“ Right you are, friend- Come along, then, let us be
jogging We’ve swilled quite enough to transact business
on. Mrs. Maloney, my dear, let the other gents as is here
assembled have whatever else they chooses to call for to-
night, at my expense. I never likes to disturb harmony,
and I wouldn’t be leaving them so early but that dooty
calls, and that’s a voice as never falls unheeded on a true
Englishman’s ear. Good night all, and God bless ye,”
And tipping the wink to his mate Ned, they got Jack
between them, and supported him out of the- shanty—for
truth to say he was rather unsteady on his pins—beinj
followed by the vociferous cheers of the other diggers,
whom the prospect of further drinks, at another man’s ex-
{>ense, deprived oi any desire to qu : t the 51 Emu " loi \
ong while to come.
Besides, by this time the flaring naphtha lamps had beau
lighted, and the place looked extra comfortable.
Mother Maloney was all smiles too, and evidently in-
tended to carry out Dick Dawson’s instructions to the
letter, the fact being that he had playfully pitched on t*
the counter another small nugget before going out,
“ In for a penny in for a pound,” was the motto of one
and all, and what mattered it if they were unfit for work
next day, for was it not Sunday, a dies non f
CHAPTER IV.
TRACKING TO MURDER. PUTTING lIIS FOOT IN IT.
Now there are exceptions to every rule, and so when we
said just now that one and all had made up their minds to
stay and continue the carouse, we must except four of
their number. We shall see who they were presently.
Dick Dawson, his taciturn mate Ned, and the half-
intoxicated Jack Hartley, were hardly out of the shanty,
when the tall man with his two curiously-nosed companions
also rose to their feet and re-shouldered their tools.
“Where away? What’s the d hurry?” enquired
one or two of the diggers.
“ Wife in the straw. Stores to get in. Morrow Sunday,”
growled the tall man.
“ And we’ve got to take care ov our little brother ’coa
you see he ain’t big enough to take care of hisself,” added
the flat-nosed man, with a sly wink.
This observation produced loud roars of laughter, and
before they had subsided the strangely assorted trio had
quitted the shanty.
Hardly had they disappeared from view when Mr. Nor-
folk Howard, the inebriate new-chum as every one be-
lieved him to be, was observed to stagger to his feet and
make a series of short tacks towards the shanty door.
“ Hi, we can’t spare you! ” roared out some one. “ Glad
you’ve come round, old fellow, for we want another song.
A tip-topper like the last.”
“ Can't sing, be-be-before been sick. Fe-fe-fe-feel as
th-th-though my liver wa-wanted to come up. Le-le-let
me pass, please.”
Several hands had been outstretched to detain him, but
this speech caused them to be hastily withdrawn, and
as wide a passage as practicable to be afforded him as well.
Another second and he also was outside the shanty.
Everything was wrapped in gloom. The hot wind had
been succeeded by a southerly buster, bringing rain on its
leaden pinions. The trooper took off his hat and allowed
the pelting shower to refresh, for an instant, his heated
face.
Then his sharp eyes pierced the gloom ahead, and he
saw the three men whom he was after about fifty yards
in front, whilst the three other men, whom he rightly
guessed that they were after, showed very indistinctly ia
the distance.
“ Murder and robbery are clearly their little game,” mut-
tered the disguised trooper to himself. “ Perhaps, how-
ever, I’ll be able to turn the tables on them. With me o»
the other side it’ll be three to three, for the drunken man
don’t count for much ; and then I must pick out the tall
one for myself and the other coves may settle Lanky Jijß


and Lardy Bill between them, for they aren’t worth pow-
der and ball yet.”
And as he concluded this mental cogitation the trooper
thrust his right hand into the left inside breast pocket of
his seedy frock coat, to discover whether the stock of his
pistol was handy to his grasp.
Meanwhile, unconscious that they had either a foe
in their rear, the tall man, the fat man, and the man
with the macaw nose followed the tracks of Dick Dawson
and his companions across the Flat.
“This rain is fortunate,” said the tall man, “ for it has
driven every one under canvas. Not that folks are very
thick about this part at any time of a night. However,
it’s best as it is, and there’s plenty of light to work by.”
“ Oh, I feel so soft-hearted,” exclaimed the fat man,
“I’m in the mood of a sucking dove. Why would the
fool flash about his gold so ?”
“ To tempt better men to possess themselves of it, of
course,” put in he of the macaw-bill. “ We'll put it to a
deal better use than he would, eh, Ned?”
“ Silence! and listen to me. You see that crooked old
gum tree? Curse it, you can’t help seeing it, for its trunk
looks like a wiiite ghost. Yes, you’ve spotted it now.
Well, the nearest track to the township leads right past it,
and almost at its foot there is a deserted shaft close upon
ninety feet deep. We must overtake them at that point,
overcome them—without using our pistols if possible—for
t!io traps are getting pretty well as thick about the place
as the bush flies and mosquitoes; and pitch cm in head-
long,” explained the tall man grimly.
“ Oh lor ! I feel so soft-hearted,” sighed the fat man ;
“ but what is to be must be, and it would be ungracious
not to take the good things that Fortune puts ; u our
way.”
“ Umph, you was always a very tahng young man ex-
cept with the petticoats,” retorted Macaw-bill. “See
L,-at you do your share of the work.”
Meanwhile every minute brought Dick Dawson, Ned,
and Jack Hartley nearer to the lonely spot fixed on for
their murder.
Three hundred yards farther would have taken them
into the very thick of the canvas township, Hartley’s tent
being about double the distance on the other side.
Arrived opposite the gum tree, however, the intoxicated
digger’s legs positively refused to boar him any further,
aid down he went. Dick and his mate were busily dis-
cussing how they should get him up and along, when both
were suddenly grasped from behind.
“ A cry for assistance, and I’ll send a bullet through the
brains of each of you! ” said the tall man of the trio, sud-
denly showing himself in their front, and pointing a
double-barrelled pistol at each of their faces alternately.
“Submit to bo quietly knocked down and stunned, and
your lives are spared! ”
“ I!.-:, !;a, ha! Ned Kelly, is it thee?” exclaimed Daw-
son ; “ Well, this is a spree ! Why, the nuggets are all
Brummagem ware, specially manufactured and sent out
for salting claims * with. They aren’t worth their weight
in copper or mnntz metal. Don’t you knoAV Carrotty
Larkins, eh, old chum?'’
“ Why, your hair's as black as a nigger's! and your mate,
who is he ? ”
“ Nimming Ned, the cracksman! Well, this is a lark!
Not that our get-up is better than yours, and yet it is a
feather in our caps to have taken the cappen in. Were
you three at Mother Maloney’s? I never spotted you.”
Before Kelly could make any reply, a voice shouted
out:—
*• Beware of those fellows you are falling with! They
•» A 'nefarious traffic extensively carried on in 853. See Melbourne
are bushrangers. I call upon you in the Queen’s name,
as honest men, to help me capture them. I'll account for
the biggest. My name’s Tom Conquest, and I belong to
the Victoria constabulary ! ”
And the speaker dashed into the very middle of the
rascally assemblage, pistol in hand, determined to take
Ned Kelly dead or alive.
Had he seen Broken-nose and Macaw-bill let go of their
prisoners, which they had done a second previously ; or had
he heard Dick Dawson's chuckle, ho might have been put
upon his guard. As it was, he imagined the three robbers
had begun to chat in a friendly way with their intended
victims, so as to catch them unawares. Hence his shouted
warning.
Having given it he lost no time in levelling his weapon
at Ned Kelly's face, and pulling the trigger.
But the cap failed to explode, and ere he could discharge
another barrel, all five men were on him at once, the pistol
was wrenched out of his grasp, and he was absolutely
powerless in their hands.
“ A Joey in disguise—a wolf in sheep’s clothing ! And
is this great and free country come to this?” exclaimed
Broken-nose, lifting up his hands and eyes as though in
pious horror at such an act of base deception.
“ We will make a stern example of him,” said Ned
Kelly; “pitch him down that deserted hole. It’s ninety
feet deep. He won't survive the fall. Well, rascal, have
you a bone in your tongue, that you don't cry for mercy? ”
“ Beg for mercy from cut-throat villains like you? No.
thank God! even the terrible position lam in shall not
make me lose my self-respect,” said the gallant trooper,
with a contemptuous glance at his captors.
“ Well crowed fora dying speech and confession. You
are too good for a trap, you should have been a bush-
ranger. You’d have done honour to the cloth. However,
that can’t be helped now. In with him. mates ! ”
Che trooper was dragged to the edge of the dark, yawn-
ing shaft, the Macaw-beak’s groat splay hand being pressed
over his mouth the while, lest he should cry out and spread
the alarm that some devilry was up.
A second later he was hurled ever the brink, end fell
with a dull, hollow thud, into the awful depths that no eye
could penetrate.
“ Wouldn’t it be wise to serve the other bloke the came
way?’ suggested Macaw.
“If you did, how should I get Ins gold? No, no, tho
poor fellow’s in a drunken sleep.”
This from Dick Dawson, alias Carrotty Larkins; but
Ned Kelly stooped down to assure himself for cermju Nat
such was indeed tho fact.
Apparently tho investigation was satisfactory, for c:i
assuming an upright position he remarked—
“ He’s tight as a door-nail. You coves had better
bring him round by the best means you can, and get him
home to his tent as quickly as possible. Yes, get his gold
before he is sober enough to wonder whether he has made
a foolish bargain, and then hasten both of you to our old
quarters in the hills, for Monday night will seo me dead
or victorious. I will rob the gold escort or perish in the
attempt,”
“We are with you,” said Carrotty Larkins and Nina-
ming Ned, in a breath ; and the former added, “ It won’t
be all gold. My Brummagem nuggets will be amongst
the treasure. I’ll make three thousand pounds out of
them, never fear.”
“ You won’t have the assurance to try and pass them
off on the experienced professional gold-buyers?” ex-
claimed Kelly, with something of admiration in his tone.
“Won’t I, though? Aqua-fortis nor any other acid
has any effect on ’em, nor can they find ’em out by weight
Oh, I’ll work the oracle all right, never fear; and directly


the tiling’s done we’ll make tracks for our haunt in the
ranges. The attack on the escort will be rare fun.”
The confederates then parted; and an hour later Ned
Kelly and his two companions had left Forest Creek far
behind them.
CHAPTER V.
NED SELI/f’S HOME IN THE MOUNTAIN RANGES.
Snirr we the scene from the busy, rowdy diggings at
Forest Creek to the summit of a lofty, volcanic hill, some
two thousand feet above the level of the sea, covered to
the very top with heavy timber, and surrounded on three
sides by a dense forest, a spot where one would imagine
the foot of white man had never trod.
And yet, behold a hut, constructed of the immense
slabs of bark which the monarchs of the Australian forest
shed in lien of their leaves.
Yes, this is a peculiarity of nearly all antipodean trees,
that they rid themselves of their bark but not their foliage,
which is evergreen, whilst their trunks, clad in their new,
tender coverings, are often of a silvery whiteness.
That bark imt is brown enough, however. It is, of
course, only one story in height, and possesses a slanting
roof of the same material, a door, a couple of windows,
and a stunted chimney formed of an old cask.
Up and down its rough, furrowed, outside walls run
soldiers and bulldogs. Let not the reader stare; we
allude to a couple of species of huge ants bearing those
expressive names, the former, we presume, because they
are red, and the latter for reason that they are not only
white, but also because they bite all who are foolish
enough to meddle with them as ferociously as could their
namesakes.
Take the primitive habitation for all in all, it was just
such an one as Adam might be supposed to have set about
constructing when he had been turned out of Eden’s
garden into the wilderness; and one of Eve’s fairest
daughters is at ali events looking forth from one of its
casementless window-apertures at the present moment.
Her eyes are bent on the long white road that crosses
the well-grassed plains fifteen or sixteen hundred feet
below her eagle’s nest on the mountain’s summit, looking
like a narrow ribbon or a silver-scaled serpent.
It is the newly-made road, leading from Kyneton and
the gold fields at Forest Creek and Mount Alexander to
the metropolis of the colony, Melbourne; a track, hardly
finished though it is, on which many a ruthless and savage
deed has been committed; for this heavily-timbered bill
and the forests that clothe three of its sides, are the
haunt of the bushrangers, and this particular hut is called
by them the Look-out Station,
It commands, indeed, a wide and extensive range of
view, comprising hill and plain, bush and scrub. North-
ward may be descried with a telescope the square church
tower and the shingled roofs of the township of Kyneton,
and to the left of it that irregular fringe of wattle trees
marks the winding course of the Coliban river. Many a
score of miles across the undulating and thinly-timbered
plains, and directiy in front, rise, with rounded summits,
another mountain range* behind which is Ballarat; and
over the intermediate country is dotted here and
there at wide intervals, a white, one-storied, deeply-
veranduued squatter’s station, with the out-buildings
generally at some little distance off ; whilst the only signs
of life visible, are alternate white and brown specks,
which a nearer view would disclose to be sheep and cattle.
This fair landscape is closed in by a sky like a gleaming
polished steel shield, from the centre of which the sun
glares down like a burnished brass boss.
Having described the view, let us regard the viewer.
That she is a Currency lass, or native-born Australian
girl, is perceptible at a glance. An Englishman would
have pronounced her seventeen, for she was tall, lithe,
and gracefully formed, and the delicious contours of pre-
mature womanhood were already perceptible in her bust;
but she was in truth only just turned of fourteen, for the
glowing sun of Australia brings flowers, fruit, and girl?
to an early perfection.
This young girl’s complexion was t‘«xo of a brilliant
brunette, her eyes hazel, her hair of a neh glossy brown,
her lips red as cherries, and the teeth within as white and
small as strings of pearls; yet even whiter, if possible,
than those teeth, were the bare, plump neck and shoulders,
adown which her glossy tresses wantoned, and the arms
that were crossed on the rough window-sill over which
she leant.
There was no danger of the delicate skin getting sun-
burned whilst she did so, for above the hut towered (to a
height of full ninety feet before they began to branch off)
the stately iron-bark trees ; and the foliage of the blue-
gum, the peppermint and the shea-oak helped to form a
canopy o’er her pretty head whenever she deigned to walk
abroad.
Suddenly, whilst she gazes, a horse’s hoof-strokea
become audible, evidently toiling up a steep and rocky
pathway close at hand.'
The maiden gives utterance to an expression of mingled
joy and surprise, and the next instant, on to the tiny
splatch of grassy open space in front of the hut rides a
tall, gaunt man, bearded up to the very eyes.
“Father!” exclaimed the girl, “howglad I am that you
are come home.”
“ Well, my bonnie lass, and so am I; but you needn't
have been anxious.”
“ I wasn’t very anxious, I never am when go out with-
out your armour on, for then I think that you are not
bound on a very perilous enterprise.”
“No, my girl, you can always depend on that. Come
you and take possession of Marco Polo, for I’m dog-tired
and have got little time enough to rest in. Short-hobble
him, Rose, so that he mayn’t stray far, for I shall want
him again anon, and then come quickly in and give me
some grub.”
The young girl rushed at once out of the door, and the
bearded man, flinging himself heavily from the saddle to
the ground, first kissed her and then placed the reins in
her hand, telling her that she looked blooming meanwhile.
“Father,” said she, “Marco don’t want me to lead
him. lie will follow me about like a dog. He loves me
dearly. Kiss me, Marco Polo.”
The beautiful creature, for the animal was a thorough-
bred racer, stretched out his long, vein-tracericd neck, and
rubbed his velvet muzzle first against a cheek and then
against a glossy shoulder.
“ There !” said the girl, triumphantly, and throwing the
reins lightly over the proud steed’s neck she just as lightly
vaulted on to his back, and with a merry, ringing laugh,
trotted him round towards the back of the but.
The bearded man gazed after her fondly, but a look of
sadness came into his great haggard eyes as he muttered
to himself—
“ What would become of her if anything happened to me?
Good Lord ! I know her well. She would seek to avenge
me, and her devotion would meet with a six foot
drop. Would to heaven that I had not brought her
up to regard right as wrong and wrong as right; and
yet I could not have endured that the only being there ia
left me to love should regard me as a ruffian and a villain.
I am only what circumstances have made me, and why
should she be different? My parents were murdered by
the law, and her mother was destroyed by a villain. We


both of us owe the world nothing but our hate and our
s«orn, and by heaven, I, at least, never let a chance slip
of requiting the obligation.”
Thus muttering, or rather reflecting, Ned Kelly—for he
it W as—strode through the hut into a little lean-to shed at
the back, and forthwith commenced to indulge in a
thorough good wash, a tired Australian’s greatest delights
1\ Leu leu minutes later he entered the left-hand room
ef the hut, which was at once his own bedroom, when at
home, the kitchen and the parlour, he was a very different-
looking being to what he had been when he dismounted
from Marco Polo so short a time previously.
He had taken off twenty years of his apparent age with
the false beard and whiskers that had evidently been worn
as a disguise, and now, with face closely clipped, all but
a heavy, drooping moustache, he looked a very handsome
man of no more than thirty-five.
Hose had already spread the rough table—hewn with
his own axe—with the materials for a repast, and now she
moved up a couple of three-legged stools beside it. The
entire room contained no other furniture.
The table equipage consisted of tin pannikins and
pewter plates, and a couple of old salmon-tins held the
goat's milk and the sugar.
A large flat damper cake had just been taken up steam-
ing hot from the place where it had cooked itself on the
hot stone hearth, and Rose threw a fistful of tea into the
tin billy, two-thirds full of now boiling water as it hung
suspended over the fire, and began to stir it round vigor-
ously with a gum-tree twig, this being the colonial way
of brewing the cup that cheers.
Meanwhile, Ned went to a hanging-safe or cupboard of
his own manufacture, and took out a portion of a cold leg
of mutton.
Fishing a gridiron out of a corner, he cut the meat into
thick slices and laid it thereon, and directly Rose had
taken the billy off the fire, the gridiron took its place.
A couple of turns to the meat and it was done, and the
next instant the bushranger was gorging himself like a
half-famished wolf.
“Rose,” lie said, when he had devoured at least a pound
of grilled mutton and two-thirds of a two-inch-thick
damper as large as a moat plate, washing the solids down
with at least three pannikins of tea, “ Rose, this kind of
life won’t last much longer, my girl. I’ve nearly made my
pile, and we'll very soon leave this wilderness to cut a
shine in a big city, where we must see about getting you
married well, my Mountain Rose.”
“ I don't want to get married, father. I’m never going
to leave you.”
“ Rut, suppose I intend to take unto myself a wife, Rose.
What then V”
A look of acute pain crossed the young girl’s countenance.
“ Father,” said she, “ you are joking. Is not your child’s
love sufficient for you? You have often said so. If you
give me a stepmother I will kill her, so there.”
And the lovely little barbarian looked thoroughly as
though she meant what she said.
Ned Kelly laughed in spite of himself.
“ You are your own father’s child,” rejoined he. “ And
yet, where is the use of keeping up the deception longer,”
he added, to himself. “ For, should a bullet hap to lay
me low this afternoon, why should I doom the poor child
to toil through life with my sin-branded name clinging to
her like a curse*’ No, the cat shall out of the bag at last.”
“Father, what are you muttering to yourself? Is it
about this strange woman who wants to rob me of your
love ? Oh, be sure that she is not luring you on in order
to deceive and betray you, to secure to herself the three
thousand pounds that the Government has offered for you
either living or dead.”
“ She has never yet seen mo, Rose; perhaps has never
even read of my existence, for she has uo r been out in iiie
Colonies very long. Rose, she is the most beautiful erea-
ture that God’s sun has ever shone on. She is the talk of
the world. Sprung from the ranks of the people, sue might
have been a queen, nay, a crown was offered her, but she
would not accept it at the cost of a rebellion. She boxed
a king s ears, and the king created her a oountesa for the
honour she had done him. She is a countess now, and
she shall be more; she shall be Ned Kelly the bushranger a
wife before the world is a week older. He would like the
taming of such a splendid tigress.”
“ Perhaps the tigress wouldn t accept you as its mate,
father.”
“ When the lion woos he does so with a roar, not a purr,
child. This woman—this countess—l saw her likeness
when last I was down in Melbourne, and its loveliness
maddened me to possess the original for my own. Yes,
the woman who refused to wed the King of Bavaria
shall become the bride of the Ring of the Bush. All
Melbourne is at her feet, Rose, from the governor down
to the seediest loafer around Paddy’s market. Her latest
hobby is to win fame upon the stage, and she has had the
pluck to horsewhip, with her own fair hand, at least half-
a-dozen of those scrubby fellows who found fault in the
newspapers with her performance. Suddenly she has taken
it into her head that she would like to see the gold-dmgings,
and sure intelligence has been brought me that she starts
from Melbourne for Mount Alexander by to-day’s Cobb’s
mail. Ha, ha, ha! she won’t get quite so far as the gold-
fields this time. I mean to win her for a wife in true outlaw
fashion, and, if I mistake not, she is a woman who will
relish being thus rouglily wooed.”
“ Dear father, what have you to offer a woman such as
you have described ? Does this hut resemble the palaces
she has been accustomed to live in ? ”
“ They say that she makes heraelf equally at home
everywhere ; but if she should not like the health and the
freedom of bush life, I am rich enough to give her her
fling in great cities. I shouldn’t wonder, Rose, if I wasn’t
worth a hundred thousand pounds, or even more.”
“ She’ll make you waste all that on her extravagances,
and then she’ll hand you over to the law and consider her-
self well rid of you.”
“ Rose, your jealousy makes you a bird of ill-omen. Do
you think that I could ever love her in the same way as I
do you, or in the same way that I loved your poor mother
either? Ah, Rose, if your mother had but married
me—”
“ Had but— Did she not then marry you ? Oh God 1
am I not your child, your own child? What dreadful
mystery is this you have disclosed ?”
“ Rose, listen to me ! It’s a nasty tale to tell, and I’d
sooner be brought face to face with a dozen traps armed to
the teeth than have the telling of it, but what must be
must be, and I may never have another opportunity.
“ Come, ray dear, don’t blubber,” he continued, though
there were something very like tears in his own eyes as ho
spoke. “ I loved your mother, my lass, but ycur mother
never loved me, that was about the rights of it. She
threw away her affections on an infernal rascal, who,
having won the flower, just pitched it aside for any one
who chose to trample on. He left the poor creature to
want, despair, and abject poverty. Rose, yon were born
out of doors in the bush, in the most dreadl.J stonp of
rain and lightning that I suppose was ever known. Pro-
vidence, or chance, call it which you will, brought me to
the spot just as your poor mother was breathing her last
Squatter Andrew McPherson's baby was the only tiling
that she had to give mo as a dying remembrance ; but
though I hated brats I loved the giver, and swore to her,


ere she closed her eyes, that you should never want bite
tv sup whilst I lived. An old Irishwoman had the cus-
tody of you until you were five years old, from which
time I daresay you can pretty well remember.”
“ Well enough to believe that no real father could ever
have been half so kind. I hope that you love me as
though I was your own child? Now more than ever will
I endeavour to give you the love and obedience of one.”
“You can’t improve, my lass; you can’t improve in
that way, I mean. I wish though, sometimes, that I had
brought you up differently. I’ve given you such little
education as I possessed myself, and perhaps that’ll be
enough to serve your turn, but I needn't have taught
you to hate all the world. You see the world and I have
been at war for ever so many years, and it’s a natural
thing to hate one’s foe, especially a foe that murdered
one’s father and mother. Yes, Rose, my father and
mother were hanged. I never told you so before, but it’s
as well that you should know it now, if only to make you
thankful that you don’t bear the name of Kelly.”
** I’ll never bear any name but that of him who has ever
been a fond and loving parent to one who had no claim
on him as a child,” said Rose, coming round from her side
of the table and throwing herself on her knees before Ned.
“I cannot believe that you are a bad man, because you
have been so good to me; but if other people are not so
wicked as you have always made them out to me to be,
why wage such a cruel and relentless war against them ? ’■*
“ I cannot go into that question now,” said the bush-
ranger, hurriedly. “ Perhaps, after all, the fight won’t
last much longer. I’m pledged to my mates to help them
plunder the next Gold Escort that goes down the road, and
then comes this affair of the countess. Perhaps that’ll end
up my lawless deeds. Stay, though ; there is one debt of
vengeance that will yet remain! 1 have to kill your
mother’s heartless destroyer, like a dog. whenever and
wherever I meet him. I have been searching for him for
fourteen years—your whole life long, in fact; but I’ll find
him yet! Oh, yes, I’ll find him, Rose ! ”
The girl was about to make some reply, in deprecation,
perhaps, of the bushranger’s deadly resolve, when, glanc-
ing round to get at his pipe, the outlaw descried a cloud
af dust, miles away in the distance.
“My telescope, Rose! ” said he, as he sprang with an
oath to his feet.
Rose brought it, aid Ned Kelly peered anxiously
through.
“By thunder! it’s the Gold Escort,” said he. “ Tis a
good twelve miles away yet; nevertheless, there is no
time to lose. On with a high-necked frock and a hat, like
lightning, girl, and away to work the bush telegraph. The
boys are close at hand, though I’ve forbidden them to
come to the hut to worry you, for 1 know that you don’t like
their ways. Kiss me, Rose, and begone. I’ll get out my
trusty armour, for, clad in that, I’m a match for half-a-
dozen men.”
The beautiful Australian girl obeyed, for she knew that
Nod would brook no opposition to his will in a state of
excitement such as he was now labouring under j but she
was very sad at heart as she departed.
CHAPTER VI.
THE BUSHRANGER IN HIS IRON HARNESS.
The first thing that Ned Kelly did when Rose had slipped
out through the door at the back of the hut, was to re-don
his shaggy false board and whiskers ; his next to cut up
about balT-an-ounce of Barrett’s twist, that he carried in a
thick roll in one of his breeches-pockets, and load there-
with a short black cutty pipe
When he had lighted this with a common lucifer anl
puffed it into a red glow, he leisurelj r proceeded to the
other end of the room, and fished forth from under a pile
of dirty, frowsy sacks, two most extraordinary pieces of
defensive armour, to wit, a helmet and & breastplate of
thick unpolished iron.
The cuirass he proceeded to strap on, and thr helm*i
he laid for the present on the rough bush table.
Like that table, both these pieces of armour we in of
his own making.
He had fashioned them out of an old ploughshare, and
as the cuirass covered almost the entire front of his trunk,
so the helmet, when fixed on his head, would meet and
o’erlap it, making him invulnerable save as to legs and
arms, unless he turned his back to his foe, a weakness
that Kelly was not et all likely to be guilty of, for be had
at all events the courage of the lion, if he lacked the
jungle monarch’s magnanimity.
It is difficult to describe the exact appearance of these
two pieces of armour.
They vere heavy and cumbrous, but rifle-bullet proof
There was no attempt at ornament lavished on them, for
they were for use, and not for show.
The helmet had a narrow slit traversing its front to see
through, and in shape was not unlike that worn by the
Knights Templars in olden times.
In lieu of further description, let the reader glance at
them as depicted on our front page, just as they were
sketched by our artist from the originals.
Ned Kelly now looked to his weapons of offence, which
consisted of an American rifle and a pair of long horse-
pistols, with the Tower mark on them.
If this was a romance instead of a true history we should
have made our Ironclad Bushranger more terrible by
arming him with a brace of six-shooters, but we write of
a time when, thanks to Colonel Colt, that weapon was
only just getting known in California, and Dean Adams
hadn’t begun to dream of his now famous single barrel
revolving to six chambers.*
Ned had just loaded his rifle, rested it against the
table, and thrust ono of his pistols down between his left
leg and his boot, when Rose looked in at the window, and
pointing towards the distant road said—
“ It’s not what you’re looking out for, father. They are
only traders’ waggons.”
“ I know that well enough, my girl. But they are
travelling in the van of the gold-escort for safety's sake.
Like the silly moth, you know, who thinks he's all light
as long as he’s near the candle. The troopers and the
gold-cart won’t bo far behind them, and they'll give ’em the
go-by the other side of the Black Forest. That is to say if
I and my mates let ’em,” and Ned smiled grimly.
“ Oh, father, isn't it a sin to rob poor men of their
earnings?” asked Rose.
“It’s no sin, in my case, to rob a rascally government
who robbed my father and mother of life. The diggers have
already been paid their price for the gold. It’s now the
Crown’s ; and the Crown and I are at open war.”
“ Well, father, for heaven’s sake be c»ut ; ~ua. Tins is a
desperate enterprise.”
“ The bigness of the prize more than compensates for
the extra risk, my lass. See what luxuries it will procure
us when we become honest folks. But, Rose, should •
thing happen to me—for there’s a chance about everything
—you need never be a pauper, dependent on the cold
charity of the world. You know where the spoil is planted;
few orphan girls have such a dowry. Don’t stay here, or
the boys may murder you on account of it. Ay, lass, one
or two of them wouldn’t be over-particular. If Ido not
• Revolvers were issued to the Aua'ralian Ponce in 1649.


rsteSK-fe twenty-four hours from the time of my departure,
load yourself with as much as you can easily carry, don
your seediest clothes, and make tracks for Melbourne.”
“ Oh, father, why will you think and talk about such
dismal things?” sobbed Rose.
“ Because you are the only being whom I love, and be-
cause a prudent man prepares for everything said Ned.
laying a hand caressingly on her shoulder.
“/ the only being you love? Then you only teased
me about this countess?”
“No, what I said was true enough- I’m going to win
her for a wife. Bat perhaps the thought ov gaining such a
glorious prize stirs up my pride and vanity more than any
other feelings. A child loves its glittering t \j, but it loves
its mother better. So do I lov? hhis living toy, this Lola
Montez, Countess of Lansli.'. Yi C 'Elly, because she is
beautiful and famous, and s>:icn lly, because a king has
grasped at her in vain. She will be to me what a first uni-
form is to a boy ensign, or the Cross of the Legion of
Honour to the war-worn veteran: but you, Rose, you are
part of my life, a portion of my daily existence, the channel
that carries the life-current to and from my heart, and
without which I should die.”
And as he concluded, the man of blood and iron pressed
the lovely girl whom he had brought up as his child pas-
sionately to hit, neart for a moment, and then thrust her
almost roughly away, to catch up and sling at his back his
trusty rifle.
“Is Marco Polo there?” demanded he. “Not a mo-
ment is to be lost, Rose.”
“Yes, father, he is waiting your going forth as quietly
as though he were a dog. 1 shall follow you at a distance
on Swiftsure, so that if you are worsted and hard-pressed
you can exchange your tired horse for a fresh one.”
“ All right, my "girl, let it be so ; but steer clear of all,
danger, mind.”
“I will father, honour bright, but anything is better
than inaction.”
“ Well, mind what I have told you to do in case I do
not return within twenty-four hours. You have your little
pistols to defend yourself on the road with, in case you
are attacked ; not that you will run much risk if you dress
as 1 have told you. When you get to Melbourne take
respectable lodgings, give out that your father met his
death on the gold-fields, and marry the first honest and
sober young fellow who offers you his hand. Never mind
his being well-to-do if he’s steady and good, for you can
make him rich. You can bring him here, and take away
between you what you were forced to leave behind wdien
you went forth alone. The boys ’ll never find it; no fear
of that. To finish up ivith, your mother’s name was
Casey, and I command you to adopt it as your own if it
haps that you are thrown on your own resources.”
By this time Ned’s second pistol was thrust into his
other boot, and now he put down his pipe, and prepared
to don his helmet.
“ One more kiss, father, ere you do that,” exclaimed
Rose, almost hysterically.
He gave it her, and then, patting her on the back, said
cheerily—
“ Como, pluck up, lass. I’ll be back all right enough,
7 ;rii:g you a beautiful step-mother along with me, ay,
before this time to-morrow.”
And stalking out of the hut with his face now hidden
veneath its iron covering, he mounted Marco Polo, and
without once looking back disappeared in the grim and
sombre shadow oi the bush.
•< Now to ride after and watch over him,” exclaimed
•» oi.a dashed away the unbidden tears with the
dock ot Her hand. “ What a history he has told me of our
two selves Fancy his not being after all my father. I’m
sure I love him as much as though I was really his child.
Ilis father and mother hung, and undeservedly, so he de-
clares. Oh, how dreadful! I wonder when and how he
got his education, for I’m sure he speaks, and has taught
me also to speak very differently from those dreadful men,
Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim. whom he calls his mates. They
often laugh at his fine speech, as they call it. Oh, I wish
he could break away from those men and his present peril-
ous life! And then this countess whom he intends to
capture and bring here, she will add to his danger. Even
Samson was betrayed by a woman ! Oh, bow I know that
I shall hate her !” .
And with this concluding reflection Rose dashed
through the tree-trunks for a few hundred yards, and then
suddenly coming to a halt gave utterance to a shrill and
peculiar whistle.
CIIAFTER VIL
THE GOLD-CAItT AKD ITS CIjASD.
The gold escort and the waggons are meanwhile well on
their road. , , ,
The vehicle that contains the treasure is four-wheeled,
and rough and commonplace enough in appearance. The
driver sits on a high box in front, and tools his unicorn of
horses by aid of his long whip with rare skill. Beside him
is perched a man with a loaded blunderbuss and a brace
of pistols in Ins belt, and the gold is packed in stout,
square, iron-handed boxes, whereon are pamted strange-
looking hieroglyphics known only to the initiated.
There are five thorn and ounces of gold packed away in
those boxes, and the value thereof, is not far off £15,000,
the then price of gold being £2 19s. 6d. per ounce. There
is also in the waggon, £7OO in specie, altogether, a good
haul for our acquaintances the bushrangers, if they only
succeed in making it.
The waggon is preceded, at a smart trot, by a couple
of troopers with carbine on thigh; on each side of the
vehicle ride two with drawn swords, and half-a-dozen
more, also with drawn swords, bring up the rear.
Very different looking fellows were they from the Austra-
lian mounted police of the present day. There was a great
deal more savour of pipe-clay and heel-ball about their
attire. They wore bright blue trousers and tightly-fitting
shell-jackets (padded and puffed out to the nines) of thd
same colour.
These were adorned with red facings, and their
shoulders were decorated with red woollen epaulettes,
whilst their leather stocks were as high, thick, stiff, and
uncomfortable as though they had been iron collars, and
the peaks of their ugly, flat-topped, glazed-leather shakos
came down over their eyes in such a manner that they
could hardly see from under them.
They were armed with sword, carbine, and single-bar-
relled horse-pistol, both the latter weapons being smooth-
bored, of course. Revolvers, as we have said, were still in
the womb of the future.
In this primitive manner seven tons weight of gold had
already been carried down from the different Victorian
diggings to the metropolis, and this though they had not
yet been worked much more than two years.
The day was a glorious one ; the hot wind had departed,
and a delightfully refreshing breeze had taken its place;
afar off the kangaroo bounded over the grassy plains (an
all but extinct animal in those regions now), and some-
times a flock of gorgeously-plumaged parrots or yellow-
crested cockatoos (cock-a-twenties, the modern Free
Selector frequently names them, on account of their depre-
dations) flashed across the scene like a rainbow-hued cloud,
the accompanying screeches being anything but sweet
musii to the ear*


Tlie entire bush seemed to have assumed its bright-
est tints. The southerly buster, whose breaking we
described in a previous chapter, had freshened up t 1 e
grass and laid the dust (for clouds of dust often roll
over Australia’s grassy plains). The vertical, shade-refus-
ing foliage of the gum, peppermint, and shea oak-trees,
looked less olive-hued and sombre than usual, whilst the
emerald fronds and bright yellow blossoms of the golden
wattles were as brilliant to the eye as English laburnums,
and moreover diffused a delightful, though rather oppres-
sive, fragrance through the far.
The only drawbacks to the pleasantness of the travelling
were the bloodthirsty attacks of the mosquitos and bush-
flies; but the troopers, who had been much exhilarated by
a good dinner and copious draughts of stringy-bark and
shandy-gaff at Kyncton, made 1 ght of the assaults of such
puny foes, and were as hiliariously jolly as the lax discipline
of the sendee allowed.
Presently the half-dozen who rode in the rear of the
waggon struck up a song which was very popular with the
Corce about that time
Ths diggers, tley used to a - sail na
With launtirg, as all of you k otv;
When for licences once we were hunUag,
They always called after os, “Joe!”
Yes, they used to call afte,- us, •* Ice ' "
They always revihd us with “Joe J”
And 'twas certain t> render us sjvago
Whenever they shouted out “Joel ”
Ua* that epithet’s nearly explod'd.
The term has received its death blow;
For t’other day, as we came from tie races,
They’d the check to talue us with “Joel"
We twigged vho they ware ca’ling ‘.Too! ’’
We ca lod them for shouting out “Joel”
Wo logged ’em rght off to tie lock-op,
And that s'ewea their cal ing us “ Joe!"
There was a momentary pause, and then a deep, rich
voice took up the air—
lipy for fhese glorious goMoo days!
They will be famed for aje la story;
At hunting ccnes for 1 cm os,
’Tis theie I am in all ray glory.
T’ne tew chums I pul in a 1 right,
To rail 'em I’d jump down a shyser’j
Bnl atr 9o soon makot ail rght,
Aad to one ever is tho wiser.
Sometimes I don an old b'ne fhirt,
Disguise mjself up iik> a digger;
With hands encrusted o'er with dirt,
1 cut a precious cniious figure.
To those who sell grog on the sly,
My visit proves a wholes mo warning;
A nobbier etrong of rum 1 buy.
And send a summons in the morning.
u A libel on the profession!” shouted one of the troopers,
laughingly ; while a second exclaimed—
“ Hullo, Tom Conquest, is it you, lad? Why, where
the d have you been, and where the deuce did you
turn up from ? The inspector has been* in a rare way
about you. What’s your head bandaged up for?”
“ Well, I’ve been under an operation by rather a rough
surgeon, mates.”
“ What for ? I thought you were sound as a rock both
in wind and limb.”
“Was and is are two widely different tenses. I was
hurled down a ninety-feet-deep shaft on Saturday night,
and I was only got out early this morning.”
“ Then you must have had at least a thirty hours’ fast
of it. But how on earth did you escape a broken neck?
You’ve as many lives as a cat, Tom.”
“Ha, ha, ha! do you think so? My last life was pre-
served hi a very unpoetical manner, at all events. I fell
souse into the body of a dead horse, and the softness of
its putridity saved my existence. I wasn’t hungry during
the thirty-five hours that I was below ground, I assure
you. 1 think the aroma of my defunct preserver prevented
Mj {rcling sc. The stink was infernal ”
“ But who threw you in, and who hauled you out, man
alive?” asked a trooper.
“ Well, Ned Kelly, the bushranger,’ and four every bit
as infernal rascals as himself pitched me down the pit, and
as to who drew me cub I’m blest if I know. It was a
couple of diggers whom my cries attracted to the snot.
Directly they had landed me I stank so of defunct horse
that they clapped their hands before their noses and ran
off, rope and all, without even waiting to fcc thanked. 1
walked to the pclice-camp straight away, stripped, washed,
put on my professional jogs, had a big feed, learned hove
long you had started, and came after you. 1 late to be
out of the game when there's any fun going on.”
“ Any fun going on? What do you mean?” queried
three troopers at once.
‘ Why, that I'm a false prophet if the escort isn’t
attacked by the Ironclad Bushranger and his band as it
passes through the Black Forest.”
“ Eh, is that your notion ? On what grounds do you
found the suspicion ? ”
“ In that he visited the gold fields at Forest Creek on
purpose to pick up information as to the day and hour at
which it started, the amount of treasure that it would carry,
and anything else that might be worth the knowing. I
was sitting opposite to him and his two precious pals,
Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, in Mother Maloney’s shanty,
for more than an hour on Saturday night, in the guise of
a drunken new chum, and I watched their every movement.”
“ By George, hadn’t yon better ride forward and report
all this to Sergeant Fortescue ? He rides to the right of
the waggon. This is news and no flics.”
Ay, I think it’s about time now that 1 put him up
to the outlaws’ veiy probable little game,” and Tom
Conquest set spurs to his horse, singing at the top of his
voice as he sped onward at a hard gallop
“ Oh, stupid folks at us may laugh
And i a 1 ua Joe and all that;
What the deuce care we *or diggers’ chaff,
We’re j. ily chaps for all that,
Fur all that and for all that,
V/ ’ve our perquisites an 1 a’l that;
And though we’ve but e>ght tob a day
A tiap’s a man for all that.
Wbst though we have to exercise,
Patrol at i ighl and ail that,
Y7e have the charce to nobblsiig®
At many a tout for all that;
For a J that, and for all that
We got precious fresh fur all that;
And th High wo d > stick up grog tents
A tiap’s a mao for all that."
The gny young trooper looked a very different indiv' 1 >al
now to when we saw him attired as the out-at-eibowl
new chum.
He sat his horse like an English fox-hunter, and, added
to a figure that was a perfect model for a light cavalry
man was a handsome, frank, open face, with clear, well-
cut features, a glossy moustache, and rich brown hair that
Cf vered his head with crisp short curls, like those of a
retriever dog. Tom Conquest, in short, was a young man
of twenty-three, and of a stamp that comrades love
and the girls dote on. In return, Tom doted on the girls.
Sergeant Fortescue greeted his arrival with a warm
welcome, but h:-s face turned grave enough when Tom had
given him all his information.
“Are you hurt too much about the head fer fighting?”
ho asked,
“ Lord love you, no. There’s only a few bits chipped
out here and there, just down to the bone, but not through
a. I’ll fight all the heartier for the smart.”
“I’m glad to hear you say that, for you’re always game
to the backbone in a scrimmage. We will give these cut-
throats pepper for their mustard if they do shew up ay.
the very strongest cayenne,” said the sergeant, cheeril


It seemed strange, the thought of sanguinary strife and
slaughter amid a scene of such peaceful beauty as that
which still surrounded the rapidly-travelling escort; but
that very speed soon brought them to the coniines of the
sombre Black Forest, and Sergeant Fortescue presently
noticed a felled tree lying right across the coach track.
“That looks decidedly fishy,” observed he to Tom
Conquost
CHAPTER VIII.
STICKING DP THE GOLD-CART. A BUSH FIGHT.
Yes, there was decidedly something inexplicable about the
newly-felled tree, for if the gold-cart were to attempt to
round it, at either end, other trees grew so thickly around
that it was doubtful whether it would be able to regain
the track.
“ Hadn’t the driver better pull up whilst we ride forward
to reconnoitre ? ”
It was Tom Conquest who made the suggestion, and
the sergeant fell in with it at once.
“ Pull up your cattle, Pat Feeney. Troopers, sheath
sabres and unsling carbines. Gather round die treasure,
and be on the alert for the word of command,” he shouted,
and then glancing at Tom, they trotted quietly forward.
Simultaneously they leapt their horses over the trunk of
the felled tree, but hardly had the fore hoofs of the
animals dented the ground on the other side than six
flashes of flame and puffs of smoke directly in their front,
neralded the sham crack of as many rifles, and away was
ehred one of Tom’s red woollen epaulettes, whilst the Ser-
geant with a cry fell from the saddle.
“ Never mind me. Think only of the treasure. Tom,
n anybody can lead it and the lads out of this mess you
can. God grant I live to see it done.”
So gasped poor Sergeant Fortescue, through the gushes
of hot black blood that came surging up through his
parted, quivering lips.
Tom saw that he was no tetter than a dead man, and
with a glance of commiseration, for there was no time for
words, he leapt his horse back over the tree and rejoined
his comrades.
“Poor Fortescue’s down, boys, and it’s cur task to
avenge him,” said he. “ Out of your saddles and follow
me. This affair will have to be fought out on foot.”
“ Can’t we fire at ’em over our horses’ backs ? ’’ suggested
<:ome one.
“ No, a tree trunk will stop a bullet, but a horse’s body
wont. The fellows are armed with rifles. That’s plain
ecav.gh by the sharp ring of the discharge. So we must
look well to ourselves, for the Queen can’t afford to lose
a single man this day. The rogues shall only seize the
treasure over my dead body at all events.”
“ All serene, Tom. Wherever you lead we’re the boys
who will follow!”
“ Thanks, friends ; to the ground, then. Our nags can
take care of themselves.”
“ Why not gather in rear of the waggon, Conquest, and
use it as a rampart ?”
“Because the bushrangers, lying down each behind hia
tree, would fire at our legs till we hadn't one amongst the
lot of us left to stand upen. Now, lads, no raoie sug-
gestions. Since lam your leader, I exact implicit obedi-
ence. You all of you understand bush-fighting on foot
There’s a deep gully about a quarter of a mile ahead, and
we must try and drive Kelly and his band towards and
into it; then for the first time dare we show them our
faces. Forward!”
The troopers thereupon made a rush for the nearest
trees, but were received by a volley ere they could get
under cover that stretched two of them lifeless and
wounded a third.
There were only ten of them now, counting the stricken
man.
When each trooper had a stout tree in front of him, how-
ever, he felt more at home, and began to look cut anxi-
ously for the head or shoulder of a foe.
Tom Conquest was well to the front, and within two
yards of him, behind another tree, was his particular chum
Jack Hogan.
“ Jack,” said Tom, “ if I fall the command devolves on
you. Don’t show yourself in that way, man. Aiways take
aim from the right of your trie, for in doing so you
expose a smaller portion of your body to your adversary.
Look out!”
“ Crack!” went Jack Hogan's carbine, but the ball only
sent a strip of bark flying from a tree trunk.
The trooper gave vent to an exclamation of disgust.
“ Never mind, old fellow, better luck next time. Duck
in your twopenny, or that fellow will draw a line on you.
I’ll give you a wrinkle, Jack. Sh ike the powder out of your
cartridge into the barrel, then reverse your ball and drive
it gently home, and lastly ram in the mass of paper atop
of the bullet. You‘ll make more accurate firing that way
and there will be less recoil, and little windage. It’s a
wr nkle that I picked up in the Maori war a couple oi
years ago. Bang!”
An i Tom Couquest’s carbine rang out in turn, whilst s
scream and an imprecation told that hi* bullet at all events,
had found its billet.
( I j be continued.)
THE CELEBRATED MOITEES,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/~
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “>Biack Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea,
Demons of the Sea.
Love and Adventure.
Run away from Home.— A Life of
Adventure.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Million.
The Idol’s Eye. —Adventures In Search
of a Big Diamond.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




The firing now became pretty general. So much so,
Indeed, on the trooper’s side, that Tom had to shout out
to them not to throw a wav their bullets.
“ I wish that follow had an ounce of lead in his tripes,”
exclaimed the leader on the opposite side, the stalwart
and ferocious Ned Kelly, to Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim,
who had for shields the nearest trees to right and left of
him.
‘‘ I never guessed they'd have taken to our tactics. I
thought they'd have charged in amongst the trees on
horseback, and that we’d have picked’em off as easy a i
a, b, c. He’s a hawk of the right breed, who’s leading
’em on.”
“Oh, I feel so faint-hearted. As mild as a sucking-
dove,” moaned Sandy Bill.
“I’ll give yon a dove’s quittance in lead, if you dare to
show an equally while feather,'" hissed Ned Kelly between
nis set teeth. “Toll you what, lads, we’ll retire from
these traps in a half-circle, whose termination will bring
us right upon the gold cart. In the eagerness of the pur-
suit they’ll never notice this.”
“ Aye, that notion does you credit, cappen,” exclaimed
Lanky Jim, exultantly.
“ We will fall back then after each discharge, for then
our smoke will cover us until we gain the next shelter.
That's an Indian ruse, mates.”
The ruse, Indian or no, was put into almost immediate
execution, and the troopers, guessing from the imperfect,
smoke-shrouded view that they obtained of them that
their foes were in full retreat, would have broken cover
and rushed after them but for the restraining shout of
Tom Conquest, who yelled forth :
“ Don’t leave the trees unless you want to be shot down
/ike ’possums. Give a rush for those that the bushrangers
have just left, before they can re-load, and then play at
hide-and-seek with them, as before. They know the game,
or should know it well.”
So one set of trees was exchanged for another, and the
desultory popping whenever a head or shoulder showed
itself was renewed for a little while.
“ Jack Hogan,” called out Tom Conquest, in an under-
tone to his mate, “ when next the bushrangers fall back
we must not push straight forward, but move at an angle
towards the cover they have just quitted. You see, when
an advance is made straightforward towards an enemy, he
has no occasion to alter his aim; whereas, dodging to-
wards him obliges him to take a flying or a difficult shot.
Pass on the order from man to man, but you needn t add
the explanation, for this isn't a time for words."
It was, indeed, no time for words. The combat was
one to the death, and every one felt that, as though in-
stinctively.
The bushrangers knew well enough that they fought
with halters round their necks, and the troopers wore
equally aware, on the other hand, that the outlaws would
show them no quarter if they once succeeded in worsting
them.
Two unpleasant facts soon became evident to the latter ;
firstly, that short-barrelled Government carbines were no
match for the American rifles that Ned Kelly and his men
handled ; and secondly, that the redoubtable freebooter
was almost as good a bushraan as their own leader.
The way they glanced back to select their next stand,
then discharged their pieces, and under cover of the white
emote obliqued and gained it, was a caution to rattle-
snakes, 43 a > American backwoodsman would have ob-
served. In vain Tom Conquest threw a hint in one
direction and a word of advice in another, the carbine
balls would fly wide, whilst the enemies’ bullets told with
deadly effect whenever a trooper’s head was incautiously
exposed for an instant.
“ Jack Hogan, when skirmishing in the scrub, look for
your enemy close to the ground ; but in open bush like
this, higher up,” he muttered to his comrade, as he ob-
lerved how wildly he was firing.
But poor Jack was not allowed the opportunity to follow
his friend’s counsel, for the very next moment, as he popped
his head round his tree-trunk to get a shot at a bash-
ranger, Ned KeUy discharged his rifle, and sent a budet
through it.
Hogan fell dead without a groan, and Tom Conquest
looking round, saw that he had but five men left, whilst
the bushrangers appeared to be almost as numerous as
ever Indeed, they had only passed three of their dead
bodies.
“ We must retreat in turn, we must fall back upon the
gold-cart and defend it to the last gasp, aye, to the last
drop of our blood,” said Tom Conquest.
“ A great deal wiser plan to spring into our saddles and
ride as though the devil were at our heels, to the police-
camp at Curragal for succour,” answered a trooper.
But the half-dozen men were allowed time to do neither
of these two things. .
The bushrangers had either at last grown tired or hide-
and-seek warfare, or else they guessed how their fire had
diminished the number of their foes.
Whichever it was, they made a sudden rush out of
cover, firing as they came on.
Before that discharge three more troopers went down,
and the next instant the three survivors found themselves
surrounded by nine bushrangers.
They drew their swords and defended themselves gal-
lantly, but again regulation steel was no match for tiie
clubbed rifles of their foes.
Down they were felled like ninepins, and brained as they
lay half-stunned on the ground.
Tom Conquest alone managed to effect an escape. He
cut one bushranger down, ran a second through the body,
tripped up a third, and bolted.
Tom was a capital runner, and he made fov the deepest
and darkest part of the bush.
Several shots were discharged after him, but by the
mercy of Providence he escaped them all.
Soon, however, the bushrangers pursued him in a mob.
Dodging out of their view as much as possible behind
the tree-trunks, Tom presently espied a small patch of
scrub, into the midst of which he dived as swiftly as a hare,
there to “ play possum.”
CHAPTER IX.
EINQED IK BT FOES. A DARING ACT OF BRAVADO.
Tom’s place of concealment was in deep shadow, and the
scrub itself was very thick, but when the bushrangers
came on to it and began to beat it with the stocks of
their rifles, the fugitive almost suspended his breathing,
and even closed his eyes lest their glitter should betray
him to his fees.
The man-hunters ended up by firing several shots into
the patch of scrub, and some of these hummed by Tom
Conquest’s ears most unpleasantly close.
Still, however, he made not the slightest stir, and he
was amply rewarded for his forbearance by hearing the
bushrangers presently move away.
No sooner were they gone than the trooper, after first
cautiously looking around him, quitted his place of con-
cealment in turn, and began to move warily through the
forest in their wake, reloading his carbine as he went.
Presently he made a slight detour, and approached the
confines of the bush as near as it was safe to do so, about
five hundred yards to the left of the gold-cart.
As the horses that had drawn it were gone, he conclude !
that the driver and the man with the blunderbuss had long
ago cut the traces and escaped on tliem.
It was not those horses he wanted, however.
He turned from the gold-cart, around which the bnsn-
rangers had already gathered like a swarm of bees, and
casting his gaze across the plain, he saw, quietly feeding
at a little distance away, the chargers of the unfortunate
dead troopers—his own amongst them.
Lying flat on his belly, and wholly concealed from view
by the long grass, he placed a hollowed hand on each side


of his mouth and gave utterance to a long, shrill, and
peculiar whistle
On hearing this, one of the chargers pricked up ears
and, with a joyful neigh, came trotting towards him.
Directly his fine bay horse was alongside of him. Torn
Conquest rose to his feet and flung himself into the saddle.
The robbers were far too busy with the treasure to
take notice of anything so far away.
Tom Ic-Aed undecided what to do for a second or two
after gathering up the rains, then he ejaculated—
“l’m a darned fool for my pains, and doubtless shall
get a bullet through ray head as the sole reward of my folly,
and yet I can’t help it, no, I’m dashed if 1 can.”
As he concluded he drew a large white handkerchief out
of his pocket, and fastened one corner to the top of his
carbine-barrel and the opposite one to the trigger-guard.
Holding this primitive flag of truce aloft he set spurs to
his nag and galloped him gently towards the gold-cart
and its pillagers.
He got within hailing distance before he was perceived,
and then reining short up he shouted to attract attention,
at the same time waving his white flag.
The bushrangers looked round quick enough at this,
and seemed to be altogether astonished at the strange
vision and what it was about.
“ What the d is your lit Lie game? ” suddenly bel-
lowed out one of them.
“ I challenge your cut-throat leader to mortal strife, with
whatever weapons he chooses. Man to man, out here in
the bush, I will fight him to the death.”
The bushrangers greeted this challenge with a shout of
laughter.
“ Look here, you thundering fool,” yelled forth Kelly
himself, “ my cokernut is worth three thousand pounds,
ind yours is not worth as many brass farthings, so I
decline your polite invitation with many thanks. It would
pay you handsomely to kill Ned Kelly, though perhaps
you’d find it no easy task now that he’s got his armour on;
but it wouldn’t benefit Ned a bit to kill twenty of the
likes of you, and he’s a man who never fights unless ‘here’s
money to be made by it. He gets quite enough hard
Knocks in the way of business not to care overmuch to
indulge in them for a pastime.”
“Coward!” cried Tom Conquest, “you arc a brag-
ging poltroon, Kelly.”
“All right, my man; no one wiil believe that charge but
a fool, and what fools choose to credit matters very litcle
to me. Such an insult, however, must not pass unavenged.
Bring me down that chattering magpie, mates.”
Thereat the other bushrangers began to re-handle their
rifles, and Tom Conquest, seeing no fun in remaining
there to become their target, hastily levelled his carbine,
covered Ned Kelly therewith, and pulled the trigger.
He heard the ping of the bullet against some part or
other of the bushranger's iron panoply, and then he
wheeled round, and dashed off at full gallop.
The next instant the bullets were flying around him Kke
hail, but again he was fortunate enough to escape being
struck.
When he judged himself to be out of range, he again
wheeled round, and observing that Ned Kelly was evi-
dently uninjured, he shook his ust at him menacingly, al-
though threatening his destruction at some future time,
and then continued his onward flight.
“ Hey for the police-camp at Curragal,” muttered ha
fiercely to himself; “I may be able to take vengeance on
those infernal villains for the murder of poor Hogan and
my other comrades, before sundown, even yet.”
The bushrangers now lost no time in bringing up their
horses, which had hitherto been piqueted some little
distance away in the forest.
Each horse carried across his shoulders two large and
itrong leather bags attached by a strong strap.
There were thirteen horses in all, and, consequently,
twenty-six of these bags.
The boxes of treasure were quickly taken out of the
gold-cart, and dashed open with repeated blows from th*
butt ends of the rifles.
Then everyone set to work to fill the aforesaid bag*
with th© wealth contained therein, until at length they
were puffed out to their fullest dimensions.
What remained of the treasure the bushrangers crammed
into their pockets and boots, until at last they could
hardly waddle about.
Had a posse of mounted troopers descended upon them
at that juncture they would have fallen easy victims, for
they were as uuwieldly as turtles.
Ned Kelly had laden himself with far less treasure than
any of the others.
“ Now, mates,” said he, when the whole had been ap-
propriated, “ away with our wealth to the secret hiding-
places in the mountain ranges. I shall not accompany
you, as I have further busmess to transact ere I return
home. Take mine and our dead friends’ horses with you,
however, for I will make use of one of the trap’s nags for
my further journey. Plant my share of the spoil along
with your own until I return to the mountain and ask you
for an account. We will be quiet for a few days in our
dens, until the excitement attendant on this affair is some-
what over. It would take an army to find out all our
haunts in the Mount Macedon ranges. Stay ; before you
depart pile the broken boxes in the cart, and set fire to
cart and all. Now then, look lively, my lads.”
The deed was done in a twinkling ; the red flames shot
quiveringly upwards, and then the bushrangers made hasty
tracks for their homes in the mountains, Ned Kelly s steed
and the horses of the dead being led by sundry of the sur-
vivors.
When they had all gone, the ironclal bushranger
rounded in the troopers’ chargers, and selected the best
and strongest of the lot for his own use.
“ I want strength and endurance more than mere speed
on the present occasion,” muttered he to himself, “for I
don t intend to play the runaway game.”
Carefully re-loading his rifle, he slung it at his back,
transferred his pistols from his belt to the holsters,
examined curb-chain and girth, and finally vaulting into
the saddle, trotted gently into the forest defiles.
“ Father!” called to him a voice, as sweet yet clear as
the note of the bell-bird ; but he heard it not, he was so
busy with his own thoughts. He never even glanced in
the direction where sat a young girl on a white horse, her
face every bit as white as it, not more than a hundred
yards to the left of his course.
She would have ridden after him but she dared not, for
a river of blood seemed to flow between them. She never
before had looked upon a scene of slaughter, never before
had beheld the face of a dead man, and three now lay be-
tween her and the being whom she had always loved as a
parent.
But Ned Kelly thought neither of blood nor death. His
reflections were—
“ This night the beautiful Lola Montcz, Countess of
Lansfeldt, shall, instead of a European king, have an
Australian bushranger for a bridegroom.”
CHAPTER X.
BAILING UP COBB’S COACH—A WOMAN’S PLUCK.
Daylight has changed to moonlight, a transformation
effected in less than a quarter of an hour in semi-tropical
Australia.
The heavens have changed from the bu» c
steel to the deepest indigo, and are dotted so thickly with
eturs that our northern skies would seem almost a blank in
comparison. Chief amongst them is the glorious constel-
lation of the Southern Cross, and close to it may be ob-
served that strange patch in the sky which has puzzled all
astronomers to explain, except by the incomprehensible
assertion that it is a void within a void, a yawning chasm
in the midst of emptiness, a literal hole in space. That is
all that can be got out of the astronomers; and, though


the author has gazed wonderingly at that oddly-shaped
sky-patch a thousand times, he can broach no new theory.
How bright that full, large, fair Australian moon is!
The smallest print could be read beneath its rays. It
Hoods hill and plain, bush and scrub, with its soft white
fight, and all the creatures that love the night are up and
about to enjoy it.
The locusts drone like bagpipes out of tune in the tree
branches, and the low, plaintive note of the mopoke, or
Australian cuckoo, is answered by the still more mournful
cry of the wild fowl from some neighbouring swamp, or
the howl of the warrigal, or wild dog, from the deepest
racesses of the bush.
But all these sounds together are eclipsed in mournful-
ness by the rattling of the loose bark against the tree-
trunks, which, where their last year’s clothing has fallen
off, gleam as white as sheeted ghosts on all sides.
Is this a wonderful constellation, or a comet, coming
rushing through the trees with the speed of the very
wind?
No, it is three great lamps marking the three points of a
triangle.
As it approaches nearer a vehicle all ablaze with scarlet
and gold, and in shape not unlike a circus band carriage,
may be descried, drawn by four long, weedy-looking horses
that have the go of the very devil in them.
High up on the raised box sits a tall, slab-sided Yankee,
wearing a soft drab felt hat, at least a yard in height from
the brim, which is almost wide enough to hold a donkey
race on; in his left hand he holds a fistfull of reins, and
in his right grasps a whip fifteen feet long in the lash, with
which he can flick a fljC from off one of the leaders’ ears, or
give a crack as loud as any rifle shot.
But where the deuce is the man driving? Well may
that question be asked, for to the uninitiated there is not
a trace of a road visible.
No, it is all grassy bush; ups and downs, humps and
hollows, felled trees and standing trees, bushes and huge
scattered pieces of bark.
But this is Cobb’s ro/. 1 mail coach, doing its six hun-
dred and nine miles journey between Melbourne and Syd-
ney, and there isn’t one of Cobb’s drivers who would
hesitate to take his gaudy, springless, wide-wheeled and
wholly uncomfortable vehicle over the ruts of an earth-
quake or doAvn the sides of Mont Blanc, if told by his
employers that the thing had to be done.
When the enterprising Cobb first started his Yankee
coaches in Australia he had to battle against some opposi-
tion, but proffering to convey the Government mails to
Ballarat three hours quicker than any other coach pro-
prietor, he was given the chance of doing so.
Most people Ince fast travelling, and so the new Yankee
coach was crowded the first day of its run, but it didn’t
arrive so at the end of its journey. At first it was all very
delightful, but when the metal had been left behind (it
didn’t extend very far in those days), and the driver
evinced a decided inclination to reach his destination much
as the crow flies—that is to say, on the bee-line principle,
with a contemptuous disdain for all intervening obstacles—
even the bravest began to feel nervous, if not absolutely
terrified.
Matters grew worse and worse. First one side of the
coach would fly up in the air and then the other. Next it
would be plunging like a ship in a rough sea, and anon
seem as though ih was contemplating turning a complete
summersault.
“ For goodness sake be careful! ”
Such and many a similar petition was hurled at the
driver’s ears by the passengers, who every minute were being
shaken together, or almost pitched over the sides ; but the
tall-hatted Jehu paid not the slightest attention to their
remonstrances or prayers, so they at last began to
let themselves down over the back, an easy feat enough,
and anyhow better than remaining where they were to be
pitched out and killed,
gttffiof At to say Cobb’s coach reached its destination
without a single passenger aboard, but it won the mail
contract, and has kept it ever since, and now hundreds of
its coaches and thousands of its horses traverse the four
leading colonies of Australia in every direction. People
soon took to travelling by them when they discovered that
accidents seldom or never occurred—indeed, they are so
wide between the wheels that, with the entire absence of
top-hamper, there is little chance of a capsize, except
through a wheel coming off.
But to return to our story.
On comes the particular coach with which nv have to
deal, at a pace of about twelve miles an hour, the wheels
now and then almost shaving a gum-tree trunk, or the end
of a felled shea-oak, as it whizzes along through the moon •
lit bush.
The driver might have followed the new road had he
liked, but he prefers the old route; all the more as the
bush track does not knock his horses’ feet to pieces like
the metal.
Suddenly a dark and mysterious form spurs a big bay
horse out from amongst a neighbouring clump of trees, and
plants himself directly in the coach’s track.
Cries of alarm ring forth from inside the vehicle, and a
passenger who produces a brace of pistols has them forcibly
wrested from him and thrown away; for everyone seems to
know by instinct that that ill-omened vision in front of
them is a bushranger, and the passengers, almost without
an exception, are fearful that the least opposition may anger
the outlaw into butchering them all in cold blood.
“ Bail up, you ! ” (both adjective and sub-
stantive are too blasphemous and disgusting to be printed).
w Bail up, or I’ll put an ounce of lead through your brain-
pan ! ” shouts the stranger to the driver, as he draws a
pistol from his holster.
All right, sirree. Job Fairwcather’s always ready to
yield to a convincing argument such as that there! ” re-
joins the Yankee, coolly; and reining up his cattle he pro-
ceeds to light a big cigar.
The man on horseback now rides slowly up to the coach,
and, as he draws near, the terrified passengers observe his
strange iron head-dress and cuirass.
“ It’s the ironclad bushranger himself,” whispers one in
quavering tones.
' l Yes, it’s that infernal rascal, Kelly, without doubt,”
echoes another.
“ Up with your hands above your heads, every man
Jack of you. Up with them, I say. By thunder, I’ll brain
the man who disobeys my orders. Your pardon, ladies,
don’t be alarmed, your sex protects you from harm, but I
must have your watches and other jewellery as souvenirs
of your charms. Hullo, you with the white choker—l like
a parson for an assistant—just empty those fellows’ pockets
of their contents and hand them to me.”
“ My good man, respect my cloth,” pleaded the clergy-
man, very meekly.
“ You are a lying hound, notwithstanding your cloth,
to call me a good man, when you know well that I’m
about the biggest villain left unhung. Do as I bid you,
or you’ll never patter from a pulpit again. Turn each
pocket inside out that I may be sure you aren’t tricking
me, and if you find anything of an explosive nature in
either of them don’t by accident turn it this way, or by
similar accident the contents of my pistol will get mixed
up with your brains. A wink’s as good as a nod to a blind
horse, you know.”
“ But, I—l’m not a horse,” faltered the hesitating
divine.
“ Well, perhaps ass would be nearer the mark, in your
case, and had I an ass that wouldn’t go, wouldn’t I pistol
him? By heaven, don’t force me to finish the couplet, or
I’ll end it in d unpleasant pantomime ;” and as he
concluded he thrust the muzzle of his weapon within f
couple of inches of the clergyman’s head, who thereupor
yielded to the exigencies of the position.
“ I must turn pickpocket, gentlemen,” said he plaintively
It’s a great disgrace to my cloth ; but necessity has n c


law. Fray allow rne !” and he proceeded to do his work
effectively and well, now and then exclaiming in muffled
monotone, “ For God’s sake, gentlemen, continue to keep
your hands up in th'; air, or the miscreant will murder us
all in cold blood. Do. there’s good fellows.”
The “ good fellows ” did exactly as they were told, for
they had quite a# much objnation to being shot at, as had
the clergyman himself.
When all their valuables had been transferred to the
ironclad bushranger’s pockets, and every one of their own
had been turned inside out, Ned Kelly turned to the
womenkind, of whom there were three aboard the coach,
and said—
“ Now, ladies, I can hardly set the parson to search you,
for I daresay the black cloth that he prides himself on
would blush as scarlet as a soldier’s coat at the mere
thought of such a thing. I trust to your honour, there-
fore, 10 give me all that you have about you. Chains and
watches I know all of you possess, and rings on your
fingers as well. Stay, up with your veils in the first place.
Ned Kelly don’t often look upon a woman’s face.”
Up went two of the veils at once. The third fair one
nesitated.
“ The really beautiful are always modest,” said the
daring outlaw. “Madam, I have heard that you are
partial to kings; won’t you show your fair face to the
Ire nclad King of the Australian bush ?”
" Ah ! you know me !” exclaimed the veiled female, in
a slightly foreign accent, “Well, if you want very much
to see my face, there !”
And so saying, with two of the tiniest hands, she raised
her veil, and revealed a countenance in every way calcu-
lated to enthrall even the most impressionless by its rich,
glowing, voluptuous Southern beauty.
No twin stars that gleamed down from out the indigo-
hued heavens were as bright as those large, dark, melting
orbs, whieh, however, seemed to be equally full of fire.
They were shaded by the longest and silkiest of curved
lashes, and surmounted by the most beautifully-arched of
jetty brows.
Her hair was brushed back from a low, broad forehead,
white and pure as snow. Her features were most delicately
chiselled, her rick, full lips were red and pouting, her chin
charmingly dimpled, her full, rounded throat as fair as
alabaster. She looked a prize worthy indeed of a monarch.
By this time the other women bad banded to the bush-
ranger all their valuables, but he took them mechanically,
and all the while was seemingly unable to avert his gaze
from the enchantress’s face.
“ Lola Montez, Countess of Lansfeldt,” said he, “ your
destiny is to become the wife of Ned Kelly, the King of
the Australian bush. The parson shall marry us at once,
and then I’ll take you right away to your future home in
the mountain ranges. What do you say to my plan,
countess ?”
“ That I haven’t so much as seen your face. How can
I tell whether I shall like you? I have shown you mine ;
’tis but fair that I should behold yours in return.”
“ Well, I don’t know but what it is.” And the bush-
ranger dropped his reins ou his horse’s neck, and raised
his ponderous iron head-dress.
Hardly had be done so, however, when the beautiful
woman (we have her portrait before us whilst we write)
pulled a small pistol from within her sleeve and fired it
point-blank at the bushranger’s face, accompanying the
action with the contemptuous remark—
“ Where seven men sit panic-stricken before a single
villain, 'tis time for a woman to show what she can do.”
Unfortunately, the beautiful specimen of the sex in
question had not done nearly so much as she intended.
The little bullet from her almost toy weapon, instead of
penetrating to the bushranger’s brain, had only shorn off
a portion of his left ear>
Maddened by pain and rage, he hastily redonned his
helmet, and,dashing up to the coach side, hissed between
iiis set teeth—
“ For that act of treachery I won’t marry von at aIL
LolaMontez, Countess of Lansfeldt, and some time almost
Queen of Bavaria, shall become the mate instead of
the wife of the King of the Australian Bush. Come,
quit that d coach for the crupper of my horse on the
instant, ere I force you to obey me with a -rip on one of
those plump arms that’ll leave a livid ring for weeks.”
“ Kufflan, you shall kill me before I will consent to go
with you !”
“By heaven, but you shrill go with me. Now, you men,
keep up those hands, and at the same time keep still. 1
don’t want to ruin the ladies’ dresses with the blood and
brains of any of you, so take care that you don’t drive me
to it. If you stroke ray fur the wrong way by daring to
interfere in this woman’s behalf, I’ll slaughter the whole
biiing of you in cold blood, by George I will. Now,
madam, look lively. I’ve taken an oath to have you,
and by thunder I will, so make no more to do about it.”
He spurred his horse still closer alongside the coach as
he spoke, and grasped her by an arm, but no sooner had
he done so than his hand was slashed across by the keen
blade of an Albacete knife.
“ Tiger cat! ” be yelled, as be let go his clutch, “ throw
that knife away, or I’ll put a bullet through you, beautiful
as an angel though yon are.”
“Do it, ruffian. Better death than to fall alive into the
power of such as you.”
Whether Ned Kelly would have shot her, or whether he
used the threat merely to intimidate the proud and coura-
geous Spanish beauty into yielding to bis will, is a point
that was never decided, for at this critical and highly-
dramatic position of affairs another pistol rang out, and
Ned Kelly wheeled his horse round to confront four well-
mounted men, the foremost of whom held his smoking
weapon still in his grasp.
“Sheer off, my hearties, unless you want me to give
you a swift journey to purgatory,” exclaimed Ned Kelly,
with an oath. “ I don’t suppose you guessed who I was,
only seeing my back, eh ?”
He spoke in sneering accents, but then all in an instant
his tone altered to a shriek of vindictive and triumphant
rage.
“ Squatter M'Pherson as I live ! And so the devil at
last has debvered you into my hands? Take this from the
lover of the girl you murdered, whom you left to die of
want in the bush, you smock-faced scoundrel.”
As be spoke, he transferred his reins to his teeth, and
drawing his pistols from his holsters, fired both point
blank at the squatter.
It was very seldom that Ned Kelly’s bullets didn’t fly
true to their billets, and he was, as a rule, equally handy
with his left hand as with his right; but on the present
occasion the rage and excitement under which he laboured
caused both balls to fly wide, and the next instant two of
those who were with the squatter fired at the bushranger
in turn, and he found to his dismay and chagrin that
a ball had penetrated his right shoulder, depriving him
of all use in that arm, whilst he was more than suspi-
cious, from its rearing, that the other had wounded his
horse.
Not to flee for his very life under such adverse circum-
stances would have been little short of madness, so, setting
spurs to the troop horse, Ned Kelly broke through
the four mounted men, who in vain endeavoured to
lay hands upon him as he passed, and made off into the
bush.
Before they could reload their pistols he was fairly out
of range, and though three out of the number were most
anxious to pursue him, the squatter, their master (for the
others were his stockmen), refused to hear of such a thing,
knowing perhaps that, if they did pursue the bushranger,
all the shots from the long rifle that he carried slung at
his back would, in all probability, be fired at him alone ,
for, strange to say, not one of them had observed that
Ned had been fairly winged in the shoulder.
At any other time the bushranger would have drawn


fein directly he was out of range, to hurl defiance and
threats of future vengeance against those who had worsted
him ; but on the present occasion he was stricken too
sorely to do more than mutter them to himself.
That much he did, however, binding himself by the
most awful mental oaths to kill M'Pherson ere the year
was out, and to possess himself of the lovely Spanish
woman whilst she was on her way back to the colonial
metropolis.
Thus much resolved on, he determined to make his way
back to his bark hut in the ranges with as much speed as
possible.
He soon discovered that the troopers were out, how-
ever, and patrolling in force between the Forest Creek road
and the hills.
He dared not risk running the gauntlet, circumstanced
as he was, and so he struck away to the left and rode
more than a dozen miles to a deserted shepherd’s hut, in
which he thought he would hide for a while.
Alighting from the troop-horse, he started it off, for the
animal's wound was after all a trifling one, and creeping
into the hut sank exhausted in a corner, where he was
almost in an instant covered with ravenous fleas, they
being the usual habitants of such a place.
Meanwhile Cobb’s coach was merrily bowling along
again. To the slab-sided Yankee driver the scene that
had just occurred was almost a weekly one, and he treated
it as one of the ordinary incidents of the road. The pulse
and heart of only one of the travellers beat as calmly as
did his, and they pertained to the beautiful Spaniard,
Lola Montez, Countess of Landsfeldt.
CHAPTER XT.
A squatter’s station and a free-and-easy guest.
Change we the scene to a squatters’ station some dozen
miles to the west of Mount Macedon—a large, rambling,
one-storied weather-board structure, whose roof termi-
nates in a wide, deep verandah, that runs round three
sides ot the building, and is buried beneath the leaves
and blossoms of well-nigh every variety of climbing
plant.
Pretentious structures of stone and brick have long ago
taken the place of these primitive habitations of the
colonial aristocracy, as the squatters indubitably are ; but
they do not harmonise nearly as well with the character-
istics of the surrounding scenery, which requires pictur-
esqueness rather than grandeur for its accompaniments.
That pile of buildings a quarter of a mile away on the
left is the wool-shed and its surrounding stables, barns,
&c., rough structures built of the native woods, roofed-in
with shingles split on the station ; whilst just below, near
the creek, is the sheep-wash. You may see it glistening
beneath the white moonlight; and for the rest behold an
undulating grassy plain, sprinkled singly and in clusters
with trees, with a glimpse of a white post-and rail fence
at intervals; and in an opposite direction Mount Mace-
don, begirt by sombre eucalyptus forests, that mount its
sides and crowd its very summits.
Four or five days have elapsed since the sticking up of
Cobb’s mail, thirteen miles away, by the ironclad bush-
ranger, and the rescue of Lola Montez, the lovely Spanish
adventuress, from his clutches, and now Andrew M'Pher-
•on is at home, where, looking forth from the front of hia
station, he could have exclaimed, with Alexander Selkirk,
that he was monarch of all he surveyed; for his run extended
in that direction for no less a distance than fifteen miles
right away ; and, scattered over that extensive domain, he
can count his horned cattle by thousands and his sheep
by tens of thousands.
Should he not have been a happy man, more especially
as his greatest treasure of all is a daughter who dotes on
him, and who is famed tor her beauty throughout the
entire colony ?
Andrew M Pherson is not a happy man, however. Ho
has three reasons for being otherwise. He mourns the
loss of a wife of whom he was very fond ; his heart has
long been stricken with deep, though unavailing remorse,
for the seduction and afterwards brutal desertion of a
beautiful and innocent girl, whom fifteen years ago he
cast aside (as a child throws away a toy it has grown tired
of) in order to marry that wife; and to these two sources
of grief has lately been added the threat that, for his
heartlessness and brutality in the onr ' Jtance, he is
doomed to perish by the avenger’s steel a bullet within
the year ; and he feels that the ironclad bushranger is the
man of all others most likely to keep his word.
But away with ill-omened forebodings. It is Lily
M‘Pherson’s fifteenth birthday, and the event is com-
memorated by a b dl at Mittagarra.
Friends have come from far and near (to use the latter
relatively, for people living a score of miles apart were
considered near neighbours in Australia in those days),
and this is why the stable-yard is full of traps and bug-
gies ; the stalls of saddle and driving horses ; and the
roomy and well-furnished rooms of guests.
Yes, if the squatter’s mansion of the gold-fever era was
still of wood, he had at all events learnt to furnish it
luxuriously within; and the bullock-drays that brought
up from Melbourne all these new requirements to an arti-
ficial state of existence, also brought wives and daughters
dresses and folderols of the very latest fashion in Coilins-
street.
Thus it is that, at the present joyous assemblage, the
young people can dance to the strains of a ninety-five-
guinea Erard's piano, instead of those of an indifferently-
played fiddle, which would have been the case a few years
before; and thus also it is that the slim and graceful,
albeit delicately-rounded, forms of Australia’s bright-eyed
daughters are arrayed with all the richness, taste, and
elegance that could have been found in a London or Paris
fashionable salon.
Conspicuous amongst them all, ay, as much so as a
stately lily would have been with daisies only for its rivals,
behold our Lily, the daughter of Andrew M'Phersou, and
the sole heiress to all his wealth.
She is attired in simple white ; a soft, clinging Indian
muslin, trimmed with valuable old lace, and her sole orna-
ment is a spray of silver wattle, intermingled with her
golden hair.
There is sufficient of topaz in her eyes, of coral in her
lips, and of pearl in the exquisite texture of her skin for
her to dispense with the real gems, for in her case the
presentment is far more lovely than the reality could be.
Nothing could exceed the whiteness of her smooth and
polished shoulders, save cherry blossom or snow, and
not one of the forty-five thousand varieties of rose is
delicate enough iu its tints for us to compare her cheeks
with.
She was at once a poet’s vision and the bright creature
of a painter's fancy, who has just awakened from a dream
of the bright and blessed habitants of heaven.
To sum up all, she was perfection’s own self in face,
form, smile, voice, and movement.
No name but that of Lily would have suited her, for
she had the lily’s purity, as well as its whiteness and its
sweetness.
And yet, why does she look unhappy to-night?
Is it because she would prefer the respectful homage
and attentions of some of the young “ Cornstalks ” with
whom she has been acquainted from childhood upwards
(in a less fervid clime she would have been but a child
still) to that of the tall, languid, and “ haw-haw ” kind of
swell who seems to have almost wholly monopolised her.
Captain Montague Vavasseur has come out to Australia
“to see what the demmed infernal place is like,” or, at
least, so he himself would have described to one of hia
own sex the reason of his visit.
He had been at Mittagarra for a week.
He had ridden up to the Home Station one evening
and, a perfect stranger, thrown himself on the hospitality
of the squatter as coolly and collectedly as a man with


full purse would enter one of our great London
hotels.
“He had aeard tell of the demined hospitality of the
squatters, and he’d put himself to the inconvenience of
coming up country to see if it had been exaggerated, as
he intended to write a book on the demined country.”
This was very much the manner in which be bad intro-
duced to M/Phersou, and, by way of answer, he
had been tos*i to “mate himself thoroughly at home for
as long as ever he chose to stay;’’which he had done
accordingly, to the very top of his bent.
Captain Montague Vavasseur looked of any age between
thirty and forty.
He was tall and spare, with a long, drooping, tawny
moustache, and curly hair, which was growing thin in places.
“ Demined heavy helmets in the Dragoon Guards—my
corps—make all the fellahs’ heads bald in no time.” Such
was the excuse that he gave for that.
Rut the heavy helmet couldn’t have given him those very
decided crowsfeet about the eyes, which, in conjunction
with the thinning hair and the genially blase manner of
the gallant captain, sufficiently hinted to the close observer
that not only had he sown a plentiful crop of wild oats,
but also reaped tares in abundance.
He had now constituted himself the fair Lily’s shadow.
Could it be that the captain was a mere adventurer, who
had perhaps run through a fortune in the old country, and
then come out to the new one to revenge himself by mar-
rying a squatter millionaire’s daughter?
If so, he had sat down to lay siege to the proper citadel,
at all events. And has he a chance of success?
Let the young lady’s actions answer the question.
See, she escapes from her shadow at last. She, in fact,
sends him away to get her something, and whilst he is
gone slips out of the ballroom (after all, 'tis but a carpet
dance), evades one or two of her girl acquaintances every
bit as skilfully as she had got rid of the captain, and a
minute later leaves the house by means of a long French
window that opens on to the verandah.
No sooner is she out of doors than she looks cautiously
around her, and, feeling convinced that no one is watching
her movements, she speeds through the garden and the
small peach orchard beyond, and three minutes later gains
a post-and-rail fence, where she is immediately clasped in
the arms of & handsome young trooper.
CHAPTER XXL
lily’s meeting with tom conquest.
“ I WAS afraid you would not be able to get away, as you
had a party at your place, and yet I would not have missed
the chance of wishing you many happy returns of your
birthday, Lily darling.”
“ I knew that you would be here, Tom, and I resolved
that you should see me by hook or by crook. Well,
why don’t you compliment me on my appearance, sir?
Don’t you see that 1 am en granite toilette ?”
“ I see that you only want a pair of snowy wings, though
?ot a bit more snowy than your beautiful neck and
ihoulders, to make a complete angel of you, darling,”
exclaimed the young trooper, in tones of intense admi-
ration ; and then he sighed heavily as he added—“ Ah !
Lily, I very much fear that you are so far beyond my reach
as though you really were an angel. There is an awful
gulf between riches and poverty.”
“A gnlf that true love can always bridge over, Tom.”
“ I’m not so sure of that. Your proud father will never
give you to a poor devil of a trooper with a scanty pay
of eight shillings a day ; and until you are twenty-one
you cannot marry me without his consent.”
“ Rut I’m only six years distant from twenty-one, Tom,
and the time will soon pass by. I recollect my ninth
birthday as though ’twere yesterday.”
*• Small consolation to a man who wishes to pluck the
dainty rosebud to be told that he shall have it when it
becomes a full-blown rose.”
“ Will you not love me when I become a woman.
Tom ? ”
“ Yes, but I’d like a lovely girl-wife to commence with.
It’s very hard, Lily, that fate should persecute us in this
manner. Now 1 have tried hard to win the reward offered
for the capture, alive or dead, of Ned Kelly the ironclad
bushranger. O i two occasions I have nearly run him to
earth, but he is as slij p uy as an eel, and has as many lives
as a cat. Tluee thou.-ond pounds would bring in three
hundred a year, which with my pay would keep a nice
little cottage going full swing at Richmond or Sowh
Yarra, without being beholden to your father for assist-
ance. Rut even then his consent would have to be asked.”
“ I would not marry you until it was given, Tom. And
I should so shrink from owing our happiness to blood-
money.”
“ Rut I don’t know bow to get monev any other way.
It’s wifchin the lines of my legitimate employ. I’m bound
down to serve the Queen as a mounted trooper for three
more years, and I can’t desert my Hag, you kn,/,v. If
’twasn’t for that I’d precious soon try the diggings.”
“ Well, Tom, dear, keep up a good heart for I’ll be
true to you through thick and thin. We must trust to
time, and better still to Providence.”
“ Lily I will find out a way to make you mine within a
year or I will go mad. It is horrible to think how near
others can get unto you, and I, who love you more than
life itself, obliged to keep at such a terrible distance. Who
is that tall, pump-shaped fellow who has been mooning
over you the whole evening? lie's spoons on you, ay,
gravy spoons at the very least.”
“ Oh. he’s a guest, a self-invited one, and I don’t like
him in the least. Papa didn’t like him at first, but he has
changed round and been awfully taken up with him the
last few days. He is a Captain Montague Vavasseur, an
Englishman in search of the picturesque, and in my opinion
no end of a humbug as well. Rut how did you learn all
this, Tom? I hope you haven’t been a Mr. Paul Pry?”
“ Is there any harm in regarding one’s pet constellation
or over-bright peculiar star through a telescope, Lily?
No, I haven’t been a Paul Pry; I’ve been a simple as-
tronomer, studying the movements of a heavenly body,
through this tiny but very powerful opera-glass. That
must have been the reason that I saw the fellow mooning so
distinctly. The evening was, I suppose, too warm to have
the curtains drawn.”
“Warm! I call it melting hot, Tom. lam so glad to
get out of the close, stuffy rooms, into the com-
paratively pure air. Rut I must not stay much longer,
or I shall be missed. How still everything is, Tom,
I’ve read of the weather being like this just before an
earthquake.”
“ Happily, darling, we are not subject to such fearful
convulsions of nature in these favoured regions. There’s
a decided hot wind blowing, though. I wonder your
father don’t clear away the trees a little on the north, for
were a bush-fire to spring up in the ranges 1 wouldn’t say
but that a fierce hot wind might not one day bear it on its
wings down upon Mittagarra in a sheet of flame. The
grass too is as dry as tinder to-night. I have even re-
frained from smoking my accustomed pipe, rather than
that the shadow of a danger should menace my adored
one.”
“It is not at all kind of you thus terrifying your adored
one half out of her life,” retorted Lily, with a lauyh. But
though she spoke lightly, yet the rapid rise and fall of her
fair expanded chest, and the sudden flight of the delicate
colour from her cheeks showed plainly enough that tb}
trooper’s words had really alarmed her.
“ Pardon me, darling,” said he, folding her in his
embrace, “ I told you in order that you might givo your
father a hint on the matter. That the station has stood
for fifteen or sixteen years without being so destroyed is
sufficient proof that the danger is not a very serious one ;
yet, nevertheless, to be forewarned is to be forearmed, you
know, and I haven’t known exactly such a season as this


since my arrival in the colony. Why, the creek has
dwindled dc-wn to a chain of pools already.”
“ I’ll put an idea of the possible danger into papa’s
head, Tom. And now good-bye, dear, for I must be
going,” said Lily.
“ First of all, darling, accept the birthday present that
I bought yon the last time that I was down in Melbourne.
A small token of my great affection for you, Lily. Look,
do you like ahem, dearest ?”
And, as he put the question, Tom Conquest suddenly
opened a little red morocco case that he had for some
time held in his hand, and revealed, reposing in their nest
of crimson velvet, fj uair of beautiful opal earrings,
“Oh, the unlni.iiy stones!” exclaimed Lily, as she
clasped her hand:, a;»d heaved her plump and milk-white
shoulders far out of hsr dress. “Oh ! Tom, what made
you buy me them ? Don’t you know that the opal always
blights true love, that, in fact, it is full of evil meanings
and omens?”
“ Let me fling them away, then,” said Tom, though not
without a sigh, for the trinkets represented many a self-
denial extending long months.
Perhaps the young girl read the meaning of that sigh,
and of the somewhat troubled look that accompanied it,
for she suddenly rejoined with a laugh—
“ What a little silly I am to take notice of old women’s
foies, and to pretend to put faith in such ridiculous super-
stitions. They are lovely earrings. I never saw such
sweet opals in my life ; a rainbow would look dull com-
pared with them. I thank you very much for your kind
present, dear Tom, and as a penance for my paining you,
which I can see that 1 have done, 1 will allow you to put
them in my ears.”
“If you think they really are ill-omened stones ”
“ 1 think nothing of the kind, Tom; so please do as I
tell you.”
The amorous and gallant young trooper was nothing loth,
Lily bent towards him over the post-and-rail fence, and
with trembling fingers he affixed the beautiful earrings to
the still more lovely ears.
In doing so their faces came very close together, and to
help stealing a kiss was to Tom a matter of sheer impossi-
bility.
It was received with a scream.
“ Lily, what’s the matter? You are surely not angry
with me ?”
“oi, Tom, I’ve been bitten. It burns. It is some
poisonous thing. Oh, God! there it is again!” and as she
spoke she thrust her hand down inside her very low-bodied
dress, and, from her bosom dragged a hideous, brown,
many-legged centipede.
It was at least nine inches in length, and must have
crept into its last soft, innocent resting-place from a hole
in the topmost rail over ■which the young girl had leant.
With a shriek she now threw it from her, and Tom at
once trampled it under his foot. Then he exclaimed—■
“Is there a doctor amongst your guests? If so, run to
him at once, darling.”
“ Yes, Doctor Roper is there. Do you think that I will
die, Tom ?”
“ No, no ; there is no danger at all when medical at-
tendance is on the spot. Run., dear, run. One kiss, and
away. Never mind the burn. God grant that your beau-
tiful flesh escapes a scar. That is my chief dread.”
So Lily kissed her lover through her tears-of anguish,
and rushed away ; and he, flinging himself into his saddle,
trotted off, muttering—
“ Why did she, after all, accept the opals? It must be
all their doing.”
CHAPTER XIII.
CAPTAiT.t VAVASSEUR OPENS HIS HEART.
Lily M‘Piierson’s re-entry amongst her friends, pale,
tearful, and palpitating, stopped the merrymaking in an
instant.
She was surrounded at once by an anxious circle,
Doctor Roper the foremost of all
“ Off with her to her room at once,’’ said he, directly he
was informed of what had happened. “ One or two of you
girls suck the poison out of the punctures, and be sure
that you don’t swallow it. I’ll be there presently with a
bottle of whisky. Queer medicine, Miss M'Pherson ; but
you’ll have to drink every drop in wine-glass doses within
the hour. What do you think of that?”
But though he put the question, the doctor didn’t wait
to have it answered.
“ M'Pherson, carry your daughter to her room ; her
strength is failing her. Now, young ladies, lose no time ;
away with you ! Get as much poison out of the punctures
as your pretty lips can, and the whisFty will drive out the
rest. Cherries dipped in cream the poetical part of the
operation, and guzzling raw spirits the pi’auueal. 1 know
where the fire-water is kept.”
Within an hour beautiful Lily M'Pherson had drunk a
quart bottle of proof spirit, in wine-glass doses at five
minutes intervals, without feeling it rise in the slightest
degree to her head.
“ Now you’ll do,” said the doctor. “Go to sleep, and
you'll wake up to-morrow morning almost well.”
“ Shall I be scarred at all, Doctor Roper ?” asked Lily,
anxiously.
“ In a month’s time there will not be the slightest mark
of either bite.”
Five minutes later our pure and lovely Lily was fast
asleep.
Supper was immediately served ; but no one seemed to
have much appetite, the gentlemen especially, and directly
it was over there was a general move.
Horses were re-saddled or harnessed to traps and
buggies, good-nights were gravely said, coupled with evi-
dently fervent hopes that Miss MTherson would be well
on the morrow, and then the birthday party broke up and
dispersed in all directions.
The following morning found Lily without a trace of
either inflammation or fever, but nevertheless very weak
and disinclined to get up. She had her breakfast in bed,
and then amused herself with reading for a couple of
hours, the fierce, hot wind meanwhile shaking the window-
frames, and laying a thick deposit of red dust all over her
toilet-table.
About noon her anxious father came to visit her for the
second time.
“ Well, my darling, and how do you feel now ? ” he asked.
“ All right, papa; only weak and tired. Isn't it a
dreadful day without ? ”
“ A regular brv k-ftelder, my dear, as we used to call
them across the border. The thermometer stands at a
hundred and twenty degrees, and the cherries and peaches
are actually roasting and frizzling on the trees. The water
in the creek, too, seems to get lower every hour, and if it
goes on much longer, our loss in sheep and cattle will be
tremendous. I haven’t seen such a summer since my
arrival in the colonies twenty years ago.”
“ I hope there’s no danger of a bush-fire, papa,” said
Lily, uneasily.
“ No, no, my dear. I have enjoined everyone about the
place to be most cautious how they light tires and pipes
out of doors, and to bury broken bottles wherever they
come across one.* But, Lily, I have something more
novel than this kind of thing to talk to you about. I have
received an offer for your hand in marriage, and I’ve very
nearly promised it.”
The beautiful girl felt almost as sharp and acute a pang
as these words fell upon her ears as whes the venomous
centipede had plunged his fangs into her snowy flesli u&e
preceding evening.
“ Oh, papa,” she gasped, “ how terribly abrupt you are.
An offer for my hand. Who can it be from ? ”
* Broken bottles freq,uen‘ly cause bush fires.


“ Captain Montague Vavasseur. The Honourable
Montague Vavasseur, if you like it better, and heir-
apparent to the Earldom of Cassilis. Oh, he has perfectly
convinced me of the truth and correctness of his state-
ments. I shall one day see my darling child an English
countess.”
“ No, you wiL not, papa, at all events if the title is to
be won through Captain Montague Vavasseur. He is
the most brainless puppy that I ever encountered. Of all
men in the world I think I detest him the most.”
“An excellent and infallible symptom that you will
love him in the future. I assure you, Lily, that he is
madly smitten with you, and your mishap last night
brought matters to a crisis. By George! there was no
pacifying the man, even after he was assured that you
were in no earthly danger. When the guests had departed
ne opened his heart to me fully, said that he’d come out to
Australia in order to select a pure and perfect child of
nature for a wife—yes, those were his very words, and
that he had at last discovered the perfection of his high
ideal in you.”
“Very pretty language, papa, I make no doubt. I haven’t
discovered my ideal of perfection in him, however. Papa,
do you want to send me sixteen thousand miles away from
you? ”
“My darling, I am tired and sick of a squatter’s life.
Nothing would please me better than to realise my for-
tune, and return to Europe.”
“ Oh, papa, I would rather die than marry that dreadful
man ! ”
“ Well, I didn’t like him at first, as you well know. It
takes some time to get thoroughly acquainted with some
people’s inner w r orth, and he is a case in point. What
think you? He concealed his rank, because he wished
to be loved for himself alone ! Doesn’t that touch you,
Lily?”
“ No, because it seems to me that he concealed the
only thing that he possibly could be loved for,” rejoined
Lily, contemptuously.
“ My child, don't be so truly nonsensical in your ideas.
1 have set my heart on seeing you a peeress, in allying
my wealth to your husband’s title ; the partnership is not
an unusual one in these days. I shall be thankful when
the moment arrives to turn our backs on Australia for
ever. IV hat with droughts, floods, bush-fires, bushrangers,
and the constant smashing of the Melbourne banks, this
place is not the paradise that some folks make it out to be.
I ve twenty thousand pounds now hid away in my iron
sale, because there’s not a single bank that I can trust
with it.”
“ Well, papa, surely we can make arrangements and go
to Europe without this Captain Montague Vavasseur
being mixed up with it?”
“ Lily, how perverse and obstinate you are. I trust that
this dislike to a marriage with the Honourable Montague
Vavasseur, is not occasioned by any prior and less worthy
attachment! There has been a trooper fellow hovering
about the station all the morning, asking some of our
people how you are. How could he have got to know
that anything was the matter with you, and how would it
concern him in any way ?”
“ It might have been Mr. Conquest, papa, and if it was,
you can’t forget that at one time he was on terms of close
intimacy with the entire family.”
“ Before they ran a mucker. Circumstances alter cases,
Lily. So if this fellow was Tom Conquest the trooper,
remember that your father would rather follow you to
your grave than take you to church to give you away to
a beggarly trap with a pay of eight shillings a day. By-the-
by, you ve never told me yet where you got that centipede-
bite. There are very lew in the house—l haven’t seen one,
in fact, for months. It occurs to me now, that I missed
you for a considerable time during the evening, and heard
more 1 than one of your young friends enquiring after you.”
u Oh, papa, I rushed out of doors to try and get a little
afresh air, it was so stitlingly hot within; and now do
please leave me alone for a little while, for what you have
told me has put me quite in a fever.”
And Lily straightway turned her flushed face to the
wall to avoid all further questioning.
“ Well, think over what I have said as calmly and as
quietly as you can, and endeavour to come to a sensible
decision thereon. You’ve heard the saying that young
people think old people to be fools, but old people know
young people to be so. Thereon pondering, come to the
conclusion that your father knows better what is good for
you than you do yourself, and bend yourself to Lis will as
a dutiful and affectionate child should do.”
And with these words Mr. M‘Pherson quitted the
room.
“I wonder if he noticed the earrings?” thought Lily to
herself; and then she burst out crying, for, though she
loved her father dearly, she was nevertheless not a little
afraid of him also, for he could be a very violent man
when his strong will was persistently thwarted, and on
one occasion, in a fit of ungovernable anger, he had even
lashed his beautiful child with a stock-whip.
“ I’ll be true to you, Tom, as long as mind and flesh
can stand it,” soliloquised Lily to herself as the painful
remembrance of this event occurred to her. “ But, oh !if
papa beats me into marrying this stranger, I’m sure that I
shall give way before very long, for I am such a little
coward, and do dread pain so.”
CHAPTER XIV.
THE BUSHRANGERS AT MITTAGARRA.
An hour or two later the squatter and his guest are sit-
ting under the passiflora-covered verandah of the house,
smoking cigars and drinking cold whisky-and-water.
Captain the Honourable Montague Vavasseur has again
opened his heart to his host, and has received a good deal
of vague encouragement in return, and now both men,
thoroughly satisfied with themselves and with each other,
lean back in their easy, cane-seated armchairs, and, shaded
from the blood-red sun, whose lurid glare quivers over
the yellow-brown plains which stretch away in the distance
far as the eye can reach, busy each with his own thoughts
of the future.
The cigars are smoked out and fresh ones lighted, but
still the castle-building goes on ; in fact, it is too hot to do
much else. Even the cattle lay under tha scant shade of
the gums and iron barks with their tongues lolling out for
lack of water, the birds of the air shelter themselves in
the leafy walks, and nature in a strange unnatural stillness
seemed to be awaiting with hushed awe either an earth-
quake or the blast of the last trump.
All at once, however, there appear upon the scene—one
around either angle of the verandah—a pair of bearded
ruffians clad in ragged blue jumpers open at the dies!,
still more ragged moleskin trousers, blucher boots worn
all out of shape, and battered and weather-stained billy-
cock hats slouched well over their eyes.
The only things bright about them are their eyes ar d
the barrels of the formidable-looking pistols which they
grasp in a threatening manner as they approach.
“ Good gwacious!” exclaimed Captain Montague Vavas-
seur, and in an instant he has slipped in at an open win-
dow and made good his escape—at all events, for the
present.
But the squatter is either slower of movement or else
scorns to avail himself of the same ingenious ruse.
“ Hulloa! you infernal scoundrels, what do you want
here ?” he asked, at the same time picking up the empty
whisky bottle for a weapon.
“ VVe don’t want to hurt anybody. We feels as mild as
lambs, don’t us, Jim? We only dropped in on a little
matter o’ business.”
“I don’t transact business with men who approach me
with arms in their hands. Put up those pistols, and the*
say what you require.”
“We requires to know where our Ceppen is, for one


thing. It’s come to our ears that you and he had a bit
of a shindy t’other night, he by hisself, an’ you with three
to back yer. He aren't turned up since at our usual
rendayvoo, and so we’ve corned to know whether you laid
him by the heels or runned him to earth, or what was the
upshot on it."”
“ If you call Ned Kelly your captain, I’m sorry to say
he got away from us. I imagine he was badly hit, though,
and as he hasn't turned up, I trust that he has died, alone
and untended with an ant-hill for a pillow, in the lone-
liest recesses of the bush, like the wolf that he was.”
“ Well, those are nice compliments to pay our head boss
within the hearing of his two most particular pals. Shall
we put a bullet in his crop to teach him civility to his
betters, eh, Lardy Bill?”
“ Lord! no, Lanky Jim. I feels so soft-hearted, you can’t
think. Which way did our noble capting ride, Mr. McPher-
son, Esquire?”
“ Towards the ranges at first, and then he turned off at
an angle towards the Ten Mile,” answered the squatter,
savagely.
“ Ah, that was to avoid the traps. They was pretty
thick over the lower spurs of the ranges about that time.
The capting’sa’cute un, and I guess we’ll find whereabouts
he have planted his blessed self now. His daughter be in
a rare way about ’im, reg’lar demented like.”
“His daughter? Has the infernal scoundrel a child,
then ?”
“ A \Jopted one, ’tis said. The capting found her a new-
born babby in her dead mother s arms. Long while ago it
must ha’ been, for the gal’s fourteen year old now. if a day.
I've heard tell that the poor woman was trying to find out
some infernal scoundrel of a swell squatter cove, who had
seduced her with promises ov marriage when her time
coined on sudden, an’ that Ned Kelly, riding up as she war
dying ov exposure an’ wet an’ cold, swore that he d be a
father to her little ’un, which he hev bin all along.”
“ This is a strange tale. Did you ever hear the name
of the woman who—who died r 1 if not, what does Kelly
call her child ?” asked the squatter, much paler and more
agitated at the bushranger’s admissions than he had been
x minute before at sight of their levelled pistols.
“ Never heard tell of her mother’s name. Did you,
Lanky Jim?”
“No, nor don’t want to either. Just cut this palaver
short, Lardy Bill.”
“ All right, don't be in a hurry, old ’un. Don’t know
the woman's name, sir. but tire girl goes by that of Hose,
and a handsome, bonny lass she is too, only none of us
dare so much as to cast a hye on her.”
“ Is she tall or short, dark or fair—tell me what she
is like ?”
“ I can’t describe a gal. Perhaps if I was to say she
was a feminine, juvenile, an werry handsome, a flattering
edition of your own self, I’d be drawing the best picter as
is possible. You might stand for her father main well,
and if you was so everyone ’ud see the likeness atwixt
you."
“ Come, stow all this rot. Do you want to keep bar-
neying here until the long-legged cove, as slipped through
the window, brings half-a-dozen of the station hands down
upon us? Come, just you stop it, Lardy Bill. 1 came
to stow the swag, not to yabber yabber about a gal,” and
Lanky Jim tweeked his macaw-bill with angry impatience
as he concluded.
“ Lord love the man! how impatient he is surely. None
of the station hands can be down on us under half-an-
hour, an’ by that time we’ll be far away. Howsoraever,
as short reckonings is said to make long friends, Mr.
’Pherson wll now doubtless conduct us to his iron
safe, inside which a little bird has sung to us that there
are twenty thousand pounds locked up,” and Lardy Bill
bowed ironically.
“Villains! would you rob mo of such an immense
■tewount, even if I had it ?”
“Ay, or double as much D lif money is the
root of all evil, as the parsons preach, you should thank
us for delivering you from it. Anyhow, it s you r go
our lead—one of the two ; and a fortin aren tso much
use to a dead man,” growled Macaw-bill.
Andrew M'Pherson saw that the two men were tho-
roughly in earnest at last, and that it was as much as his
life was worth not to yield to their demands.
“ Come along with me, if it must be so; but as my
daughter is very ill. I will ask you to make no more noise
than necessary,” said he, therefore. _ , ,
And, with a bushranger on each aide of him, he entered
the house. ' . ~,
“ Surely Captain Vavasseur will turn up at the right
moment, and prevent these fellows from decamping with
the spoil,” thought the squatter to himself. “If he’s wise
he’ll thrust a weapon into my hand as well, and then we 11
be able to fight the rascals on equal terms, confound
them !”
To his intense dismay and disgust, Captain \ avasseur
did not turn up, however. .
The men forced him to conduct them to where the iron
chest was, stood over him whilst he unlocked it, and then
helped themselves to all the bank notes and specie that it
contained. _ .
Having done this they forced him down into a chair,
and bound him thereto with the tassels and cords of the
window curtains, and, for their better security, locking the
room door on the outside and taking the key away with
them.
Andrew M'Pherson was in a terrible pucker at the way
in which he had been robbed of so much treasure, andtho
non-appearance of Captain the Honourable Montague
Yavasseur.
“ The man must be a poltroon and a coward,” muttered
he between his set teeth, “to desert a tellow in that
fashion. I’ll tell him a bit of my mind when I next come
across him.”
Hardly had the words escaped his lips when the object
thereof unlocked the door and entered the room, fairly
bristling all over with weapons.
“Well, you're a pretty fellow, and no mistake,” said
the squatter, angrily.
“My dear sir, I rushed where I thought you would
naturally have sped also, to defend to the last drop of my
heart’s blood the threshold of your daughter’s chamber.
As, however, the ruffians approached not, I at last de-
serted my post, and came to seek you. Where are the
ruffians ? ”
“ Far enough off by this time, and my twenty thousand
pounds with them,” growled the squatter. “ Please to
remember, when bushrangers turn up the next time, that
they aren’t a class of fellows who have any design on the
opposite gender, unless, indeed, it happens to be a racing
mare. Pillage is their sole object, confound ’em ! Just
undo me, will you? and I’ll get up another bottle of
whisky. It’s no use pursuing ’em, for they are sure to be
well mounted, and their haunts are not a score of miles
away.
CHAPTER XV.
REVEALS A BREACH OF HONOUR AMONG THIEVES.
If we have made the visit of the bushrangers to Mittagarra
station rather a quiet affair, we have at all events erred on
the side of truth.
Bloodshed seldom or never accompanies such visits,
unless there is some grudge to be satisfied.
The author of this narrative was a visitor at balboa
station at the time it was stuck up by Morgan, who popped
in as quietly one night as though he had been a friend of
the family, requested a good supper to be laid before him,
invited the ladies to play and sing to him, enjoyed a pro-
longed game at chess with his host (moving the piece#
with his left hand whilst he held his revolver in his right),
locked his entertainers in their respective bedrooms, when
the time for retiring came, with a cheerful good-night,


cured vhom up to give him his breakfast at early dawn, and
an hour later rode away on a three-year-old racing colt
worth a thousand guineas, laden with every portable valu-
able about the place.
Of course had opposition been offered affairs would have
turned out very differently, but members of the bushranger
fraternity generally pounce down on a farm or static if at
a time when nr resistance is to be apprehended, and then,
as long as ar-{ allowed to have everything their own
way, tucv a-- .vraiable as a bear when eating honey, es-
pecially alter making a good haul.
On the present occasion Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim rode
way from Mittagarra well pleased with themselves and the
world in general Their horses they had left concealed
in the shrubbery, within a stone s throw of the house, so
that, as M‘Pherson had told Captain Vavasseur, pursuit
(with ! he wooded ranges so close at hand for thorn to fly
to for shelter and concealment) would have been worse
inau useless.
“ A. good job, that,” said Lardy Bill to his mate as they
headed their horses towards the Ten Mile. “A very fine
Haul for the two ov us.”
“ Yes, but not so much when divided between a score,”
granted Jim.
“ And why should it be divided between a score, mate?
We two got the information out of the drunken shepherd
who was knocking down his cheque at ‘ The Bun yip,' 1 and
we two did the whole blessed thing thing ’atween us. so
why should we go blowing about it, and letting all the
world know? ”
“ Lardy Bill, I won’t say as what you Laint sensible in
the abstract, but you forget the capting. He’d precious
soon hev us lynched on to a gum-tree branch if he found
out we was a working on the cross, and not on the share-
an’-share-aliko principle—he would so.”
“ Now that we've feathered our nests so well, why
shouldn’t we ha’ done with the capting, and the other boys
ss well, Lanky Jim? Ten thousand apiece! why, what a
shine we could cut in the old country with such fortins, if
ne could only once get clear away from this blasted land
of hot winds, moskitters, and sandy blight. We could set
up a big pub in Whitechapel and do a roaring trade, my
sye, we could.
*■ Oh there's somethin? so sw«*et in the crib I wa» boro in.
And there’s no hi eg, I’m sure to com.are with it here;
How delightful the cry, • Bug my sprats!’ all the tunning,
And the voice of the potbov »s comes round with the beer.
It here I stop, perhaps I’ll be scragged, there's no knowing—
So to London’s crack fakements I’ll get back again;
And if t but live till the next wassel’s going.
I’ll be off to old England and Petticoat-lane.
“Oh, I’d like to drop in mw to old Barry Pn ter’s.
Where they servo up the ‘slap-bang’ so stunning an<Sbe>—
Oh. could I bat get at those sheeps’ heads and trotters,
Jumping Moses I I’d walk into them like a shut;
I'd satisfy soon tny most craving desires—
Do my penn'orth o' pudding again an 1 a?ain ;
And slip into the fried Ash of old Mother Mjera,
The corpilent Jewess of Petticoat-lane.”
“ Umph ! that’s quite enough of that,” grunted Lanky
Jim, “ You’ve got a woice as ud charm the heart of a
wheelbarrow, Bill; but then you see I ain’t a wheelbarrow,
and what’s more to the pint, I’ve got no taste for poetry
or music. Whilst you’ve been a philandering with the
muses, one or two werry sensible notions has crept into
my pate. I approves ov all your propositions, Bill, an’ you
may consider that motion as carried. But 1 rises now to
make an amendment. Why shouldn’t we add another
three thousand to our present fortin, mate, by selling the
capting to the traps? Answer me that, Bill V”
“ Why, you infernal villin, you vouldn’t surely? And
yet I’m blessed if it’s half'a bad idea, Lanky Jim. The
capting must be a great plague to all honest folks, and so
ve mighli look upon it in the light of a duty as we ewes
to society Society hev bin werry good to us,
Jim, and if you really think as ve could square the
obligation in that manner, why, as an Englishman an’
a Christian ”
“ Stow all thaf vot: ” interrupted Lanky Jim, impa-
tiently. An extra fifteen hundred each aren’t to be
sneezed at. Not but what I subscribes to honour amongst
thieves, as long as it’s observed on all sides- Hut who
first broke the code ? Why, the capting his blessed self.
Vot did he go all alone to bail up the coach for? Why,
it stands to reason, to pocket the whole of the
sttag unbeknown to us. A man who’d serve his pals
in that mean way would betray ’em just as lief. We’lf be
beforehand with him, Lardy Bill, and just cop the reward.”
“Veil, Jim, I’m a soft-hearted chap as can t say no to
a mate, but I wonder where the deuce we are to look for
the capting?”
“Oh, well find him, never fear. It’s a bargain, eh?
No backing out ? ”
“ Criss-cross on it, there! ” and. thrusting a very dirty
finger into his mouth, Lardy Bill marked a cross on hi«
throat with the wet digit, exclaiming—“ Sti’ike me dead
:f I tell a lie, Lanky Jim.”
“ I hat 11 do,” chuckled Macaw-bill. “I know well that
a Lancashire-born man won’t break that oath. We must
get ourselves up as a couple of swagsmen or shearers, mate,
lor it 11 serve no good purpose our being recognised by
either traps or beak, for, though there's a free parding
offered to any members of the band as betrays the capting,
yet it seems to me as it ud be safer to do it in a private
kerpacity ; for, as the public characters that we are, some-
thing might bo remembered agin us, an what we’ve just a-
done might crop up, too, worry awkward.”
“ If anything did crop up to hinder our making imme-
diate tracks out of the cussed country some ov the boys
would assuredly cut our throats for us. I say, Ned sold to
tlm beaks, what’ll become ov the gal ? A tine lass, Jim,
an if I was'but a marrying man ”
“Stow that. Isay, Bill, couldn't we make sommut ont ov
the wench as well ? She knows where all the capting’s
riches is planted, depend on it. She'd pint it out with a
knife at her throat, maybe.”
“It stands ic reason as she would, in course it do, Jim.”
“ Tk;n there’s another augermentation on our riches,
Lardy Bill. When we hev copped the spoil, we must sill
the gal’s throat to stop her tongue wagging.”
“ 1 put’s a veto on that, Jim. I won't have the laaa
injured.”
“ Nonsense, beauty's only skin deep. Her blood’s the
same ot/lovvr as a sheep’s.”
“ I don't care, I won't have a hair of her head injured,
I tell‘you.”
“Then maybe you'll live to regret it, Lardy Bill.” And
Jim at once sank into a dudgeon, as he ever did when he
was crossed in aught.
“Ay, my lad,” he muttered, “I’ll silence the wench
whether you likes or no, when the time comes, and you
dare riot split on your only pal. And when we gets to
England—if we sets up in business together—it strikes
me as one of the pardners will die suddenly one night—
of appleplexy, mebbe—an’ a will will be found leaving all
his property to the tother. Ay, Lardy Bill looks just a
fit subject for appleplexy, an’ I’ll make him carry on at
the brandy-bottle, doctored a bit it maybe, till grim death
carries him off.”
These pleasant reflections beguiled another six miles or
so of the journey, Lardy Bill being sunk in equally deep
thought, when all at once they were recalled to themselves
by a voice hailing them with—
“ Hi, there, mates ! Lanky Jim, Lardy Bill! Hi, there,
I say! ”
Both men at once glanced in the direction of the
A glance was sufficient.
“ It’s the capting ! ” exclaimed both in a breath.
CHAPTER XVt
A SCHEME OF DEVILISH VENGEANCE.
It was indeed Ned Kelly, lying just inside the open door
of the shepherd’s hut, into which he had crawled for
concealment three nights ago.
He looked miserably thin, and hungry and careworn.


“Hullo'i governor, we was a-looking for yon," sang out
Bill, as he and Jim rolled out jf their saddles and led
their horses towards the hut.
“I though that some of you would have been by long
ago. I hid here from the traps the night of the gold escort
robbery.”
“Did you get any tidy pickings aboard Cobb’s mail,
capting ?”
It was Lanky Jim who put the question, and his grey
fishy eye gleamed greedily as he did so.
But Ned Kelly answered him—
“ What 1 dia pick up will be apportioned fairly when I
return amongst you. I’ve not stayed away from our
haunt in the ranges from choice. 1 was wounded in the
attack on the coach, and had to fly for my life. Landed
here, I started off the horse, lest its presence should be-
tray my whereabouts, and when, the following night, I
started off myself to return on foot, I plunged my left leg
into a wombat hole, not a dozen yards away, and gave it
such a wrench that I was glad to creep back here on all
fours.”
*• I say, boss, it’s lucky for you that shepherds and hut-
keepers, stockmen, and station hands in general, have
most of ’em sloped to the diggings,” laughed Lardy Bin.
“ You'd have been nailed, else, to a certainty."
“And as helpless to defend himself as a sucking-babe,”
added Lardy Jim, more to elicit information than audit
else.
“ Not quite that,” said the ironclad bushranger, bending
on his subordinate a keen and searching glance. “ I have
a ball through my right shoulder, but my pistols are both
loaded, and 1 can make as sure of shooting a man with
my left hand as with my right. Eut here, lam answering
questions instead of putting them. When did you last
see my daughter Rose? ”
“This blessed morning, and a worry white Rose she
looked,” answered Bill.
“ I’ll soon restore her colour to her. Thank God she
has not left the Lookout-hut—to, to search for me I
mean, of course. She—she might have come to some
harm if she had. Well, I’m as hungry as a wolf. Roots
and berries don’t fill a man much. Whose run am I on ?
1 don’t know much about this side the ranges. What
station’s that over there ? ”
“ Mittagarra—MTherson’s station,” answered Lardy
Bill. • 3
“ What! Andrew M'Pherson’s ? ” exclaimed Ned Kelly,
with almost a shriek of delight. “Is the infer is the
squatter at home-, mates ? ”
“ How the deuce should we know? ” responded Lanky
Jias, as he bestowed on his accomplice a warning look.
“ You may be sure that he is at home though, for squat-
ters don’t leave their stations at times like these. There’d
be a general sloping of all hands to the diggings if they
kid”
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
Passion. Paris Life at Twenty.
TIE “ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS, 2/-
“ Do you think this hot wind will blow itself out before
night?” was Ned Kelly’s next question, cs, be looked
anxiously and eagerly around.
“ Not much chance of it, I should say, from the sandy
redness on the, sky in the direction that itV coming
from,” rejoined Lardy Bill.
An expression of fierce exultation crossed the haggarf
countenance of the Ironclad Bushranger.
“Nor do I think it will lull,” said he. “Now listen ta
me, Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim. Ride back to our haunt
in the ranges as fast as your nags will carry you, and bid
Rose be of good cheer, for that I will be back to-night.
You needn’t tell her that I am wounded, for it would
only cause her to fret needlessly, poor girl,” and Ned
sighed.
“ Lord bless us, capting, aren’t you a-going to return
with us then?” queried Jim.
“No ; I have other matters to attend to first, One of
you come back with a led horse at ten o’clock to-night to
take me away. Ha, ha, ha! there will be plenty of light
to find!, out the hut by,” and Ned chuckled, grinning to
himself.
“ Not any too much light, capting, for the moon’s on
the wane,” said Bill.
“Well, well, there will be the stars, won’t there?"
answered Ned, his usual caution having by now returned
to him. “ See that you bear in mind all that I have said.
Make it five minutes to ten to be here, and then you are
certain not to be over the hour. I don’t think we are
short of gold watches in the ranges, eh, lads ? For the
present just leave me a fig of tobacco to stay my hunger
and a bos of matches to light my pipe with, and I’ll last
out the day very well; especially as I have pleasant
thoughts to amuse me.”
“May we make so bold as to ax what those pleasant
thoughts are. capting?”
It was Lanky Jim who put the question, but the answer
that he got was one that effectually shut him up,
“ You needn’t snap a fellow’s head off, capting,” he
muttered, apologetically; and, two figs of Barrett’s twist
and a box of lucifers being handed to Ned, the two sub-
ordinates hastened to take their departure, for the Iron-
clad Bushranger knew how to exact implicit obedience
from his men—at all events, whilst they were within
sound of his voice or the sinister glare of his eagle eye.
“ I wonder what’s the natur’ ov the little game that he’s
bent on now?” said Lardy Bill to Lanky Jim, when they’d
got a little distance away.
“ Blessed if I know, and darned if I much care,” re-
torted that worthy. “One thing, he couldn’t be in a
better place for us to sell him to the traps. Keep it dark,
Lardy Bill; keep it dark from the boys, I caution you.”
“No fear of me blabbing. And so you think things
are working round, Jim ?”
(To he continued .)
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Agnes Wdloughby. | Woman.
I he Soiled Dove.
Skittles in Haris, a Biography of 7 116 Bea -utiful Demon.
a lascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. i ... ... ~
Incognita, a Tale of Love and The Lady Wlth the Camelias -




“ Working round ! Why, they hcv worked round
already. Well, bring the trap-* from Curragal up to tlie
hut to-night, But we ll keep ahead on ’em, and settle his
hash before they comes up. Did you notice how the
weather-boards was .<hr',;nk, Bill? We can draw a head-
line on him from the back of ihe hut through a dozen
gaping fissures. You see he’s of the same value dead as
living, an’ dead men can’t split on their pals. We couldn’t
disguise ourselves past Ned Kelly’s recognition, an’ he’d
be wild enough to say anythink about us when once he
knowed as twas we who had sold him. We can easily
tell the Joeys as be let fly at us first.”
“ Lanky Jim. you’re tlie devil’s own godson,” exclaimed
Lardy Bill.
“ If so be as that’s the case, then we’re twins. Brother
Smut. But there mustn’t be any quarrel or disagreement be-
tween pot and kettle in this case. We must force the girl Rose
to disclose where the captiug’s spoil is all hid away afore
we starts on the expedition, for all the gold and jewels
in the world wouldn’t tempt me to trust myself up in
them ranges when once the deed as we contemplates is
done. The boys would skin us alive, or roast us over
slow fires, if once they could lay hands on us. That’s
why we’ll hev to cook the girl’s goose when once we've
forced her to point out where all the swag's planted.
What must be must be.”
“ The gal shan't be hurt, Jim; no, not a hair ov her head.”
“ Pooh-pooh, man ! Don’t be a muddle-head.”
“I won’t have the wench hurt in any way, Jim ; so there.
No, nor insulted either, as much as by a look. It’s bad
enough to make tlie lass a beggar, though her pretty face
is a fortin that neither you nor I can take away, and I
hope as it will get her a rich husband and a good un.
We ll make her take an awful oath not to betray ns, and
if she won’t do that we’ll lock her inside the hut—ay,
and gag her too, if need be ; but nothing more serious-
no, not for worlds.”
Lanky Jim tried to shake Bill’s “cussed stupidity,”
as he phrased it, but all in vain, and so he relapsed into
a surly mood again, nor rediscovered his tongue until they
had reached their home in the ranges.
Meanwhile, Ned Kelly remained in the hut, little guess-
ing that plots were being hatched against his life by the
men in whom he placed almost implicit confidence.
There he lay, gnawing twist tobacco to stay the wild
cravings of his hunger, and all the while gloating over his
anticipated vengeance.
“Ay,” he muttered to himself, “if the north wind but
lasts, as I feel sure that it will, PH roll a sheet of flame
down upon your homestead, Andrew M‘Pherson, that
shall give you and yours a foretaste of hell. If you manage
to escape, it will yet render you a houseless beggar, and
it will take a swift stock-horse to cary you out of its
reach with life. Your flocks and herds will be sure to
fall a prey. Ha, ha, ha ! and I don’t believe there’s more
than one chance in a hundred that anything living except
the birds of air will get clear off, for the conflagration
will rush onward at the rate of fifteen miles an hour at the
very least, if only the hot wind does not lull. Ah, my
girl, the one and only love of my life, even though Andrew
M'Pherson’s victim, you shall be fearfully avenged to-
night, and all the devils in hell shall dance with glee.”
Little did Ned Kelly guess, as he indulged in this rhap-
sody, that she whom he loved, at all events as his own
child, Rose Casey, was at that very instant sheltered at
Mittagurra station.
CHAPTER XVII.
SOSE CASEV A GUEST AT MITTAGARRA.
Return we new to Pose Casey, the adopted child of the
lawless bushranger; to the fair and lovely maiden who,
twenty years later, still looking a mere girl, was destined
to pass as his sister ; wuile lie. in truth an elderly man
of fifty years and upwards, was so wonderful in his strength,
his sprighflmess, in's agility, and Lis disgn.ses that, to the
last moment of his life, ay, even on the scaffold, he was
reported in all the colonial papers to be considerably
under thirty.
Had anyone half-at: hour after he was cut down but
peered into the coffin in which they laid him (a privilege
which was extended only to the author of this narrative
as his captor), he or she might have imagined the pale,
cold corpse lying there to have been the grandfather of the
apparently young man who had been standing in the dock
of the Supreme Court House on trial for his life but a few
short weeks previously.
We must not, however, anticipate. We have only been
tempted to do so to this extent lest they who have read
the report of the trial in the cobimns of the colonial 1
newspaper press, or cheap and inaccurate biographies of
this remarkable man written by those who know nothing;
abouivfum might be disposed to question our data or even
our facts, both of which are indisputable.
It will be remembered that Ned Kelly, on bidding Rose
farewell ere he set forth to attack tlie gold escort and
Cobb’s mail, had commanded her, in case he did not re-
turn to the bark-hut within twenty four houis, to con-
clude that he was either dead or captured, and to make
the best of her way to Melbourne, with as large an amount
of treasure concealed about her person as she could
conveniently carry.
But Rose did not foilow these injunctions. She clung
to the hut day after day, hoping against hope that the
man whom she regarded and loved as a father might yet
return to it and her.
She might not have made up her mind to quit it even when
she did but fora dreadful dream that Lardy Bill and Lanky
Jim broke in upon her when she was asleep, tortured her
by roasting her over a slow, fire until she confessed to
them where Ned’s own share of treasure was planted, and
then barbarously murdered her, so that, as they phrased
it, “ she should have no chance of splitting on them.”
Rose put faith in dreams, for all people are inclined to
be superstitious who live in trackle s wilds or grim and
sombre forests where nature clothes herself with solitude
and her immensity.
She therefore no longer dared to remain alone at the
Lo'ikoul Station , and so, as the glowing sun began to
sink in the west, s e said good-bye to it with many tears,
and made her way towards the plains.
She carried a brace of small loaded pistols, concealed
about her person, and much treasure in gold and unset
jewels as well She was mounted on Swiftsure, and made
up her mind to reach Melbourne, though it was ninety
miles distant, without a halt.
Perhaps there are no horses in the world possessed of
so much hat tom and endurance as those reared in Austra-
lia. Who would think of riding a grass fed beast ninety
miles at a stretch in Englanrl? What English horse, in
1 act, would do it? But such a journey is no uncommon
feat in Australia. When on the lookout for bushrangers,
the author once rode a single nag seventy miles a-day for
five consecutive days, without injuring him in the least
degree 5 but it must be remembereu vhe path was green
turf, and not as Punch't “’Any” has it—“’Orrid ’ard
roads.”
But though Rose Casey intended to make Melbourne'
in a single stage, she was uot destined to do anvtbinsr of
the kind. J °
In fretting about Ned Kelly and her abandoned home
she did not particularly attend to the path that she was
pursuing. The consequence was that she got out of the
lo*er spurs of the ranges at quite a contrary point to that
which she should have done, and so for more than an hour
she essayed to strike the main road in vain.
At each cast that she made she got further and further
afitdd, in fact, and as the hot wind, laden w ,h fine brick-
coloured dust, was still Chpccl y blowing, she soon be
to suffer from thirst.


in vain she struggled against the inconvenienc®, which
*OOn became a positive torture.
Not a creek or a waterhole was to be seen, and so,
catching sight of a white-roofed station, Rose resolved to
ride up to it and ask for water, both for herself and nag,
and to be put in the right direction for Melbourne as well.
What if they did question her? she could make some
evasive reply or plausible excuse for travelling alone at
such an hour, and they would not dare to detain her by
force.
So she galloped Swiftsure past the woolshed and the
dockyard, through the Home Paddock, and right up to
the cockatoo fooce that surrounded the peach orchard and
the little vineyard
She was quietly rounding this when she heard a voice
exclaim—
“ What, is that Annie Martin, and alone? Can it be
possible ?” and at the same moment a slim and graceful
figure, clad in white, came forth from behind a tree and
approached her.
“ I'm not she whom you iraagine lam a stranger and
a lost traveller. I’ve ridden up to beg some water for
myself and horse, and to be put in the right direction for
Melbourne,” answered Rose Casey.
“ You mustn’t go any further to-night, whoever you
are,” said Lily M‘Pherson. ‘‘ You don’t mean to say
that you are travelling down to Melbourne alow f Why,
I declare, you arc a girl no older than myselr, and how
beautiful you are too. I hope you aren't a ghost.”
As darkness was rapidly veiling the scene and such a
lovely and mysterious visitor had never before turned up
in that region at such an hour, Lily’s doubts may be par-
doned.
But Rose Casey put them at rest by saying, “ If I was
a ghost I don’t suppose I should feel thirsty, or be such a
simpleton as to lose my way. No, I’m a fellow-mortal,
and, I’m sure, look much more earthly than you do.”
“Then if you are a mortal you will have to stay at
Mittagarra all night. It will be dark in five minutes, and
there is no moon. You would have to pass through the
Black Forest too, and might be set upon by the Ironclad
Bushranger or some of his band. Come, dear, 1 will go
with you to the stables myself, ayd then take you in to
supper, it will be just ready. You don’t mind sleeping
with me ?”
“Do I mind sleeping with a lovely and kind little
angel? you should ask. But no, I cannot stay. Tis im-
possible, impossible!”
“But what makes you in such a hurry? No trouble
I hope ?”
“Yes, yes, I—l have lost a very dear friend, my only
friend on earth, in fact. That—that is why lam in such
haste to reach Melbourne.”
“ Uh, 1 am so sorry. But do come in. if only for an
hour, for rest and refreshment. lam sure my father will
send one of our stockmen to see you at all events safely
through the forest. How brave you must be to dare to
travefalone of a night. Come, dear, come along. I will
take no refusal. An hour is but a very little while.”
Rose Casey was persuaded. She had never been inside
a rich squatter’s house in her life, nor had she ever been
addressed with words of kindness by one of her own sex.
The situation had its charm and she could not resist it.
“ All right,” she said, “ I’ll stay an hour, if you wish it;
but you must not try to keep me any longer. ’
Lily was over the fence in a twinkling. Her first action
was to grasp Rose’s hand, her next to pat Swiftsure’s
snowy hide.
•• Come along, said sho. “ the stables are close at hand.
I’d call a man to take your horse, but we’ve not too many
about at present, for they’ve nearly all run away to the
diggings. However, I daresay we can manage.”
They did manage very well, and five minutes later Lily
M'Fherson led the lovely brunette (whom she little ima-
gined to ne her half-sister) into the house to present her
to their joint father
At that instant it was that Ned Kelly, far away in the
deserted hut in the bush, struck match after match and
threw them, flaring brightly, in amongst the long dry
grass and the little patches of tea-tree scrub that grew
close up to the unhinged hut door.
The herbage ignited almost immediately, and the
flames began to spread and rush down the hill before
the wind.
In an hour that conflagration would be miles in depth
and breadth, and Ned chuckled to himself at the thought
that every inmate of Mittagarra was doomed by it to a ter-
rible death.
CHAPTER XVIII.
MR. M'niERSON SEES A ©HOST.
Lily M'Pbierson was prepared to witness some surprise
on her father’s part at the arrival of such a visitor at such
an hour, but she was wholly astounded at the manner in
which he did receive her.
The squatter was deep in his weekly Australasian as
they entered the large and sumptuously-furnished dining-
room, and at first he did not look up therefrom ; but as
they drew near ho exclaimed—
“ Well, Lily, I suppose your advent announces supper?”
and, throwing his paper down, he peered up beamingly
through his gold-rimined spectacles.
In an instant his ruddy cheeks blanched to the ashy
whiteness that distinguishes those of a corpse, his lips
parted, his eyes opened to their widest extent, his hands
closed around the arms of his chair with a convulsive
clutch, and he gasped with accents of horror—
“ Lily -Lily ' Great heavens ! do you see that you
are no* eicne * Lily, I say, dc you or do you not see the
than that is clinging to your arm? You have brought the
dead in with you, child; the dead that have been buried
for well-nigh fifteen years. Or—or—is it ray conscience,
that is brew.ng this beautiful yet horrid phantom? If so,
the hour of my "icn fate is near. Lily, do you see any-
thing standing by your side ? ”
“Dear father, what ails you? Yon must have been
asleep in your chair ami had a fearful dream. Nay, you
cannot even yet be wide awake. This youug lady is no
ghost; she is a traveller who has lost her way, and is our
guest for an hour, that is all.”
•‘No, no, no! It may appear so to you, but she looked
just like that before you were bora. It is the ghost of
Rose Casey, and it has come for me,” exclaimed the
squatter, covering his eyes with his hands, and shuddering
with horror.
“ What’s your tatnor’s name, girl? ” asked Rose, sharply,
at this juncture.
“ M'Fherson, Andrew M‘Pherson ; did you not know?”
answered Lily, hardly knowing what she said, for she could
not comprehend the scene at all.
“ I think you'd better tend him. He looks as though
he was going to have a fit,” rejoined Rose, coldly and icily;
and as Lily "flew to her father’s side, her half-sister glided
out of the room just as though she was indeed the ghost
that she had been taken to be.
Arrived at the door she paused, thrust her hand into
her bosom and pulled forth one of her little pistols.
“ Would it not bo a good deed to slay ray mother's
murderer? ” she muttered to herself, between her tightly-
clenched, strong, wiiite teeth ; and for an instant the
squatter’s life really hung in the balance, for the beautiful
barbarian was a dead shot.
Happily, ere her finger could curl around the trigger,
her true woman’s nature asserted itself.
“ I can’t do it,” she half sobbed, and turning round she
tore through the passage and out of the house at the back,
mailing her way direct for the stables.
Before Lily M'Fherson, in her new-born anxiety con
cerniug her father, was even aware of the fact that sue
had quitted the room, Rose was in the saddle again, and
riding rapidly away from the station


She had not slaked her burning thirst, and yet it no
lo nger oppressed her.
She had not the slightest idea how she should discover
the road that led *o Melbourne ; but she thought little of
that either.
Her sole desire was to get as quickly away from the
house that held her mother’s betrayer and murderer as
possible; she felt that she should not be able to breathe
freely till such time as her horse’s hoofs did not even
spurn his land. Oh, her wrath and her hatred were very
bitter!
Suddenly, however, whilst looking around for some
particular beacon or well-known landmark to steer by, she
caught sight of a huge surge of fire, rolling with resist-
less impetus down tne wooded slopes about five miles
away, and bearing directly towards the s\. 'tion.
“ Good God! If none of the station hands are up
and about, and there is no one to give them they
will be lost!” gasped Rose.
For an instant she almost exulted at the fate that
seemed to be rushing down from the ranges upon her
mother’s destroyer and all his flocks and herds and other
worldly possessions.
But then she thought of the beautiful young girl who
had spoken so lovingly to her, and had seemed disposed
to show her so much kindness.
“ Oh, I can’t let her perish without warning. She is
not answerable for the sins that her father committed
before she was born. I will ride back and save her, even
though I lose my own life in the attempt.”
Wheeling Swiftsure round, she lost no time in putting
her humane project into execution.
The horse had had abundance of water, and was
thoroughly refreshed, so that he bore her with the speed
of the wind itself.
There was no time to ride round to the side of the
house, so Rose put her steed at the garden fence, and
thereafter guided him straight across the brilliantly-laid-
out flower beds, reckless of what damage he wrought,
for she knew well that a far more fell destroyer was near
at hand.
And now she had gained the verandah, and was about
to shriek out the name of Lily, when a voice exclaimed
close by—
“ Good gwacious ! what a shock you gave me. Oh my!
I never! ” and Captain Montague Vavasseur rose from
out the depths of a cane armchair, in which he had been
comfortably dozing ’neath the starlight.
“ I want to see Miss Lily instantly. Call her, if you
please.”
“Oh gwacious ! what’s the matter ? Who are you, my
dear ? Oh, weally ! ”
“ Will you do ray bidding, you gaping fool (we have
over and over again declared Rose to be a barbarian), or
must I ride right into tflb house ? ”
“Oh lor’! oh lor'! here’s a go ! You are a female
bushranger, I do believe. Help! Murder! Fire! Miss
Lily ! Fire! Murder ! Help ! ”
“ That’ll do,” said Rose, “ that’ll soon bring her. Go
on ! go on !”
But the gallant captain, instead of going on, ran off.
He darted backwards through an open French window,
umch as he had done on the occasion of the visit of Lardy
Bill and Lanky Jim, and disappeared.
So Rose now began to scream out the name of Lily with
all the strength of her lungs, at the same time giving the
information as to whereabouts she was to be found.
To her intense relief, she presently heard the swift
pattering of f«et. and the next instant her half-sister was
by her side
“ Spring up behind me on Swiftsure,” said Rose, ex-
citedly “ Ask me not why or wherefore, but do as I bid
you. Not a moment is to be lost ”
“No, no v answered Lily; “ I cannot leave my father.
Somehow or other, you have frightened him. He is ill.
I cannot make it out 1 can make nothimj out You have
brought some dreadful horror or mystery beneath oni
happy roof Oh, heaven ! what can it all mean ?
“Lily, this is no time for explanations- 1 want to ><aye
your life ; do not, by delay, render it impossible. A bush-
fire is rushing down on the station From the ranges. It
you are short of hands you can’t drive the fire-plough, and
so stop its advance. The conflagration, when it once
reaches the grassy plains, will speed on at the rate of
twenty miles an hour before this fierce north wind. Lily,
I hate your name and race, and not without reason, but I
love you, and would fain save you, if you will give me
but the chance. So, for heaven’s sake, come !”^
“What, and leave my dear father behind? Never!
Away you ! and fear not but that we will follow close be-
hind. Away, away ! We will to the stables at once 5 we
have horses enough for all. Good-bye—go, go!”
“ Swear to me first that you will be in the saddle in five
minutes.”
«I dn swear it. But why will you think of me more
than of yourself?”
Rose made no answer except, “ Remember your oath
and wheeling her horse round again, crossed the garden,
leapt the fence, and stretched out across the plain, lighted
op way by the red glare of the conflagration.
She glanced back and was thunderstruck at the headway
that the bush-fire had already made.
A dense, lurid smoke spread like a sombre canojv,
abrve the blazing bush. Huge trees, like gigantic funnel
of steam engines, were belching forth flames thirty, fort#
and even fifty feet in height, which waved and curled iu
the wind like the flaunting banners of the dusky legion
of hell.
Already horses and cattle, frightened by the glare and
roar of the conflagration that was yet miles away, tore
across the plains with neighs and bellowings, whilst thy
poor stupid sheep gathered together in flocks and stare*
stolidly at the advancing destroyer.
“Oh, God ! ” thought Rose, “ will she escape in time’.
And yet,” she added fiercely, “what is she to me or I to
her? I was a fool for my pains. Let her perish with
her father, and the fool new-chum who ran away from
me, and who doubtless she intends to marry.”
CHAPTER XIX.
THE FLIGHT FROM MITTAGAURA.—THE PURSUIT OF A
FIRE-KING,
And now the big bell that is commonly used by the coo*
to call all hands to dinner is tolling for dear life.
Vain its iron alarum, for the down- swooping fire want*
no herald of i»s approach.
From the huts tumble the men, all making for the stables,
whilst already through the swamp of the nome-paddock
gallop the station-horses, with Jumbo, the black bov,
shouting and cracking his stock-whip incessantly in the.,,
rear.
There was “ mounting in hot haste ” indeed, whilst the
eagle-hawks fluttered and circbd and indulged in harsh
and discordant screams of terror high overhead, and lower
down flying foxes, singly and in pairs, beat their forked,
leathery pinions, and with mouse-like squeaks steered
southward, with little thought of the nectarine and peach
orchards that are the scene of their usu 1 nightly feasts
and gambols.
“ Can anything be done, sir? ” asks the station overseer,
as he touches the brim cf his sun-tanned cabbage-tree hat
to his master.
“ No; we are not enough of us. Let us think of oui
lives and our lives only It would be madness to attempt
anything more,” answered the squatter gravely “Stay,
don’t forget to let the poor dogs loose. -
“ Jackson, Jones, Jumbo, my horse, you knaves! Why
the devil don’t you bring mo out my horse ? ” screams
Capt. Montague Vavasseur, at this juncture putting in an
appearance, with a very pale face and excited mien. •* i
want my nag at once my men ! ’


“Jack’s a? good as his master in a case like this. Vavas-
our,’’ said the squatter, somewhat sternly. “ Tis each
for himself, and God for us all. You know where your
horse is stalled as well as anyone. Now, Lily, my dear,
you must ride Sheetanchor and I’ll take Yon Yangs. Don’t
be frightened, there is no great danger, I assure you, at
all events for you. For me, perhaps, who have had a
warning from the spirit world—-ah! ”
And Andrew MPherson, who had muttered the final
remark in an undertone to himself, shivered as he thought
of his late visitant, whose wonderful likeness to her dead
mother at the same age had caused the squatter to regard
her, especially now, as having been her ghost.
But now everyone belonging to the station, womankind
and all, are in the saddle.
_ “ Come on! ” shouts Jack Fowler, a dandy young stock-
rider, as he gives a crack with his whip as loud as any rifle
shot. “We’ve plenty of light to steer by, so the devil
take the hindmost, as I think there’s every probability that
he will on this occasion.”
And away go the fugitives at breakneck speed through
the bush, following the reckless and well-mounted Jack
Fowler as best they can, and stringing out like British
fox-hunters.
“ Steady, my lads, steady! it’s no use bursting our beasts
early in the flight. We shall want all their strength, wind,
and endurance later on,” cried out the squatter, warningly,
and then he turned to Lily to cheer her up, and assure her
that there was no real danger.
She could tell otherwise by the blanched and haggard
look of her father’s face ; but she pretended to be°com-
forted, for she was as brave as she was beautiful; and, in
truth, she did not look a quarter so scared as did Captain
Montague Yavasseur, who rode on her left, and who could
ejaculate nothing but, “Demined country!” which he did
continuously.
Already the heat of the conflagration could be felt,
though it was still a good two-and-a-half miles in their rear.
Already the enrolling smoke had blotted out the indigo-
hued heavens and all its gleaming stars, whilst sparks
quivered in their stead amidst the sulphurous canopy—
quivered and twinkled and perished in countless myriads.
Around, all was horror and confusion ; the sheep were
clustering in larger and larger groups, facing and stamping
at the roaring flames, as though thus they could intimidate
tk'em from further approach; whilst the panic-stricken
and more rational cattle, amidst a perfect tempest of
bellowing, were pouring in long lines into the flats, and
rushing along them, instinct-led, towards the nearest creek.
Here and there, half-wild horses were pursuing the same
wild course, whilst kangaroos “bumped, bumped, bumped”
a dozen feet at each leap across the plains, and wild dogs,
red as foxes and ravenous as wolves, scudded past the
fleecy flocks, for once in their lives without the slightest
wish to rend and tear and devour their best-beloved of
spoil.
Oh, the horror of their bowlings as they tore along !
the wailings of the damned could not have been more
awful.
Lily shuddered and glanced back over her shoulder.
What was that that she beheld? A huge fiery serpent
hundreds of yards in length, rushing madly through space !
The luminous monster stole on, zig jagging through the grass
towards the devoted station as though sentient with life.
“ It’s the brush fence,” explains the squatter hoarsely,
and even while he speaks it spreads abroad amongst the
grass, advances in the changed form of a sheet of flame,
leaps upon its prey, rears its gorgeous crest above the
roof and even the topmost chimney, sweeps in at every
window, shoots up a mimic volcano through the shingled
roof, and in a couple of minutes Lily beholds her child-
hood’s home reduced to a heap of smouldering ashes.
But there is no time to shed weak, sentimental tears.
The horrible foe is too near.
CHAPTER XX.
The rush and roar of his advance are now so loud that
they absorb all other sounds.
The conflagration is at present four miles wide and
nearly six deep. The brush fences will, in fact, in some
directions carry it forty or fifty miles before it can re-
ceive a check.
Straight ahead, towards a wide gully with a creek
brattling along its bottom, seems to be the only possible
avenue of escape, and that haven of refuge is still a dozen
miles distant.
Even if the creek is reduced to a string of waterholes
the flames will not be able to leap across the wide chasm
that, during the countless ages, its wintry floods have
worn in the soft alluvial soil, and in its depths there will
be coolness and moisture and safety.
How much all three are required none but those can
guess who have been placed in a like position.
Already is the hair of the fugitives beginning to crisp
on their heads, their throats are too dry for speech, and
the horses, despite the heat and the rate at which they are
being pressed forward, are as dry as at starting, the sweat
having been absorbed by the intense heat of the atmos-
phere. Now, too, their tongues begin to 101 l out, their
gallop is not so steady as it was, their eyeballs seem to be
starting half out of their sockets, and frequently they utter
shrill neighs of terror.
Now and then Andrew M‘Pherson still attempts to com-
fort and encourage, as best he can, his beautiful child,
though he cannot even be sure that she hears him above
the roar, ay, almost shriek, of the flames.
Captain Yavasseur has shot ahead long ago, and can no
longer be seen. Indeed, presently the smoke grows so
thick and dense that it seems as though earth had been
left behind and they were winging an aerial flight through
dim and lurid clouds.
God of heaven! is the fire heading them ?
On either hand now they can hear the crackling of the
flames, as well as in their rear.
Yes, the dimly-seen trees spout smoke and fire, and
seem to change to columns of red-hot gleaming iron.
A minute or two later and these bush giants, still
spouting cataracts of flame, begin to fall about and
around them, filling the smoky air with sparks and hot
ashes.
Suddenly Lily loses sight of her father.
She looks wildly around but sees him not.
She tries to cry out, but her parched throat refuses to
utter an articulate sound, and all the while crash ! crash 1
crash ! come down the trees around her, happily in this
part of the run growing singly and at some little distance
apart.
Ah ! a shriek from her horse—for horses can shriek
under the influence of either pain or terror. A wave of
fire flows beneath them, reaching, however, hardly to his
knees, and in an instant past; but he falls writhing on the
scorched and blackened plain, struggles to rise, falls again,
and this time a huge flaring bough hurtles through the
air, and comes down across his neck and shoulders, pinning
him to the earth for ever.
Happily in his first fall Lily was hurled out of the saddle,
clear of his frantic and agonised struggles, and there
she still lies, witc a thick rain of ashes descending
upon her, when a horseman, clad in some kind of a uni-
form, draws rein by her side.
NED KELLY BETRAYED AND CAPTUBSD.
All this while Ned Kelly, the ironclad bushranger, lay
in the deserted shepherd’s hut at the head of the Mitta-
garra Run, up in the ranges, rejoicing in the havoc and
destruction he had wrought.
There was no chance of the fiery avenger recouing on
himself as long as the wind continued in its present
quarter; and did he not presently expect Lardy Bill and
Lanky Jim with his horse ?”
Little did he guess, whilst he was so ruthlessly rejoicing
over the too probable destruction of Mittagarra and a]


who were beneath its roof, that perils quite as imminent
threatened himself.
now, whilst he laughs and chuckles like a fiend or
s maniac, or a strong mixture of both, at the awful fate to
which he has doomed the man whom he hates, and all
belonging to him, his treacherous accomplices in a thou-
sand villainies, Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, attired as
shepherds, are creeping through the tea-tree scrub
towards the back of the hut iu order to shoot him down
and sell hi? dead body to the police.
The police themselves are close at hand and watching
the movements of the two seeming shepherds keenly, for
they are not quite convinced that the whole affair may
not be a plant to lead them into a very death-trap, and
that the hut towards which the two informers are stealing
may not hold a dozen hale armed and vengeful bush-
rangers instead of one wounded and almost helpless one.
Carefully and very cautiously, tor the two slinking
jackals are in heart mortally afraid of the wounded tiger,
Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim approach th*» rear of the hut,
gun in hand.
“Oh, I feel so suit-hearted—mild as a sucking-dove!
Don’t you, Jim? ”
“No, I don’t; and It you experiences such darned com-
mon-place sentiments, why the d don’t you leave the
deed and its reward to me ? ”
“ Because, since he has to be shot, a brace ov bullets in
his vitals won’t hurt him much more nor one ; and, besides,
you forgets the debt as 1 owes to society along ov him,”
retorts Lardy Bill, anxiously.
No fear is there of the conversation being overheard,
with the roar of the conflagration so near at hand. How-
ever, it is prolonged no further, and both the rascals now
creep towards the hut in silence.
Presently they reach it, point the muzzles of their pieces
through two of the many fissures between the gaping
weather-boards, cover their victim as he lies on the ground,
almost rolling in his fierce joy at the too probable destruc-
tion of the maagainst whom, for fourteen years, he has
borne such an inveterate hate, and almost simultaneously
•discharge their guns fairly at his head.
Ah ! only the caps explode, and it is just the same with
the second barrels.
“ Treachery has been at work, the police have drawn
the charges, so that we should have no part in the taking
of him, and that they might cop the whole reward ! ”
hissed Lanky Jim in Lardy Bill’s ear. “ But d ’em,
we’ll foil ’em yet. Quick, Bill! let us dash round to the
front and beat his skull in before they can come up! ”
“Ob, Lord! I feel far too soft-hearted. He’s got his
revolver, and we’re blowed on. If the traps do us out ov
the reward, they’ll leave us the gallows for our pains. I
don’t want any further proof of their ill will. I—l’m a-
going to slope, and I hope as you’ll have the sense to
■follow me.”
And. turning round, he dashed away at the top of his
speed, followed, after only a moment’s hesitation, by the
Macaw-beak,
Ned Kelly, with the roar of the flames in bis ears, and
the blood lust against Andrew MTherson in his heart, had
■not even heard the snapping of the four percussion-caps
so close behind him.
Neither did he hear the scuddering away of his two
faithless allies, or the stealthy advance of the police in
their stead, until the latter rushed into the hut tn n.anse
and threw themselves upon him.
His left hand had almost clutched a pistol as it lay on
the ground near at hand, when one of the troopers kicked
it out of his reach ; and, though he struggled as despe-
rately as he could considering the nature of his hurts, he
was soon overcome and bound securely.
With a bitter oath he demanded to know by whom he
had been betrayed, for he felt convinced that he had not
sheen discovered by chance.
“Two shepherds brought us the information—leastways,
they said that they were shepherds, though some of us had
NED KELLY.
our doubts on the point Have you a coupL of choice
acquaintances with peculiarly-shaped noses —one Hat ami
broken at the bridge, and the otlur for all the world like
a cockatoo’s bill? ” asked a sergeant.
The expression of the ironclad bushranger’s counten-
ance was terrible to behold as the trooper made this
explanation.
lie had put more confidence in those two men than in
any others of his band, and now they were revealed to
him as the worst of traitors and sneaks.
“ You can easily have your revenge.” said another
trooper. “ They have given us the slip now but doubt-
less you can tell us where they are to be found. If
through your assistance we can capture them, I think I
may offer you the satisfaction of having one hung on
either side of you.”
“ I cannot betray their haunts without at the same time
betraying that of others who may be true and faithful to
me. Besides, I prefer wreaking personal vengeance. Take
me where you will, and lock me up where you like, yet I
will escape, and kill those two men by tortures such as
have never yet been dreamed of. As for hanging ! Ila,
ha, ha! the hemp has not yet been ).-anted that is des-
tined to make a rope for my neck. No, no, of that you
may take your oath.”
And, having thus delivered himself, Ned Kelly re’apsed
into sullen silence. Not another word could be got out
of him for the present.
So a horse was brought up and he was lifted on to its
back, and his ankles secured by a strong rope under its
belly.
Then the half-dozen troopers mounted in turn, and closed
in around him, carbine on thigh and quite ready to shoot
him through the head should he make the slightest attempt
at escape.
Ned Kelly smiled grimly.
“I don’t object to all this,” said be, “for I want a little
nursing and doctors’ treatment badly enough. I had a
bullet driven clean through my shoulder rbe other night,
and a police surgeon is just the man to put me to rights
and set me up for work again. Directly he has done this
I shall wish you good-bye and be off again to the ranges.”
“ I say, Ned, where did you pick up your fine speech ?”
asked a trooper.
“ I had the honour of being educated by an Oxford
8.A.”
“ Ha, ha, ha, ha! at Oxford University in old England,
Ned?”
“No, at a Government Establishment in Hobart Town,
called The Tench. My worthy preceptor had been sent
out because, in a momentary fit of forgetfulness, he signed
another man’s name instead of his own to some money
security or other. Hard, wasn’t it? He took a mortal
fancy to me, the old bloke did, and made me something
more of a scholar than perhaps you even imagine.”
“It’s a pity you haven’t put your learning to better
account, Ned,” said the sergeant, gruffly. “Thunder
take that fire,” he added, “what a round we’ll have to
make owing to it. How the deuce did it break out i
wonder? Is it any of your infernal devilry, Ned Kelly,
eh?"
“Yes, I wanted to roast out Squatter MT’herson, and
I guess I’ve about done it,” answered Ned, with a
demoniac and reckless laugh.
“ Roasted out M'Pherson ? Had you any down oa
him then ?”
“ I've been seeking Ws destruction for fourteen years
and a month.”
“ Umph ! you don’t generally leave your debts of hatred
unpaid so long. I suppose you didn’t care how many
innocent people, who had never done you even a fancied
injury, you destroyed with him.”
“ Devil a fear, as long as he went along with them.
When a city is bombarded the innocent women and
children have to take their chance of hurt. This is a
similar case. Who serves old Blazes must beware of


scorched fingers,” and with another reckless Ned
Kelly grew sulky once more.
Not another word in fact could be got out of him until
they arrived at a bush township just on the other side of
the Black Forest, where, on gaining the police-camp, he
was unlashed, taken down off his horse, and locked up in
one of the ceils, where he was given a good supper, where,
moreover, a surgeon came and dressed his wound, by no
means a dangerous one, as the bullet had gone clean
through him, making only a flesh wound.
CHAPTER XXL
RII>E FOR LIFE.— SURROUNDED BT FLAME.
Lily M'Pherson no sooner felt herself lifted off the
ground, and placed in front of someone on a great, strong,
proudly-stepping horse, than she wailed firth the one
word, “ Father! ” and then fainted dead away.
“ Thank heaven for that! ” exclaimed Tom Conquest
the trooper, for it was he. “The two of them I could
not have saved, yet it’s ten to one that she’d have had it
so or neither, if she had maintained her senses; so it’s
just as it should be.”
He strained the unconscious girl to his breast as he thus
soliloquised, at the same time pressing his lips to the
floating masses of her hair; albeit, instead of the “per-
fumed tresses that novelists are so fond of describing,
it smelt most abominably of fire and sulphur.
Then, surrounded by crashing branches, blazing bark,
and sudden whirls of yellow flame, that would continually
play and crackle about him from some sappy fern, shel-
tering Lily’s face from the intense heat as best he could,
whilst he felt his own cracking and blistering, and his
eyes apparently changing into balls of solid tire within his
head, dauntless Tom Conquest strove his utmost to get
out of the fix into which his love for the fair girl, whom
he dimly hoped to save, had gotten him.
And whilst he pushed resolutely on in the direction
that resembled a raging hell more than anything else,
Tom could not help reflecting to himself, uncharitable as
it was to do so at such a time, that in all probability Lily
was now an orphan, and all obstacles to their union
removed by the fact, for, not a couple of minutes ere he
had rescued her. he had ridden past her father lying .appa-
rently dead in the middle of a patoh of blackened sward,
himself almost as black as it.
1 om struggled to quell such thoughts as quickly as they
occurred to him, but though a man may combat evil
deeds, uncharitable or wicked reflections are far more diffi-
cult to overcome, and ’twas so in the present instance.
But much danger and peril had yet to be encountered,
and the trooper now began to centre all his thoughts
upon the present.
It was almost impossible to decide in what way to
lead, and so he determined to leave it in great mea-
sure to the instinct of his charger.
Often he felt as though he must fall from his saddle,
which he could net but think began to feel crisp beneath him.
The wind every now and then roared and shrieked
through the burning waste, carrying with it dense clouds
of ashes that obscured everything to the darkness of mid-
night.
On these occasions he was obliged to pull sharp up,
os even his charger's head was hidden from his view.
Several times he almost despaired of escape, for still occa-
sionally a tree fell crashing near them, and frequently in
the murky gloom they could almost stumble on to a seem-
ing pillar of fire that lay hissing and sputtering across
their track. Then too the heavily-laden horse would often
tread on spots where the fire had crept into the earth
along the rotten roots of trees, burning his feet and fet-
locks and covering himself and double burden with red-
hot ashes as he struggled out.
All at once—crowning catastrophe at such a time and
place —the horse summed his fore fetlock in extricating
fcuraself from one of these holes, and went dead lame.
Tom Conquest dismounted and lifted Lily MTherson
also to the ground.
She seemed to be showing some faint signs of recover-
ing from her swoon, and he had begun to feel that his own
senses were on the point of leaving him in turn, when his
feet slipped from under him, and he slid and rolled by
turns down, down, until he finally splashed into water.
It was only a foot or two in depth, but such as it war
it instantly instilled new life into him.
He scrambled out of it a different man, and bounded up
the bank full of fresh vigour.
A minute later and he had half supported half-borne
Lily MTherson down the almost precipitous declivity,
and having sat her beside the water hole, he ascended the
bank yet a third time for his horse, which he had some
difficulty in getting down.
This feat accomplished he had time to think and his
thoughts told him that they were at the bottom of the
gully, which he had been striving so long to reach, and
free from all further danger.
CHAPTER XXII.
NED IN LIMBO.—ROSE TO THE RESCUE.
Ned Kelly meanwhile lies fretting and fuming in solitary
confinement in one of the narrow, dark lockups of the
police-station at Boroma.
This is the first time that he has defied tlx? law unsuc-
cessfully ; the first time that it has immeshed him in its
net, and so he strides up and down the small, confined
space with all the fury and restlessness of the tiger that he
so closely resembles, stopping every now and then to
seize hold of and shake the thick bars of his cell door,
more as a vent to his fury than with any hope of getting out
by that means.
Since the wound in his shoulder has been attended to,
ho feels almost free from pain, and his brute strength
seems to be almost restored by the hearty supper that he
has eaten.
True, his right arm is of little or no use. but he feels
that with his left he could do wonders were he only free,
and how eagerly he longs to be free no one can imagine
whose movements have hitherto been so unfettered as his.
And how fierce and burning are the thoughts that coarse
through Ins brain. How he longs for vengeance on Lardy
Bill and Lanky Jim, and how fearful is his dread that, not
content with betraying him, they may have afterwards
repaired to the hut in the ranges, and tortured Rose into
confessing where all her and his private spoil and posses-
sions were hidden ; as likely as not both ill-using and mur-
dering her when the necessary information has been
obtained.
It was strange that these fearful thoughts and appre-
hensions did not turn his brain. They certainly seemed
to set it on fire, and caused him to shake the iron door, or
rather gate, of his cell with redoubled force every time
that his rage got almost too strong to bear.
But the troopers pay no heed to the row that he is
making ; and, as there aie no other occupants of the cells
that night, be has no neighbours to rail at him for keeping
them awake with the shindy.
Why are the troopers so oblivious of his existence?
Well, the fact is they are entertaining a guest whom
they delight to honour, and the like of whom they have
never had quartered upon them before.
Hardly hail the doctor departed, after doing all that he
could for the prisoner, than Rose arrives, mounted on a
white horse, in a perfect state of sweat, and herself bear-
ing every token that she had just ridden a desperate race
against something or other.
“ I would like a drop of water and to be permittexi to
rest here for a little while, if you please,” she had said to
the sergeant. “ I am a niece of Mr. M'Pherson, of Mitta-
garra ; but in endeavouring to reach the station, where I
was expected as a visitor, I have been driven back by a
fierce bush-tire, and narrowly escaped with my life. Dt


you think that my dearest uncle aud cousin can hare fallen
victims to it ?” And she put on a most anxious expression
of countenance.
“No, miss,” answered the sergeant, for W. M‘Pherson
was u great man in those parts ; “ I don’t think as how you
have much grounds for fear. The fire broke out in the
ranges far enough off to give sufficient warning of its ap-
proach, and your uncle, miss, keeps horses that can go,
and no mistake about it. Therefore, I don’t see as you
need be anxious, and I think you’d a sight better let me
run across the way to the ‘ Leichardt Arms ’ and bespeak a
bed for you there. I’m sure Mrs. Jones would be proud
to turn out of her own at any hour to accommodate a rela-
tive of Mr. M'Pherson.”
“But I wouldn’t have worthy Mrs. Jones put herself to
such an inconvenience at such an hour. What is the use
of a bed to one who is far too anxious to sleep? and how
could I enjoy comfort in a cosy bedroom when perhaps at
this very moment my poor uncle and cousin are homeless
and houseless wanderers? No, please to give me a chair
to sit in, or a shakedown to lie on, for a couple of hours
here ; then it will be daylight, and I’ll ask you to alloAv
one of your troopers to ride with me over to Mittagarra,
for I shall be too nervous to go alone, not knowing what
horrors or painful surprises may have to be encountered
at the end of the journey, or even on the road,”
Here she managed to squeeze out a few more tears, and
even to give a convulsive movement to her bosom as
though she was labouring under some strong emotion; so
the good-natured sergeant granted her petition at Once,
lifting her tenderly out of the saddle to the ground, and
ordering one of the troopers to conduct her steed to the
stable.
It was certainly rather strange, agitated as she was, that
she should have so narrowly observed in what direction
the trooper led her horse, and exactly where the door of
the stables was situated, ere she suffered the sergeant to
lead her inside the station.
Here she drank off three pannikins of water in rapid
succession, thereafter indulging in a copious flow of tears;
eventually, however, almost permitting herself to be
convinced that her uncle and cousin must have escaped
the conflagration, whereupon she became comparatively
calm.
The sergeant pressed her to partake of some food, and
she did so ; also to drink a glass or two of Cawarra wine,
and she complied. Lastly, she was pointed out a colonial
sofa, and told that she might appropriate it to her own use,
and she proceeded to take immediate possession.
Still, every one was anxious to do something more for
her, which may be accounted for by the fact that she was
both yourg and lovely; fourteen being the age at which
girls born and reared in a hot climate like Australia are
freshest and most charming.
But she would not have anything more. She smiled and
brought the deadly battery of her bright eye into full play,
and then begged everybody to take no further notice of
her, as she meant to snatch a couple of hours’ sleep if it was
possible.
So the sergeant went and got a couple of pillows for
her charming head, and one of the troopers threw a horse-
man’s cloak loosely over her prettily-rounded form, and she
pretended to close her eyes and woo slumber right off-hand,
but did nothing of the kind.
She distinctly heard the sergeant say in an undertone to
his men—
“ Now, lads, ’tis high time that we followed the young
•ady’s example, bless her innocent heart and pretty face,
for we’ve had a tough night’s work, and we’ll have a
tougher one to morrow in getting Kelly down to Mel-
bourne ; for if we don’t act promptly some of his band
may attempt a rescue, ay, and effect it, too, for he’s lots
of sympathisers in these parts So turn in, and snatch
what rest you can, and 1 shall do the same. Tierman,
you'll escort Mr. M'Pherson’s niece over to Wangaratta
as soon as ever she requests you to be astir, only don’t
rouse her until she wakes of her own accord, for it ’ud be
a pity.”
Then the sergeant and the half-dozen troops-s all
crowded into an adjoining room to the left, and shut the
door between the two, and the half-closed eyes of the g:rl
on the sofa twinkled with keen satisfaction as she observed
that the key was on her side, and a stout bolt also, both
to be used if needful.
She lay quite still, however, and her gaze now that she
was alone wandered all round the room that she occupied,
and which was dimly illumined by a lamp on the mantel-
piece, which the sergeant had turned down very low ere
he quitted the chamber.
By its light she beheld whitewashed walls adorned with
pistols, carbines, sabres, handcuffs, and here and there
a big reward bill, one of which offered “ len thousand
pounds for the taking of that daring outlaw and murderer
Edward Kelly, either alive or dead.”
The beautiful girl’s eyes gleamed brighter than ever as
she read this huge poster through. She had often seen it
before posted on gum-tree trunks out in the bush, but
with its present surroundings it seemed to have a ne\
fascination for her, and when she had finished its perusal
she muttered to herself—
“ You haven’t got him to Melbourne yet, and perhaps
you won’t. What fools you were not to take him oead.’'
Having thus given vent to her feelings she took further
stock of her surroundings, particularly observing the
troopers’ jackets and shakos that were hung up on pegs
here and there, and some pairs of high, brightly-polished
boots, armed with glittering spurs, that stood in one
corner.
This and very much more she noticed, especially a
second door exactly facing her couch, aud, when one of
the troopers had opened it a little while previously, she had
seen a dark and gloomy passage within, with a narrow
grating here and there, and a bunch of huge, for-
midable-looking keys which the aforesaid trooper had
hitched on to a certain hook when he returned to the
room.
Having taken all these careful mental notes, Rose Casey,
whom the reader has doubtless long ago recognised,
listened anxiously for all to grow still in the adjoining
apartment, as on the sound slumber of every one of the
half-dozen policemen and the sergeant depended the success
of the desperate enterprise that she had planned, namely,
the rescue of the villain whom she loved as a father.
The reader may wonder how she knew that h« was
there.
It happened by the simplest means in the world.
By dint of hard riding, and having got a good ten
minutes’ start of those whom she had so chivalrously, and
at such great hazard to herself, ridden back to warn of
their peril, Rose had managed to keep ahead of the con-
flagration, until after a nine-mile race, neck aud neck with
Heath, she had reached a long strip of fallowland, in the
centre of which she was safe.
From this oasis of refuge she had watched the whirls of
the fire-king rush by on either hand, surge on surge and
wave on wave, o’ercanopied by enrolling clouds of dun
smoke, and when the tempest of desolation had passed her
by with a rush and a swirl she had continued her flight,
and shortly afterwards reached the outskirts of Boroma,
when she beheld entering the township from another
direction a small body of troopers escorting a prisoner.
Instinct almost seemed to tell her who that prisoner was,
but she reined back her horse into the obscurity of a small
paddock to make sure, and her heart gave a great leap
within her as conviction resolved itself into certainty and
she beheld Ned bound and helpless in their midst
Then she rode a little way back into the bush to mar-
shal and array her thoughts.
It took her nearly an hour to make up her mind what
was best to be done, but at last she had resolutely decided
and this was the result.
At last Rose Casey threw the horseman’s cloak; from oft


her, raised herself on the couch, slipped off it on to her
feet, crossed the floor as noiselessly as though she had
been a spectre, and listened at the door on the other side
of which she fondly hoped that the troopers were all sound
asleep.
Not a sound camo from within save hard and stertorous
breathing, mixed up with an occasional snore, and with a
smile of satisfaction Rose noiselessly turned the key in the
lock and shot hoinfc -the bolt
Then she tucked a pair of the big boots and a sabre
under one arm, put a shako on her head, thrust a brace of
pistols into her pocket, burdened her other arm with as
large a sized uniform jacket as in her anxious haste she
could stay to select, took down the great bunch of keys
with trembling but deft fingers, and, holding them so that
they should not jingle, managed to open the door that led
into the dark passage with the gratings here and there, and
passed through it.
When she had fastened the door behind her she found
that it too was lighted a little way down by a common
tallow dip fixed in a dirty tin sconce that was hung against
the wall.
The wick had contracted such a cauliflower-top that
the feeble rays hardly did more than render darkness
visible.
They did, however, enable Rose to peer into cell after
■sell, and discover each to be empty until she came to the
one exactly opposite the light, in the extreme end of
which she distinguished a form huddled up in a corner
with a pair of keen, dark, vengeful eyes gleaming out
from beneath shaggy brows.
Their expression changed in an instant as they lighted
on her. The crouched-up form upreared itself to its full
height and noiselessly approached the iron grating that
served for door.
“ Rose !” it exclaimed anxiously, “ Good heavens, what
brings you here, my girl?”
“ I am come either to save or to perish with you,
father,” she made answer. “Here are disguises and wea-
pons, and the keys to unlock your dungeon door. The
police are sound asleep. I know the way to the stables.
In five minutes, father, we will be clear off.”
CHAPTER XXIIL
THE ESCAPE FROM BOROMA,
Ned Kelly had some difficulty in convincing himself that
he was not dreaming.
When by dint of rubbing his eyes and grasping Rose’s
hand through the iron bars of his cage he had assured
himself both that he was wide awake and that she was no
.'ision of a distempered imagination, he began to entertain
nervous fears on her behalf which never in his life had he
felt on his own.
“ Oh, Rose,” said he, “ they will imprison you for years
for this assistance that you are trying to render me. Go
away, go away ; I will escape without your help by-and-
bye. I will not have you imperil your precious liberty for
the sake of a scoundrel like me. I say I xvill not.”
“ It’s of no use, father; you are only losing valuable
time. I escape with you or remain with you. lam quite
decided about that. You could not persuade me to the
contrary though you talked for a month, so do not let me
incur all the peril in vain. Ah, the right key at last,”
and, flinging open the door of the cell, Rose rushed in
and threw hersffif sobbing with joy into Ned’s arms.
He could no longer withstand her entreaties; the
open path to liberty was indeed too great a temptation.
“ You are noble girl, Rose,” said he, “ and hence-
forth our lives Hiall still more be bound up together.
How on earth have you managed to work the oracle ? ”
“This is not the time to tell you, father. We must
work now in order that we may have a chance of talking
by-and-by. Here is almost a complete trooper’s dress.
On with it and let us get away as soon as we cam**
•* But these old moleskin pants, Rose ? ”
“ The high boots and the skirts of the tunic will almost
hide them. Be quick, dear father.”
Ned was quick. He dragged on the boots, but the coat
was too much for him.
“ Give me a hand, Rose, I can’t get this arm into the
sleeve. Bullet through the shoulder the other night.
Stiff as the very deuce, my dear.”
The lovely girl lent her assistance on the instant. She
was as gentle as a young mother could be ever her firs' 1 '
infant.
The tunic on, she buttoned it np, next strapped on the
sword-belt, bidding Ned hold the scabbard in his hand so
that it should not rattle.
Then she placed the shako on bis head.
“ Now follow me as noiselessly as a fly creeps over a pat
of butter. Come ! ”
She had not yet given Ned the pistols, for she could not
bear the thought that they might have to be used against
those who had been so kind to her.
Knowing his ferocity and impetuosity she resolved that
he should only have them in case of the most urgent
necessity.
He did not ask her for them.
It was strange how a great, heavy man could step so
lightly, but Ned resembled a beast of prey in all things,
even in this.
Out of the cell, along the dim, candle-illumined
passage, and through the door at the end thereof into the
main room of the station, and there was only one door
between them and liberty.
Ned was halfway across the floor, and Rose was close
up to the colonial sofa that had been given her as a
sleeping-place, when the bushranger gave vent to a
muffled sneeze.
He could not have helped it for the life of him, but it
was sufficient to occasion an alarm.
A step was heard in the next room, and the handle of
the door was seen to shake.
“Artifice, not violence!” whispered Rose, flinging her-
self at once upon the couch.
Ned caught her meaning. Three strides and he was
pottering away amongst the miscellaneous articles on the
mantelpiece.
At that instant the door between the two rooms was
half opened, and a trooper’s head and shoulders were thrust
partly through.
Seeing, in the dim light, a tall, stalwart form clad in the
uniform of the corps, he exclaimed with a yawn
“ Hullo, mate ! what’s up? You’re early astir.”
“ Don’t let me disturb you fellows. I’m out of the
weed, and I’m after somebody’s ’baccy.”
“ All right.”
A minute later and Ned Kelly had noiselessly unlocked
and unbolted the outer one.
As noiselessly he opened it, and then gave Rose a quick
and significant glance.
She was on her feet in an instant, and out into the star
light.
Ned then shut the door, and tramped somewhat heavilj
down the little garden path to the <5 ater gate, so that the
ring of his spurs should be audible.
Rose, on the contrary, crossed it diagonally, so that she
might not be seen from the window of the room which the
troopers occupied.
Arrived at the fence, she first signalled to Ned which
way he was to go, and then scrambled half-through and
half-over it.
Presently they stood side by side at the door of the
stables.
“ Foiled after all! ” hissed Ned between his set teeth,
as, on lifting the latch, it refused to yield to Lis pressure.
“We might have made up our minds that it would be
locked.”
“ But, father, 1 was not quite so foolish as to leave my
bunch of keys in the cell door. One of them will doubt-
less undo it.”


And she produced them from her pocket
One after the other was eagerly and impatiently tried,
but not until the entire bunch was gone through was one
foundthatwouldproperlyturn in the lock and open the door.
With fresh hopes then they entered the stable.
“ Will you pick oat your horse, Rose, or shall I?”
•* Oh, I have Swiftsure with me, father.”
M But is he used np, that’s the question ?”
* No he’s fresh as a daisy, I’m sure.”
"We have a ninety-miles ride before us.”
"•All right father, I am ready for it.”
Ned said no more, but selected what seemed to be the
ongest and toughest of the troopers’ horses, and began
saddle it.
In three minutes it was harnessed and accoutred, but
•se was not an instant behind with Swiftsure, for like
many a colonial girl she could groom, saddle, and ride a
horse fully as well as one of the opposite sex.
“ Here father, stick these pistols in your holsters,” she
now said, giving Ned the long and brightly-polished regu-
lation double-barrels for the first time. “Now then, are
you ready?”
“ Not quite lass. I’ll just hamstring the other nags to
bar all immediate pursuit.”
“Father, if you do I’ll leave you at once and for ever,”
said Rose in subdued accents of horror. “ Poor things!
How could you be so cruel ?”
“All right, girl, go ahead,” rejoined the bushranger
sheepishly ; and Rose led Swiftsure out of the stable, Ned
following* her with the troop-horse that he had selected.
Suddenly an idea seemed to strike him. He locked the
stable door and tossed the keys to Rose.
“ Put them in your pocket,” said he, ’twill take them
some minutes to force the lock, and a minute saved is a
minute gained. Now then, into the saddle my lass, and
hurrah for Melbourne city !”
CHAPTER XXIY.
COBB’S COACH AGAIN. —PURSUIT.
Rose was atop of Swiftsure in a twinkling, and, Ned
having mounted the stolen charger with some pain and
difficulty, they trotted easily away side by side from the
stables.
It was a necessity that they should pass the front of the
station, however, and it unhappily chanced that as they
did so the restless trooper whom Ned had successfully
hoodwinked within doors was looking out of a window and
caught sight of the fugitives.
The night, or rather early morning, was clear, and the
starlight even brighter than usual, so that a female form
and a white horse were clearly visible. _
His suspicions aroused, he glanced into the next room,
and at once perceived that their fair guest was gone, and,
this causing him to smell a considerable-sized rat, he
dashed across the floor and into the dim passage beyond,
to discover that the Ironclad Bushranger was gone also.
“Hi there ! Up mates ! Kelly's hooked it! That in-
fernal wench that we gave shelter to has set him free.
Curse her!” he yelled at the top of his voice, as he
rushed back into tL e room where he had left his com-
pamons.
In an instant they were all of them equally enraged and
excited.
They rushed forth pell-mell, and grasped the first fire-
arms that came to hand ; but they might just as well have
taken it more quietly, for by the time that they got out of
doors Ned and his pretty girl-rescuer were out of sight.
“ We must saddle our nags and pelt after them, lads,
said the sergeant, “ It’ll be daylight in a couple of hours.
Ten to one they’ll take shelter in the ranges, for the reason
that he’ll think it’s the last place we’ll look for him after
vhat has happened.”
“ I’d sooner say he’d wing his flight straight for Mel-
bourne. A big city affords twice as secure a hiding-place
as a Dig forest,” suggested a trooper.
“It’s just possible that he may think of that, especially
as he is such a chap for all manner of disguises,” said the
sergeant. “Tell you what, lads,” he added; “we’ll
divide our forces. Four of us will beat up his old quarter*
in the ranges, and the other three shall ride on the Q>ur
towards Melbourne. And new there’s no time to be lost
so let us to the stables at once.”
Great was the troopers’ rage to find tne door locked,
and while they were breaking it iu, Ned Kelly and Rose
had gained the open bush on the other side of the town-
ship, where, avoiding the metal, tney struck across
country as the crow flies, in the direction they wanted to
travel. ,
«I’d go back to the hut first to secure some of the spoil
but for the risk of the thing. You see, Rose, as Lardy
Bill and Lanky Jim have turned traitors, the entire band
may be just as bad as they, and I’m not exactly in fighting
form at present,” said Ned, growlingly.
“ Oh, dear father, let us push on for Melbourne, and
there disguise ourselves, and take to homester pursuits,”
answered Rose. “What is the good of living the life of
a hunted wolf, with the certainty of being run to earth
some day?”
“Perhaps you’re right, lass; perhaps you’re right;
though I don’t think Ushould live long without some ex-
citement. An honest life must be a terribly dry and un-
interesting one. By thunder, Rose, here is the Melbourne
mail! See the three lamps glinting amongst the trees ?
Touch up Swiftsure, and come along with you.”
“Father, what would you do ? For goodness’ sake,
don’t bail up a coach at a time when every moment is of
vital importance to us—when deadly foes are on our
track, and at any instant may come up with us. I have
gold and gems to the value of many thousands of pound*
about me. What do you want more ?”
“ Nothing, Rose, nothing. I won’t meddle with the
coach. I only want to see who’s aboard of her. Como
along, lass, 1 say, and keep on the off-side, so that that
infernal white horse don’t show up quite so plain. We
shall hardly lose a second of time, for the coach is going
townward ; and, besides, I’m accustomed to gratify my
whims at any and all hazards.”
Rose made no further objections. Traversing the roll-
ing plain obliquely, they struck right across the coach’*
course, riding parallel with it as it drew near.
“Hi there, you! Do you know if any of Kelly’s
fellows are out to-night?” yelled the Yankee Jehu, as he
observed Ned’s uniform and dangling sword-scabbard.
“ Reckon not. A swagsman told me just now that Ned
was taken, but I’m blest if 1 quite believe him,” answered
the bushranger with a laugh.
“ If he is, I hope they’ll scrag him without loss of time,
or he’ll manage to slip out of their hands somehow. Good
night, mate.”
And the great, gaudy, springless vehicle shot past them
like a comet.
Rose had taken little heed of what had passed between
her companion and the tall-hatted driver, for all her facul-
ties had been riveted and enchained, as it were, in the
contemplation of one of the passengers, on whose face,
as she sat inside the open coach, much of the light of one
of the lamps had fallen.
It was a woman—young, fair, statuesque and wondrously
beautiful. And yet to Rose her loveliness seemed to be
that of the glittering-scaled serpent, that repelled whilst
it attracted; a comeliness that savoured of the malevolent
rather than the beneficent.
She involuntarily shuddered as she continued to regard
her, and a kind of presentiment seemed to enter into her
soul that their lines of lives would cross, to the ship-
wreck of her own happiness and to her father’s de-
struction.
“ Well, Rose, you see there is no harm done. I have
let the coach go on its way," said Ned, turning towards her
with a smile.
“Yea. an.A she is in it who you hoped would be a paa-


•enger • and now 1 suppose there is not the slightest doubt
about Melbourne being our destination ?”
“ Why, my lass, what on earth ails vou? And how the
deuce did you kaaw that the Countess of Lansfeldt was
in yon coach ?”
“Through the instinct that any ordinary wild creature
feels when it meets the eye of a deadly foe, father.”
“She’d better be a foe to you, Rose, or I’ll twist
her neck ; but you’ve scon in her Ned Kelly’s future wife,
nevertheless. Did you say, lass, that you’d great store of
wealth about you in gems—in unset gems?”
“ Yes, father. Ive all the diamonds that you have ever
3to brought home.”
“ That’s fine, Rose. We will be able to dazzle the
Melbournites in fine style, this proud woman included.
I have our future pretty clearly mapped oat, I think. A
brilliant future it will be.”
“ Not as long as the gibbet for you and the prison-cell
for me cast a shadow over it, father,” answered Rose,
sorrowfully. “For heaven’s sake,” she added, vehemently,
“don’t let the light of that woman's eyes blind you to
present danger.”
The warning was not a needless one, for at that instant
the ring of hoofs became clearly audible at some distance
in their rear, and Rose, glancing back over her shoulder,
dimly distinguished what looked in the starlight like
shadowy forms of men and horses coming swiftly on their
track.
“ It’s the troopers, father,” said sh*.,
“ Spur up, then, my girl, and we’ll soon say good-night
to them,” answered Ned, cheerily; but even whilst he
spoke he inwardly blamed himself for having lost valuable
time over the coach.
And now the pursuers sighted the chase, greeting it with
a “view hallo!” that would have done credit to a Leices-
tershire hunting-field.
CHAPTER XXV.
a race for life.
“ Tms will be a big run, Rose,” said Ned Kelly, “so we
mustn’t take too much out of our nags at first setting off.
It’s good staying power more than speed that'll win the
day. We must try every dodge that occurs to us to throw
’em off the scent, lass.”
Rose made no answer save a slight inclination of the
head, but she thought within herself—
“Oh, for some big patches of scrub instead of this open
bush, and that night were only approaching instead of day.”
“I wish your nag was any colour but a white one, Rose.
He’s almost as good as a lighthouse to tell those fellows
which way to steer,” growled Ned, presently.
“ Shall we separate, father, to—to meet again some-
where near Melbourne ? ” asked Rose, bewildered and
oppressed by the thought that now she was of more
danger to Ned than service, a notion very painful her.
“No, girl, no. You and I never separate any more—
whilst, at least, we have the chance left us of keeping to-
gether. It’ll be daylight in an hour and a-quarter, and
then a white horse will be no worse than a brown one.
Curse that coach, and the woman inside it also, if they
have let us into this mess! ”
All the while that the two were thus communing to-
gether, they were journeying onwards at that easy, slinging
gallop, that is so peculiar to Australian horses, making it
no difficult matter to those familiarised with the pace
to almost sleep in the saddle without falling therefrom.
Not with such deadly peril close in their roar as Ned
and Rose had. however; a peril that signified the gallows
for one, and years of long imprisonment for the other, if
they were but taken.
So still was the night air (for the north wind had died
out and no blustering southerly buster had yet succeeded
it) that often they could hear the laughter and conversa-
tion of the troopers, and even the jingling of their sword-
ecabbards and chain-bridles as they came tearing along.
“ ihey seem to make cock-sure of running us to earth
in the end,” growled Ned.
“ Ought we not to strain every effort, to shake them off
before daylight, father ?”
“Ay, ay, lass, but the thing is to get sufficient start
They are too close on our heels for us to play them a
trick of that kind. Ah, Rose, if you’d only have let mo
hamstring their horses this danger would have been
escaped altogether.”
“ Better run this peril than be guilty of an atrocious
cruelty, father. Oh, dear, what's that?”
“ What’s what? Oh, I see, an enemy ahead of us.
Where the deuce could he have sprung from now ? Out of
the earth, one would almost suppose. Well, a bullet will
soon send him to earth again, that’s one blessing.”
And Ned plucked s pistol from his holster as there
came sweeping towards them, uttering discordant cries,
a slim trooper, mounted on a wild-looking horse, and
apparently wearing a black mask.
lie didn’t venture very close, but, keeping just out of
pistol-range, eyed them with keen scrutiny.
Suddenly he gave a strange and unearthly kind of a
chuckle, threw up his head, and emitted* the shrill
“ Co-00-ec ! ” that when uttered by an Australian black-
fellow can be heard in calm weather at least two miles
away.
It was instantly responded to, and with evident satis-
faction, by the pursuing troopers, towards whom the mys-
terious apparition immediately sped, without having
afforded Ned a chance of getting a fair shot at him.
“ Confound that devil's imp!” said he, as he returned
the pistol to its holster, “it will be of little use our
attempting to conceal ourselves during the daytime any-
where, now that that bloodhoujnd kv.s joined them.”
“ Who and what is he, father?” asked Rose.
“ Eh, don’t you know, lass? Why he’s a cursed native
chap. There’s lots of ’esa in the force now. They use
them as trackers, and no dogs in the world have such
good scent or such keen v'aion as they.”
“ Never mind, father, cheer up. Our nags are as fresh
as when we started.”
“I’m chiefly thinking of you, tny child. Don’t speak
to me for a bit. I’ve a half-formed notion in ray bead,
and I want to ponder it out.”
So Rose relapsed into silence, and for some five minutes
naught was to be heard save the thud, thud, thud of their
horses’ hoofs upon the green turf, the humming of the
locusts in the tree-branches o’erhead, the sharp trum-
peting of the bush mosquitoes, with the occasional shrill
cry of “More pork! more port:! more pork!’’ from the
Australian cuckoo, answered perhaps by the jocund “ He-
haw, he-haw, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha; he-haw, ha, ha,
ha,” of the laughing jackass; each one of these sounds
mingled, however, with the thud of other and more dis-
tant hoofs, and the faint chink and rattle of military
accoutrements.
“Rose,” said Ned suddenly, “We must risk all on a
chance. Yes, by George, we must. If we can't shake off
those d traps before day-dawn we'll have a hundred
enemies in our rear and many a foe in our front as well,
and be taken to a dead certainty. We must strain every
nerve to get out of their sight wldlst darkness lasts, and if
we can succeed we’ll double on them, cross some of the
ground that the bush-fire raged over last night, strike
across country to Ballan, and gain Melbourne to-morrow
night by the Bacchus Marsh instead of the Kyneton-road,
which latter will be safe to be covered with Joeys on the
lookout for us. That's my scheme, Rose.”
“ Pray heaven that it may be crowned with success,
dear father. Shall wo spur on now ? ”
“ Ay, at racing speed, lass. Keep your eyes on my
horse’s head and handle your own nag to correspond.
Now then, away 1 ”
The pace was now increased to almost railway speed,
and to Rose it seemed as though, instead of their pro-
gressing, the green turf was flowing under their horses'


fc&et like a ghostly river, and the white-trunked gum and
iron-bark trees reeling past them in a drunken or maniacal
waltz.
With tueir heads stretched well forward and their ears
cast sharply back, their thin nostrils quivering, and the
veins in their glossy necks swollen out to the size of whip-
cord, Rose’s white mare and Ned’s stolen police charger
pelted away neck and neck through the gloom.
They could hear at first their foes urging their steeds
on in pursuit, but the sounds seemed to grow fainter as
they tore ahead.
Well was it for them that the darkest hour is that im-
mediately before the dawn, for it served them well in the
present instance.
“ By Jehoshaphat, we’ve given them the go-by after all,”
suddenly exclaimed Ned as, after traversing the open bush
at breakneck speed for half-an-hour, he drew rein to
listen if he could still catch the sounds of pursuit.
“Now, IPw, we must swoop round to the right, and
double on them with a wide sweep. Come along,”
“ All right, dear father, I’m ready for anything.”
And away they went again like the wind.
Another half-hour and the air became pungent with the
aromatic odours of burnt gum-leaves, which plainly enough
told them that they were rapidly approaching the arena
of last night’s conflagration.
Presently hundreds of red-hot stumps of trees gleamed
like so many danger-signals out upon the plain in front of
them, and ere ten minutes had elapsed they were travers-
ing a scorched and blackened desert where their horses
sank fetlock-deep in ashes at every step.
“This’ll puzzle the black tracker,” laughed Ned. “ See,
the ashes are so light that even this gentle breeze fills up
the slight indentations of our horses’ hoofs as soon as
they are made. We will skirt it for a league or so, and
then cross a creek that I wot of, and steer straight to-
wards Mount Buninyong, which will bring us into the
Ballarat and Melbourne road about midway between
Ballan and Bacchus Marsh. Are you tired, Rose?”
“No one could feel tired mounted on Swiftsure.”
“And I dare say, if Swiftsure could speak, he’d return
the compliment by saying that no horse could feel tired
with such a feather-weight as you upon his back. So come
along, for a backfellow can see a devil of a way across
such a bare plain as this, and the dawn is coming up fast.
Another hour, and I hope we’ll be able to take it a deal
more easy.”
CHAPTER XXYI.
THE ASSASSINATION OF MR. M'PHERSON.
It was trot, trot, trot, now, every step of their horses
sending a cloud of black dust and ashes eddying around
ihem.
lied hat tree-slumps were all about, and everv few
minutes they would pass a blackened and half-roasted
bullock, around which the eagle-hawks were already clus-
tering, for it was not often that they had their mcali
cooked for them in this fashion.
They were the only signs of life ; all other birds had
flown far away; the kangaroo and long-legged emu had
also fled; even the wild warrigal, smelling roast beef afar
off, stood on the margin of that ebony desert, uttering
his wild, unearthly howling, and afraid to cross it.
All at once an object that Ned had taken to be the
scorched and blackened carcase of a sheep, rolled over on
to its back, and an almost inarticulate voice exclaimed —
“ Water—water—l thirst, I burn! Water —for the love
of God!”
“It’s a man, and he’s alive ! ” said Rose. “ How dread-
ful it is that we can’t give him what he asks for.”
“ He’d die directly he’d drank it, I expect; and, besides,
we have no time to think of anyone but ourselves. Come
along, lass, and let the old buffer be.”
“Oh, father, how can you? Let us, at all events
bestow one word of kindness upon him in passing.”
She spurred Gvviftsure towards the strange-looking ob-
ject as she spoke, but was suddenly greeted with an appa-
rently half-choking cry of—
“ The spectre again! The spectre ! Keep off, Rose
Casey! Keep off, I say! Torment not a dying man !
Oh ! don’t come nearer—don’t come any nearer ! ”
“Eh, who the devil have we here?” exclaimed Ned
Kelly,” pushing his big, powerful horse in between Rose’s
white steed and the prostrate man. “ What name do you
answer to, eh ?”
Catching sight of the uniform of one of the mounted
constabulary, and the ghost, as he supposed Rose to be,
being at the same time hidden from his sight, the apparent
log of burnt wood said feebly—
“ I am Mr. M'Therson of Mittagarra, and I don’t believe
I’m so badly hurt as what I look. I was more suffocated
with the smoke tiian scorched by the flames. I shall livt,,
oh I shall live ! ”
“ I don’t think that you are likely to live.”
“Oh yes I shall. I shall get over this. A drop of
water and I shall be a new man.”
“ Rose,” said Ned, “ there’s water at the bottom of
that gully, a couple of hundred yards to the left. Go to
it, my lass, and bring a little in your hat.”
The young girl immediately started on her humane
mission ; the squatter, whose face and hands were every
whit as black as his charred clothing, shuddered as she
passed him by.
“Well enough you may tremble at the sight of her,
M‘Pherson,” said Ned Kelly, in the low and terrible
accents of suppressed passion. “That girl is not th«
ghost of your victim, Rose Casey, but her daughter.
Would you know who I am? ”
(To he continued. )
THE CELEBRATED MOTELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/-
The Biaoh; Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. Love and Adventure.
The Star of the South. —A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“The Black Angel.’’ Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tala of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Arnerioan War. Million.
The Rebal Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.—Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Diamoid.
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. j Lord Scat rer brain, or the Rough
Tom Holt’s Log. —A Tale of the Deep Sea, 1 Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lor>’imer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of tne “Thunder.”




ne squa ! te- did not speak, he only glared.
“ 1 see you are afraid even to guess. Well then, I was
the boy lover from whom you stole her. I was with
her when she died. I adopted her child as my own,
though her father was a villian, and I swore as I did so
that the day should come when I would avenge both the
dead and the living by taking that villian’s life. Andrew
M‘Pherson, you have another child, born under happier
auspices than poor Rose Casey. Well, I hope that
the fire I kindled last night in the ranges will make her a
pauper, as surely as this knife is about to make her an
orphan.”
And as he concluded Ned Kelly flung himself out of his
saddle, whipped a knife out ot his pocket which the police
had overlooked when making him a prisoner, opened the
blade with his teeth, threw himself upon the prostrate
squatter, and, heedless of his faintly-gasped petition for
mercy, sheathed it thrice in his body up to the very hilt.
As he withdrew it for the third time he espied Rom
hurriedly retracing her steps with the water that he had
made a feint of sending her for; and anxious that she
should know nothing of the dreadful deed chat he bad
just committed, he shoved the open knife under the body,
and, leaping into hts saddle, laid hold of the bridle of
Swiftsu-e, who had s-ood quietly by the whole while, and
trotting towards her with b )th horses, headed her off, as
it were, from his victim, aud, as he came up with her, said
cheerily—
. “No good after all, my lass. Hardly was your back
turned when he went off like the snuff of a candle. So
now jump into i oar saddle again.”
“ Oh, father, are you quite sure he is dead ? ”
“As sure as lam that you’re alive. Didn t you s°o
me dismount and bend over him ? It was to make sure
that his heart had stopped. Oh, he’s as dead as a door-
nail.”
“ Father, how comes that blood on your sleeve ?
“Blood? Oh, ah, yes, to be sure. He coughed it up
just as the death-rattle took him in the throat. ’
“ Oh, father, mayn’t I go up and look at him ?”
“No !” thundered Kelly. “ (let into the i-addle ; we
have lost more than enough time over him. Do you for-
get that the bloodhounds of the law are upon our track—
that a much worse death than his threatens me,and years
of wearisome imprisonment yourself ? Mount —mount, I
say, and don’t be a fool. Do you hear ?”
“ Yes, father,” said Rose, obeying his command with
something very like terror, for never had she known him
to speak so crossly to her before.
The next minute the prostrate form of Andrew M Phor-
son was left far behind; but little did Ned Kelly suspect
that not one of Its three stabs had touched a vital part,
and that the squatter was destined to live, tobis(Ned s)
no inconsiderable peril in the future.
Suddenly'Rose exclaimed, “ Look, father, we are not
tbe only travellers across this terrible desert of fire and
ashes. Over away yonder I can see two other mounted
forms. They look to be our very duplicates; a trooper,
and a lady with him.”
Ned glanced in the direction that Rose’s outstretched
hand indicated, and the sight filled him with uneasiness
and apprehension.
“ Let us get down int o the gaily before they spot us,”
said he, “I don't think they’ve seen us yet.”
Happily they were close up to the aforesaid gully now,
and the next instant both of them were on their feet, and
carefully leading t heir horses do wn the almost precipitous
bank.
How the poor creatures drank of the still pools when
the bed of the creek was presently reached, Ned and Rose
greedily following their example, for the latter had been
too anxious about the apparently dying man out upon the
plain to gratify her own thirst before.
Their parched throats relived, Ned said to Rose—
“ You mind the nags, whilst I climb up the bank again
to take observation. I want to be assured that that trap
NE D KELLY.
CHAPTER XXYIT.
A MEETING WITH OLD ACQUAINTANCES.
hasn’t really espied us, as our future movements must
depend on that.” ,
Placing both reins in Rose s hands, he swarmed up
the bank easily enough, even though his one arm was
still of no use to him ; and when his eyes were above the
level of the plain, for he did not deem it prudent to
reveal a single inch more of his person, he took a wary
but comprehensive glance all round.
The two riders were considerably nearer now, but ho
noticed two things— .
Firstly, that they rode very slowly and in zig zagging
fashion ; and secondly, that their faces were continuously
turned earthwards, as if looking for something.
“It’s the legitimate daughter searching for her father »
body,” he muttered between his teeth. “ Hang it, she
can’t very well miss finding it, or that trooper chap fail
to discover that something more than the flatnes has been,
at work upon it. Thunder ! if Rase wasn t here Id.
ride out into the plain and pistol them both, for it would
be far the safer plan. But there, I can t bear my bonny
lass to regard me as a demon, and so X must stay my
band while she's in my company ”
And having thus soliloqui-ed, Ned descended into the
gullv again, and said to Rose —
“ \Ve’d best ride down the creek for a mile or so, for
if we were to scale the opposite bank hereabouts, it s
very likely they would see ns, and then they might come
across our pursuers and tell them which way we had
winged oar flight. Come, my girl, to horse ! ”
A minu'e later they were riding along at the bottom
of the gully, with the banks rising to a height of twenty
feet on either side of them.
The winter torrent of yelow water, that doubtless ab
seasons of flood filled the whole gorge, having shrivelled
up under the fierce summer heat to a string of shallow
pools, this was no difficult feat, and when they had
journeyed about a mile and a quarter in this fashion,
they scrambled with their horses up the opposite side of
the chasm, and found themselves on another wile,
sparsely-treed plain, with a curious conical mountain
rising skywaid at a great distance away, which Ned in-
formed Rose was their steering point, Mount Buninyong.
The hordes w r ere ranch refreshed by the water they had
druok.and also by the wetting of their hoofs as they jour-
neyed down the creek,and now they cantered easilyalung
as spry' as though they had just came out of the stable.
Half-au-hour later the sun rose up out of the eastern
heavens, surround* d by a cohort tf rosy clouds. The
distant mountains blushed every shade of bine —from
royal purple to the softest ultramarine, and ihe entire
face of nature was revealed, looking calm, tranquil, and
in every way most beautiful.
Trie route of tbe two fugatives lay across a gently
undulating country, well grassed and watered, cu tied
thinlyq and in park-like clumps, with the graceful pencil
cedar, mingled with dogwood and native walnut trees,
whilst the strongly-scented wattle-blossoms filled the
air with fragrance, and the low rich notes of the thrush,
the sweet warble of the magpie, and the boisterous
cadence of the laughing jackass reverberated through
the still atmosphere.
All through the morning they encountered hardly a
soul, which is scarcely to be wondered at, inasmuch as
they kept clear of the ordinary lines of travel, and
about midday tbey drew rein on the margin of the
Bandy Jim Creek, whose banks were almost carpeted
with wild flowers of rich and varied hues, bub, with one
or two rare exceptions, affording no perfume.
Above them, litre and there, cropped up picturesque
rocks of bluestone, half hidden by tne blossoms of the
clematis and ranunculus, intermingled with the creamy


petals of the dwarf bankaia, or native honeysuckle, and
the silvery and golden bloom of the wattle.
They short-hobbled their horses so that they might
recruit their strength with a feed of the sweet rich grass,
only to be found at this season of the year growing near
running water ; but how to fill their own stomachs was a
much more difficult problem—in fact, a complete puzzle.
Necessity, however, being the undisputed mother of in-
vention, and Ned Kelly discovering that there were some
shoals of fish in the creek, conceived the notion of spear-
ing with his sword as they wriggled their way
through the shallows.
It was no easy job this, but he at last succeeded in
nailing two, and, having killed them, he and Rose devoured
them raw, for they were fearful of lighting a fire lest the
smoke should attract the attention of any scouring bands
of troopers on the lookout for them.
Nothing but fearful hunger could have tempted them
oartake of such a repast; but they were surprised to
find the fish really delicious eaten in that manner—a dis-
covery which, however, had been made by many before
them, for in the north of Asia there are entire tribes who
would declare that cooking fresh-water fish in anv manner
entirely destroys the delicacy of their flavour. Chacun a
son <7 out, we say.
After an hour’s rest the two fugitives again beiook
themselves to the saddle, and they had not ridden very far
when they descried two individuals tramping along in
front with shouldered swags, at whose appearance, as they
drew closer to them, Ned uttered an oath that seemed to
be one more of delight than of rage,
“ What’s the matter, father?” asked Rose.
“ Don’t you know those infernal scoundrels ?”
“They look to me like Lanky Jim and Lardy Bill; but
I could not swear from a back view.”
“They are the very men, though. Rose, it was those
two rascals who betrayed me to the traps.”
“ Are you quite sure, father, that it was them?”
“By George, yes ! One of the Joeys told me all about
it, and also how they tricked them out of the reward
offered for my capture. They fired at me, Rose, through
the back of the hut in which I lay concealed, the treacher-
ous Judases! They dared not face me living, so they
determined to take me dead,”
To such high tones had Ned raised his voice as he con-
cluded that one of the men heard him, and turned round
to see who it was.
“ Tt.’H onlv a tran an’ a sraL” said he to hia companion.
“They won t taae no nonce ov uo,
“Oh Lord! won’t they, though ?” exclaimed that indi-
vidual, looking round in turn. “ Why it’s Ned Kelly’s gal
on her white hoss. Oh, what can it mean? I feels so
soft-hearted over it, Jim.”
“ Don’t be a mean-spirited cuss. She won’t notice who
we be in this rig-out; and if you’re afeard as how she
will, veil yer ugly mug with a good cloud of baccy-smoke
as they rides past,”
This was very good advice, no doubt, but the ruse didn’t
avail them in the present instance.
‘‘Bail up, you ruffians!” was suddenly thundered in
their ears; and the next instant one was hurled to the
right and the other to the left by the buffeting shoulders
of the trail ed police charger.
Both w nt to grass, half-stunned, wholly bewildered ;
and, before either could rise, he was covered by a levelled
pistol, one of which was grasped by Rose Casey,
“ Well done, lass ! ” cried Ned. “ Don’t let the scorpion
get a chance of turning hia sting towards you If you see
his hand moving towards shirt, belt, or pocket, put a
bullet through his head. Now, Lardy Biil, I think I’m in
your debt. Am I, or am I not?”
“Lord, capting, who’d have thought it would have bin
you? Now, this is what I calls onhandsome ovyou—first
entering the perlice, an’then ’unting down a couple ov old
mates as was always true as steel to you.”
** Liar 1 you know that I’m no tran well enough, ay, as
well as you know that you and your mate tried to sell
me the other night, and made a nice mull of it. Your
gun hung fire, didn tit i Ha! ha ! the Joeys had drawn
m charges so that you shouldn’t cop a penny of the
reward. It strikes me that they’ve been done brown in
turn. But that’s no matter. You shall never play the
character of Judas any more. I'm going to turn a
beast, half fox and half wolf, into a dead jackass.”
“Oh, don’t shoot us, capting! We don't deserve it.
You ve been told a pack of lies about us—nothin" more.
111 take my solemn affidavey to it.”
“ onl y did you betray me, but I’ll bet that before
you decamped you robbed the general community right
and left, you oily-tongued sneak and traitor,” answered
Ned, severely. “Turn out your pockets, dog!”
Lardy Bill at once did so. They were empty.
“ Off with your jumper, and fling it here.”
“ Lord love you, capting, and what for?”
“Do as I bid you, or I’ll blow your brains out.”
Lardy Bill obeyed the order with a groan.
Ned caught the jumper jacket, and whistled as he dis-
covered how very heavy it was.
lie banged it against the pommel of his saddle, and it
gave out the dull ring of gold.
“ Pretty well padded, ’pon my word,” said he. “If
the rest of your togs are quilted in like fashion, you must
be a walking mint.”
“Oh, Lord, capting, it’s only our own little savings and
gams. Don’t rob us, capting, pray don’t.”
yon ** _ expect I’ll only be getting back my own
gold, and if it should happen not to be so of what use will
it be to two dead men ? ”
“ Dead men ? Oh don’t go for to kill us, capting!’
At this moment crack went a pistol, and Rose uttered
a faint cry of pain.
Involuntarily, Ned Kelly wheeled his horse round to
Rose’s assistance, and no sooner were his eyes diverted
from Lardy Bill than he in turn plucked forth a pistol
from inside his open shirt, and took a cock-shot at Ned.
“ Are you hurt, dear? ”
“No, father, no. Look out for yourself. That man’s
got another pistol.”
It was true that he had, but before he could discharge
it Ned’s horse was tramping him into the dust.
Seeing his comrade’s danger, Lanky Jim endeavoured
to push by Rose, concluding that a levelled pistol in a
girl’s hand was most likely of little account; but he had
not got three yards when Rose fired at him, and brought
him down with a ball through the hip.
She might have killed him had she liked, for Ned haa
taken great pains in teaching her pistol practice, but she
had a woman’s natural horror of taking human life.
“ Bravo! lass, we have scotched the old serpents
finely,” laughed Ned. “ What made you cry out? ”
“A bullet grazed the tip of my ear, father.”
“It’s lucky it didn’t take it off. You ride on a little
way now, Rose, and I’ll overtake you.”
“ Don’t kill them outright, father. Oh, don’t! ”
“ Bide on, girl, I toll you. Ride on at once.”
“ Not until you promise me you will spare them.”
“ Rose, obey mo, and don’t be a fool.”
Father, you shan t take human life whilst I have th
power to save you from a crime,” and she looked super
latively lovely as she spoke.
CHAPTER XXVIII,
A TIKIHRLE REVENGK,
Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, with their weapons discharged
and no chance of being allowed time to reload them,
writhed in their agony and despair upon the ground,
whilst Rose pleaded with Ned for their miserable lives.
They had little hope that she would succeed; but for
all that she did , for wonderful is the influence of woman,
over even the most fierce and rugged natures.
‘T m an infernal fool to listen to you, but I never coulc


deny you anything for long, and you know it; so you
just ride on, and I’ll grant your desire,” Ned was fain to
mutter at length.
“But—but you will not break word?”
“ Did I ever break a promise to you, Rose ?”
“ No, no ; and since you have promised me so faithfully
I will trust you. And yet why should I ride ou? Why
do you want to remain behind ?”
“To force these fellows to strip, so that I may be sure
they have disgorged all their plunder.”
Rose made, no further objection, but rode on ; and
directly she had got a little way off, Ned, again turning
towards the grovelling men, commanded them to strip
and throw him each of their articles of attire in turn.
It was no easy command to execute, sorely injured as
they were, but Ned vowed that he would pepper them
with bullets if they did not, and trample them beneath
his horse’s iron hoofs as well; and so they were fain to
make an effort, and as each garment was in turn tossed to
him he shook it, and, if it gave forth the chink of gold,
spread it across the pommel of his saddle, and if it did
not, dropped it contemptuously on the ground with an
oath or a sneer.
When the tvi o men were reduced to an Adamite state of
simplicity and coolness, Lardy Bill quivering in his
fatness and Lanky Jim shivering in his leanness, Ned
uncoiled the long trail rope that hung at his saddle-bow.
and throwing it at, rather than to, Lardy Bill, said
sternly—
“ Get up, you deg, and bind your companion firmly to
that tree.”
“I—l can’t get on my pins, capting. Your horse has
trampled all my bones out of jint.”
“ He shall trample you into a shapeless heap of blubber
if you don’t obey me.”
“ Oh, lor’, don’t talk like that. Which tree ?”
“The one just behind you, that the white bull-dog ants
are running up and down so lively. They’ve got a nest
just at its foot—see V”
M Lanky Jim looked round as well as Lardy Bill, and
Uttered a shriek as he beheld his doom
“Oh, mercy! capting, mercy!” he gasped. “The
devilish things will cover me all over in five minutes.
They will devour me alive. In an hour I’ll be a skeling-
ton, a hideous, grinning skelington. Oh, you promised
not to murder us.”
“ Nor will I. The ants may eat you or lefivo you alone,
just as they think fit. I’m not responsible for their
actions. Now, Lardy Bill, hurry up. Now, Jim, look
lively. The ants will thank me if I have to puncture
your tough hide with a bullet-hole or two so that they
may creep into your intestines, but you hardly will.”
Lanky Jim shrieked at the mere idea of such a thing,
and without further spoken objection walked up to the
tree and planted his back against the trunk.
“ Bound to do it, mate, though it goes sadly agin my
grain,” said Lardy Bill, as he followed him up with the trail
rope, and then he added in an undertone, “ I’ll do it so that
ye can slip out again as soon as his back’s turned on us.”
But Lardy Bill was not allowed the opportunity of
carrying his amiable intentions into execution, for Ned
Kelly watched the operation a great deal too closely to
give him the chance.
A dozen times at the very least he found fault with
Lardy Bill’s method of operations, but at last Lanky Jim
was bound tightly and securely enough to satisfy even
him, and then he commanded Bill to give the ant-mound
(a hillock as large as a bee-hive) a good stir with the iron
lynch-pin that was at one end of the rope. _
“ But if I do they’ll be all over me, capti»g!”
“Well, Bod what do I care about that?”
“ They’n as big as bees, and they nip for all the world
like the cussed quadrupeds they’re called after.”
“ And aren’t you in a fine condition for nipping?”
Lardy Bill groaned aloud, but he dared not disobey the
iOtjKnands he had received.
Standing as far away from the ant-hill as ever he could,
he stretched out an arm and hand, and gave it a thorough
good stir.
The terrified and ferocious insects the next instant
covered it in their countless myriads, some of them making
straight for Lanky Jim with wide-gaping jaws.
Lardy Bill, with fear-rolling eyes, and his mouth screwed
up into the shape of a monstrous capital O, was on the
point of beating a hasty retreat, quivering all over like i
giant blane-mange cast in a particularly ugly mould, who*
he was brought to a halt by Ned exclaiming—
“ Go back and sit down on that mound.”
“ Oh, lor’, capting, I’d rather die a hundred times ! It
would be worse than being kicked to death by spiders,
that would,” answered Lardy Bill, trying to convince both
himself and Kelly that they were both joking, but with
lamentable ill-success.
“Doas I command you, scoundrel! Did you fancy
that I was going to let you off easier than your mate, or
do you want my horse to knock you down and dance over
you again first V”
“Oh, capting, this is awful, this is!” moaned Lardy
Bill; and he went and plumped himse f down where he
was bidden, hoping, perhaps, by sheer weight to squash
a few hundred of his foes ere they could attack him ip
turn.
In an instant, however, he sprang to his feet with an
awful shriek, and was in the act of rushing away at all
hazards when Ned Kelly levelled a pistol at him, and put
a bullet through one of his thighs, thereby causing him,
with a shattered howl, to fall backwards right across the
ant-hill.
In the twinkling of an eye he was covered with thr
ferocious insects.
He tried to break away from them again, but his per-
forated leg refused to support him.
He fell down once more among his diminutive foes,
rolling, writhing, shrieking, and endeavouring, but all in
vain, to scrape them off his naked body with his hands.
In vain we say, for even when they were torn limb from
limb, the gaping mouths, with the heads only attached
thereto, clung firmly to the flesh whereon they had so
grimly fastened.
Ned Kelly stayed for a second or two to watch and
keenly enjoy the agonies of the two scoundrels who had
sought to earn three thousand pounds blood-money (ulti-
mately raised by successive additions to ten thousand
pounds) by betraying him to the police; and then, giving
utterance to a bitter laugh, he set spurs to his horse and
galloped after Rose.
He overtook her about a quarter of a mile on, coming
back to meet him
“ What did that pistol-shot mean, father ?” she asked.
“ Only a bullet through Lardy Bill’s leg, so that he
should be no better off than the fellow whom you winged,”
answered Ned, with a laugh.
“ You have kept your word, father?”
“Of course I have. Why these doubts? I ask you
again. Did I ever break my word to yon f"
“ Never, father. Forgive my mistrustin'.; you, even for
an instant; but I know how you must hate these two
sneaking sordid wretches. What are those clothes across
your saddle-bow ?”
“ Some of the rascals’ togs. They are heavy with gold
pieces and other treasure that is sewn up inside the lining.
We have not time to rip them open now. We must push
ahead, Rose.”
Ned Kelly would have been still more anxious to push
on rapidly had he only suspected that the pistol shots that
had been fired had reached the ears (for sound is borne to
a great distance in the clear pure air of Australia) of a
posse of mounted troopers who were ou the keen lookout
for him and his fair companion.
And now, arrived within a close distance of where the
honclad bushranger’s hideous revenge had been perpe-
trated, the agonised shrieks of Lardy Bill and Lanky Jii.i


ed them on to the exact spot just in time to prevent that
vengeance from being wholly consummated.
They gather round and deliver the men, who in another
five minutes would have been as dead as Hamlet’s ghost
and Queen Anne, and Lanky Jim has just strength and
venom enough to gasp, “ Ned Kelly an’ his gal gone that
way, towards Buninyong,” ere, with a groan and a gasp,
he faints dead away.
So two of the troopers remained to tend the apparently
dying men, whilst the remaining three spurred sharply on
the fugitives’ track, presently holding a brief council of
war, and deciding to make somewhat of a detour with the
object of heading them, and planting themselves in
ambush in a secure place where they could quietly await
their coming, and pop off Ned Kelly from behind a tree
without allowing him the slightest chance of escape, or ef
injuring any of them in turn.
CHAPTER XXIX
ROSE GRADUATES FOR THE GALLOWS,
Ned Kelly and his beautiful adopted daughter rode as gaily
along through the sunlit bush as though grim death wasn’t
lying in wait for them (in the guise of three well-armed
troopers sheltered snugly in ambush) a matter of three or
four miles ahead; and sometimes the ironclad bushranger,
ironclad now no longer, would laugh and chuckle to him-
self at the manner in which he fondly imagined that he
and the bulldog-ants in partnership had polished off his
late treacherous allies, without the breaking of the
promise he had made to Rose.
Little did he imagine that Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim
had quite as good reason to laugh at him, and the Squatter
Andrew MTherson to join in the chorus. The axiom
that threatened men live long was fated to be exemplified
in all three instances in a most remarkable and ex-
traordinary manner.
Rose could not imagine what Ned was chuckling about
bo frequently, but she was unfeignedly glad to see him in
such good spirits, and sometimes smiled for company.
’Both smiles and chuckling were to receive a check
■before long, however, for as they drew near unto the
Melbourne and Ballarat road the usual array of bills and
posters on the smooth bark of the blue-gum trees became,
a distinguishing feature in the otherwise romantic scene;
and suddenly, just above the by no means modest flourish
of trumpets of Doctor L. L. Smith, appeared the familiar
lion and unicorn fighting desperately as usual for the
crown, the lion having for second and backer a huge
dumpy capital V, and the unicorn an equally dropsical-
looking capital R,
This imposing heading proclaimed a police reward, to
Ned Kelly the most engrossing of all literature ; so he
pulled rein for moment to read the proclamation calmly
through, the more so as he saw his own name in vary big
print thereon.
The first little discovery that he made was that he had
increased in value to the extent of a thousand pounds
since the Gold Escort Robbery ; for the immense sum of
Four Thousand Pounds was now offered for his capture
alive or dead ; but this fact did not alarm him half so
much as a supplemental reward of £5OO that was offered,
lower down in the bill, for the arrest and safe custody of
a young girl who was stated to have personally taken part
in the attack on the escort, and to have fired at the driver
and his companion as they were making their escape from
the scene of slaughter.
Then followed her description, and it was so exactly like
Rose that she might have been recognised therefrom as
readily as from a painted portrait.
Ned swore a terrible oath.
“Never mind, father,” said Rose, calmly. “I asK for
nothing better than to share your fate, whatever it may
be. Government has anticipated my wish.”
“ But it has been humbugged with a lie. You took nc
part in the gold robbery ; you never fired at the two
cowards who cut the traces and galloped off on the cart-
horses before the traps and my boys came to blows, did
you. Rose, eh?”
“ You know, father, that nothing would induce me to
attempt to take human life except the most desperate
extremity, such as in defence of my own or your existence.
The two men you speak of galloped close by me as I was
waiting with Swiftsure for you to escape on in case you
were worsted in the fight, and Marco Polo hurt so that
he couldn’t bear you away. They both looked at me very
hard as they shot past, and I think would have been up
to some mischief had they not observed a pistol in my
hand.”
“The venomous rascals! And so they thought that
they would sting you at a safe distance? Should I ever
lay a hand on them, I’ll ”
“ Don’t fret, father. Let them be,” broke forth Rose,
interrupting him. “See, lam not angry ; no, nor fright-
ened either. Let us think only of present dangers, for 1
can’t believe we are out of the wood yet.”
“Well, lass, I would be more satisfied myself if dark-
ness was only a couple or three hours nearer. We daren’t
strike the Melbourne road until dusk has set in ; the risk
would be too great.”
Scarcely had these words escaped Ned Kelly’s lips than
forth from behind rather a big patch of tea-tree scrub
that bordered the faint bush-track that they were pursu-
ing, came spurring the three troopers who had planted
themselves there in ambush to await their coining.
The fact of Rose riding between them and Ned had
alone prevented their discharging their carbines at him
from behind their leafy cover, and in all probability
bringing him down without the slightest danger to them-
selves.
They cursed her for the coincidence, but still, as they
were three to one, they did not anticipate defeat.
They didn’t regard the young girl in the light of a
possible combatant, and so they gallantly swooped around
the strangely assorted pair, brandishing their sabres anu
calling upon them to surrender themselves peaceably.
Ned’s answer to this was to pluck forth a pistol from his
holster and shoot one fellow through the midriff, who at
once dropped from his horse, writhing in the agonies of
de _ith.
Then, had he only been able, he would have drawn the
sword that hung at his own side, and tackled the other
two.
But his right arm being still next to useless, he hurled the
discharged pistol at one of the troopers’ heads, and then
made haste to pluck forth the second.
Ere he could do so, however, both were upon him, the
sword of the first raised to cut him down, and that of the
second shortened to run him through.
Rose saw with horror the imminent peril that he was
in, and thinking only of saving his life, nor pondering
that to effect that she would have to commit an act that
the law would regard as murder, and puirsh with the
gibbet, she drew forth one of her own handy weapons, took
quick aim, fired, and saw a second trooper drop from his
charger to the ground.
At the same instant the third and now sole survivor
made a slice at Ned’s head, but the bushranger ducked it
suddenly and avoided the blow, seizing his assailant in
turn by the throat and coinpressing it with such force
that he dropped his weapon and looked as though his eyes
would follow suit.
Had not Ned’s horse suddenly edged away he might
have succeeded in throttling him outright, but as it was he
was obliged either to let go his hold or part company with
his steed.
He chose the former alternative, and the trooper took ad-
vantage of his sudden liberation from that awful clutch to
beat a precipitous retreat.
“ We must pursue him—we must kill him, or jour own
life is sacrificed, Rose,” said Ned. with his face as white
as that of a corpse


The lovely and now trembling girl had never seen him
look so pale before. On his own account he never would
have turned so, but he saw that she had committed murder
in his defence, that the trooper was stone dead whom she
had fired at, and that if the third man was allowed to sur-
vive his evidence would suffice at any moment to clasp that
fair, round, full throat with a collar of hemp ’neath the
awful gallows.
Determined, mereforo, to slay him at all hazards, Ned
Kelly spurred his horse in pursuit; out what was his
horror at discovering that he could only get a limp out of
the good steed that had hitherto borne him so well!
He dismounted, to find that it had run the point of one
of the dropped swords into the soft part of the off fore-
hoof, the weapon having fallen into a deep wheel-rut,
leaving the point and some three inches of tha blade pro-
truding.
“Dismount and lend me your nag, Rose.” said Ned
hoarsely; *• that fellow must be account d for.”
“ I won’t have any more blood shed, father,’*
“Nonsense, your own safety demands it, child.”
“ I won’t owe my safety to more crime. I know what
I have done—l did it to preserve your life.”
“ And now I want to preserve yours in turn.”
“It may not be, father; I will not have it so. I will
gallop away from you if you do not desist.”
“ Rose, are you mad ? But what’s the good of further
talk? Your hesitation has given him already too great
a start. I could never overtake him now. There is a
Eolice camp not five miles away, and in an hour we shall
ave a whole pack of them at our heels. Now what the
deuce is to be done?”
Ned had never been so nonplussed before.
“ We must both ride on one horse,” said Rose.
“Yes, for those of the two dead troopers have followed
their mate at a gallop, confound them. But Swiftsure’*
nearly used up as it is, Rose.”
“ There’s several horses in yonder paddock.”
“By Georgo ! we’re close upon a station then. I have
it, Rose—we must play a bold and desperate game. ’Tie
our only chance. I’ll jump up behind you. See, there 1
am. Thunder! but I’m twice the man that I was yester-
day. There’s the Horae Station, Rose. I can see it be ■
tween the trees. Spin towards it like wildfire, my lass.”
CHAPTER VYT
TAKING THE BULL BY THE HORNS.
Rose did as she was bidden, and would fain have asked
Ned on the way what he intended to do there, but that
she knew he would not thank her for disturbing his
thoughts in such a way.
Presently he enlightened her somewhat of his own free
will, and this was the programme he submitted for her
guidance:
“Rose,” said he, “Ned Kelly’s band have stuck uo
the Melbourne and Ballarat day coach between Ballan and
Bacchus Marsh, and murdered every passenger aboard ol
it except yourself. Of three troopers who came up to the
rescue two were served in like manner, and I, the third,
had my horse shot under me and only escaped a like fate
by shamming dead. When they had gone—the bushran-
gers I mean—l brought you on here as being the nearest
human abode to the scene of the inhuman butchery. You
are in the greatest anxiety to reach Melbourne to receive
the blessing of a dying mother, and I am of course in the
same eager hurry to convey the news to the nearest police
camp—-which lies in Melbourne direction, mind you—of
the outrage Kelly’s rascals have committed. With such a
yarn we shall both of us win the sympathy of the good
folks at the station, no matter who theymiybe. Well
get a hasty meal—of which we both stand in great need—
the loan of horses to help us on ourwiy, a change of
clothing—oh \ Js. I’ll manage that—and whatever else we
may require You’ve some blood on your face, Rose—
don't rub it off —and lota of iv Oyour dress, better still.
You must look very pale and frightened, but determined
on continuing your journey, and I shall talk of escorting
you to Bacchus Marsh, where you can catch tho mght
coach. That’s the outline ot my plot; I may improve on,
the details as they are demanded of me. Don tgo forget-
ting your assumed character and calling me lather. i. e
very careful about that, my lass.” M
“ What shall be our respective names then t
“I’m Mr. Lanyon, and you’re Miss Delaney. w
“Very well, I’ll try my best to anstain the character.
“ Rmht, girl. Try, and you’ll do it, never fear. Wo
are dole up to the station. This nag was lent no by a
woman, whom we encountered on the way, to bring us
hither as soon as possible., and I am to say that it would
be sent for. Stay, no, that will hardly go down, for they
will wonder why we didn t push on for the nearest town-
ship instead. We must abandon Swiftsure, and do the
rest of the journey on foot. I’m as right as ninepence,
and all my stiffness has passed away. I only wish that
my arm was as good as my legs, and I d be precious w ell
content.” . , _
Ned was on the ground by this time, and Rose speedily
dismounted in turn.
“ Now then, off with saddle and bridle, ihe grass will
hide ’em long enough for our purpose, and there are half-
a-dozen other white horses abou*', so that one more adued
to their number will attract no suspicion. As to the traps,
they’ll never suspect us of taking refuge in such a place.”
“What are we to do with these jackets and things?”
“ With all the treasure in them ? Oh my !” and Ned
gave a low whistle, expressive of embarrassment.
Suddenly, however, he began looking intently along
the ground close under the outside fringe of scrubland
presently espying a wombat-hole, he signalled to Rose
to toss him the things, which he commenced to twist up
into small compass, and then to ram down into the hollow
funnel.
“There’s a plant!” he said , ‘a hundred to one 111 find
It again though I don’t come for it for a matter of flis
months ; and I’ll wager that no one will find it but me.
Come along!” ,
“ Must 1 say farewell for ever to poor Swiftsure ?’
“No fear. I'll bring him safely away when I como
the treasure. But let us hurry up.”
Rose obeyed, after ouss rubbing her soft cheek against
jwrasare & cqamxy vcivev ixmzz,ie.
The horse uttered a low whinney, and would have fol
lowed them had not Ned driven it back.
There is no need for us to give a description of another
squatter's station, for they were all pretty much alike at
the period of which we write. When our story leaps over
a period of some years, as it is destined to do ere it closes,
we may be tempted to give a word-picture of what such a
residence and domain is now.
The supposed trooper and his lovely girl companion
were received with the hospitality that distinguished the
Australian squatter of that day, and Ned Kelly’s tale was
listened to with a mingling of sympathy and horror.
The squatter was an old white-haired gentleman, who
had landed with “ Johnnie Falkner,” the lately well-known
Collingwood, J.P., in 1838, and had helped him to build
the first habitation ever erected on the site of the now
magnificent city of Melbourne.
He and his matronly, silver-ringleted spouse and two
middle-aged spinster daughters all gathered round the
trooper and the girl to listen to the thrilling account of
the bushranger’s fabulous misdeeds, Mr. Fairfax bemoan-
ing meanwhile the fact (Ned was delighted at it) that his
three stalwart sons and most of his station hands were
cattle-mustering that day far off in the ranges, so tha<- they
could afford no help.
Ned told his tale most plausibly; and Rose wepa over
her dying mother, and shuddered at the horrors she had
just been the witness of, in capital fashion, so that, as-
Kelly had foreseen, horses were immediately offered them,
and food and wine pressed on their acceptance.


n.oth were nearly famished ; but, as eating ravenously
under the circumstances of their visit might have excited
suspicions of the truth of their story, Hose required a
great deal of pressing ere she could be induced, as her
entertainers it, to “ force something down to keep
up her strength.’-
Even Ned ate as taough his natural appetite had been
much impaired by what he had just taken part in ; but he
got through a very tidy picking for all that, and made up
for lack of solids with plentiful libxtions of the rich red
hermitage that was the produce of Mr. Fairfax's cwu vine-
yard.
“ Might I ask you to increase the obligations that you
are placing us under, by lending each of us a new rig-out,
Mr. and Mrs. Fairfax?” said the bushranger, as coolly as
possible, when ho had finished his repast. “ I see Miss
Delaney shudder each time that she involuntarily glances
down at her blood-stained apparel, and as for myself, I
feel convinced that I should reach the police-camp with
much less chance of being murdered on the way, were I
dressed as a civilian instead of as a trooper. I have every
reason to believe that the police post is watched by some
of the wretches, so that no intelligence shall be borne
thither of their infernal doings. Indeed the rascals
stripped and carried away the uniforms of my two unfor-
tunate companions, so that if two seeming troopers should
call here during the afternoon or evening, don’t forget
that in all probability they will be a couple of those awful
miscreants disguised as such.”
“ Oh, dear me! can’t you send me some protection from
the station, Lanyon? My sons and the stockmen may not
be back until to-morrow night; before then we may all be
murdered in cold blood.”
“I will send you aid directly I reach the police-camp.
I shall drop Miss Delaney at Bacchus Marsh, there to wait
the evening coach. It wdl be all in ray way. You will
know the troopers I will send by a white band round their
sleeves, so I advise you to close and barricade your doors
and windows, and fire upon all others who may approach
the place, without holding any parley, for they will
naturally tell any amount of lies to gain admittance. Now
for these togs that you are going to lend us, and if the
fresh mounts could be ready for us by the time that we
are ready for them, a good quarter of au hour might be
saved.”
" A very sensible remark. I will tell Sammy, the black
boy, to round in and saddle for you the two fleetest steeds
that I’ve got in the horse-paddock. Maria, my dear
(this to his wife), will you instruct the lad to that effect.
.Jane and Fanny, do you take Miss Delaney to your room
and see what you can do for her; and you, Lanyon, come
along with me. I fancy that a suit of my eldest sou’s
clothes will prove au exact fit for you.”
As it happened, the fit could not have been a bettor
one, and Ned being left alone in the old squatter’s bed-
room to dress, he first locked the door, and then, taking
off his bushy false beard and whiskers, made free with
Mr. Fairfax’s shaving materials to make a clean scrape of
what had before been only a close crop.
This done, he redonned the mass of false hair for the
present, completed the transmogrification of his general
toilet, little heeding what pain his wounded arm gave him
in pulling off one coat and lugging on another, and in ten
minutes he was all ready to depart.
CHAPTER XXXI.
THROUGH STILL FURTHER PERILS.
Ned didn’t say no to another glass of wine, as it was pressed
upon him, but he was very glad to see Rose enter the room
iust as he was on the point of laying it down empty.
She was clad in a light grey cloth habit and a low-
crowned soft felt hat decorated with a plume of cock-
feathers, white cotton gauntlets, and so forth, and looked
a very different girl from what she had done half-an-hour
previously.
She could hardly help smiling at Ned's change, who had
purposely picked out the most dandified suit of all that
had been laid before him ; so that, arrayed as he now was,
he would have cut a very passable figure in Great Coll ins-
street at promenade hour.
The squatter and his wife were most anxious to know
what they could do more for them, but Ned declared that
there was nothing more left to be done, and Rose said that
she only wished that she had a pair of goggles to save her
eyes from the dust, which had tormented her terribly
coming along.
At this remark Ned bestowed upon her a glance of
approval, and there happening to be a pair of that species
of spectacles about the house, they were hunted up and
promptly found, and when Rose had donned them, they
added very materially to her disguise.
And now the horses were seen, in the custody of the
native boy, being walked up and down just outside the
window ; so Ned declared that no time had better be lost,
and Rose again pleaded her anxiety to reach her dying
mother’s side as soon as possible, and as all the Fairfaxes
were anxious for some troopers to arrive for their protec-
tion as sdon as might be, they offered not the slightest
opposition to their immediate departure.
Consequently, a couple of minutes later, after a warm
shaking of hands and no end of good wishes on either side,
the bushranger and his girl-companion trotted away on a
couple of the best horses that the old squatter possessed.
“ We gammoned the flats well, and no mistake,” ob-
served Ned, when they had done looking back and waving
adieux to their late kind entertainers. “If the traps do
ride up to the station now to make enquiries, they’ll he
taken for disguised bushrangers, and receive bullets in
lieu of explanation. What an infernal lark it’ll be ! ”
Rose smiled as in duty bound, perceiving that it was
expected of her ; but she wished from her heart of hearts
that the need and occasion of such larks had passed away
for ever.
No sooner had they got out of sight of the house than
Ned pulled off his false beard and whiskers, and shoved
them well under his saddle-flap.
“ What do you think of me now, Rose ? ”
“Oh! father, it improves your appearance wonderfully.”
“ Would you have known me, had we met by accident? ”
“ Not in the least. You look a languid swell of the
first order. I saw just such a one at Mittagarra station
the other night, but you cap him altogether. You look
like one who would faint at the mere sight of blood. It’s
a wonderful transmogrification ! ”
Ned didn’t take much heed of this. A portion of Rose’s
speech had alone struck him.
“ What the fury took you to Mittagara? ” he asked.
In as few words as possible Rose told him.
“ But you took nor bite nor sup beneath that accursed
roof? ” and he looked at her almost fiercely.
“ No, father, I did not,” and she told him briefly why.
“ Rose ! ” exclaimed Ned. “ ’tis a wonder that I did not
destroy the one solitary being whom I loved on earth,
amongst those whom I had good reason to hate, and for
your and your mother’s sake, my lass,” and he proceeded
to tell how that it was he who had created the bush-fire,
with the intention of destroying Mittagarra and all whom
it contained.
His narration was interrupted, however, before he had
got very far with it by the sudden vision of four mounted
troopers riding directly towards them.
“ Oh, father, we are doomed to ill-luck,” said Rose.
“ Well, I can’t'say that we are very fortunate.”
“ One thing, we are in fine racing condition. I am
sure both our nags would go like the very wind if put to
it. We’d best not let them get too near.”
“ Rose, our best plan will be to put a good face on the
matter and confront them boldly. It would be bad policy
to allow ourselves to be chased too close up to Melbourne
so as to give the entire force the cue that we were playing
’possum in or about the city. They’d be on the eternal


lookout for us there, and we’d be in hourly danger of
arrest. I want, whilst we are ruffling it in full feather at
Melbourne, for everyone to suppose we are somewhere else.”
“ Well, father, your will is my will also,” said Rose.
“ All l ight, put a good face upon it then. I’m a nephew
of old Fairfax, and you are my daughter. We are making
a short visit at the station ‘\>nfouud it, did you pick up
what ’twas called? ”
“ Yes, father; its name isTarramea.”
“ Good ! That’s fine. We are going to—to —to Bacchus
Marsli for evening vespers. This is Sunday, aren’t it? ”
“ Yes, but vespers have commenced long since.”
“ Well then, to meet some friends who are journeying
to Ballaarat by the evening coach. That’ll do.”
“ That’ll do ; and our names, father ? ”
“ Roger and Edith Fairfax, but they won’t ask them.”
“ Should they do so it is as well to be prepared.”
There was no time for further colloquy, for the four
mounted troopers were now close upon them.
Ned and Rose were on the point of passing them by
with careless nods when he who seemed to be in command,
though none of the four wore a sergeant’s stripes, reined
up his horse and said—
“ A couple of words with you, sir, if you please.”
“ All right, my man,” said Ned. “ What is it ? ”
“ Have you seen anything of a gal on a white horse, and
a man on a big brown one ? ”
“ No, we haven’t met anyone since leaving Tarramea.”
“ But I saw two such people, papa,” interposed Rose,
“ or at lea.-t I think so, for they were too far off for me to
be quite sure about the matter.”
“ What w r ay were they riding, miss ? ” asked the trooper
“ I saw their horses’ heads and necks on the other side
of yonder brush fence as we were coming out of the home
paddock. The man’s horse was behind, and seemed to be
going lame. They were heading towards the gap between
the Black Hills.”
“Do you hear that, mates?” exclaimed the trooper,
turning towards his companions. “ Ten to one they are
making for the twelve-mile patch of the Malice Scrub that
lies between Deep Creek and Burnbank, but I guess we’ll
overtake them before they reach it, especially V Ned’s
horse has gone lame. Thank you for your information,
miss. It’s that murdering villain, Ned Kelly, and his
young savage of a gal that we’re after. A rare chip of the
old block that wench is turning out—couldn’t have been
worse if she’d been born a boy. However, she’s com-
mitted murder at last, and Jack Ketch is waiting to clap
the white cap over her bold, handsome face. Thank ’ee
again, miss. You’re quite safe riding in that direction,
if so be as you aren’t mistaken in the parties,” and,
touching the brim of his shako, the trooper wheeled round
and, followed by his companions, galloped away in the
direction that Rose had indicated as that taken by the
fugitive.
“ You did that capitally, my dear. By the time that
they have discovered the wild-goose chase that they have
been sent on we shall be in Melbourne safe from all
pursuit,” said Ned, approvingly, as they renewed their
journey.
Rose made him no reply. She was weeping bitterly.
For a long while she managed to restrain her sobs, but at
last, when her bosom was almost bursting with its pent-up
emotion, she was forced to give way to them, which she
did unrestrainedly.
“ Why, lass, what on earth’s in the wind now?”
“ Nothing, dear father. On my word, nothing.”
“ Tut, tut! folks don’t blubber for nothing.”
“Yo—yo—you don’t think that the hangman is really
waiting for me, do you, father ?” sobbed Rose.
“No, no, child, I’m very certain he is not.”
“ Oh, father, such a terrible, such a disgraceful death !
The muffled head—the horrid drop—the hooting crowd !
I’d sooner be gored to death by wild oxen. Father, pro-
mise me a present directly we get to Melbourne. Say that
it shall be the first thing that you will buy me there?”
“ All right, Rose, it shall be so if you wish it.”
“ Good, kind father, purchase me then a bottle of the
most deadly poison—a phial so small that I may easily
conceal it in my bosom. I will only have recourse to it
to save myself from a death of ignominy and shame.
Indeed 1 will, father. Why can’t we leave the country
altogether, and lead different lives elsewhere ? ”
“ Silence, Rose, or you will drive me mad.”
“ Not another word after you have promised 100.’*
“Well, well, there! I promise; but, Rose, there isn’t
the slightest danger. Our detection will be impossible.
I see nothing but a career of affluence, splendour, and
absolute safety before as. Ido not, indeed. Tut, tut!
my bonnie girl, dry your tears. In four hours’ time we
will be in Melbourne, gay, glittering, joyous Melbourne,
and all our troubles will be over. We will be as ‘ big bugs ’
as any people there.”
Thus did Ned try to cheer Rose up, and he in part suc-
ceeded, little fancying himself, meanwhile, that the perils
of the journey were far from being over, that the deadliest
was, in fact, yet to come.
CHAPTER XXXIL
SOME OLD ACQUAINTANCES.
Shift we tho scene to a spot some twenty miles nearer
Melbourne than that whereon we left Ned Kelly and Rose
—a piece of thick scrub about three miles in length and one
in breadth, situate between the Mount Alexander and the
Ballaarat roads just as they unite in one, and so continue
all the way to the metropolis.
In the midst of that patch of scrub, yet so situated that
.they can hear the rumble of heavy or the rattle of light
vehicles proceeding along either road, is pitched a camp;
and around it are gathered a group of seven as ruffianly-
looking fellows as any nation under the sun could manage
to produce.
The full moon shines down upon a dirty ragged calico
tent, on a huge cauldron of savoury broth that hangs sus-
pended from three crossed props over a big fire ; on the
woolly-headed, bare-armed buck nigger who superintends
the cooking; on the dark, gipsy-looking sentry, who
stands grasping the barrel of his rifle and intently listen-
ing for the slightest sound a little further off; and, lastly,
on the five remaining rascals, who sit or stand eagerly dis-
cussing, and occasionally laughing over, deeds of violence,
bloodshed, and murder, in close proximity to the aforesaid
ragged tent.
Are they honest miners, journeying to or from t£
Ballaarat or Mount Alexander diggings?
Well, they are got up as much as possible to look like
it, but their ferocious countenances give to all honest
labour the lie.
The least ruffianly-looking of the group wears an old
bell-topper hat cocked rakishly on one side of his head,
—albeit it has lost its brim a long while ago—and a
red belcher handkerchief twisted loosely around his neck.
With one hand thrust deep into the side pocket of his
rusty jumper, and the other balancing a dirty clay pipe in
such a manner as to give point to his arguments, our old
acquaintance Dick Dawson, alias Carroty Larkins, haran-
gued his cut-throat-looking band as pourtrayed in our
engraving.
“Pals,” said he, “we must all stand true to each
other. We are but seven of us left, but seven has always
been a lucky number, and I don’t see as why it should
prove an unlucky one now that you've done me the
honour of electing me as your capten. All I can say is
that I'll prove as true as steel to your interests, an’ that
without showing favoritism to one more nor to another.”
“ Like our old capting with his precious Lardy Bill an’
Lanky Jim,” growled the man who sat on his left, grasp-
ing the handle of a big woodsman’s-axe with both brawny
hands.
“Hear! hear! Well said, Nimraing Ned,” growled a
chorus of voices, and then a single one added, “ Ned


Kelly took too much upon his blessed self. He war a
tyrant, he war, divil a doubt of it.”
. “ Which I will never be lads,” ejaculated Carroty Lar-
kins quickly; “no double allowance of spoil for mo just
because I’ve the honour of being your leader. No such
thing. Share an’ share alike, I" say. You see .1 aren’t
hampered by the petticoats.”
“ Blow the petticoats!” came a unanimous chorus.
“Well, they are at the bottom of every mischief,”
assented Carroty Larkins. “The capten, I moans to say
the late capten, allays thought a deal more of that gal
Rose nor he did of any of us, and, wither his vitals ! we
was none of us considered good enough even to cast a
glance upon her. I’ll bet that he desarted us all along of
her—desarted us without so much as a good-bye or a
Devil-take-ye. He never knowed no manners, did Ned.”
“ I wouldn’t say as how he hadn’t made up his mind to
betray us to the traps. If that wasn’t his little game why
need he have slipped off so sly after the gold escort affair,
eh, pals ?”
It was Nimming Ned who put this question; and some
replied to it with dubious grunts and others with nods of
more than half-approval.
At this juncture, however, the sentry out beyond the
camp-fire held up his hand to impose silence, and everyone
began to listen intently.
“Riders—two of ’em !” ejaculated Nimming Ned.
“ Shall we stop them ?” questioned everyone with his
eyes, though not a word was spoken.
Then Carroty Larkins, after a moment’s consideration,
said—
“Ay, on'course we will. All’s fish as comes to the
net, lads. Come, let us look sharp.”
The other men at once sprang to their feet, and, grasp-
ing their weapons, stole after their leader through the
thuk undergrowth, ready for any deed of villainy as long
it brought them in gold.
Med Kelly and Rose were riding quietly the road
Melbournewards, when all at once three shots were fired
out of the close scrub on their left, and down went both
their horses, writhing and kicking in their death-agonies.
Ned was on his feet in a twinkling; but, seeing Rose
tying apparently unconscious on the ground, and within
a likely distance of having her brains kicked out, he flew
to her aid without ever bethinking himself of what the
character of the danger could be that now menaced
t) v,l~_
As he was in the act of lifting her up, however, both
were surrounded, laid roughly hold of and torn apart,
whilst Carroty Larkins shouted out—
“ Prig his barkers, if he’s got any, and empty his
pockets afterwards. Not that he’s of much account, only
a lardy-dardy swell. We’ll pluck him and let him go,
and keep the young woman for ourselves. Ha, ha! that’s
the little game.”
“ Larkins, you’re improved in villainy since we last parted
company. Don’t you know me ? ”
“ Jehoshaphat! The Capten ! Leastways I should say
Ned Kelly, for he ain’t capten no longer, having ov course
been sacked when he sneaked away without so much as
a good-day to his old pals.”
Carroty Larkins tried to speak defiantly, but as he was
a cur at heart, there was a something that would creep into
his tone that gave the lie to the independence of his
words.
“ Who dares to say that I deserted the band ? ” exclaimed
Ned, as he struggled fiercely in the hands of his captors.
“I was betrayed into the hands of the traps by Lardy Bill
and Lanky Jim, and my daughter helped me to escape from
the Boroma lockup only last night. We have been pur-
sued hither and thither by the Joeys almost ever since,
and our retreat is now cut off in every direction except
that of Melbourne, which is alone why we are journeying
thither. So how do you make it out that I’ve sneaked
away ? ” and the bushranger looked around him fiercely.
“ Well, it looked werry like it, didn’t it mates?” re-
joined Larkins, glancing eagerly round for, at all events
the moral support of his pals.
.“Ay, werry,” let out Nimming Ned. “And if Lardy
Bill and Lanky Jim betrayed you, as you tell us they did,
what became ov ’em after ? Just you answer that Ned
Kelly.”
“ What became of them? You’ll lu re to ask a certain
nest of bulldog-ants, far up in the bush, that question,”
broke forth Ned Kelly, fiercely,. “They should have
taken more care to keep out of my way. Ha, ha ! fearch
for them if you like, and you’ll find Lanky Jim’s skeleton
bound to a tree, and Lardy Bill’s stretched across the ant-
hill at its foot, with his right thigh bone shattered with a
pistol-bullet, so that he could not crawl away. So perish
all who would dare to play me false!” and as he
concluded he cast a terrible look around upon his late
followers.
Carroty Larkins, quailing before it, slunk away, but
Nimming Ned, who had more brute-courage, exclaimed
with a wolf-like growl—
“ Which way is it to be, mates—the old capten or the
new un? I’m for Carroty Larkins, I am.”
“And I’m for Ned Kelly, still!” at once spoke up
another bushranger; whereupon Larkins, coming back,
exclaimed heartily, “I’m for Ned Kelly as well, and as I
expect ar; we all. Ned, I was opposed to you as long as
I thought you’d used us mean and shabby, but I accepts
your explanation as a true un ; indeed, I’ve no doubt
whatever of its being so, and I therefore resigns the com-
mand and beseeches on you to take it up again. There,
I’ve said it.”
A cheer from all parties concerned greeted this speech,
in which Nimming Ned faintly joined.
Thereafter he walked across to Larkins, and whispered
in his ear—
“ Our hailing him as our capten noiv , don’t stop us cut-
ting his throat when he’s asleep by-and-by. His carrion’s
worth as much as his living body remember, and I’ll eat
my head if both he and she haven’t a precious lot of spoil
hidden away about, ’em,” and here he chuckled grimly.
The rest, however, seemed heartily glad to have got
their old leader back again, and conducted him in triumph
through the belt of scrub to their camping-ground, where
the soup was just done to a nicety and all ready for
eating.
Rose had by this time quite come round, and great
was her horror at discovering by whom she was sur-
rounded.
Ned’s rage and mortification were every whit as great,
but he dared not show it. All that he could do was to
make the best of circumstances and patiently abide his
tiy.j.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
PLANS FOR THE FUTURE.—MELBOURNE.
Yes, Ned Kelly was really annoyed, almost beyond all
patience and endurance, that his lot was again cast
amongst this set of ruffians.
He had made up his mind to have gone to the neigh-
bouring colony of Sydney—to have introduced Rose to the
respectable world, and somehow or other secured her a
brilliant marriage.”
Yes, he had determined to be a political refugee (a
class of men that all romantic women love), an Irish noble
with a price set upon his head for endeavouring to
emancipate his unhappy country from the rule of the
heretic Saxon.
And now here was a dead weight cast upon all these
brilliant plam'j and prospects, a dead weight that he
dared not cast off. But in the meantime what
should he do with this disreputable-looking tail in
Melbourne ? They would never pass muster as Irish re-
fugees, they looked a deal more like Neapolitan brigands,
and the chances were that they would find themselves


totally unable to keep out of mischief, whilst the odds
were at a hundred to one that if one got lagged he would
seek to slip his own neck out of the hangman’s noose by
substituting those of all his comrades, his (Ned’s) and
Rose’s included.
And yet Kelly felt that to shake them off now was
impossible. Having re-elected him their captain, an
honour that it would have been as much as his life was
worth to have declined, they would stick to him as tightly
as barnacles stick to a drifting piece of wreckwood, expecting
him almost daily to plan out schemes of villainy that would
enrich the entire commonwealth, which riches would be
quickly dissipated in women and wine, two sources from
which betrayal was about equally to be expected. Could
things possibly have happened worse ?
How Ned now regretted that he had revealed himself to
the bushrangers, for he felt sure that not even Carroty
Larkins would have recognised him else.
True, he had done so in order to save Rose from their
ruffianly hands ; and when he reflected that the revelation
certainly had saved her, he became convinced that after all
he had acted for the best.
So the question was reduced to that of making the best
of a bad bargain. Whas was already done could not be
recalled. He must make what use of these men he could,
controlling them so that they should do as little harm as
possible.
Rose guessed pretty nearly what were the subjects of
his thoughts, and so did not interrupt him even by a
word.
The bushrangers, however, soon showed themselves to
be more impatient; and when supper was disposed of and
pipes lighted, they nudged each other as to who should be
spokesman, and presently Carroty Larkins made bold t®
speak up—
“ Well, capten, sif/ce I’ve given up the command to you
with a werry good grace, I suppose as I’ve a right to con-
sider myself your leftenant; and in the character of that
there indiwiddle I now axes you the plan ov our future
campanes.”
“ May I first enquire of yon what you intended to have
done in case I hadn't rejoined you?”
“In course you may, capten, an’ in the present instance
easy axed is easy answered. You see we’ve a tidy little
covert here, right atween two roads, and them the main
roads to and from a couple ov rich diggings, so that we
couldn’t be in a better spot for filling our pockets at other
folks’expense. Ain’t I right, boys ? If so, speak up.”
“Ay, ay ! a fine place,” echoed several rangers.
“ The best place that I ever saw,” echoed Ned.
“ Come, I’m glad as you agrees with me, capten.”
** Yes, it’s the best place I ever saw for the traps to hem
you in on all sides and catch every mother’s son ov you
without a possibility of a single one breaking cover. How
long have you been here ?”
“Arrived just six hours ago,” said one.
“ I thought you could not have been much longer than
that at work,” laughed Ned. “ 'Well, another twenty-four
would probably have seen you all in a much securer place,
namely, inside Pentridge Stockade. Why, you could not
have chosen a more favourable spot for being entirely sur-
rounded, cut off, and destroyed.”
The men looked perfectly astounded and bewildered.
Larkins scratched his round bullet head and looked both
silly and sullen ; whereupon Nimming Ned bent forward
and whispered in his ear :
“Three inches of cold steel will atone for all this. ’Tis
a poor return for what you’ve just bin and gone and done
for him, to show you up in tins manner, Carroty, darned
if it isn’t! ”
The remaining live men, however, seemed to be remark-
ably thankful that their old leader had turned up in time
•to preserve them from the catastrophe that he had pointed
•out as threatening them.
And now they demanded, as in one breath, what were
hi* plans for the future.
“ Wait a bit, my lads, and I'll tell you. Rose, my dear,
just walk out of earshot, will you ? ” I have that to say
to these brave fellows that it is not fitting that you should
hear. Keep a sharp lookout for deaf adders, though, for
this used to be a terrible place for them, and come back
when I whistle.”
Rose raised no objection, but did as she was bidden.
“Now, my lads,” continued Ned, “are you ready for
great things V and to accomplish them the more surely,
can you keep for awhile from drink, sweethearts, and blow*
inq ? and it’ll be worth your while.”
Thereupon some of the bushrangers remarked that if
’twas very much worth their while they might manage. At
all events, they would try, they said.
“ It’s no good only trying,” retorted Ned testily, “ Be-
fore the enterprise is commenced I’ll have to bind each
one of you by the most solemn and awful oaths to remain
sober, and give the fair sex ( foul sex would be a more cor-
rect term, when applied to some of your sweethearts) a
wide berth, until we are clear away at sea.”
“ At sea? ” echoexl two of the bushrangers, almost joy-
fully ; for they had once been honest, sturdy, British
sailors. “At sea, did you say, capten ? ”
“Ay, at sea!” reiterated Ned, “and in possession of a
stout craft laden with golden spoil, and bound for the old
country! What think you of that, lads? ”
“That the thing’s a deal too good ever to come off,
that’s what I think ov it,” growled Larkins.
“Tut, tut! nothing’s impossible to brave and determined
men. But there’s a hard nut to be cracked first—the nut
that the golden kernel is inside of. What say you. lads,
to robbing the richest bank in Melbourne city and de-
camping with the spoil ? Don’t speak all at once ! ”
But they did speak all at once, the scheme was so
exactly to their taste.
Even Nimraing Ned was won over.
Larkins alone was obdurate, for he hadn’t forgiven
Kelly for so severely criticising his generalship, and out
of sheer spite he felt disposed to oppose him in everything.
In reply to a host of questions —all poured in upon him
at once, and mingled with Carroty Larkins’s clearly
audible asides of “ The thing can’t be done. It stands to
reason as how it can’t be done. A short road to the gal-
lows, that’s all that it’ll prove,” and so on—Ned raised a
hand to impose silence, and then said impressively—
“ Listen, lads, to my scheme. The Bank of Australasia
is on the right-hand side of Collins-street, a few doors
from the Criterion Hotel and the Aryns Office. Opposite
are some fine shops, and it’s not very often in these times
of everybody sloping off to try their luck at the diggings
that one of ’em isn’t to be let. 1 shall take one of those shops
and open it, say, as a wholesale drug store, or a merchant’s
of some kind. The upper portion 1 shall appropriate as
my private residence, whilst the entire ground floor and
the cellars will be devoted to business. Do you follow me ? ’
There was a general shaking of heads, and looks of
quite comical bewilderment.
Not one of the assemblage understood him in the least
degree.
Ned smiled grimly, and then continued—
“ In my business I shall require many hands—ware-
housemen, and shopmen, and carters, and indoor and out-
door porters. They will live somewhere or other about
the basement premises, and talk and dress and act like
other folks. They will make no friends in or about
the city, but be sober and orderly and civil to all cus-
tomers and others, and work by night as well as by day.” ’
“ Oh, that be bio wed!” at this point remarked some-
body.
“ Yes, they will,” said Ned Kelly, fixing the speaker
with his eye ; “ for at night each man will be working for
his own future. He will be wielding spade and pick to
make himself a millionaire.”
“ A milliner! What the deuce do we want to make our-
selves milliners for—a trashy trade as is only fit fo#
women?” growled Carroty Larkina.


“ TLti capten don’t mean that kind ; he means the sort
as is rolling in wealth, numskull. Millioners and millin-
gers hain’t the same thing either Go ahead, boss, and
don't mind him.”
“Well then," said Ned, “at night, to speak more
plainly, we’ll be driving a tunnel right under Collins-
street to—can anyone guess where ? ”
“Ay, close up to some bonnio craft as is lying along-
side the quay at the bottom ov Flinder’s-street, which
we’ll board and carry on, then put to sea in,” hazarded one
of the ex-sailors wildly.
“ Fool’s game, fool’s game! ’’ muttered Larkins.
“1 should think it would be,” laughed Ned Kelly.
“ The tunnel wdl be into the bullion vaults of the Bank
of Australasia, where each one of us will be able to enrich
himself to the very top of his bent. Ila, ha! you seem
to grow suddenly interested. What think you of my
plan, lads? Do you fall in with it, eh? ”
Fall in with it? There wasn’t a bit of doubt about
that. The seven men suddenly changed into seeming
maniacs in their greed for gold. Their eyes almost started
out of their heads, their hands clutched the air or the
grass; they gasped for breath, the scheme seemed to them
such a grand one, and the success thereof so extremely
probable.
“And when we’ve copped the gold, if so be as we do
cop it, what then, capten V” asked Larkins.
“ Ere that time comes I shall have chartered a sloop or
small coasting schooner to convey some of my merchandise
to New Zealand. The gold ingots, and bars, and nuggets,
and dust, once on our own premises, we can pack them
away into boxes and barrels bearing the name of our usual
wares. At dawn our carts will convey them aboard our
vessel as she lies alongside the wharf ; a few minutes later
the remainder of her crew will go aboard of her, to wit
ourselves, decked out in true nautical fashion. A steam
tug will be ready to take us in tow, and we shall be fairly
outside the Heads, with a blue above and a blue below, as
the song has it, by the time that the city clock strikes Gn,
and the lazy bank clerks are just settling at their desks.”
“ Capten, it’s you that’s got the head for contriv-
ing, an’ no mistake,” exclaimed a bushranger who hadn’t
before spoken. “The schame’s a beautiful one intirely.
Faith, an’ whin I gets back to old Oirland wid my share
ov the wealth, I’ll buy a castle, an’ marry a beautiful young
colleen, an’ drive a bright yaller chariot drawn by six
spotted coach-horses, wid a post-boy in scarlet on each
ov ’em. ’Dade an’ I will that.”
“ Ye’ll never get to Ireland, man, for the capten’s mite
ov a coaster will go down in the big seas off the Cape of
Good Hope,” growled Larkins.
“ Why, you chuckle-head,” exclaimed one of the ex-
sailors, on hearing this, “who’d think of sailing to England
that way? It’s round the Horn we’ll have to go ; and for
the mountain billows that one meets with in those regions
always and for ever a-rolling before the brave west winds
to the east’ard, give me a light-heeled craft as ’ll dance
over them, far before a huge monster as will wallow down
souse between every wave and feel as though she never
meant to rise again. 1 know what it is to take aboard one
ov they icy green billows, I can tell you, m tes—ay, and
what it is for a big ship to broach to in ’em also, and per-
haps have her poop cabins wrenched from out of her, and
scattered all over the sea like shivered matchwood.”
“ So vou see, Larkins, that a small, light, well-built
craft, that answers her helm quickly, is as safe as a three-
decker,” said Ned, turning to the in everyway discomfited
ex-captain. “ Now let me put it to you at once and for
all t me, do you cast in your lot with us heartily and of
your own free will? Answer 1:1* 44 a man.”
44 1 do, capten, hand and heart. There’s my fin upon
t,” retorted the party addressed, who knew well enough
that if lie attempted to back out now he would most as-
suredly be murdered as one who knew far too much for
th» safety of the rest, leave alone his power to compromise
the success of their daring enterprise
Ned Kelly accepted the offered hand, and gave it a
wring that caused the proprietor thereof to wince. Theft
all the other bushrangers crowded around him, eager to
shake hands in turn.
When Kelly had gone through the ordeal, he said—
“ Now, I and my daughter had better continue onr
journey to Melbourne at once. You will have to give us
two of your horses in place of those that you have shot.
Take the harness off the dead animals for our use,
and drag them out of sight into the bush, for should some
trooper come across them ere you are well away from here
their suspicions would be sure to be a roiled, and you
might precious soon find yourselves in Queen-street. Now
my final directions are, that you all get well away from
here before dawn, leaving your horses and all weapons
that can’t be readily concealed, behind you; that you enter
Melbourne singly, or at most in pairs, and from different
directions; that you get yourselves shaved and looking
decent as soon as possible, and even before you think of
reassembling, each in the kind of dress that was the badge
of his calling or pursuit before he took to a fierce and
lawless life, for there are slop and second-hand clothes
shops everywhere, and that you await my coming in the
employment office that you will find in Great Bourke-
street, nearly opposite the Horse Bazaar, at noon, on
Tuesday, all pretending to be strangers to each other.
You understand me?”
“ Yes, yes !” exclaimed everyone in a breath.
“Make haste with our horses, then,” answered Ned.
No objection was raised. Two of the men immediately
sot off to catch and equip a couple of steeds, and Ned
whistled to Rose.
In a minute she was by his side, and looking up anxi-
ously into his fa 'e.
“We are about to continue our journey,” said he;
“ shake hands with our friends, lass, for when next you
see them we shall all of us be engaged in honest and legi
timate trade.”
“ 1 am so glad to hear it,” answered the lovely girl, and
she held out one hand to Carroty Larkins and the other
to Nimming Ned at once, who each laid hold of tin*
tendered article as gingerly as though it was a piece of
valuable waxwork that without tender handling would be
very likely to break off in their grasp.
The others copied their tactics exactly, as presently did
the two men who brought up the horses.
Ned lifted Rose into the saddle and then mounted
himself.
The bushrangers would have raised a cheer, but Ned
stopped them, as it would not have been altogether safe,
and after reiterating some of his cautious and directions
they rode away.
“ We are well out of that moss, dear,” said Ned.
“ Yes,” answered Rose, “but I’m glad we tell across the
men, both for their own sakes and that ol others, since
you have really persuaded them henceforth to turn over a
new leaf and lead an honest life.”
Ned Kelly locked keenly at the fair girl. There was no
suspicion or irony either in her expression or tone. He
had never seen her look so bright and happy before, and
so he had not the heart to undeceive her as to the honesty
of his and their future career.
“ Yes, Rose.” he said, “ with the capital that I have in
hand I am going to open business as a merchant, and take
all these men into my employ.”
“ Oh, father, I hope none of them will betray you.”
“ I have no fear, girl.”
“ Well, you know them better than I do, and if you feel
certain that you can trust them 1 shall feel very happy in
the thought that you have done them good.”
4 Jie happy, then, for I am quite safe.”
And then he changed the conversation to other topics,
for he dared not dweU longer on that oue.
Melbourne was now only fifteen miles distant, and scat-
tered villages and townships soon began to enliven the way.


Now and then a coach would flash past them, going one
way or the other, and frequently they would meet or over-
take a heavily-laden tilted waggon; those approaching the
metropolis laden with bales of wool, or perhaps a stinking
cargo of green hides, and those proceeding up country
filled with provisions, wares, and clothing for the shops
■and stores of far-distant bush townships
Troopers, too, were encountered, with jingling chain-
bridles and clattering sword-scabbards, and diggers on horse-
back and on foot, all pressing forward towards the golden
El Dorado of Ballarat and Forest Creek, to find, very pro-
bably, after months of toil, mares’-nests instead of nuggets.
By-and-by the dark grey walls of the formidable prison
of Pentridge frowned upon them, causing Ned, brave as
he was, an involuntary shudder; and shortly afterwards
they rattled through the pretty suburban township of
Brunswick, to be quickly succeeded by that of Fitzroy,
when for the first time the gas-lamps of Melbourne spread
out before them in long glittering lines of light, and ten
minutes later they drew rein at the already famed Albion
Hotel in Great Bourke-street.
Here Ned ordered the very best accommodation that
the house could afford for himself and daughter, who
gazed in awe and wonder at the to her sumptuously-fur-
nished room to which they were immediately conducted,
wondering in her own simple mind whether anything in a
king’s palace could be finer.
Poor rooms, after all. Gaudiaess and execrable taste
was all they then could boast of.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
MESSRS. BELLAMY & CO., WHOLESALE MERCHANTS.
A week has passed away, and a new ssd extensive place
of business has been opened in Great Collins-street,
exactly opposite the Bank of Australasia, under the desig-
nation of “ Bellamy & Co , wholesale merchants.”
The warehouse is, however, apparently crowded with,
great bales and boxes and articles of merchandise, done
up in every form and shape; and clerks and indoor and
outdoor porters and warehousemen, all clean and business-
like, are eternally pottering hither and thither; and carts
and waggons are continually being laden and unladen be-
fore the doors ; and sailors, with a fresh and wholesome
smell of the briny about them, visited the premises hur-
riedly and darted away again with equal speed, hitching up
their unmentionables, and squirting tobacco-juice about the
jiavement, as sailor-men are proverbially supposed to do.
Had anyone looked at the upper windows of Messrs.
Bellamy & Co.’s, he would have observed those of the draw-
ing-room floor to be draped by cloth-of-gold curtains, deco-
rated with heavy bullion fringe and tassels; and at one or
other of them he would have frequently seen the face and
form of a young and lovely girl, the face framed by a mass
of glossy clustering curls, that gleamed with almost the
THE “ANONYMA
PICTURE
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
JBOAE*:OS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
brilliance of jet as they rippled over full, fair, creamy
shoulders that would have put to shame the whiteness oi
Carrara marble ; and the form, that was just swelling into
the rounded contours of womanhood, draped in the most
expensive stuffs that the whole world was capable of con-
tributing to its adornment.
After business hours a couple of thoroughbred horses,
held by a natty groom, or a high dogcart and tandem,
might be frequently beheld in front ot the side private
door, and presently that young girl would trip forth, attired
for riding or driving, as the case might be, and attended
by a gentleman who was supposed to be her father,
but who might almost have passed for her elder brother
said gentleman being always faultlessly attired, and neatly
gloved and booted—and bystanders would remark, as the
comely and aristocratic-looking couple dashed off
“There go the rich Mr. Bellamy and his only child.
Dear, oh, what a roaring trade that firm’s doing! ” Whilst
some of the deeper thinkers, who nad lived in Melbourne
for some years, would be apt to mutter to themselves
“ I wonder who the deuce that fellow is, and where he
turned up from, and whom he transacts business with? No
one recollects his coming out,” and so on, ad infinitum.
Of course the reader is better informed, and has long
ago recognised, in Mr. Bellamy and his daughter, Ned
Kelly and Rose Casey.
And how happy is Rose. She believes that the man
whom she regards, and notwithstanding all his crimes
venerates as her father, is really leading an honest life, and,
furthermore, has induced others to do so. She recognises
at least half those clerks and porters and sailors and ware-
housemen as former members of the bushranger band up
in the Mount Macedon range}, and the new hands who are
strangers to her, and about equal them in numbers, look
to her equally honest and respectable.
How changed would have been her feeling had she but
known that the whole lot of them were the biggest set of
villains ever left unhung, that the subterranean tunnel was
already commenced whose termination would be the bullion
vaults of the opposite bank, and that one and all, her stylish-
looking companion included, were ready to commit any
and every crime rather than be foiled in their undertaking.
Behold them of a night in a large room on the basement-
floor of the mansion, that has been given up to them for
their sole use, and you would not suppose this
There sit Carroty Larkins and Nirnming Ned in the
foreground, pipes in hand and a great pewter pot of
gin and ale standing between them on the rough table,
looking as respectable as two working men could well look :
at another table sit our sailor friends, similarly engaged
(our artist has drawn them to the life), whilst a couple of
younger and more ardent spirits are doing a double shuffle
in their heavy hob-nailed boots, and three or four of cheir
fellows look admiringly on.
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby. i Woman.
I! 16 S° il( r d ov . e - , . The Beautiful Demon.
Skittles in Pans, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The i_ ac jy with the Camelias.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and . . _ .
Passion. Pans L,fe at Tw enty.




CHAPTER XXXV.
AN UNEXPECTED APPARITION.
In the last chapter the select company therein depicted
sat with open eyes and mouths, expecting the promised
vocal display.
“ Go it,” shouted Nimming Ned, taking a pull from a
flask and handing it to Carroty, who plentifully wet his
whistle and then struck up the following ditty:—
“ What a difference exists between London and here.
For there things are cheap, but here things are dear ;
There a shilling goes further in value, though small.
Than a sovereign out here, which goes no way at all.
At home aristocracy seems all the go.
On the diggings we’re all on a level, you know;
The poor man out here ain’t oppressed by the rich,
But dressed in blue shirts you can’t tell which is which.
** Now for the chorus, boys :
** So this is the country, with rich golden soil,
To pay good reward for industrious toil ;
There’s no masters here to oppress a poor devil,
For out in Australia we’re all on a level.
The swell that in London rides through Rotten-row
Is admired and bowed to by many, you know ;
But if he thus rode down the Ballarat-road,
I rather guess he would be jolly well “joed.’’
Lucky diggers in cabs you may frequently meet.
In blue shirts, being driven in Great Collins-street;
If they dressed so in London and drove about there,
Good gracious 1 how all the Cockneys would stare.
To the Church of St. George’s in Hanover-square,
To get married, the great folks of London repair ;
In phaeton the bridegroom and all his friends ride,
And a fine carriage then dashes up with the bride.
Full of fashion and beauty the church is that day,
And how sweetly the bride weeps when given away.
To the breakfast they hasten, and then, light of heart.
The happy pair off to the Continent start.
But a wedding out here is a different thing;
No carriages drive up, no marriage-bells ring.
To the church here the girl and her lover they start.
And if they don’t walk they ride in a spring-cart.
The bride takes a bottle of brandy, chock-full.
And to keep up her spirits imbibes a long pull;
She don't faint away, nor yet get in a funk,
But when married goes home, and gets jolly well drunk.
in London the swells in the parks drive all round,
But the diggers drive here with a pick underground ;
And the props that they use, surely, everyone knows,
Aren't like those used in London for hanging out clothe*.
The women use fans there, the men use ’em here,*
Though to Cockneys that statement may sound very queer;
And the fellows that frequently hang round hotels,
Out here are called loafers, at home are called swells.
In London, the gas is lit up every night,
But the thing that’s called gas here don’t give any light ;
The gutter at home and the gutter out here
Are things widely different, to all is quite clear.
In London two trotters you get for a penny,
Which you pay a bob here for, or else can't have any;
All kinds of provisions are high in price here,
And taturs and greens is most awfully dear.
In London you go to a threepenny hop,
But here it’s a bob if tie weasel you pop ;
At home there are workhouses, here none at all.
So, of course, here the weakest must go to the wall.
In London the peelers down aries will go,
To make love to the cook and the victuals, you know.
But here there’s no aries down which to intrude,
So, of course, the Australian bobbies are slewed.
The gals that come out in Australia to roam
Have much higher notions than when they’re at home;
And you'll find precious quickly they don’t care a pin
For a digger unless he has plenty of tin.
Lots of gals from an offer that would be debarred
If they togged up in Hoyle’s prints at fourpence a yard,
Find it perfectly easy a husband to fix,
Dressed in a score yards of satin at seven-and-six.
“Now, chorus for the last time, lads, and in sood
folium—•
" So this is the country, with rich golden soil,
To pay good .tsard for industrious toil ;
T here's no masters here to oppress a poor devil,
For out in Australia we’re all on a level ”
Just at this moment their mirth was somewhat damped
Ify the sudden entrance of Ned Kelly, whose looks were
furious, and his words no less so. lie scowled upon the
revellers with ill-suppressed rage—
“ldiots! dolts! confounded asses! What are you
about? Do you want to rouse the whole neighbourhood,
and call down the attention of the police ? Curse you all!
• A fan is a machine for pumping fresh air down a mine shaft.
Am I always to be in danger from your infernal stupidity,
by which you risk your own necks and mine too ? Clear
out of this, the lot of you ! Such pals as you are, are not
to be trusted. I'm only safe because I've got your necks
in my hand, ana down you must go with me if 1 go to the
‘ drop.’ I shat up this crib to-night and leave it. We
don’t work together any more. I'm done with this job.
Now vammns ! ’’
The men expostulated, but they might as well have
tried to move the pyramid of Cheops.
Out they went.
Ned locked up the place, and, to bailie his crew, he
arranged to meet them in a week on the ranges.
He appointed another meeting with Carroty and Daw-
son, and removed the same evening with Rose to an
hotel.
He began to fear that so many codas would spoil the
broth, and that their want of caution would betray them
and him too.
They had nearly “knocked down” the “spoils” they
had in their possession when arriving in town ; and if they
required fresh supplies they must return to their old bush
practices of robbing, and perhaps murdering, lucky
diggers.
This was of daily or nightly occurrence at Gandliurst
and Ballarat.
The ground was honeycombed with pits from twenty to
fifty feet deep, and nothing was more easy or common than
for half-drunken or perfectly-sober diggers being, like
Joseph, “cast into the pit,” there to remain and rot.
Many a lucky digger has entertained his assassin, and,
when asleep, been murdered and thrown into the nearest
hole in the nearest “ claim.”
Ned’s band were most practised in this style of
“foraging,” as they named it, and always knew how and
where to replenish their exchequer.
Consequently the most of them cleared out of Mel-
bourne the following morning at daylight.
To deaden suspicion Ned removed the same night to a
third-rate hotel.
lie gave orders to have all his merchandise and furni-
ture sold (as he was about to proceed to England), paid a
quarter’s rent, and gave up the premises.
But nothing was more foreign to his intentions than to
abandon his bank project.
Rose did not know whether to feel alarmed or pleased at
being an inmate of what seemed to her too public a resi-
dence, but, keen and observant, she followed Ned Kelly,
and maintained a cool demeanour.
Graceful and ladylike by nature, and not being too
demonstrative in manner, she passed muster for the
daughter of a gentleman who was visiting the land of gold
for amusement, while the sight of so many gaily-dressed
people and waiters, flitting about in hot haste, brought all
her self-control into action.
Ned seemed to know the hotel as well as if he had
been its oldest inhabitant, and bringing Rose into the
dining-room, he ordered a plentiful rather than elegant
repast, which was quickly served, and as quicklv de-
spatched.
“Rose,” said Ked Kelly, as he pushed away bis plate
and leaned back in his chair, “ it is time that you went
to bed. The long journey is too much for you. You
look thoroughly done up—washed out; but a good long
‘coil’will bring the bloom back again. Listen to me
Keep up the name of Bellamy ; show no surprise at any-
• tiling you may see or hear, but keep your ears and eyes
open, and let me know all you see and hear.”
As the unfortunate girl rose with a sigh to go to the
room appointed to her, she stooped and kissed the fierce-
bushranger.
Ihe caress seemed to produce a saddening eifeef upon
him , he leaned his elbows upon the table, and shaded hi.
face with his hand as if striving to conceal its expression
from Rose.
“M hat is the matter, fathershe asked. “It is yoi


who require sleep. Your eyes are sunk deep in your
head. Rest, father, or you will be knocked up.”
Ned laughed bitterly as he pushed back the hair from
the girl’s brows and looked fixedly into her eyes.
“ I have no time to be ill, Rosa/’ he said. “ This place
and all about it call up strange recollections. lam rather
downhearted at times, and particularly so to-night. I’va
something to think of, so be off to your room.”
She obeyed without uttering another syllable, but was
evidently depressed by Ned’s manner and vorda.
Sed sat staring for a long time at the gaudily-decorated
walls.
uo 679 s were fixed upon vacancy, his thoughts evi-
dently concentrated upon some important project.
At last he sprang to his feet, and, giving himself a shake,
as if to dissipate unwelcome thoughts, he put on his
“ billycock ” and rushed out into the open air.
He was in a restless mood, and paced nervously through
the streets, stopping now and then to scan the faces of
the passers-by, for, like all criminals, “he feared an
officer in every bush.”
Some had only just arrived in the colony, and exhibited
all the curiosity and interest in surrounding objects, of
“ new chums.”
Activity and ardour seemed the characteristic of every-
one. Busy about business or pleasure, “ the world before
them where to choose,” as Milton says of our first
parents—no downcast labour-worn faces —plenty reigned
round and about—and every man had that look of inde-
pendence and hope so absent from the careworn faces of
our working population.
The women, too, had less of the “ drab’’-like and
slattern aspect so cha acteristic of our female “lower
orders.”
And no wonder. Beef and mutton were and are two-
pence a pound, and wages from twelve to fourteen shillings
a day.
The poor man’s paradise, it’s no wonder if the inhabi-
tants of this modern Eden felt and looked “ as jolly as
sand-boys,” whatever that may mean. But with a splen-
did climate, easy work, good pay, and plenty of food,
cont-at and something more irradiated the faces of “the
working classes ” of this marvellous colony.
The night was beautifully fine ; but this is a cold and
inadequate phrase to convey a picture of an Australian
night,
A sky of burnished silver, studded with stars as bright
as harvest moons, flooded the atmosphere with a rich light
even when there was no moon to dwarf them ; and small
print can be read by starlight in these regions. Moon-
light is as unlike anything of that name in England as
electric-light is to a farthing dip or the speck in the back
of a glowworm.
In Australia she is seen in her full glory, and makes a
second day of the night.
Her disc presents the surface of burnished gold which
one sees when regarding her through a powerful
telescope.
Such a thing as “ the pale moonlight” spoken of by Sir
falter Scott does not exist in the Antipodes. It is soft,
mellow, with the effulgence of fifty-power European
moonlight, and almost rosy in tint.
The very stars were almost as bright as northern
moons, the sky was studded with them as'with diamonds.,
and might have suggested to the reflective where tire real
“ diamond diggings ” were to be found.
As Ned Kelly was returning to the hotel, bent on
“ turning in,” he thought how peaceful everything looked,
and what a contrast the calmness above presented to the
restless fears of every kind that encompassed him here
below.
His rugged nature was somewhat softened, and fast, then
he noticed a very “seedy” looking young fellow glancing
wistfully into the open door of the hotel.
The expression of his face was so woebegone- and ex-
hausted that he spoke to him-**
“ Down on r luck my lad, eh ?” he asked.
“Luck!” was thv. sullen and sad reply—“ I and that
word parted company losg ago. Work I cau’t get, as they
say I’m a 1 swell ’; and as t® begging, well, 1 couldn’t
whine or cringe even if I was o*i the brink of starvation.
I’m big and strong, and willing to » 'rk; but somehow
I don’t know how to begin. Ha! ha: Well, after
all, this sort of thing makes up one’s life, bvutitc» ’t last
for ever, and that’s a comfort. I must either do or dfe.”
“ Been to the diggings?” Ned asked
“ Yes, and parted with every shilling for a salted claim,”
the young fellow replied. “If 1 ever meet the man who
sold me, this world will be too small for both of us.”
“ What is your name ?” Ned Kelly demanded. “You
seem to be a fellow of pluck. Can Ibe of any help to
you ?”
“My name, if it’s any use to you, is Harry Marston ”
A sudden thought flashed through Kelly’s brain.
“I’ll use him,” he muttered ; “ just the man 1 want-
unsuspicious, young, and respectable. He’s the ladder I’ll
climb out of danger on.
“ There’s a sovereign for you ; you can repay me when
you can, and, if you follow my advice, you won’t long
want tin. Give me a look in at the Bush Inn to-morrow
morning—Mr. Bellamy. Humph ! we don’t do the swell
business with cards here ; but you’ll remember the name.”
“ Remember the name,” Harry Marston said, his face
blazing with hope and gratitude ; “by Jove ! I won’t
forget it in a hurry. No angel of light could be more
welcome than the sight of you.”
“ I am not quite one of your angels of light, yet,” Ned
Kelly said, laughing; “ a little darkness suits me better
at times ; but I don’t suppose who or what I am matters
much to anyone. Enough,” he ejaculated, with some
bitterness, “we shall meet and understand each other
better in the morning, I dare say.”
He turned away abruptly, and, entering the hotel, strode
up the staircase towards his bedroom.
He had nearly reached the top, when he stopped and
clutched at his hair. His blood, which seemed to suddenly
stagnate, in another instant coursed madly through his
veins, for right in front of him stood “Sandy” M‘Phcrson,
or the “fetch ” of the squatter.
“Death and furies! speak if you are a man,” Ned Kelly
growled between his teeth.
Even as he spake, the figure vanished, and Ned, with
all his powerful strength and iron will, felt as weak as a
child, and clutched the ballusters to save himself from
falling.
“Am I mad?” he muttered. “ Has my brain turned'?
Come back, and if you can be grappled with, let me place
my hands upon you, and I will finish the work I thought
I had done before.”
There was no reply to these ravings, and after a
moment’s hesitation; Ned Kelly entered Lis room and
glanced wildly and ferociously around.
“It was my fancy,” he said; “but I’m not a fellow
given to that sort of thing. Pshaw! when Ned Kelly’s
‘ nut ’ fails him and he goes wild, some of the lob here-
abouts will have to look out; but I’ll get out of this right
off, and cut the road. I’ve enough, and Rose must be
looked to.”
lie threw himself on the bed, bnc could not sleep.
Whenever he closed his eyes the figure of Andrew
M‘Pherson rose before his heated imagination He
certainly saw a man he thoroughly believed to be as rfcad
as Adam. His knife had dived throe times into his body,
and if he lived alter that, more than Ned Kelly would have
been astoundet He tumbled and tossed about all night.
At last he fell into a troubled heavy sleep, but was evi-
dently greatly disturbed by his dreams. His whole career,
as well as its probable end was vididly pictured by the
nightmare that oppressed him. Day dawned, and found
him awake but restless and feverish. He was weak,
trembling, and continually glancing over his shoulder.
He did not leave the room until he had swallowed


a pint of brandy to restore his shattered nerves. The
fiery spirit put nerve into him. His eyes glistened
as of old, and when he went down to join Rose at break-
fast, the girl saw no signs of the miserable night Ned
Kelly had passed, or of the “ shadows that struck more
terrors to the soul of Richard ” than the forms of fifty
ordinary enemies.
“ Oh, father,” said Rose, “ jus A before you came down
such a funny thing happened. I was sitting by the
window, when & tall, dark man stopped and stared at me
—not impertinently, but as if he had seen me before.
And, stranger still, I think I have seen him, but I cannot
tell where. But, if he did once know me, I don’t know
how he could have recognised me in this disguise allud-
ing to her hair, which no longer curled over her head like
the wool of a Newfoundland dog, but was now worn Ma-
donna-like. The whole character of her face was changed.
“ So she, too, has seen him,” Ned muttered, compress-
ing his lips, and grasping the edges of the table. “This
must be a visitation from the dead No man could live
after the way I handled him with my knife. I couldn’t be
such a botch as to do my work so badly. I don’t generally
leave much to finish when I’m on the war-path.”
“ You need not pay any attention to strangers, Rose,”
he said aloud. “ People just arrived in the colony are
always looking out for others they have met in Europe,
and strange mistakes are often made. I towever, its not
worth bothering about, so we’ll talk of something else.”
As soon as breakfast was over Kelly went into Collins-
street and opened an account with an obscure bank in the
name of Mr. Bellamy. He didn’t want to parade himself
too much, but he knew the police would never look for
Ned Kelly in the Bush Inn.
Considering all circumstances he played the part of a
gentleman fairly well. Rose acknowledged him to be an
actor of no mean merit. Ned had observed that another
house opposite the Bank of Australasia was to let. His
thoughts immediately reverted to the apparently aban-
doned scheme of robbery. Like many people, robbing a
bank did not seem so criminal as robbing an individual,
and, although the crime had little weight with Kelly, the
thought of plundering a company was more to his liking.
Kelly reconnoitred the premises and saw they would
do well for his purpose. They were furnished, which
would save him a great deal of trouble. He took note of
the agent's address, lost no time in possessing himself of
the key of the house, and made a close examination of the
rooms, but especially of the underground portion. There
he was for some considerable time inspecting. He left the
place with an expression of satisfaction on his countenance.
He immediately took the house, and then sought Rose, to
whom he communicated the fact of his having become the
tenant of the premises in question.
“ Now, Rose, make yourself at home as soon as possible.
We shall be very comfortable there.”
He told her of his rendezvous with Marston, and then
went to fulfil it. He was sure the young fellow would
keep the appointment, the sovereign lent him would
ensure his punctuality.
He found Harry Marston waiting for him, and it leaked
out in conversation that the young fellow had been
brought up to the medical profession.
“ So you understand the use of drugs and theii prices ?”
said Ned Kelly.
“ Pretty well,” Harry replied.
“ Then as I am about to open a drug store in Collins-
Btreet you may as well come and manage it for me. We
won’t talk about wages now, as you can agree on that
matter another time. You will find me as good a boss
as any in or out of the colony.”
Harry Marston was delighted, and took a great liking
to his free-mannered and free-hearted employer. Little
did he dream of what was coming, or, poor and miserable
is he had been, he would have shrank from the service as
from an engagement in the infernal regions.
“ When am I to commence wort ?” he asked.
“At once,” Ned replied. “Of course I shall want you
to see that the shop is properly fitted, so you raay as well
come along now, and I must introduce you to my daughter,
Miss Bellamy.”
Harry Marston looked uneasily at his ratner dilapidated
clothes, which Ned Kelly, ever observant, understood in
a moment.
“ Never mind your togs,” he said, jovially. “It isn’t
the feathers that make the birds here. We’ll rig you up
to-morrow in first class style, and in such a way as will
make you think you’ve never left England, and you shall
yet ‘ swell it,’ as finely as any ‘ big-wig,’ in the colony.
Rose is not the girl to judge a man by his coat.”
Harry Marston sighed. He was then thinking of a quiet
little village, and an ivy-covered cottage, with a lawn
running down to the banks of a stream ever making music
as it hurried to greet its parent ocean. He was thinking
of the garden-gate where he parted with some one inex-
pressibly dear to him, and the words he uttered were
imprinted on his memory.
It was the old tale—never to forget her—that hope
would buoy him in his efforts to win that which would
enable them both to realise the dreams of their youth.
Alas! what sad awakening have most of those dreams!
Little do either party know the influence of time and
absence. Love, like death, appears to make an impression
that never can be mitigated, much less effaced ; but, alas !
both have their poignant impressions lulled by the great
physician, time. However, in lovers’ eyes there’s no such
thing as time or change, and Harry’s last words were, “ Rich
or poor, we shall meet again.”
He remembered how she turned away slowly and sadly,
and how he watched her with a choking sensation, and a
feeling that he must call her back or go mad. He had
always written hopefully to Amy Melville, until the day
came when he found himself robbed of his little capital,
and a homeless outcast in the streets of Melbourne.
But now there was a chance of retrieving his fortune,
and in his gratitude he could have embraced Ned
Kelly.
“ Rose, my lass,” he said, after he had introduced her
to Harry Marston, “what do you think of him? He looks
as if he was from the right stock, eh ?”
“ I think I shall like him very much ; especially, father,
as you seem to be quite taken with him.”
“ But you musn’t be falling in love really, Rose, for
that would spoil all my plans for your future.”
Rose laughed merrily, and said she was not one of the
falling in love sort.
“ Love him, indeed!” she said. “ Why, father, what
nonsense you talk. When I fall in love with anybody,
I think the sky will fall—there’s not much danger of
that.”
“ But I want you to fall in with my little plan. You
must gain his love if you can, it will be most necessary to
our future plans. He is an instrument I must use. All
men are vain and weak, especially where women are con-
cerned. When a man thinks a woman—especially a pretty
one—is taken with him, he’s half-captured, and already
started on the road to meet his fate. So, exercise your
influence over him, Rose; make him your slave, and
when the time is ripe for action, we can mould him as wo
wish.”
Rose nodded her pretty head, and displayed her white
pearly teeth as she smiled, but still she did not relish the
task placed before her.
“ I told Marston that he was to be my assistant,” Ned
continued; ' but you must find means to impress him
with the idea that I have taken a great liking to him, and
am thinking of setting him up in business—to give him a
start in the world.”
“ And he is to pay you back when he is properoutt,”
said Rose.
“ That’s the style, girl,” Ned replied; “ I see your part
will not want much rehearsing. We will have his name
over the door, and so throw the Joeys off the scent*’ 1


He here revealed to Rose his intention to rob the bank,
and the means by which he intended to do it.
Rose seemed greatly agitated, but knew it was useless
to expostulate. Besides, it must be confessed, her moral
sense had not been improved by her relations with Ned;
but he assured her this would be his last coup, and then
he’d be to South A-aaarica and lead a different sort of
lif*.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
HOW THE DRUG-STORE FLOURISHED,
It took some time for Harry Marston to believe in his
good fortune, or to thoroughly appreciate it.
His patron, Mr. Bellamy—as Ned Kelly called him-
self—interfered but little, save in the employment of
a porter or two, and, as the reader may guess, Dick Daw-
son and Carroty Larkins were not long in establishing
themselves on the premises.
One evening, as Harry Marston was writing a letter
full of hope and good tidings to Amy Melville, Rose
entered the room, and looked over his shoulder.
“Writing home?” she asked. “Pardon me, I am
sorry that 1 disturbed you.”
“ Don’t apologise, Miss Bellamy,” Harry Marston said,
as the colour mounted in his cheeks. “I am writing to
those who are most dear to me in the world. I was tell-
ing them of my good fortune, and that I could not make
out why Mr, Bellamy and you are so kind to me.”
Rose sighed, and cast down her eyes.
“My father is a peculiar man, and he acts on the im-
pulse of the moment,” she replied. “It is no vain boast
to say that he is so enormously rich that he does not
know what to do with his money, and if he has given you
a start, perhaps it was for—for my sake as much as your
own.”
“ For your sake, Miss Bellamy? ” Harry Marston said,
opening bis eyes in astonishment. “ J fail to comprehend
your meaning.”
“Do not question me,” Rose said, turning her head
away shyly. “My father desires that I shall become the
wife of a worthy man, but he Las left me to follow the dic-
tates of my own heart, and——”
She ceased speaking, and with hurried footsteps she
turned and left the room. The fact was that she was not
playing a part. She was evidently attracted by the hand-
some person and amiable manners of the “ manager.”
“What is the meaning of all this ? ” said Harry Marston,
pressing his hand to his brow. “ Can it be possible that
the girl has taken a fancy to me ? Pshaw! I must be a
vain madman to think of such a thing, and yet why was
she so disturbed ? ”
The thought troubled him, and impressed him more
than he cared to own. There lay the unfinished letter to
Amy, but he had been three years in the colony, and the
long, weary absence might have sickened her heart and
estranged her affections.
All this he argued and more. For a moment he almost
wished he was free—love, beauty, and wealth before him !
“If Ido not write,” he said, “she may think that I am
dead, and in time, with the last ray of hope, she will per-
haps forget mo.” But he felt he was a traitor as these
thoughts flashed upon him.
Rose’s beautiful form and face was vividly depicted in
his mind as he spoke, and he advanced towards the table
with the intention of tearing the letter into fragments,
but as he touched it, a thrill went through him, and the
chord vibrating on his heart brought back all the old
memories.
“ What a coward and villain I am,” he cried, passion-
ately. “ To thus return evil for good, to encourage the love
of my benefactor’s child with the knowledge that I cannot
accept or return it, is a base return for their generosity
in my hour of peril and want. No, 1 will yet have to repel
her, I know not ——l will confide my secret to her. 1
know she is good and generous, and will esteem me aP the
more for my loyalty to Amy.”
He finished the letter, and then, as if fearing that his
good resolutions might break down, he ran out to post it,
and felt delighted to know that in a couple of months it
would be in his darling’s hands.
Rose watched him from a window, and as she did so a
peculiar light flashed into her eyes,
“So,” she murmured, “you do not take the bait so
well as I expected, but time will show. If a woman’s wit
and a woman’s cunning ever conquered, I will bring you
to my feet, Harry Marston; and I would in truth be
nothing loth to see you there.”
The evening was cool, and Harry Marston strolled
quietly along the street, enjoying the cool breeze that had
succeeded a blazing day.
Two men talking rather thick and loudly attracted his
attention, and hearing Mr. Bellamy’s name mentioned he
stopped.
“Well, Jack,” said one, “our new boss is cutting a
fine shine with his money; and did you twig the girl ?
Why she’s dressed like Queen Wictorey.”
“And yet he ain’t no gentleman, I’ll swear,” Jack
replied. “See here, Bill, I was in a swell’s service for
many a year, and I can spot the real thing as quick as you
can a diamond from glass. Why this feller don’t brush hia
teeth in the morning as all the swells do, and his hands
are as hard and coarse as bullocks’ hoofs. And as for the
girl, I’ll tell you what she is ”
“What is she?” demanded Harry Marston, losing his
temper and striding up to the fellows. “ Keep a civil
tongue in your head, and don’t be talking of people you
know nothing about, or you may get into trouble, my
friends,”
“ Who in thunder are you ?” the man demanded. “If
this is not a free country I should like to see one. A man
may say what he likes here.”
“ But he must take the consequence,” said Harry
Marston. “I happen to be the keeper of the drug-store,
and to be on good terms with Mr. Bellamy and his daughter,
so I won’t hear their names bandied about by such scum
as you.”
The men looked at the well-knit muscular figure before
them and felt abashed.
“Don’t rise your dander,” Jack growled. “When a
man comes into such a place as this and flings money
about as the wind scatters chaff, it is only natural that
people should wonder where he got it from.”
“ That is his business and not yours,” Harry Marston
replied hotly ; “ and it is like your confounded impudence
to mention his name in any way but with respect.”
“ Well, you have a right to stick up for him,” said the
man called Bill, “ especially as you are the young fellow
he has taken under his wing. But don’t be above taking
a bit of advice. Keep your eye open ; mind who you’re
working with. We knows a thing or two.”
Harry Marston was too indignant to reply, and, turning
sharply on his heel, he loft the two men staring at him.
The conversation did not add to the ease of Harry
Marston’s mind.
Why should Mr. Bellamy be suspected by anyone, and
suspected of what?
The want of cleanliness about the teeth and the hard
hands had never impressed him before ; but he thought
of all now.
But what were such trifles to the gratitude he owed the
man who had lifted him from the mud to a Kate of
prosperity ?
Filled with thought, he was nearing the shop, when a
man slipped a piece of paper into his hand and glided
away like a shadow.
The paper was a printed bill, offering ten thousand
pounds reward for Ned Kelly, dead or alive ; and Harry
Marston, after reading it carefully, folded it up and placed
it carefully in his pocket.


“ I am not likely to fall across this celebrity,” he said,
laughingly, as he entered the house, “ and if I did I
think I should give him a wide berth rather than risk
being made a target of to his sure aim. Besides,
by this morning’s paper he’s far enough off just
now.”
He was thinking of an acoount of a “ bailing up ” of a
bank-manager which appeared in that morning’s paper,
and in which the name of Ned Kelly prominently
figured.
The fact was, some ruffians belonging to his former
band traded under his name, and caused it to be sup-
posed the übiquitous Ned was always the chief of that
party, and the head and front of their offending.
Tnis suited his purpose well, and directed suspicion
rum his person when residing in the city.
He was not quite so prodigal of showing himself now
until after dusk. He became more cautious as the great
aim and end were approaching.
But to return to Harry.
“ Hulloa ! What are you waiting for?”
He addressed Dick Dawson and Carroty Larkins, who
were hanging about in the passages.
“Mr. Bellamy told us to wait,’ Carroty Larkins re-
plied “He says that as we are sometimes late in the
morning he will have us sleep in the house.”
Harry Marston made no reply, but the intelligence
astounded him ; and he was puzzled to know what motive
Mr. Bellamy could have in keeping two such fellows under
the same roof.
“Very well,” he said at last, “ I will see Mr. Bellamy
and have the necessary arrangements made for you. By
the way, you are a couple of strong fellows, why don’t
you go into the bush and earn ten thousand pounds by
catching Ned Kelly ?”
“Eh ?” said Carroty Larkins, starting back. “ Who
put you up to that dodge ?”
“A notice issued by the Government.” Harry Marston
replied. “ Here it is, and you may make what use of it
you think fit.”
Carroty Larkins and Dick Dawson exchanged glances ;
but Mr. Bellamy’s voice calling for Harry Marston put an
end to all further conversation on the subject.
“I have sent for you,” said Ned Kelly, “to ask you a
few questions. I may be right or I may be wrong, but I
fancy that you have been casting sheeps eye’s at my daugh-
ter Rose.”
“ I give you my word of honour that such a thing has
never entered my head,” Harry Marston replied hastily,
and he blushed up to the roots of his hair. “My dear
sir, I would not dare ”
“Tut, tut! ” said Ned laughingly, “ boys will be boys,
and girls will be girls Hear me out. I rather suspect that
Rose has been drifting in .the same direction. You have
acted squarely with me, and I will be honest with you,
and I tell you plainly that if you can win her, I will throw
no obstacle in the way.”
Harry Marston drew a deep breath, a mist gathered
before his eyes, and the room seemed to swim.
“ Mr. Bellamy,” he said, “ lam at a loss to understand
why you continue to shower favours on me. You picked
me up a beggar, knew nothing about me, and yet over-
whelm me with kindness, and would even sanction my
rr irrying your lovely daughter! ”
•• My dear fellow,” Ned interrupted, “ I haven’t travelled
round the world half-a-dozen times without knowing when
I see a real good fellow—one of the right sort! Well, of
course, I come of a good family myself, so you see I am
able to judge. And as to knowing little of you, perhaps
I know more than you think. Well, think over what I
have said, and keep the matter a secret.”
“ I will be plain with you,” said Harry Marston ; “ in-
stead of having any thoughts of your daughter, who is far
removed from me in poii*. of worth and wealth, I am
engaged to be married to a lady in England.”
“So are many young fellows here,” Ned said; ** hut
they have left others behind them who may take their
places. But I don’t want to throw cold water on your
hopes, and as I have said before, I suspect that Rose is
getting fond of you ; you had better sleep out of the muse,
and see as little of her as possible.”
“But, sir,” said Harry Marston, hope you do not
think I have taken any mean advantage of my position
here?”
“ On the contrary, I think you have acted hue a roan, in
telling me the truth,” Kelly replied. “ Well, there is an
end of the matter for the present. Look out for a suitable
place in the morning, but in all other respects you will
be master here as usual.”
As soon as Harry Marston left the room, Ned rose and
walked hurriedly to and fro.
“ What am I doing? ”he said aloud. “I am tampering
with the girl’s happiness—she fancies him already, that s
clear, and what sort of a mate am I preparing for him ?
My example has not been of the best —but there, it’s no
use preaching; she must take things as she finds them,
and if they are a little against her grit—well, I can’t help
it. I've done my best for her, and I love her as a father
—ay, better than half the fathers and mothers in the
world—and ought she not to serve me ? Of course she
ought. Yet I would not be sorry if she could marry Harry
Marston; he’s a decent, good chap, but he’s booked
in England he says. Well, that takes off some of the
regret I should feel at his being bagged for the little
affair that’s coming off. But what does it matter when
we’re all off with the bank’i gold ? He’ll be nabbed as a
party to it, because his name is over the door. I can’t,
however, sacrifice us all to him—nor Rose neither. He
belongs to another woman; more fool he, that's all I’ve
got to say—good chance for him lost here.”
He started as the door opened, and Rose softly entered
the room.
“ Father,” she said, “ am I to continue this deceit with
Harry Marston ? I assure you I don't like it, only you
tell me it is necessary to your plans. I have had an inter-
view with him, but he is gloomy and silent.”
“ I hardly know what to say, lass,” Ned Kelly replied,
knitting his brows, and speaking in a low tone of voice.
“ I begin to wish I had never set eyes on him, or brought
you into it. You ought to be away from me altogether;
I'm bad company, my girl, for you.”
“Do not heed me,” Rose said earnestly. “What can
Ido to repay the love and gratitude I owe you ? I fear
but very little, and yet in my poor way would sacrifice my
life for you, as I ought to do, if necessary; and 1 would
do so to the last.”
“To the last!” Ned Kelly repeated. “What do you
mean by that last ? ”
“I have strange fancies at times,” Rose replied—“day-
dreams, some people would call them, for I lose myself,
and seem to wander into the future, where I have more
pi asure than in the present, which is saddened by appre-
hension for you. There is something telling me that my
career will not be a long one in this world. I have inde-
finite apprehensions, I don’t know of what. When I try
to think of the future, a sort of mist comes over my
thoughts, but most especially when I think of you, dear
father, then I become doubly uneasy—l feel lam losing
my nerve.”
“ Come here, lass,” said the bushranger.
He placed his hands on the girl’s shoulders, and gazed
thoughtfully into her eyes.
“ I fear another feeling is stealing into your heart, and
that is altering your nature. You fear something, and
you don t know what you fear, unless it is, as you say, for
me. Well, the track lam in now will carry me out of
the path we have both followed for some time, and lead
us to money and a quiet life, far away from the scenes I
shall not wish to recall; far from the land that saw the
ignominious death of my parents, and the destruction of
the only woman who ever really had the heart, such as it
was, of Ned Kelly.”


CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE GHOST SPEAKS.
“ Come ' look sharp there ; I want a nobbier, and so
would you, miss, 1 can tell you, if you had rich e.i and
walked the number of miles I have.”
The speaker was a smart young fellow, booted and
spurred, and as he stood at the bar he hummed in a rich
manly , voice a tune to the time he impatiently marked
with his whip on the counter.
The pert and pretty barmaid who was spooning on a
young and good-looking man just returned from the
diggings, and probably doing her best to fix him in a
matrimonial sense, did not seem pleased at the stranger’s
manner. But his good-tempered face and handsome ap-
pearance brought back her good temper, and she added a
smile, gratis, to the drink.
“ Phew!” said the stranger, as he put the empty glass
down and smacked his lips, “Tom Conquest feels some-
thing like himself again, but whether I continue to feel in
the same frame of mind depends on whether the news I
have got is true or false. I've heard funny facts about
Kelly, It is too good to be true.”
“ What have you heard?” said the digger. “ From all I
have heard of him there isn’t much ag;%st him. He’s
shut up only a bank or two, and it’s only the rich that he
makes shell out. Whoever heard of Ned’s molesting a
poor or a working man? Why there isn’t a shepherd in
the colony who wouldn’t give him his last pipe of negro-
head and every bit of mutton and damper left uAhe
hut.”
“ Oh that may be,” said the trooper, “ but robbery is
r bbery and nothing else, whether it be rich or poor. 1
suppose if you made a pile worth £l,OOO you’d be rich,
wouldn’t you? Well, if Kelly stuck you up and took
the savings of your life’s work how would you feel? Do
you think that would be only robbing the rich ? He don’t
rob where he can get nothing, that’s about it, and he
wants the shepherds to keep him fly to the movements
of the police. I hope my suspicions about Ned Kelly are
right. My information ought to be good if those two
fellows I rescued from the ants can be believed, and yet
it seems hardly possible that Ned would have the audacity
to come here.”
Tom Conquest called for another “ nobbier ” and lin-
gered some time over it; standing with his back to the
counter he could see the people passing to and fro in
the street.
Suddenly he gave a start, and uttered an involuntary
cry, much to the astonishment of the young lady and her
half-enamoured swain, and rushing out of the saloon he
reappeared dragging a man with him.
“Is it you, Sandy MThersou ?” Tom Conquest cried,
“ or have you come on earth again to tell us what you
think of the other place?”
“I am thankful to say that lam still in this sphere,”
Andrew MTherson replied, “but what in the name of
wonder brought you here ?”
“My horse’s legs and my own strong determination to
accomplish what I have taken in hand,” Tom Conquest
replied. “ But sit down, for I want to have a talk with
you. Who healed those gashes Ned Kelly gave you?”
M‘Pherson smiled as he sat down and toyed with the
straw of ihe sheny-cobbler which had been meanwhile
■served to him.
“It is not a long story,” he said, “ but as it may bear
telling, perhaps you would like to hear it ?”
“ I should,” said Tom.
Both were speaking low, so as not to be overheard, and
as the bar was almost deserted, they could converse with-
out fear of interruption.
• It so happened,” said M‘Pherson, “when Ned Ke’ly
dug his knife into me that I had a thick bundle of papers,
•just delivered by the mail, in my pocket, and they saved
my life. The would-be murderer was too infuriated to
«top and ascertain what turned the point of the knife, and
I received only one flesh wound. Blood spurted out on
his hands and coat, and he left me fully satisfied that J
was thoroughly done for.”
“Wonderful!” said Tom Conquest. “Well hrw
is ” ’
“Do you mean Captain Montague Yavasse ir?” MTher-
son, interrupted. « Oh. he is very well, and I hope to see
him married to my daughter, Lily, before the year is out.”
“ The devil you do,” Tom Conquest muttered under
his breath, and then aloud, “ It was about your daugj ter
I was going to ask.”
“ Oh, she is all right,” M'Phcrson answered carelessly;
“ a little paler than usual. I believe the silly girl has
formed an attachment somewhere, but she must learn to
get over that. She shall not throw herself away on any
fellow who chooses to crop up with a good-looking face
and empty pockets.”
Tom Conquest winced, but he had too much good sense
to make any reply, and he broke away from the subject
abruptly,
“You asked me what I am doing here,” he said ; “ may
I put the same question to you?”
“ Certainly,” said M‘Pherson. “ I have just lodged the
gold and specie I intend for Lily’s dowry in the Bank of
Australasia, where it will be safe from the clutches of such
rascals as Ned Kelly and his wolf-like gang.”
“ What would you say if I told you I strongly suspect
that Ned Kelly is in Melbourne?” said Conquest.
M‘Pherson’s face went as pale as paper.
“In Melbourne !” he repeated. “ Then every hole and
corner ought to be searched, and the scoundrel hung on
the tallest gallows. Stay! By Jove! that accounts”for
the strange vision I had the other night at the Albion
Hotel, in Bourke-street. I going to my room, but
hearing footsteps I turned, ana saw a man glaring at me
with such a furious look that I was glad to get out of hia
way, and lost no time in doing so. I thought at the tim
there was a look of Kelly about him.”
“ Did he appear to be alarmed at the sight of you ?”
Tom Conquest asked.
“It did not strike me so then,” M'Pherscn replied. “ 1
thought the fellow was mad and with delirium tremens, so
I made myself scarce ; but now I turn it over in my mind,
there was wild surprise in his eyes, just as if he had seen
a ghost. Could it have been that ruffian Kelly?’’
“ Thank you,” said Tom Conquest, closing the book in
which he had been making notes. “The plot thickens,
and somehow I fancy that I shall touch Ned Kelly on the
shoulder before many days are over.”
“ If you do I will give you anything you ask,” M‘Pher-
son said, eagerly. “You shall name your own price;
anything I have shall be yours.”
“I shall be satisfied with the reward offered by the
Government,” Tom Conquest returned. “ Mr. M‘Pherson,
I will ask no money from you; still, if I succeed I should
like to ask you for a present.”
“What is it?”
“ You won’t be offended if I speak plainly?”
“ No. Go on ; out with it. What the deuce have Ito
give better than money?”
“ Your daughter.”
Had a dynamite explosive fallen at the feet ot Andrew
M‘Pherson he could not have been more taken aback or
looked more astounded and vexed
“What!” he cried, “you marry my daughter Lily?
Pooh-pooh! This is nonsense. Rubbish! Come, Tom,
be serious, talk sense. You know that’s coming it rather
strong. T ’ve no right to give away what does not belong
to me. My daughter is not ray slave, to be bartered away
at my pleasure, or exchanged for any equivalent J may
select.”
“I was never so earnest in my life,” Tom Conquest
said. “ I love Lily with all the strength my heart is cap-
able of, and if she consents. I don’t see difficulty.”
“ And so you are the fellow who has i,een hanging
about ray place ?” said M'Pherson beginning to bluster.


“ Tliis is taking a very unfair advantage of a casual obser-
vation. All the Kellys in the world are not worth sacri-
ficing Idly for. No, ray boy, Lily must not marry a pauper,
or even (with a sneer) a Government mounted policeman.
I must pul a stop to this little game. It is too prepos-
terous.’'
“ I love her too well to mind the covert insults you
would convey by your words. You would give her away
to an adventurer and a mountebank,” said Tom, “ without
an enquiry as to his means or even his character. There
is as much of the captain in that fellow Vavasseur as there
is life in Julius Caesar. Give him ray compliments, and say
that I happen to know he is a swell ‘ cracksman ’ from
London, and he had better skedaddle before he is laid by
the heels for that small jewellery business in which he was
implicated twelve months ago. You don’t seem to like
this. Mr. M‘Pherson?”
“ You are telling me a pack of lies,” Andrew M‘Pherson
said, “ I don't believe a word you have uttefed.”
“It is well for you that you are Lily's father,” Tom
Conquest said. “ Well, time will show whether I am a
liar or you a fool for entertaining a fellow who has the gift
of the gab and a heart as black as midnight. I have no
wish to quarrel with you, M‘Phcrson. So now to business,
I’ll yet make you think very differently of me and your
sham captain. Where are you staying? ”
“ At the Albion.”
“Then don't mention my name, if you wish to see Ned
Kelly laid by the heels,” said Tom Conquest. “ You see
lam disguised; would you have known me if I had not
told you who 1 was?”
“ No, you have dyed your hair and altered your face
somehow.”
“It altered itself from the hour I was pitched down that
hole by Ned Kelly and his ruffians,” said Tom Conquest,
“ but there’s a good deal of life in me yet, as I hope to
let m.v friend Ned find out to his cost.”
CHAPTER XXXYIII.
A PASSAGE TO WEALTH.
Harry Marvton was not long in noticing that Ned Kelly
was anxious to get him out of the house each evening as
soon as the premises were closed. He saw Rose at times,
and she continued her part of the love-smitten maid, but
Harry avoided her as much as possible.
Rose was determined not to let him slip through her
fingers so easily.
“ Mr. Marston,” she said, one day, “ I am very lonely
here in the evening. My father has much correspondence,
And, preferring to be alone, often writes far into the night.
So you see,” she added, with a musical laugh, “‘ I stoop
to conquer,’ aud J want you to act as my friend and
companion.”
“ Most Avillingly, Miss Bellamy,” Harry Marston replied,
“It has ever been the impression that friendship, pure and
simple, between a man and a beautiful woman could not
long endure without degenerating into love, degenerat-
ing, I say, because in friendship there is no element of
selfishness, whereas love is the sublimity of selfishness oa
both sides. Each party loves because each party gratifies
him or her self by so doing, whereas friendship has nothing
to gain but the gratification of its object, and that friend-
ship I feel for you, and I do not fear misconstruction.”
“That is almost saying that you are incapable of falling
in love,” said Rose, coquettishly.
“ Far from it,” Harry Marston rejoined, “ 1 am helplessly
heart and soul in love already.”
“Indeed,’' said Hose, with something of disappointed
irritation in her manner. “I am not inquisitive, but I
should like to knoAV who the lady is.”
“You may see her sooner than you expect” Harry
replied. “I am about to write and ask her to come out
to Australia.”
Was it perfect acting that caused the blood to fade
from Rose’s cheeks? No, she had overdone her p<rrt, the
play was becoming a reality, and although she struggled
against her own feelings, she confessed that she was
more than half in love with Harry, her own and Ned
Kelly’s intended dupe.
Her reluctance to play a part that might imperil the
future of Harry was rather weakened by the avowal she
had just heard from his own lips.
Rose felt that she fould not stay in Harry Marston’s
presence. She was trembling with jealous anger about a
girl she had never seen and perhaps never would, ti. c l the
sensation was novel to her.
“ I would have saved him in some way,” she said, “ but
not now. Let her come to the rescue if she can ; he has
despised ray Icve, for he must have seen that I am not
indifferent to him. Hisavowal of his passion for another was
intended to stifle all evidences of love on my part. Why
did ray father ever bring him here? But she may never
come out—l’m too hasty. I feel that he really likes me,
and were it not for this boyish love but here he is
It was evening, and Harry approached her to enquire
the whereabouts of her father. She proposed to accom-
pany Harry to seek, Ned, and away they went, a very
handsome pair, it must be admitted.
No sooner were they out of the house than Ned Kelly,
throwing aside his town clothes and jewellery, adopted a
labourer’s suit, and wont, lantern in hand, down to the
cellar.
The place was almost blocked up by empty barrels,
desigae 1 to be very shortly filled with de'rris , the work of
Ned and his assistants Messrs. Larkins and Dawson.
“ Here we are, Ned,” said Carroty Larkins. “ and
ready to go to work with a will. The tools in the box
labelled * Soda ’ are splendid, and the ouly difficulty will be
in getting to the bank too soon.”
“ What are we to do with the earth as we dig it out ?”
Dick Dawson asked.
“Fill the casks with it.” Ned Kelly replied; “the
cellar is too small to hold all the stuff we dig out. I will
take care that nobody lias the key but myself in the day
time. Now then, lads, clear away and let us go to work.
We have plenty of time, but I want the work to be done
quietly and without loss of time.”
The men went at it with a will with pick and spade.
Ned took his turn, and at it they went; not a word was
spoken.
The tunnelling Avas easy work through the clay-soil unt 1
they got to the bank foundation-wall. The rattle and
rumble of the vehicles overhead all day long prevented
the noise the picks made against the stone foundation
being heard, even had the vault been inhabited at the time.
The work of making a cavity here was speedily accom-
plished.
Ned Kelly swung the instrument over his shoulder and
struck the cellar-wall with a skilful and powerful blow.
A dull sound, like the booming of a muffled bell, came
from the wall, and Ned Kelly looked askance at his
comrades.
“What is the meaning of that?” he asked, under his
breath. “ I never heard such a sound come from solid
earth.”
“It sounded like a death-bell,” Carroty Larkins said.
“ I don’t half like the sound.”
“ Peace, you ass! ” Ned Kelly hissed. “ Omens are for
children and frightened women, not for men with gold
within their grasp. Go in and win, you fools, while you've
got the chance.”
Thus encouraged, they worked silently on. aud suc-
ceeded in accomplishing their object.
They postponed their entry into the vault until such
time as the bank officials would be absent on a public
holiday or the Sabbath.
Kelly took care the men should keep sober, aud pro-
hibited any “ liquoring up” until they had got’clear out
v of Melbourne.
They groAvled a good deal at this prohibition, and would


have disobeyed but for the glorious golden prospect before
them. Once successful, they could bathe in brandy.
After their work, Kelly, enjoining silence, told his
worthyassistants to be off to their “flea-traps” —G ohmic e-
beds—while he remained behind to examine the progress
made, and test the tunnel.
Apparently satisfied h e turned away, but sprang sharply
round as he thought he heard a voice. So he did, but
only the voice of a B«mk clerk in the Bank vault stowing
away raw gold.
Ned Kelly’s hair bristled and a death-like hue appeared
through the swarthiness of bis cheeks. Clenching his
fists and assuming an attitude of defiance he hissed out—
“ Man, goblin, C' 1 ’ devil, Ned Kelly is ready for you.”
But it must have ueen fancy after all, for who should
1e in the tunnel ? There was not a living creature but
Ned Kelly in the cellar, and at last, convinced that he
had been labouring under e delusion, he turned away
locked up the cellar, and went to the sitting-room, where
he found Rose.
“Well, lass,” said he, “ have you any news to tell me?
Our work proceeds merrily, and all will be ready in a few
days.”
“That is well,” Rose replied; “but I am rather
troubled in ray mind, father.”
“ What about, my girl ?”
“I went out with Harry Marston, as you know,” Rose
replied, “ and we were followed all the time by two
strange men. One of them was the man who stared so
hard at me as I sat at the hotel window ; the other was
younger, and although he endeavoured to conceal it, I
knew from his gait, as well as seeing him recognise some
troopers, that he was one of the force.”
“Hulloa! that looks dangerous. There’s smoke some-
where,” said Kelly; “we must get out of the fire. That
infernal reward is enough to make a man sell his own
father, and is almost enough to make Larkins or Dawson
peach—or any of the mob, for the matter of that. I don’t
like it, though, girl; it has a queer look. However, cheer
up, my lass; after the haul, we’re off to enjoy a little
quiet for the rest of our lives. I’m sorry to leave Harry
in the trap to be caught, but self-preservation and yours,
too, Rose, require a sacrifice ; and I don’t know but Miss
Melville’s lover is as good a stopgap as anyone else.”
He touched a tender chord in this hit at Harry’s indif-
ference to Rose, but she only sighed.
He recognised the meaning of her dejection, and com-
forted her by saying—
“ He’ll be in no danger, as his remaining after our de-
parture will shield him, if not from suspicion, certainly
from being convicted, if tried.”
Rose concealed the true state of her feelings, and said—
“l am only too anxious about your safety, my dear
father. What should Ido if anything happened to you ?
I would rather die a thousand deaths than live to see you
come to any harm !”
“ You are a brave, good lass,” Ned Kelly replied, placing
his coarse, rough hand on the girl’s pretty head. “ Well,
talk no more to-night. I’m tired as a costermonger’s
donkey after a race-day, and you don’t look too fresh.”
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
THE TRADE-MARK OF VILLAINY.
When Harry Marston left Rose he walked slowly back to
bis owa lodgings, and had reached the door when he felt
a tap on his shoulder, and turning sharply, found himself
confronted by a broad-shouldered, stalwart young fellow
about his own age.
“You have made a mistake, I think r but as it is getting
dark, it is a very excusable one, although you ‘ tap ’
rather hard upon the shoulders of your friends if you
claim their recognition often in this fashion.”
“ I don’t think there’s any mistake, my friend. I took
the liberty of following you some short time since, and
will be pleased if you can spare me a few minutes of your
time, which I suppose is not too valuable.”
“ You’re devilish cool, my friend ! What the deuce do
you want with me ? I’m not accustomed to be pulled up
like this in the street or anywhere else,” said Harry; “and
as I never take liberties, I never allow them, especially
from strangers. What do you want with me?”
“ Don’t lose your temper, I don’t mean you any harm,”
was the reply; “ but Ido not wish anybody to hear wli» ■ I
have to say, which is for your good and for mine.”
Harry gazed fixedly at the stranger, and being impressed
by his frank, manly bearing, and having no possible grounds
for apprehension of any kind, followed him.
Scarcely a word was exchanged until they reached a
house in a by-street. The stranger tapped sharply at the
door, and in another minute Harry Marston found himself
in a room filled with constables and troopers.
“ What is the meaning of all this ? ” Harry Marston
demanded, as, amazed and alarmed, he recoiled towards the
door, which had been promptly locked and bqlted as he
entered. “ For what reason have I been lured to tins
place ? ”
“ Patience, my friend,” said the man who had brought
him to the house. “ You will know the reason presently,
and admit that it is a good one. My name is Tom Con-
quest, and I am on the track of that murderous villain,
Ned Kelly! ”
“Well, what has that to do with me? Surely you do
not take me for that notorious scoundrel? ” said Marston,
in an amused tone of voice. “For my own part, nothing
would please me better than to see him dangling from the
gallows.”
“ You are the keeper of the drug-store in Collins-strcet,
I belie re ? ” said Tom Conquest.
“ Yes; but what right have you to cross-question
me?”
“No strict right as yet; but I think you will prefer
answering a few quiet questions here, to the exposure of
going before a magistrate, who will make you answer what
he likes. Your patron goes by the name of Mr. Bellamy?
Marston saw the force of his interrogate.'b representa-
tion, so replied—
“ Goes by it? Why, of course, his name is Bellamy !’’
“ You think so, but I think otherwise,” Tom Conquest
observed quietly. “ 1 daresay it will cause you some
alarm when I tell you I suspect that this so-called Mr.
Bellamy has a strong likeness to Ned Kelly.”
“ Why, you must be cracked,” said Harry, “or he must
be, to venture into such a place as Melbourne. Bah !
He’s a kind, good, generous fellow. I know him well;
to him I owe my prosperity, and I won’t hear a single
word said against him. He’s as much Kelly as you are.”
“ I don’t blame you,” Tom Conquest returned, “ but
listen to me, and drown all sentiment. I saw you with a
lady to-night, and I’ll swear in any court of justice that
she is Rose Casey, Ned Kelly’s adopted daughter.”
“Nonsense,” said Hnrry Marston, “her name is Rose
Bellamy.”
Tom looked perplexed, and stroked his chin thought-
fully.
“ I seldom forget a face, especially when it belongs to
a woman,” he said. “ Well, we will say, for argument’s
sake, that I am mistaken in the young lady, but if Mr.
Bellamy, as you call him, Las a bad scar on the back of
his left band, and wants a piece of his right ear to make
it complete, Ned Kelly is as good as in the meshes of
the net which the law has been weaving for him.”
Harry Marston’s heart beat high, and the colour in
his cheek faded away. He had often wondered why
Bellamy generally wore a glove on his right hand, and his
hair over tns ears in so not a climate, xet tie could no®
credit that the man so highly worthy of gratitude could
be the man whose hands had been steeped in crime of
every kind.
The whole colony was on the adert for the villain who
had wrought so much mischief ; the blood of Kell/’*


victims, and the wholesale, daring, daylight robberies he
had committed cried aloud for vengeance ; his name was
used as a taunt to the police, and the influence of his
courage, success, and example was most pernicious and
dangerous in a population so leavened with new and old
crime, for the jails of the neighbouring colonies had been
silently emptied into Victoria.
“If Bellamy is the man I want,” Tom Conquest con-
tinued, “ he bears the trade-mark of villainy stamped
upon him in the very signs I have mentioned. Test him.
my friend, and let me see jmu again to-morrow evening,
here and at this time. If you are an honest man, you will
be as anxious to prove the truth or falsehood of this sus-
picion as I am.”
“ I am sure that I shall disappoint you,” said Harry.
I admit he always wears gloves when he goes out. but not
in the house. 1 have noticed a scar, that any man might get.”
“We’re on the track, believe me. At all events you
will keep this meeting a secret ?”
“ Yes, because I would not wound so good a fellow by
the bare mention of your suspicions,” Harry replied.
However, he was glad to get into the open air, and away
from the keen-eyed man who scrutinised him so closely,
and now the light and almost contemptuous demeanour he
had assumed gave way to a whirl of conflicting emotions.
Ilis brain throbbed in unison with his heart, and he turned
faint at the thought that he might have taken service under
the greatest scoundrel unhung.
Marston was early at the store in the morning, but did
not see Kelly, who was not visible till the evening. When
he did appear he was restless and uneasy.
They were having a pipe together in the back-room,
and were keeping up a constrained conversation. Both
were evidently not thinking of the subject of their talk,
and at last both relapsed, with abstracted air, into semi-
silence.
This was suddenly broken by Kelly, who said—
“ I was wondering what brought you out to this country
without plenty of capital.”
“ Oh, many men of first-rate family have come out
beggars.”
“ Oh, you did not need to tell me that good blood ran
in your veins, for any man with an eye in his head can see
you’ve get the points of breeding—foot, hand, and ear.
These are thoroughbred marks that don’t escape me any
more than they do a womai ”
“ Well,” said Harry, forcing a laugh, “ I see you have
two of the points, but let me see the third, your ears.”
Kelly started to his feet as Harry Marston approached,
and showed evident signs of apprehension and dislike to
the investigation. He was obviously most reluctant to
undergo the examination. He was more angered and con-
fused than the circumstances warranted.
“ Harry,” he said, with an awkward attempt at dignity,
“I never take liberties with others, and never allow them
to be taken with me.”
“I meant no offence,” Harry Marston said. “If I have
offended you, lam sorry for it; but I think you have
taken me up rather sharply for nothing.”
“ I allow no man to trifle with me,” Kelly said, striding
up and down the room in a towering fury; and then as if
recognising the suspicious violence of his own conduct
in visiting _ with such animosity, Harry’s movement to
uncover hig ears, he seemingly calmed down, but
felt rather nervous and suspicious that “something was
up ”or why this attempted scrutiny ? He left the room
without a word, leaving Marston pondering over his
conduct and the allusions of Conquest. Harry did not well
know what course to take, so was content to await his
next meeting with the trooper. Me liked Kelly person-
ally, and even if satisfied of his identity would hesitate to
denounce a man from whom he had received nothing but
generosity. Had he not saved him from starvation, lifted
him from the streets, fed him, clothed him, and paved the
way to prosperity? But a murderer and a wholesale
thief !—his kindness must have a motive. If he were really
the notorious ruffian, Kelly, so savage a beast and reckless
a robber could not be actuated by honest feelings towards
a stranger like him. “If he were Kelly!” The thought fully
possessed him, he could not shake it off. “ Better the
streets and starvation than to eat the bread of charity
from the blood-stained hand of such a merciless, dog,” he
suddenly exclaimed.
Meanwhile Ned Kelly was not idle.
As soon as he was clear of the room, he sought Rose,
and stood before her with troubled aspect; her face was
pale and rigid, and he walked up and down the room like
a caged beast.
She could not imagine what was the matter with him.
and her first thought was that some dire calamity had or
was about to happen. She was in constant fear and
trembling, not knowing at what moment the thunderbolt
might fall.
“Father! father!” she said, placing her hands gently
on his arm, “ what has happened ? Don’t look so wild,
you alarm me! ”
The clouds were lowering on Kelly’s brow, and his face
was almost purple with perplexity and annoyance ; but
with a great effort he recovered his self-control.
“ The game is up,” he said ; “we are sold ! That ac-
cursed whelp, Marston, knows who lam ! I saw it in his
eyes, though he endeavoured to conceal it. You must fly,
Rose ; take the first vessel for Sydney, and when there go
to the post-office, and ask for a letter addressed to Rose
Jennings. It will be for you, and will contain instructions
when and where to meet me. By that time I shall have
matured ray plans, and will be either a man or a mouse.”
“Oh, father!” Rose cried in a sudden agony of fear,
“Ay at once. Do not hesitate, or think of me, or all is
lost! There has evidently been treachery. Someone
has given information. I thought you were too bold.
You have been recognised. Marco Polo will carry you
thirty miles before midnight, and then you can laugh at
pursuit. Get back to the Ranges, where you are safe.”
“You don’t want money, I think ? ” Kelly said.
“No, I have sufficient to last for a long time yet.”
“ Well, you ought to have, as I drew out the rest of my
balance at the bank, and gave it into your charge, Rose.
Keep it and use it, my girl, until we meet.”
“ Kiss me, and begone, before it is too late ; my heart
grows cold, Rose replied, “at the thought of what will
happen if you remain here.”
“ You must stop in the house for another hour,” Kelly
said; “by that time I shall be out of Melbourne, but
first ”
His chest heaved, and again the terrible evil light
flashed from his eyes.
“ are you thinking of ? ” Rose demanded
“ Thinking how I should like to be in the cellar with
Harry Marston just now. I know he’s the traitor 1 saw
he suspected me. How I should like to clutch him by
the throat, and feel him growing weaker and weaker
under my hands. But I suppose I must reserve that
luxury for the future. There’s life in Ned Kelly vet as
those who try to nab him will find to their cost.” ’
CHAPTER XL.
UNWELCOME VISITOUS.
“And go,” said Tom Conquest, “you are satisfied
I am right, and that you have been made a fool and
dupe of ? ”
He addressed Harry Marston. who stood with his back
against the wall, looking gloomily at the youim trooper.
‘‘Yes, Marston replied, “ and yet it goes against the
gram to turn informer. If I could give back the favours
the man has showered on me I should feel satisfied.”
“lavours!” Tom Conquest repeated, sneeriimly. “The
murderer of men and helpless women and children de-
serves no mercy. You ought to think yourself lucky that
you have escaped so easily, and proud of having dare
society so good a turn I and my men will make the raid


in two hours’ time. Now go, and use your time as you
think fit. We shall not want you.”
Tattle dreaming of what had happened, Dick Dawson and
Carroty Larkins were waiting as usual for Kelly.
“ I wonder what keeps the gov’ner ? ” Dick Dawson
growled. “ He’s mighty particular about keeping the
key of the cellar. We might have made the haul by this
time.”
“ And the girl has shut herself up,” said Carroty Lar-
kins. “ I don’t like the look of things, Dick—l don’t, I tell
you. What if Ned lias heard something, got scared and
cut off by hisself, and left us to stand the racket? ”
“No fear,” said Dawson. “He wouldn’t leave the girl.
Come, Carroty, tip us a stave just to pass the time till he
comes. Strike up, old man, don’t be downhearted.”
An uproarious shout of applause followed Niraming Ned’s
gong, and scarcely had the sound died away when Rose,
plainly dressed and wearing a thick veil over her face, ap-
peared on the scene and was passing out, when Carroty
cried—
“ Here, stop a minute. “ When are you going, miss?”
“ How dare you ask the question ?” Rose returned.
“ Are you my gaoler ? Out of the way, or you shall
answer for this to my father.”
“Where’s Ned?” Carroty Larkins demanded. “It’s
past his usual time, and we don’t want to waste the whole
Bight in hanging about and hollering ourselves hoarse.”
Rose did not deign to reply, but sweeping haughtily past
him she reached the door. It was opened for her from the
outside by a vigorous blow which splintered the stout
panels and sent the lock flying
There was no back way out of the house, and as Tom
Conquest, with a score of police at his heels, appeared,
Rose and the bushrangers knew they were caught like rata
in a trap.
“ Very sorry, miss,” said Turn Conquest, raising his cap,
“ but you must consider yourself in custody. I arrest you
as Ned Kelly’s accomplice in murder and robbery.”
He handed her over to a stalwart officer, who took her
gently by the arm and led her back into the house,
“ Keep a sharp watch on the windows,” said Tom Con-
quest, “ and scatter the brains of the first man who at-
tempts to escape. Now, lads,” he added, drawing a pistol
and levelling it at Dick Dawson's head, “the game is up,
so you may as well submit to having bracelets put on
without trouble. Hold up your hands. I’ll shoot the first
man who resists.” Dawson did not seem very much afraid
of Tom’s pistol.
“But what’s the row? What hare we done?” Dick
Dawson whined, while a wink passed between him and
Conquest.
“ Stow you yabber, and tell me where Ned Kelly is! ”
“We don’t know no such a party,” Dick Dawson
replied, with a look of injured innocence on his face;
“ Mr.. Marston is our master, and a very nice gentleman
he is.”
“ That’s a lie! : ' Tom Conquest said, as he clicked the
handcuffs round Dick Dawson s wrists. Where is the
man you call Bellamy?”
“ Gone out,” was the reply, “ and when he comes hack
lie’ll make you smart for this ’ere outrage on our liber-
tit i-. ; ’
“ You’ll be to tell your story to the magistrates,”
Tom Conquest said. “ I happen to know all you rascals
by name and reputation.”
Dno by one the bushrangers were handcuffed and taken
awi.y, Tom Conquest and six men remaining behind.
The young trooper did not send Rose with the first
batch of prisoners. He kept her in the sitting-room above
the shop, and endeavoured to question her, but not a
word would she say for a long time.
“Come, miss,” said Tom Conquest, impatiently, “I
don’t wish to be hard on you, and I’ll give you the chance
of turning Queen’s evidence. You are much too young
and pretty to die, but if you continue your obstinate con-
flict yen will surely be handed, as I ample proof of
who you are, and what part you have taken with Ned
Kelly.”
Inwardly trembling, yet outwardly calm, Rose assumed
a look of surprise and indignation.
“If you wish to speak of my uncle, Mr. Bellamy,
I will give you all the information that lies in my power,”
she replied haughtily. “ lie is dining with some friends
at the Albion Hotel.”
“ That tale won’t do for me,” said Tom Conquest.
“ Then find a better one, and act upon it,” Hose re-
turned. “This is some infamous plot. I don’t know
what you mean by associating my name with that of a
bushranger, but you will have to pay dearly for this out-
rage upon innocent people. Where’s your warrant ?’’
“ Hulloa! warrant indeed ! What does ‘ Miss innocent ’
know about ‘ warrants ? ’ ”
Tom Conquest and his men glanced knowingly at each
other.
The time passed away, and as the American clock struck
the hour cf midnight, Rose burst out laughing.
“ You are a strange girl,” Tom Conquest said. “ What
is the reason of your mirth ? ”
“My own thoughts,” Rose replied “Take me away,
or lock me up here, I am sleepy.”
“ That thundering villain Kelly has given us the slip,”
Tom Conquest muttered “ Marston has evidently let
the cat out of the bag too soon. Kelly smelt a rat and hag
bolted. Well,” he added, turning to one of his brother
officers, “ I don’t see the use of keeping the girl here ;
she has made up her mind to keep her lips closed against
the truth.”
Rose laughed again, and so loudly and scornfully that
the room rang with the sound.
“ I am quite ready,” she said; “ give my compliments to
Mr. Marston, and say that I should like to see him in the
morning.”
“Take ray arm,” Tom Conquest said, “there is a
crowd in the street, for the news has spread like wildfire;
but we may be able to slip away unobserved. Clear a way
for us men.”
The lair prisoner, however, did not escape unobserved.
As she appeared the motley concourse of people sent up a
shout, and Tom Conquest felt Rose's arm tremble on his
arm for the first time.
“ That’s Ned Kelly’s girl,” roared a fellow. “ I wonder
how she’ll like the change from gold bracelets to iron ones.
She don’t look much up to the stone jug and floor-
scrubbing.”
“ She’s a woman after all,” said another. “ Don’t jump
on her now she’s down on her luck.”
“But she’s worse nor Kelly,” shouted the first speaker,
“ she’s a very devil in petticoats.”
A rush was made at the man, and it would have gone
hard with him had it not been for the interference of the
police, who huddled him into a side street, in which he
made the best use of his legs.
Rose felt somewhat relieved when the prison gates
opened to receive uer, and when placed in a cell she sat
down on the edge of the poor pallet.
“Father is safe, and that is all I care about,” she said.
“ I would rather have my tongue torn out than utter a
single word against them. Hasten, good Marco Polo for
each stride takes you master further away trom
danger.”
Sleep of course was out of the question. Her brain
was itself discover who the traitor could be.
She thought of Harry, but she knew nothing of his
attempt on Ned’s ears, and concluded it was the work of
Carroty or Dick.
In the morning the female warder entered the cell.
“Am I to appear before the bench, to-day ?” Rose
asked.
“ Yes, but not before you have had something to eat
and prepared yourself for what’s before you. I’ve been
in a mess myself, and know what it is,” the woman replied
with something of sympathy in her voice. “ Keep up


ydtir pluck. I daresay there’s nothing against you. There
are lots of swells want to see you.”
“ I will see nobody,” Rose said, almost fiercely. “It is
oad enough to be here, without being stared at like a wild
beast. It ought to satisfy them that they will soon see me
in the dock.
CHAPTER XLI.
NED KELLY MEETS WITH HOSPITALITY.
Checking his horse for a moment, Kelly turned his head
and looked at the lights of Melbourne, now far away in the
distance, and then leaning forward he patted Marco Polo
encouragingly on the neck.
The horse pricked up his ears, as if knowing what was
required, and, in answer to a word, swept along in a swing-
ing canter, covering mile after mile untiringly, and seem-
ingly without exertion, but Ned Kelly knew better than
to over-tax the willing creature’s strength, and drawing
rein proceeded at a moderate pace.
Kelly was armed to the teeth, and was resolved that he
would never be taken alive.
He branched off the main road into the bush, though
he had little chance of encountering anyone at that hour
of the night.
After leaving Melbourne behind, he had not met a
single human being. After travelling two hours, he sud-
denly brought Marco Polo to a standstill and listened.
Was it the wind, or did he hear the sound of voices?
He was not mistaken; for as he sat as motionless as a
statue, and under the shadow of a large tree, a frag-
ment of a song, followed by a burst of laughter, put him
on the alert.'
“ A party bound from the diggings to Melbourne,” ht
muttered ; “ I must have a look at them.”
Not far away he came to a tent pitched under some
trees, and the sound of the horse's hoofs brought out four
men in hot haste.
“ Who are you?” one demanded.
“ A stranger to you, at any rate,” Kelly replied. “ Put
up your barkers. What do you take me for ? Surely you
don’t think I’m going to eat the lot of you, do you r
I’ve missed my mate—have you seen anyone pass ? I’ve
ridden a long way, and both myself and my nag are done
up. Give me a pipe of tobacco and a drop of tea ; u
mouthful of damper wouldn’t poison me. So, mates, I’ll
join you.”
“Oh, you’re as welcome as the puppy dog on the chain/'
tried the wit of the party; at which there was a guffaw
of laughter.
“ But who the devil are you?” demanded the speaker.
“No tricks must be played with Sam Clinton. If I bark
I bite as well.”
“ Well,” said Kelly, “ I have something to do with the
j dice, and my name’s Tom Conquest.
“We have heard of you,” said Sam Clinton ; “so web
come to what we have and a share of what’s going.”
After a hearty meal of mutton, damper, and tea, KeHy
went out to see that Marco Polo was safely tethered, and,
returning to the party, threw himself down on Ins side,
and apparently wont to sleep ; but no weasel was more
wide awake than he.
Ho noticed that the men wore broad belts, filled with
nuggets and gold-dust, roun'd their waists, but they were
not to be caught napping, as they took turns at sentry
duty.
“I wonder why they did not employ the Government
escort,” Kelly mused. “ Perhaps they thought they were
strong enough in numbers to do without it, but if I had
another man with me, I’d make them go a little lighter
in their pockets to Melbourne.”
But they had sheltered and given him food in the hour
of need, and, remorseless villain as Kelly was, he banished
all thoughts of robbing the men.
Before the sun rose the ptrty of diggers were astir, and
after breakfast Ned Kelly bade them adieu and went his
way; but his horse had not taken many paces when he
heard a shouting after him.
“ What’s the row ?” he demanded, wheeling his horse
round, and clapping his hand on a pistol. “ There’s no
good luck for anybody in turning back.”
“ You have left something behind you,” said the digger
• “ What is it?”
“ One side of your whiskers,’’the man replied, laughing.
Ned Kelly cursed as he touched his cheek and discovered
the truth of the assertion. The whiskers had fallen off
during the night, and as Ned Kelly rode up to the man
who hold it he said sternly—
“ A man in my line has need of some kind of disguise
Take care that neither you nor your mates say a wordabopt
this”
“I don't see anything to get your dander up, Mr.
Conquest,” said the digger. “I’m jiggered if I’m quite
sure you’re as square as you look.”
“Just mind your own business, and don’t bother about
mine, I’d advise you.”
As he spoke he saw something resembling a cloud of
dust in the distance, but his practised eye convinced him
that il was a scouting band of troopers, and, giving the
reins a shake, he swerved Marco Polo round, and set off
at a fast gallop.
“Show them the way, my lad,” he said, prAting Marco’s
neck ; “ those cocktails would be stumped an hall an hour
at such a pace as this.”
(To he continued .)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tala of the Groat
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Ssa.
Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
Love and Adventure. Rodney Kay, or the Life and Adven'ures of
Run away from Home.— A Life of a Scapegrace.
Adventure. The Cloud King.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Ha’f-a- Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Million. Ruin.
The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search One in a Thousand.
of a Big Diamoud. Andrew Lorrimer.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough Robert the Rover,
Diamond Polished. The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




CHAPTER XLIIL
A RATHER UNCOMFORTABLE CONVERSATION.
It took Ned some weeks to traverse the distance to
Sydney, seven hundred miles as the crow lliev But he had
no adventures on the road worth mentioning, and only
awaited the arrival of Rose, to quit the colony for some
safer abode. He anxiously read the local papers to see if
anything of his doings was known, but beyond the an-
nouncement of his departure for Adelaide (as was given
out), little else was said.
Conquest, who suspected Mr. Bellamy’s identity, called
at the Melbourne newspaper cilices and requested silence
upon the subject, as likely ,o further the ends of justice.
Almost the first person he met in George-street, Sydney,
was the black-eyed Lola, who was playing at the theatre.
Mr. Bellamy paid her great court, and the countess re-
ceived his advances with pleasure; perhaps because she
was struck with his bold, manly, devil-may-care bearing.
There was the opera and the theatre, and bazaars
and fetes, and picnic parties up the Paramatta river, and
it was upon one of these latter occasions that Lola Montez
said to Mr. Bellamy—
“ You are not very colonial. Do you never take off
your gloves? ’
Ned started at the question and a flush of evident
confusion rose to his face
“ What a strange question !” he exclaimed, looking at
her keenly.
“ Oh, I am an acknowledged eccentric, and as such am
privileged to ask whatever comes into my head. Have
you a reason? ”
“ Yes, I have ; but I would far sooner not confess it.”
“ Ah, a mystery! Do you know I hate mysterious
people.”
“ Is it because you don't care for a rival in that line?”
“No, but I believe all women hate puzzles that they
can’t unravel."
u Very well, since to bo hated by you would be worse
than death itself (there he bent upon her an amorous
glance), I will no lon„er allow this little habit of mine to
remain a mystery to you. I wear gloves for the most
unromantic of all reasons, namely, because my hands are
red and coarse. Are you satisfied with the explanation ? ”
“ No, because Ido not believe it. What nonsense you
talk.”
“ Truth is often considered nonsense, for the reason that
we are so little accustomed to its sound. I wear gloves
because lam too colonial. I find my men (and I employ
a good score) work better for a master who is not too
stuck-up and who is now and then not above doing a little
manual labour himself. Such things are not expected of
employers in old and long civilised co untries, but out here
they always are, and at all events it establishes a bond of
unity between employers and employed. Still one can’t
touch pitch without being defiled, and so, though my
hands are always clean, I can’t give them the delicate look
of gloves.”
“ I would like to see a hand that had been embrowned
by honest toil. It would be a novel sight to me. Pull
off your right-hand glove.”
And why particularly my right hand glove?”
“ Because people work more with that hand than the
Other.”
“ And it is more apt to meet with accidenta also, such
as cuts and blows ?”
Ned felt that the present moment was one of deadly
peril tc him, and that perfect coolness and nonchalance
SOuki alone carry the day.
He laid a hand lightly ca Lola’s arm, at the same time
saying with an easy laugh
New it is you who are growing mysterious. You are
really driving me to the most commonplace and un-
.omantic explanation. I will be frank with you, however,
if you have the patience to listen. I was one day holding
ft chest of merc-iiaadiso steady for one of my men to split
it open with ap axe, when the instrument slipped \r his
hand and descended on the back of mine, inflicting the
most unsightly gash. Behold the direct testimony of the
truth of my words,” and pulling off his right-hand glove
he held up the scar for her inspection
The lovely Spaniard looked at it closely, an u then
suddenly raising her superb eyes scanned still more
narrowly his face.
But he stood the keen, searching gaze with an easy
smile and without the quiver of a muscle.
“ Forgive me,” she said, “ I must be mistaken ; and yet
’tis very strange.”
“ What is very strange if I may make so bold as to
ask F’
“ Wthat on more than one occasion you have
remind** sie of a bush ranger who attacked the coach in
which 1 was journeying to Forest Creek, and whom I
slashed across the back of his right hand with a Spanish
knife K.at I carried, because he was rather too demonstra-
tive.”
“ Happy man even to receive such a remembrance as
that from the most lovely woman who ever trod Australia’s
golden soil. Do you know I almost wish that 1 was he,”
answered Ned, with a glance of admiration.
CHAPTER XLIV.
NED KELLY KS SET A STRANGE TASK.
’Twas evident that the countess’s suspicions were at all
events allayed if not entirely dissipated.
Nevertheless, Ned Kelly felt that for a few minutes he
had been standing on the brink of a precipice.
If with her known impetuosity she had denounced in-
stead of questioning him he might have found himself in
a particularly awkward fix.
Lola Montez having mown her cards, however, he now
played out his trumps in such a manner that by the time
the pleasant picnic was over and they had all got safely to
Sydney he felt quite assured that ere very long he should
be able to score game against his fair antagonist.
“ That woman -thill be mine !” he over and over again
muttered to nimuelf, as he grew more and more enamoured
of the lovelj foreign adventuress. *• If my supposed wealth
and devotion should, united, fail to win her, then when the
proper time comes, she shall be seized upon and carried
aboard the treasure ship by force, where I will make ker
mine without affording her the consolation of a parson’s
pattered prayers. Hang it! ’twill not be so dillicult a
matter to run away with a woman as with a bank full of
gold.”
Thus often ran the current of his thoughts, whilst his
passion grew more intense and ungovernable day by day,
until soon he found it absolutely impossible to miss one
of her performances at the theatre, and almost as impos-
sible to restrain himself from kicking up a row with the
multitudinous admirers who besides himself were always
fluttering about her in the green-room.
“ There will be blood spilt if this goes on ranch
longer,” he would sometimes mutter to himself fierc'Ay,
and to make the probabilities of such a crime more remote
he one night won the privilege of escorting her home tc
her suburban residence at Potter’s-point, close to the
large and commodious Police Barracks, and delayed
taking his farewell in so pointed a manner that she could
not very well avoid asking him indoors ; the very thing
that he was driving at.
He did but small justice to the little recherche suppei
that was so daintily laid out by an elderly Spanish Jezabel,
who seemed to be half servant and half companion; but
a-few glasses of wine warmed him up pleasantly for what
he was firmly resolved should follow after, and so when
the countess significantly observed that it was getting
very late be refused to accept that or hpr yawns either as
a hint that it was high time for him to depart, and instead
of ris ng to his feet he sank on tc his knees, and seizing
hold of both hor hands gripped them until she almost


winced with the pain, whilst begging her to accept his
lore.
She heard him through to the very end of what he had
to say. merely interrupting him once to request him to
remember that her hands were not of cast-iron ; but when
he had done she said, with an arch smile—
“You had better get up and sit down now, for I’m
sure you must feel exhausted after all that exertion. Is
it not the case ? ”
“ I will never rise from my knees until you grant my
prayer.”
“ Oh, but I don’t mean to grant it until you have done
something to prove yourself worthy of it, and yoa can’t
perform that in such a foolish attitude ”
Ned Kelly was on his feet in a twinkling, and regarding
her earnestly.
“Pour yourself out another glass of wine, take a seat,
and look like a reasonable being. I hate to be stared at.
1 get so much of that kind of homage at all times. Now
drink your wine, and listen to me.”
Her admirer instantly vowed that he was all attention.
“ Then I’m going to say to you almost the exact words
that I’ve said to at least a dozen others who during the
past week, have made of me the same complimentary re-
quest that you have just done.”
The glass was at Ned’s lips, and he aim jt bit a piece
out of it at being thus coolly informed how many rivals he
had.
“Don’t excite yourself,” exclaimed the countess, who
had remarked the action. “ Besides, those glasses are rather
expensive. I will not say yes, to a single Australian ad-
mirer—and I assure you again that I have a host of them
—until I am avenged for a terrible insult that I have re-
ceived in their colony'.”
“ Tell me the name of the rascal who has dared to offer
it to yeu, and, if it will give you any satisfaction, I wCi
shoot him down like a dog.”
“There is no need for such extreme measures. The
man who insulted me is a common criminal, with a price
upon his head; a brutal bully who could threaten a weak
woman, and even maltreat her; a monster who could
clutch my poor arm” (and here she stretched forth a deli-
cately-rounded arm, white as milk, and bare to the very
shoulder) “and, whilst he poured forth the most infamous
and revolting threats, squeezed it in his iron grip until it
bore the marks of his vile and ruthless fingers for days.
To win my love, you mus" hunt to the death the man
who has so grossly ill-used and insulted me. The day
that the bushranger Ned Kelly is lodged in gad I will
affiance myself to you, Mr. Bellamy, and the day after he
is hung I will marry you. There is the answer to your
petition.” Ned almost thought there was a malicious
twinkle in her eye, as she imposed those conditions.
Had a bombshell dropped through the ceiling at Ned’s
feet, with the fuse all alight, he could hardly have been
more startled than he was by this speech of his inamorata.
It was not pleasant, the thought that he would have to
be hung before he could marry her, and he regarded her
with almost a scowl, as wondering whether after all she had
pierced his incognito, and was availing herself of the occa-
sion to tell him pretty plainly what she thought of him—
a preliminary step, perhaps, to ruthlessly handing him over
to the police and the gibbet,
“ But no,” he reflected, after a moment's anxious doubt,
n she would never have the pluck to sit smiling there if
she really thought herself in the presence of a man who
would think little of strangling her if he suspected she
knew him. It is not in a woman’s nature to be so bold.”
“Ah! you're a coward!” said the countess, with a
sudden petulance, “ You are either afraid of this outlaw
or you think I am hardly worth the winning at so great a
hazard. You are like all the rest. No one has closed with
my offer—not one. You colonials are a set of poltroons,
and I see very well that I shall have to go and seek him
rayself. I won’t leave this colony (would to heaven I had
never come here) until I am avenged on that man, more
for the insulting words that he dared to utter to my face
than the mere hurt he did me, for that was but a trifle. I
will seek him myself, since heaven will not raise me ap a
champion, and with my bare breast opposed to his irou-
cased one I will fight with him a duel to the very death! ”
Those who know anything of the daring, reckless, and
masculine doings of this woman, will not bo surprised at
her determination. She faced the enraged population o'?
Munich with cool and mocking threats when they, arouseO/
by her intolerable insolence and bad influence over King
Louis, tumultuously sought her life.
As she concluded, she plucked a pistol mounted in
solid silver, with an ivory stock, from inside her low-cor-
saged dress, and, apparently in a fit of absence of mind,
pulled the hammer back to full-cock, and deposited the
weapon in her lap.
Again Ned looked at her suspiciously, for this action
placed him far more in her power than she was in his.
True, he also had a pistol about him, but he would have
to unbutton his coat and dive into the depths of an in-
side breast-pocket to get at it; before he had effected
which, if she but suspected his design, she would have
plenty of time to shoot him through the head.
Besides, how could he hurt her as she lay there looking
so beautiful ?
Her broad white chest, palpitating with violent emotion,
was in its loveliness a far stronger defence than his own
thick iron corselet had ever been.
But what should he say—what do ?
He could not sit there looking like a fool (though he felt
quite as big a one as ever he looked), without making some
kind of a proposition likely to please her.
“ I would not have you risk your life for worlds,” he
therefore contrived to gasp out. “I—l will go and un-
earth this Kelly, wherever he may be ; and—and when
found, 1 will either shoot him dexd or hand him over to
the tender mercies of the law. Of v,aurse, if he resists
and I have to shoot him you will marry me equally as
though Jack Ketch had the final disposing of him 1'”
“Well, yes, I will; but there must be no doubt about
his death. His corpse must be recognised and sworn to
by at least a dozen people.”
“Of course, of course. But suppose I strive my very
utmost to brino; him to book, but cannot? Is my case
then hopeless r’
“Ned Kelly once really dead, you having done your
very best to be the instrument of his death, and failing
through no fault of your own, your case will be still V'&Sj
hcneful.” And she smiled upon him brightly.
Ned despairingly wished that he could see matters in
that light.
“Is it absolutely a necessity that this fellow should be
defunct before you marry me ?” he half groaned.
“Absolutely ; I have taken a most solemn oath to that
effect. You do not know how revengeful is a blue blooded
Spanish woman.”
“ Then I’ll hunt all Australia over for the miscreant,"
said Ned. “I will start in search of him the day after to-
morrow, Will that satisfy you ? ”
“No; I shall only be satisfied when he is dead,” an-
swered the countess. “Thanks to you, however, I have
little doubt that that event will come to pass ere long.
Good-night, Mr. Bellamy, It really is getting very
late.”
Then I will take an immediate farewell. One kiss to
seal the contract.”
“ No, I never pay beforehand for work that’s to be per
formed. Good-night, Mr. Bellamy. Don’t trouble to
come round the table. None but the brave deserve the
fair. Show me that you are brave, lam yours.”
CHAPTER XLF> r
KED’S DISCONTENTED TRUDGE MELBOURNEWAIiry
So Ned Kelly left the presence of the bcauGrul Lola
Montez without a kiss or even a hand-shake, and departed


to kill himself or hand himself over to Jack Ketch before
be conld even hope to obtain for himself such favours—
an odd position to be placed in.
“ The woman’s as whimsical and capricious as a child ;
and, by George, how bitterly she can hate, to be sure. By
thunder, its fortunate she has never taken it into her head
to inspect my ears. The curls hide ’em pretty entirely,
bub if she was to poke them on one side and find the top
of one ear nearly gone altogether she might remember
her pistol-shot as well as the slash she gave me with her
knife.”
He stalked along in moody reverie after this self-
colloquy ; but soon he broke forth again, for his mind was
very ill at ease :
“If she found me out after she had married me—l say
* if,’ for I don’t consider it at all likely—she’d not dare to
split on me then for very shame’s sake, for I know she’d
die rather than the world should know she had become
the wife of a bushranger. Ha, ha, ha! I should be sure
of her then. But how the devil am Ito get her? Well,
at all events, I must set out in search of myself, and glad
enough shall I be to enjoy the freedom of the bush again
for a while. I only wish that some lucky chance would
throw in my way a man closely resembling my bushranger
self, and I’d soon provide the carrion she wants, and
swear till my eyeballs started that he was Ned Kelly him-
self !”
All the while that Ned, according to his regular custom,
was thus muttering his inward thoughts and resolutions
half aloud, he was striding along the road in the direction
of the city, whose myriad lights covered the slopes about
a mile and a half in front of him.
A full moon looked down from the star-spangled
heavens upon the still and tranquil scene, but Ned
frowned as he presently passed the d irk and gloomy pile
of Police Barracks on his left, for therein dwelt the men
with whom he had waged war for years, the “ bloodnounds
of the law,” as he was wont to designate them.
For a minute he paused, folded his arms across his
chest, and, regarding the flint-stone pile sternly, muttered
to himself between h:s set teeth, whilst his bushy brows
almost met —
“ I wonder if the day will ever come, as I have again
and again resolved that it should do, when I and a chosen
band will gather around you, carry you by surprise, and
put every rascal inside you to death, and then, clad in their
togs, mounted on their horses, and armed with their
weapons, bail up half the swells and rob all the banks in
the colony. Ay, that would be a glorious raid, but then
I’m on another tack now, and I don’t see how the two
things could be worked together. By thunder, though,
if my present scheme fails by any chance I’ll relieve my
feelings and put myself into a good temper again by
having recourse to the other. My track shall be marked
by fire and blood, and then I’ll see if 1 can’t frighten the
New South Welshmen out of their gold as easily as I have
done the Victorians.”
Again he strode doughtily on. Never before had he
felt so excited and ill at ea«e with himself as he did on
that particular night Was it that “ coming events threw
their shadows before,” the awful shadows of the condemned
cell and the gallows-tree ?
And now the rambling, wooden, one-storeyed Emigration
Depot is abreast of him on the right, and at the foot of the
gentle descent that appears beyond lies the beautiful
Sydney Harbour, like a moonlit lake, beyond which a gas-
lit street stretches up the opposite hill, with a square-
towered church, and shops long since closed.
Far to his left, on a rounded eminence, glittered in the
moonlight the calico tents and shanties (mingled here and
there with a corrugated-iron building) of New Town,
the abode of lucky and unlucky diggers, newly-arrived
emigrants, and mauvais svjets of every description, now
the Camberwell of Sydney, and called the North Shore,
it is presumed for the reason that there is nothing North
about it. a lovely peninsula, a limited but exquisite
specimen of country scenery. The “ North Shore ” is
a gentle elevation, and is a well-known “ bib ” to all
artists.
Sounds of jollity, merrymaking, and fighting are wafted
across the hill by the fresh breeze from the bay, as far as
Government House, but Ned Kelly takes no heed of them.
What he does take heed of, however, is that tnere is a
trooper coming up behind him on foot, with his sword
tucked up under his arm and his long bright spurs clinking
as he strides along.
Another minute and he passes Ned by with a cheery
“ good-night.”
“ Good-night to you,” responds the bushranger, well
aware that prudence would dictate a courteous answer;
but though the words are as polite as they need be they
are involuntarily snapped out like the half-bark, half-snarl
of an angry dog.
The tone induces the trooper to regard the speaker
keenly, and as he turns his face round Ned recognises in
him the sole survivor of the gold escort, the young trooper
who afterwards rode close up to the cart with a white
handkerchief on his sword, and challenged him to mortal
combat.
Nothing would have pleased Ned better than to have
granted him the favour then and there, for he was terribly
riled by the events of the evening; but far too great in-
terests were at stake for him to risk the gratification of the
whim, especially where pistol-shots would be clearly heard
at the Police Barracks.
CHAPTER XLV.
MYSTERIOUS PERILS GATHERING THICKLY ROUND,
He trudged along therefore, and so also did the trooper,
for a matter of a hundred yards or more, but then the
latter came to a halt, seemed to stand irresolute for a
second or two, and eventually crossed over the road to
Ned, as he arrived almost parallel with him, and asked him
for a light for his pipe.
Ned produced his match-box (fusees and vesuvians have,
strange to say, never met with any degree of favour in the
colonies), and handed it to the trooper without a word.
But he was quite conscious that whilst the trap was
lighting his pipe he was favouring him with many a furtive
glance.
It seemed to be an operation of some difficulty, kindling
the contents of that pipe, and Ned was getting out of
patience altogether, when suddenly it glowed red all over,
and the trooper, returning the match-box, observed—•
“We are old acquaintances, I fancy. Tour face seems
very familiar to me.”
“ Well, you’ve looked at it long enough for it to be, at
any rate.”
“ Oh, no offence, 1 hope? Only everyone likes coming
across old friends.”
“I don’t recognise an old friend in you. I don’t fancy
I ever saw you before.”
“Don’t you? I feel pretty well convinced, mate, that
I’ve seen you before, but when and where I’m blest if I
can exactly remember,”
Kelly was now clean shaved, and the absence of beard
and whiskers had metamorphosed him completely.
“It dvu’t much matter. I’ve been pretty well all over
the colony in my lifetime, and so, I expect, have you,” re-
joined Kolly, sullenly.
“ Oh, j-m are colonial-born then ? ” said the trooper,
suddenly and sharply.
“ No, far from that, but I’ve been out here some years,
nevertheless.”
“ The colony seems to have served you well at any rate.
Made your pile ? ”
“Almost. I’ve prospered on the gold-fields at Ballarat,
and since then equally so in trade. Yes, I’ve no reason
to speak ill of the colony.”
“ Ever been at Forest Creek or np Kyneston way ? ”


“ No. I don’t know those parts. I made my pile at.
Golden Point, Ballarat.”
“ Ah, many fortunes have been made there. Carrying
on business V ”
“ Really, I don’t see by what right you put to me all
these questions.”
“ Oh, I don't know exactly about the right; but when
two fellows are walking along the same road side by side
they generally enliven the dulnessof the way by conversa-
tion. I’m just as ready to answer questions as to put
them.”
“Very well then, just for a change I’ll ask you who you
are ? ”
“Corporal Tom Conquest, of the Victorian Mounted
Constabulary.”
“ You are rather young to be a corporal, are you not,
Mr. Conquest?”
“ Well, you see, capturing bushrangers leads to quick
promotion in these times, and shooting them down is
almost as good. I hope to be a sergeant before long.”
“ Allow me to congratulate you on your prospects of
speedy promotion. I suppose you have no scruples of
conscience at winning it through bloodshed? ”
“What! scruples of conscience at shooting two-legged
wolves, who have twice the ferocity of their honester
brethren who run on four? I should think not. Why,
destroying vermin like that gives me very considerable
pleasure.”
“ And I don’t suppose you object to the pecuniary
reward that is generally attached to their capture or de-
struction ? Wouldn’t you like to lay that infernal scoun-
drel Ned Kelly by the heels, and pocket ten thousand
pounds, and win every honest and upright man’s gratitude
by the deed, eh ? ”
“ I believe you, mate ; and that’s just what I intend
to do.”
“ May you succeed. But there’s many a slip ’twixt cup
and lip.”
“Not when the holder of the cup’s hand is steady. I
have taken a solemn oath to bring this villain Kelly to
the gibbet, and I’m on his track now.”
“On his track at the present moment ? The devil! ”
and Ned’s hand involuntarily stole towards the pocket
that contained his loaded pistol.
“ Oh, I don’t say at the present moment exactly,” re-
torted the trooper, with a laugh. “ But lam on his track
for all that, and I’m bound to run him to earth in the end.
you’ll see. Do you know why I stopped you to ask y
for a light? ”
“ Because you wanted to pump me for some reason or
other, eh?”
“ Say rather because I had more than half an idea you
were Ned himself.”
The bushranger thought that a good laugh would be
the best answer ho could make to this remark, and ho
managed to laugh with a great deal of boisterous vehemence,
as though it were really an excellent joke to be mistaken
for so bloodthirsty a miscreant.
The trooper laughed too, and to Ned’s intense relief
added—
“ I soon found out my mistake, though I was convinced
much against my will, I can assure you. Still, there is a
likeness between you, especially in your build.”
“ I’m certainly very much obliged for the handsome
•compliment you pay me,” said Ned, bridling up. “ Some
people perhaps would feel their vanity tickled at being
told that they resembled so celebrated a character, but, as
an honest man who never wronged anyone of a penny,
I assure you that Ido not. However, I must be jogging
on, so 1 will wish you good-night. I hope you will catch
the scoundrel soon.”
“ I’m sale to do that, tor I have secret advice which I
can absolutely rely on that he svas in Melbourne for
nearly a month, and then left for Sydney.”
And with a cheery “goodnight” the trooper passed
sJcwn In the direction of the shipping, whilst Ned walked
just as rapidly in an opposite direction, feeling that perils
were fast thickening around him.
He couldn’t shake off this growing feeling of uneasiness,
lie dared not go straight home for fear that Tom Con-
quest, his suspicions not quite allayed, might track Kim
thither; and thereafter, hovering about the place in the
daytime, recognise some of his underlings.
So he walked up one street and down another, often
fancying that he heard stealthy footsteps in hie resr; but
when he looked round he invariably saw nothing calcu-
lated to arouse his suspicions, for the hour was a very late
one, and there was hardly anyone about.
At last he felt that before he dared venture home
he must fortify himself with at least one glass of
spirits and water ; and so he turned in at the private side-
door of a “ public ” in George’s-stroct, and passing through
the bar into the snug little cosy beyond, only made use of
by a favoured few, he dropped the heavy curtain that shut
it off from the general public, who at the present moment
were represented by emptiness, and giving a poke to the
embers of the expiring fire, for the night was rather chilly,
he called out for a strong glass of hot brandy and water.
It was presently brought him by Lady Knott, the land-
lady, for the “ public ” could at that time boast an Eng-
lish titled lady for landlady, and a French marquis for a
billiard-marker, sufficient proof in itself of the topsy-
turvy state of society in the colony.
Ned (beg pardon, Mr Bellamy) paid for his grog and
was thanked for his order with a civility that the ordinary
scum of barmaids would not have condescended to show to
a customer, and then the hostess, a very finely-made and
good-looking woman, moved into the outer bar again,
where a second or so later Ned heard the chink of spurs,
and peeping fortli from behind the curtain beheld the very
trooper who had been the cause of his present great un-
easiness also in the act of giving an order.
At the sight Ned uttered a muttered curse under his
breath.
CHAPTER XLVI.
NED GETS A FEW ACCEPTABLE WRINKLES.
How thankful Ned w*as that he had dropped the curtain
between the “cosy” and the bar; for he felt that he
might hear something important while he remained un-
seen, since he was well aware that young men of all types
and professions had a weakness for boasting of their
achievements, and bragging generally of what they could
do and did do and intended to do in the future, before
the divinities of the bottle-ranged shelf and mahogany
counter.
So Ned softly stirred and sipped away at his hot grog,
toasting his feet over the hot glowing embers of the
wood fire meanwhile, and wu'th the stock of his pistol
resting most handy to his grasp, in case it might be
required.
“ Why, Mr. Conquest, you are a complete stranger. J
don’t think I’ve seen you twice these six months! ” the
landlady was heard to exclaim.
“No, I don’t care for town much. I’ve only just come
here from Melbourne ; in fact, only arrived to-day. I’m
on the scent of a remarkable character, and think I shall
run him to earth. I prefer a more active life up country.
I’m off again to-morrow night at nine o’clock or about,”
answered the trooper.
“In pursuit of your favourite hobby, hunting bush-
rangers, I suppose ? ”
“Well, something in that line. Small fry, though.
Precious small fry.”
“ I thought you had made up your mind to fly at h/gher
game, and that nothing would satisfy your ambition but
the capture of the famed ironclad bushranger, Ned Kelly,
the King of the Australian bush, as he calls himself?”
“ Ah, but you can’t imagine what a slippery game-bird he
is. He has as many lives as a cat, and is here to-
day and gone to-morrow. However, I don’t think he’ll be


able to keep out of my clutches for very long now. _ To-
morrow J go back to Melbourne to nab a couple of his old
mates, who he believes to be dead. Ha, ha, ha !he left em
wounded in the bush, to the mercy of a nest of bulldog-
ants, and, egad! those industrious little insects would soon
have made skeletons of them if some of our fellows hadn’t
trotted up in time to save them. They are as well as ever
now, I hear, and shearing on the run of a Mr. Fairfax,
somewhere up Ballarat way, past Bacchus Marsh. It
seems that Ned robbed them of every stiver before he left
them, so that if I can induce them to turn Queen s evi-
dence, and help me to hunt Kelly up—a job that I guess
they’ll precious well enjoy after the trick he’s served them
—they'll get a free pardon.
“ Wherever do you pick up all your information from,
Mr. Conquest? ”
“ Ah, that’s a mystery of the service, and must never
be let out.”
“ But when these two fellows see you coming won t they
take to flight ? ”
“Why, bless your heart, I shall not venture near’em
in these "togs. There’s an awful clever shearer, who's the
talk of the whole country round, and whose nickname is
Fleecy Jim ; in fact, I very much doubt if he’s known by
any other. The cove is rather like me, and so I shall in
due time turn up at Tarramea, under his name and cha-
racter.”
“ But if you are set to shear sheep what will you do—
eh?”
“ Why, shear ’em, to be sure. 1 assure you Im a dab
at it.”
“ I hope you won’t come to any harm. Aren t you rather
too daring ? ”
“Not I. Nothing venture nothing have, you know.
Set these two fellows and one Dick Dawson on Ned’s
track, and I’ll nab him in less than a week. They’ll know
all his tricks and disguises, you see, which I do not, and
with them for my allies, I’ll cop the whole of the ten
thousand pounds that are offered for his apprehension;
for they will have a quittance in full, and far more than
they deserve, in the shape of a free pardon for all their
past offences. Do you see that ? ”
“ Yes, and I hope that you’ll be successful. That such
a villain as Ned Kelly is left so long unhung is a positive
disgrace to the colony. I declare we all shudder here at
the mention of his name.”
“ You would shudder more, perhaps, ’were I to tell you
that be was in Melbourne for nearly a month, bolted to
bydney, and has now gone back again; his daughter is with
him, but we have no evidence against her as yet. I m
sorry for her, as she is very pretty, but she has blood on
her hands as well as her father, and such a crime as the
taking of a human life must not pass unpunished. By
the way, did you ever hear of a Mr. Bellamy, who has ar-
rived in Sydney about a month ago ? ”
CHAPTER XLYIL
NED MAKES A DESPERATE RESOLVE.
Tee hostess felt somewhat bored whilst the trooper was
propounding his last query; not so the subject thereof con-
cealed in the cosy.
“A highly-respectablc man, I believe, ' said she.
“Do you know that of yourself, or only from hear-
say ? ”
“ I know what I have stated to be a fact, and so does all
Sydney. Handsome, middle-aged gentleman. He is, or
was, in business, I hear. Bellamy and Co. in Melbourne.”
“Oh, is that all. Who and where is the Co., then?”
asked Tom.
“ Very probably in London, I should say, indeed most
likely.”
“ Ah, shouldn’t wonder. I only asked out of idle curio-
sity. I don’t suppose you ever observed whether Mr.
Bellamy had a gash, a healed scar, I should rather say,
across the back of his right band, and a portion of his ears
gone ? If ’tis so I should know the firm to be a respect-
able one.”
“I don’t believe I ever saw Mr. Bellamy without
gloves on his hands. He often pays me a visit, but lam
sure I should hawe noticed his ears had anything been
wrong about them. Dear me, how inquisitive you trooners
are.” .
“ All in the way of business, madam. All in the way
of business, 1 assure you. Well, you look tired and bored,
and just a trifle sleepy, so I’ll say good-night. When next
you see me I’ll be ten thousand pounds the richer, I hope,
through being able to inform you that Mr. and Miss Kelly
are so journing at Wintles Hotel * on their route to Gallows-
place,” and with a cheerful laugh at his own somewhat
ghastly joke, Tom Conquest politelv raised his shako and
then took himself off.
A couple of minutes elapsed, and then a voice was
heard from inside the cosy calling in husky tones for an-
other glass of hot grog.
It was at once brought him, for at the season of which
we write colonial hotels were kept open all night long,
barmaids and barmen relieving each other every eight
hours, three sets being required for the labour. -The laud-
lady had not recognised Mr. Bellamy when he entered, for
the very good reason that when he left Conquest s com-
pany he donned a pair of false whiskers, but omitted tho
beard. He also mounted a pair of blue spectacles.
When the landlady took Mr. Bellamy in this second
glass of brandy-and-water she could not help noticing
how deadly pale he was, and how his hand shook as he
raised the tumbler to his lips. _ -
The lady withdrew, and some five minutes later air.
Bellamy quitted his retreat and stalked out through tho
bar, wishing her good night as he passed.
“ Odd gentleman in his ways and not over amiable, I
should say,” thought she, when he had gone; and as she
was that moment relieved, she betook herself to bed,
there to dream that Mr. Bellamy was the ferocious iron-
clad bushranger Ned Kelly, and tl.at with his outlaw blind
he had entered Sydney and set the hotel on fire, giving
her the death of an Indian Suttee atop cf the largest
four-post bedstead. &
Meanwhile the sham merchant’s thoughts were almost;
as horrible as the landlady’s nightmare-ridden slumbers.
He could see clearly now how perilous was his position
That Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, brought to Melbourne
and assured of forgiveness for all their past crimes and
offences, would hunt him up with the ferocity and unre-
mitting energy of a couple of bloodhounds, he could not
for an instant doubt, and that they would be able to
recognise half his servants as their former companions
was equally clear.
The subterranean passage that was to open into tho
bullion-vaults of the bank would not be completed for
nearly another week, and there was nothing to prevent
the trooper being back in Melbourne with these two men
in the course of two or three weeks. So he resolved on
a bold stroke.
He knew his work in the cellar was unfinished ; that a
little more work would place wealth within his grasp. He
would return by the steamer' at once, disguised, to Mel-
bourne, leave Conquest in Sydney to follow when too
late, get his pile out of the bank, and slope (via Adelaide)
for South America and England, where he was totally
unknown.
He left the next morning undetected, and in three days
trod the streets of Melbourne.
He timed his arrival to take place at night, Larkins
looked almost frightened when he presented himself.
It should here be mentioned that when Rose, after her
arrest, was brought before the bench, there was no evi-
dence against her of any offence, nor indeed, against those
arrested at the same time. The bird wanted had flown.
Consequently all parties were discharged, if not without
* Nickname re-.- Meibom ne prison.


any stain upon their characters, at least without any proof
of the reverse.
Rose then confined herself to the house, with the in-
tention of takinc the first opportunity of joining her
father.
As we have said, when Ned entered, he found Larkins
in charge. Lose was lying fatigued arid asleep.
“They must never reach Melbourne—no, nor that
meddlesome trap be permitted to return to it either,” he
at last muttered fiercely to himself. “ I must take the
bull by the herns if I would escape being gored to death
by them. I must overtake Master Tom Conquest on
the road to Tarramea, and put either a bullet through
his brain or a sabre-blade between his ribs. Ay, and then
I will just continue my journey, and put an end at once
and for ever to the careers of Lardy and Lanky. A little
bloodletting will do me good; it will rid me of the
megrims and blue devils. ”
CHAPTER XLVIII.
ONCE MORE ON THE WAR-TRAIL.
Ned was very glad to find on reaching home that Rose
had gone to rest.
Strange was it that there should be one soft spot in this
man-wolf’s nature.
All his cowardice, all his fears, all his tremblings were
for her. ■-> Until she had brought her soft round throat
within throttling distance of the hangman’s noose, and all
in his defence, he had never known fear, and now he
almost wished that he was able to pray for her safety, and
certainly he would have laid down his own life willingly
to have secured it, so inconsistent is human nature.
He even took off his boots and crept softly into her
room to look at her as she slept, but he did not dare to
kiss even her hair for fear of awaking her.
As he gazed at her he murmured to himself—
“ How much she is like her poor mother when she was
the same age. I almost wish she was with her mother. I
must try to pack her off to England, under the promise
that I will soon join her there.”
And having made up his mind to this, Ned stole out of
the room again, closed the door noiselessly behind him,
and repaired to the underground workings to see how the
tunnelling operations were getting on.
He found them in the same state as he had left them.
Larkins found Carroty the next morning, and he was
quietly introduced into the house. The whole party were
eoon at work again. The ground was hard, and the picks
had do be used very gently so that no noise of excavating
should reach the ears of anyone who might be traversing
the street above, which a police constable patrolled all
the night long, at half-hour intervals.
“ Larkins,” said Ned, “do you think the job’s three-
quarters done ?”
“ Qlfite that, I should say, Ned. I guess we are
almost under the pavement on the opposite side of the
street, to-night. I’d bet heavy on it.”
“ I’m exactly of the same opinion, for I’ve paced the
street and I’ve paced the tunnel. The pavement is twelve
feet wide. Why in two more nights we’ll be right under
the place that we want to get into, the bullion-vault of
the bank, and in a week at most well be sailing for
old England.”
Carroty Larkins spat in his hands and then rubbed
them vehemently together, which was his way of express-
ing delight.
“ Oapton, yeVid a nr® un,” said he. “ I was jealous
A yer once, but I aren’t so no longer. ’Taint in man's
nature to bea ” a grudge against another bloke as is about
to make a milliner, a golden milliner I mean, of him.”
* I am glad to hear you say so, Larkins, as I shall have to
leawe you in sole charge to-morrow, whilst I go to sec about
<3ie vessel that is to bear us away. Be sure that you make
no WK9 noise than usual, and don’t commence your
labours a. second earlier The next day is Sunday, and the
next after that St. Patrick’s day, so of course no business
will be done on either, and ere Tuesday morning I shall
be back again. But whilst 1 am away keep
indoors and sober. The loss of such a prize isn’t to be
lightly risked. Why, once in England, every man Jack of
us will be able to live like the best of the swells. I heard
only to-day that the vaults were almost bursting their
sides with gold, all awaiting the departure of the next
mail steamer, which sails Wednesday week.”
“ Oh, Lord, capten, suppose they sends the big steamer,
or perhaps half-a dozen of ’em, to chase our treasure
wessel, eh ?”
“Well, we shall have a good seven hours’ start before
one can bo despatched; the great southern ocean is rather
wider than a bush road, and I shall choose a craft carrying
such a press of canvas and of such a build that it won’t
be a very easy matter to overhaul her. The Marco Polo
and two or three other sailing ships have beaten tae mail
steamers all to bits, lately, in the voyage home, as I dare-
say you’ve heard tell.”
“ I believe I have heard summat to that effect, now
that I comes to think on it. Well, well, cap, we leaves
it all to you, for if there’s anyone who can safely lead us
through this ’ere job, the devil a doubt but you’re the
man, and you may depend on me for carrying your
instructions into effect, and for backing yer up in all
things as well.” v
A few minuiLe were gone into by Ned Kelly and his
second in command, and then the former retired to par-
take of the rest that he was so much in need of to recruit
his exhaustion both mind and body, and to brace him up
for the performance of those terrible deeds that he was sc
firmly bent on.
At breakfast the following morning Ned was a new
man, but it was in vain that he urged Rose to leave the
colony before him, and set sail for England at once.
Ned had informed her that he would have to go to
England and he gave her many reasons, all in fact that
he could think of, but the real one, why she should
start at once and leave him to come on after.
“ Neither in safety nor in danger, adversity nor pros-
perity will we be ever parted, father,” said she. “ I sup-
pose this is that woman’s suggestion ? She has consented
to marry you, and she wants you all to herself on the long
voyage, but I have a prior claim on you, and I’m not going
to relinquish it at a stranger’s bidding.”
Ned assured her that such was not the case, and brought
other reasons forward, and prayers and entreaties to back
them, but it was all to no purpose, for he still dared not
tell her that the near shadow of the gibbet o’erhung her
and that was why he wanted her to get away, for he knew
that she had hardly regarded it as a crime, shooting a
man to save his life, but rather as a justifiable act.
As she was not to be moved, he resolved to abandon
his own fears.
He convinced himself that their danger would not after
all be very great when once the troublesome trooper,
Tom Conquest, and the treacherous Lardy Bill and Lanky
Jim were put out of the way, and he had hitherto been so
successful in all his crimes that he did not for a sing!,*
instant anticipate failure in either of these.
That Conquest had imparted bis suspicions to any of
his brother constables Ned thought most improbable, as
be would naturally bo desirous of copping the whole of
the reward that was offered for his (Ned’s) slaughter or
apprehension to his own cheek, and so all the evidence
and information that he had raked up and scraped together
would perish with him.
These reflections made Ned Kelly at length able even to
laugh and jest, and then he told Rose that he was that night
going up to Tarramea to get the treasure-stuffed jackets
that he had concealed in the wombat-hole, and if possible to
regain her pet mare Swiftsure also. He advised Rose to
keep tin blinds down and keep out of sight till Lis
return


At first Rose warmly combated this resolution, but on
Ned’s convincing her that there could not be the slightest
danger attached to the expedition, she at last yielded a
reluctant assent, being partly persuaded thereto by the
conviction that ho would have gone all the same, whether
she accorded or withheld it.
So he told her when he should be back, and adduced
the most excellent reasons for being absent so long, and
charged her to remain indoors whilst he was away ; and at
nine o’clock that night, just half-an-hour after the lamps
were lighted all down Great Collins-street, he loaded
his pistols, and, carrying a saddle on his head and bridle
in his hand, he quietly took the road to the police pad-
dock, where he knew several good troop horses were to be
found. Ho placed his saddle upon the best he could find
“by the pale moonlight,” led it gently out, mounted, and
was off.
CHAPTER XLIX.
FOURTH MEETING OF TOM CONQUEST AND NED KELLT.
Ned Kelly had set out on his present hazardous, though
to him pleasantly exciting, enterprise a very different
looking man from what he had ever appeared before.
He had studied a coloured glass photograph of Fleecy
Jim, the shearer, in a Bourke-street shop window, and had
got himself up as much like unto it as possible.
He had when leaving Melbourne shaved clean, present-
ing a bare upper lip, but he had made up for its loss by
donning a false sandy-coloured whisker and beard in one,
that fastened by springs over the ears, and he had dyed
his hair and eyebrows of a still warmer and ruddier hue.
Not content even with this amount of metamorphosis,
he had by the use of walnut juice given his complexion a
brown tint, while his throat, hands, and arms were red
enough from a life of exposure, as though they had daily
had their scorching in the sun all through the long torrid
summer, and in short made himself up in every respect so
like unto Fleecy Jim that, had that worthy chanced to
have encountered him he would certainly have been con-
sidered as like him as two peas.
The garb of a shearer he didn’t require for the present,
for he felt sure that Corporal Tom Conquest would be
got up immaculately in that respect, and he intended to
trouble him for the clothes.
And now the disguised bushranger is clean away from
the dwellings of men, and his spirits rise wondrously as
he feels himself once more to be the monarch of his old
domain, the king of the Australian bush.
Tis a dark, gloomy, and tempestuous night; the wind
is coming up from the distant bay in puffs, whistles and
shrieks through the tree-covered ranges ; the shadows flit
fast and furiously across the surface of the moor, in short
flpurts like race horses struggling vainly to defeat time ; the
birds have long ago retired to their nests, the native bear
to his favourite branch, and the ’possum to his hole in the
hollow tree; the dingo or native dog howls dismally from
the deeper solitudes of the bush, sometimes answered by
the shrill cry of the blue crane from some neighbouring
swamp, as he diligently searches for a recherche supper ol
tender young frogs ; a few drops of rain fall at intervals,
making splatches on the metal road as large as shillings,
and sometimes thunder rumbles in the distance like the
devil muttering his curses in the air, preceded by a flash
of white forked lightning, that zig zags across a pall-hued
cloud and appears almost to hiss as it disappears.
It seems to be exactly the night for deeds of blood-
shed and horror, and Ned hails all thc&e tokens as good
augury of the success of his mission.
He holds the road just at the point where it branches off
in one direction towards Ballarat, and in the other towards
Forest Creek. No one can pass on either track without
being challenged by him.
A couple of troopers rattle along the road, laughingand
vmcking, but he slinks back into the bush out of their sight
and hearing, muttering a curse upon their entire race as
he does so.
He waits yet a little longer, and then he hears a solitary
horseman coming along at a spanking trot.
“ That must be my man,” thinks he, and he emerges on
the road again and rides forwai i at an eas* pace with the
intention of being overtaken.
That’s just what presently happens.
“ Good night,” calls out a cheery voice.
“Goodnight to you. Whither away, mate?” is Ned
Kelly’s answer,
“Tarramea, Fairfax's station, shearing job,” answers
Tom Conquest.
“You ride an uncommon good nag for a shearer.”
“Think so? Bought him at a Wangaratta stock sale,
an unbroken colt, for half-a-crown. Flatter myself I have
made something of him.”
“ I fancy somebody made him a troop-horse before you
had anything to do with him, I arrest you on suspicion of
horse-stealing, friend.”
“Ha, ha, ha, a good joke that. Why, don’t you know
me, mate?”
“How the devil should 1, when I can hardly make out
a feature of your face? Do you think I’ve the eyes of a
lom-cat that can see in the dark? I can judge of your
horse by his step and the way he carries his head, but I
can’t say the same for you. Anyway you are my prisoner.”
“ Put, tut, man! I thought everyone in the force could
swear to Tom Conquest’s voice, though, truth to say, he
don’t recognise yours.”
“ I know Tom Conquest’s voice well enough, but he
would have declared himself to a brother trooper at once.
Yours sounds to me a deal more like Ned Kelly the
bushranger’s, .and I’m d if you aren't Ned, too.”
Almost ’ere the words were out of his mouth he whipped
a pistol from his holster, and at the same instant spurring
his horse down upon that ridden by the disguised trooper,
rolled it right over in the mud.
“ ¥ou infernal ass!” roared Tom, as he disengaged him-
self from his fallen steed and struggled to his feet.
“What was that for, eh ? ”
“To get the better of you, of course. I don’t care for
a fight upon equal terms where it can be avoided. I want
good health to enjoy the ten thousand pounds that I
shall win for this night’s work. Now don’t move a hand
towards your pockets, for I know what that means well
enough, and I’d put a bullet through your brain before
you’d time to pull it out again.”
“ You thundering blockhead! just listen to reason, will
you ? ” ejaculated Tom, almost foaming at the mouth with
passion. “ I’m no more like Ned Kelly than Tin like the
man in the moon—no, nor so much.”
I haven t the honour of that last-named gentleman’s
acquaintance, and I don’t feel in any humour for arguing
the point with you, for I’m as sure that you’re Ned
as I am that the man in the moon is at present behind a
cloud. I’ve been on the lookout for you along the road
for more than an hour past, for, from information received,
I knew where you were bound, as well as on what errand
and how rigged out; so you see, Master Ned, there can
be no manner of a mistake, though where you stole the
troop-horse I’m blest if I can guess. Now, inasmuch as
you re just as valuable dead as living, see that you keep
your potato-trap shut, and that you obey my commands
quick and sharp, without cavil or question, or, bv gum
111 shoot you as dead as Moses.”
“uzzle of the bushranger’s pistol was within a yard
of loms head, and the bushranger’s horse stood as firm
as any rock for its rider to deliver his fire, whilst his
own had scrambled to its feet and started away at a
gallop. J
“Hold! I’ll convince you—’’Torn Conquest had sput-
teied out so much when he thought he observed his ante-
gomsts right-hand forefinger curling with gentle pressure
around the trigger of his pistol. “ Ail right, I obey,” Tom
therefore hastily finished up his sentence with, for he


knew that to get at his own barkers ere he was shot dead
would be a matter of impossibility.
“ Strip J” roared the disguised bushranger. “ Off with
your jumper, your hat, your boots, trousers, and shirt.
Come, look slippery.”
“ But ”
Tom had got as far as that, when a bellow of
“ Dry up, or take the consequences, d n you!” in
conjunction with the advancing of the pistol-muzzle still
nearer to his face, convinced him that silent obedience
was the only way of preserving his life.
feo he did as he was bidden, ia a minute or two standing
upright in only his under-flannel, drawers, and stockings!
Both his pistols were now on the ground inside his
jumper side-pockets, for not a chance of handling them
had presented itself.
The bushranger laughed grimly as he looked at the
discomfited lorn Conquest, and called to mind their very
different rencontre of the night in Sydney, and the vaunts
the trooper had afterwards indulged in.
“Now, you hound,” he exclaimed, “I think I have
clean bowled you over. So you were going to Tarramea
to join your old pals, Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, who are
already engaged there in murdering the poor old squatter
and all his family, and then to plunder the Home Station,
were you? A mightily clever-contrived scheme, I’ll
admit, but you see, we lads of the Victorian mounted
police are sometimes one too many for you.”
“I swear ” began Tom.
. “ Ha! would you, though ?” thundered forth Ned. “ A
single word, and you’re a dead man. By George, on
second thoughts, I’ll make you a stiff un anyway, for
you’ll be easier to get down to Melbourne that way. Dead
men can’t play tricks upon travellers.”
_ “ Crack!” went Ned’s pistol, and Tom Conquest felt
himself unwounded; but, turning sharp round, he was off
the metal road in a twinkling, into the scrub where no
horse could follow.
“ Bang!” went the bushranger’s second pistol, and the
trooper felt himself hit.
He was still able to dive into the scrub, into and
through which he crept for some distance, until he reached
a spot where Ned lost sight of him.
Ned swore bitterly to himself because his shots had not
proved more deadly ones.
He wasn't going to leave the man whom he so intently
hated with one spark of life in him, so after looking up
and down the road and listening intently for a second to
make quite sure that no one was approaching the spot
from either direction, he rapidly re-charged his pistols,
and, setting spurs to his horse, made after his crippled
adversary.
He tracked him to a spot where a flash of lightning had
revealed him diving into the scrub as a hare darts into
her form, but there he drew rein, sorely puzzled how to
proceed.
He saw clearly that his horse could not push its way
through the dense tea-tree branches, and yet were he to
dismount and explore them on foot, the trooper, if not
desperately wounded, might double round till he got to
the horse, and then mount it and ride away, in that manner
making good his escape.
So Ned scratched his head and resolved to have recourse
to a ruse.
“ Come forth and I’ll sptxe your Ihe,” said he. “ Better
go with me to Melbourne /vnd chance it than be helpless
there till the wild dogs gather round you, and, hungry as
wolves, tear you limb from limb.”
“ You beast," called Tom, faintly, out of the scrub. “ I
believo that you knew who I was all along, and shot me
because you wanted to nab Ned Kelly all to your
own hook. You possess the same information as 1
“ Ha. ha, ha IL hear that he’s in Melbourne, and I want ft
to secure Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, who are shearing at"
Tarramea, under promise of a free pardon from Govern-
ment, to enlist themselves as my bloodhounds and help
run him down. Ha, ha ! perhaps that is my little game,
who can tell ? If so, 1 shall find the shearer togs that you
have cast aside very handy to work the oracle with. Ten
thousand isn’t much when it comes to be divided between
two.”
“ You wretched brute, you! who are you, and where
do you come from ?”
“It won’t do you any good to have those questions
answered. I haven’t been in the Victorian police long,
though I’ve served in the New South Welsh for some
years. I won’t hurt you any more if you’ll come out.”
“ I won’t trust you. You’re a would-be infernal
assassin,” moaned Tom.
This conversation was rather a loud one, as the men
were a hundred yards apart, separated by, to a horse, an
impenetrable scrub
At this moment the moon shone out for a brief second
from behind a rift in the thickly-scudding masses of
leaden cloud.
It was what Ned Kelly had been waiting for.
Straining his eyes he saw the topmost branches of the
dwarf tea-trees shake at a certain spot, and knew that
the movement must be caused by amotion of the wounded
trooper beneath them.
It was a guide to his aim.
He jumped off his horse, and, revolver in hand, rushed
into the scrub after Tom to make his sure, but
apprehending this move Tom tore off his coat and hung
it up as a “dummy.” The night was very black, and in
the darkness it might be supposed the coat was not an
empty one, at least so thought Ned, who, in his fury,
excitement, and haste just stopped to put two bullets
through it, and, satisfied his work was complete, bounded
back to his horse, upon whose back he sprang lightly.
At that moment a deeper, pitchier darkness than ever
suddenly shrouded bush and sky, a tremendous peal of
thunder sounded as though it were splitting the very
firmament into fragments, a sheet of blinding lightning
struck Ned’s horse full in the face and crackled fiercely
all round and over it, whilst the maddened brute plunged
and reared, and lashed out furiously behind, finally break-
ing into a wild gallop and defying all its rider’s efforts to
control or curb it.
Ned kept his seat, but the terrified horse had borne
him a good mile away from the scene of his crime before
he could bring it to a standstill.
Then he rode back to the spot where Tom Conquest
had dropped his shearer’s rig-out, and dismounting he
carefully rolled up the clothes, with the stiff, narrow-
brimmed straw hat in the middle, into as narrow a com-
pass as possible, and strapped them on to the saddle in
front of him.
This done he remounted, reflected for a moment
whether it would not be as well to penetrate into the
scrub to make quite sure that the trooper was dead, and
decided in the negative when the probability occurred to
him that another flash of lightning might terrify his horse
and start it away past recovery, whilst he was pottering
about amongst the Septospermum bushes, looking for
what he might never be able to find in the almost opaque
darkness.
“The skunk’s bound to be dead,” he muttered to him-
self, “and I’m blest if I’ll waste any more time over him,
for I’ve still a longish ride.”
And thus resolving he set spurs to his horse and dashed
along the metal road at a swift gallop in the direction of
Bacchus Marsh.
About midnight he passed through the township, and a
couple of hours later he was in sight of BaKan.
Hereabouts he left the metal and struck into a bush
track on his right.
When he had followed this for about three miles he
rode into a patch of scrub on a hill, and about five hundred
yards from a head station, and dismounting and tying up
his horse—for the thunderstorm had by now passed away


—lie exchanged his own for the shearer's dress, concealed
llie former toggery in amongst the thick undorgr®wth.
lie now started down the hill for the woolshed, where
shearing was in full swing, and where he had ascertained
his two°“ blood-money ” friends were engaged—cocking
Ids hat rakishly on one side of his head, and lighting up
& short black cutty pipe, he continued his journey, as
dandy a shearer, to all outward appearance, as could have
been found between the Murrumbidgee River and famed
Hobson’s Bay.
He chuckles as he reflects how well he has rid himself
of the troublesome trooper, bub perhaps he would not
have felt quite sc comfortable and cocksure that he would
never be in danger from him any more, had he but known
that neither of his last-fired bullets had as much as touched his
supposed victim , and that the shrieks, the groans, were all
put on. The first shot inflicted a slight flesh-wound.
CHAPTER L.
FLEECY JIM AT TARRAMEA. SHEARING EXTRAORDINARY,
Every country has its special products. England has its
manufactures, America its cotton and sugar, and Australia
its wool.
The production of this latter article has called into
existence three very distinct Australian characters—the
shepherd, the bullock-driver, and the shearer.
The two former varieties of the Antipodean genus homo
we may hear of on a future occasion, but we will deal with
the shearer now.
The shepherd may be said to grow the wool, the shearer
to gather it, and the bullock-driver to carry it to market.
There you have the avocations of all three.
As shearing only comes for a few months in the year,
every class of impecunious men become shearers for the
time being, and the money earned at shearing-time contri-
butes greatly to help people to start a little farm.
But there are regular as well as amateur shearers; pro-
fessional hands who start in the warm parts and finish up
on the table lands, and who rest during the remainder of
the year, or, at all events, until they have accomplished
that thoroughly Australian feat called “ knocking down a
cheque.”
These shearers are generally called “dons,” so it don’t
hold true at the Antipodes that only in universities can
“ dons ” be found.
Of this class the “ don ” shearer was Bill Topper—
“ Slashing Bill,” as he was generally called.
It was universally allowed, in the districts where he
hung out, that he had no equal, and everyone was ready
to swear that no one knew how to open a sheep, or run
down the whipping shovlder, or put an edge on a shear like
him.
The sheds where he worked were commonly crowded
with learners, known by the name of stonehreakers and
tomahawkers, anxious to become acquainted with Slashing
Bill’s new dodges, for Bill, like all geniuses, had various
methods that were peculiarly his own, and known as
Slashing Bill’s “ opening blow,” “ new ribbing blow,”
“ right and left cut,” and other wondrous cognomens.
Bill was a sort of boss in all the sheds, for no squatter
dared offend him. He looked with withering contempt on
anyone who tried to shear as well as himself, or to head
him in a pen ; and like a cat playing with a mouse, he
"•■Quid let him go ahead, and then, putting on a spurt, he
would overtake and pass him ere the other had recovered
from his surprise.
All competition, however, soon ceased, and after a few
desperate battles with the “old dons,” he was declared
best in all the districts where he worked.
Slashing Bill bore evidence of being something superior
to the general run of shearers.
His close-knit cabbage-tree hat had even a very smart
ribbon on it, and was always rakishly cocked on one side
«f his head. His clothes were always clean and smart,
and, according to bis ideas, both professional and fashion -
able, lie spoke, of course, authoritatively, and his decision,
like that of race stewards, was always considered final. In
fact, Slashing Bill was an important man, in his particular
line, all over Victoria—a man talked of and envied in hia
little world. And even the children grew up with his name
in their mouths, as is often the case with heroes.
But, as honest Andrew Fairservice observed, “ Ilka dog
kas his day,”and now in this fourth year of Slashing Bill’s
reign, and just in the middle of the fifth season, there
come rumours from the borders of his kingdom that there
has suddenly turned up a fellow who bids fair to beat him,
or at all events, as the shearers express it to each other,
“ give him such a tying up as he never had before.”
Bill was at the time in Ballan, the head township of the
immediate district, drinking and flashing about, trying to
create a sensation with the last of his money, just as an
expiring candle gives a great flare up before it goes out.
He was, in fact, playing the part of the heavy swell,
before he began the sober comedy of the shearer.
Bill was a great man amongst the ladies, as he called the
barmaids and servant-girls of the township, and he lavished
half his money on them, and in showing off before them.
Since his fourth season he had been losing his heart over
a pretty barmaid ; but after taking nearly all his money
from him in presents, she told him very plainly, when he
popped the question, that she was “ onkoramon sorry, but
she’d been engaged for months to Flash Ned, the boundary
rider.”
This answer finished Bill slap up, so he set to at onco
at the drink, and never cried crack till the fat Irish
landlady of the “Currency Lass” had handled his last
sixpence and turned him out of doors.
He even became so sentimental on an incipient delirium
tremens, that he began to talk of drowning himself in the
creek ; but, after duly considering the extreme dampness
of the water, and that it was wholly unmixed with rum,
he gave up this idea, and, with a penny still his own out of
a £3O cheque, made off with his horse and swag on another
perambulation, and in the course of a few hours duly ar-
rived at Tarramea Station.
He had hardly sharpened his shears, tied his handker-
chief round his head, and put bis saddle alongside of him,
when the talk commenced about the new shearer, Fleecy
Jim, who was surprising the natives all along those parts.
The younger operators began to talk with almost won-
dering awe of his new method of opening a sheep, and his
quickness in running down the whipping-shoulder ; and
even hinted that he’d been known to shear a hundred and
forty sheep in a day.
Slashing Bill listened to all these mutterings with great
contempt, and silently set to work to surprise the gos-
sippers.
But no one praised him now but bis old pals ; all the
rest only “ blowing” about Fleecy Jim and his wondrous
doings, until at last Bill, after trying in vain to convince
them that he was the best of the two, threw down his
shears in disgust, and made the following speech:
“ Tell ’ee what mates, I’m darned if I’m afraid to meet
this here cove any day of the week, and shear agin him
with one hand tied behind my back. I baint afraid on him,
or any other man, and I guess I’d know how to get the
cobbler, even if the devil was shearing agin me. Tell ’ee
what ’tis. Some o’ they flash youngsters do fancy as how
they’ve got it all their own way, but I guess I’d show ’em
precious soon how many blue beans made five ; an by this
an’ by that, if they wouldn’t take the lesson quietly, but
got warm over it, an’ wanted cooling down a bit, why
I’d say, { Come out an’ make a ring, an’ show fair play,
an’ then I’ll polish you off one by one up to a round
dozen!”’
And having thus delivered himself, Slashing Bill wheeled
himself round, caught hold of a sheep, and took off its
fleece in less time than many a man would have taken in
considering where to begin.
I hen as be gazed at the shorn animal as lie let it go,
be declared with a good round oath, time


*'lf Fleecy Jim shore his sheep in that style, he must be
Bummat most extraordinary.”
And thus encouraging himself, he set to again, vowing
with a whole host of sanguinary adjectives and powerful
noun-substantives coupled ingeniously together, that—
“ If Fleecy Jim dared to show up in that shed, he’d take
It out of him, not only with the shears, but with his two
bunches of fives afterwards.” And he certainly looked as
though he meant it.
The opportunity was destined not to be long in arriving
—in fact, it arrived so soon as to suggest the idea that
the old gentleman down below had had a finger in the
pie.
Work had hardly been commenced on the following
morning when a flying rumour flew round the shed that
Fleecy Jim was approaching on a brown horse ; and fast
on the heels of the tidings came the apparently veritable
man himself.
Slashing Bill glanced at him, and then eyed him with
open contempt.
That a shearer, indeed, for him to knuckle under to!
Why, he wore tweed trowsers, a plaid Crimean shirt, and
a stiff, narrow-brimmed straw hat, with a simple black
riband around it, and was, besides, fresh and sober-look-
ing. and seemed as though he was in the regular habit of
washing himself!
Bill muttered to a pal that “ he didn’t care a straw for
that there milk-and-water chap, with all his new flash
togs. He’d precious soon show him what an old, tried
hand could do; and when he’d given him a wholesome
lesson, maybe he’d kick him into the creek.”
Well, Fleecy Jim rolled up his sleeves and commenced
work at once ; but neither of the don shearers seemed in-
clined to show what they could do at first start.
They kept up blow to blow, sheep to sheep, until
breakfast spell.
It was on returning to the shed that Slashing Bill hit
out, and passed his opponent with ease.
There ensued cheers from Bill’s party, and Fleecy Jim’s
backers began to look downcast.
But just as Bill had got two sheep ahead, Jim let out
his hand and the fleeces rolled off his sheep like the froth
off a pot of portc-r swept by the hand of a thirsty and
impatient digger, when he’s been working ten hours and
the thermometer stands at 114° in the shade.
Sheep to sheep was kept up for close upon an hour, the
sweat rolling off the two men like rain the while.
But the struggle for precedence was not of much longer
duration.
Fleecy Jim had passed his opponent in another five
minutes with ease, and not all Slashing Bill’s frantic and
despairing efforts, backed though they were by the cheers
and encoui’agements of the old hands, could bring him
up to the scratch.
When he saw his adversary three sheep ahead, and per-
ceived that he was thoroughly beaten, he threw down his
shears, and, springing to his feet with a face as red as
that of an angry turkey-cock, vowed he had had enough
of it, and that, though “ he could shear against any man,
he’d be danged if he’d try it any longer agin the devil
for his Satanic Majesty in person he certainly took Fleecy
Jim to be.
CHAPTER LI.
FLEECY JIM DENOUNCES LARDY BILL AND LANKY JIM.
So comical did Slashing Bill lock in his half-terrified dis-
comfiture that roars of laughter arose from the assembled
shearers, in which all alike joined.
Fleecy Jim laughed as heartily as any of the rest ;
but all in an instant his manner changed, his merri-
ment dried up, seemed to be frozen on his lips by a single
wave of some invisible enchanter's wand. An expression
of horror crept over his ruddy countenance in its place,
&nd, stepping back, he pointed to two of the shearers, and
“ Hullo, mates, did you know you’d two murderers in
your midst?”
The laughter was all over now with everybody, and all
eyes were turned upon the two men, the one fat, with a
broken nose, and the other thin, with a macaw-bill-shaped
smeller, at whom Jim was pointing
And the worthies in question did not conduct them-
selves in a manner that was at all calculated to convince
the bystanders of their innocence.
Horror and terror were in their eyes as they turned rail,
with the evident intention of making tracks, but a couple
of shearers promptly collared them, only to be fiercely
struck at by the sharp-pointed shears with which t'-’.a
fellows were armed.
Noticing the cowardly action, however, half-a-dozen
were quickly upon them, instead of two, and against such
numbers the precious pair of rascals had no chance.
Fleecy Jim, alias Ned Kelly—for it was he—smiled
grimly to himself, for his victims could not have behaved
in a manner to please him better.
By their very actions the fools had admitted the truth
of his charge.
“ Who are they, mate?” asked a lot of the shearers, as
they clustered around him. “ Wliat have they dona ?
They’ve stabbed Bouncing Bill, anyhow.”
“ He’s not the first by a good score,” answered Fleecy
Jim. “They are a couple of Ned Kelly’s lambs. I've
good cause to remember them, the scoundrels 1 seeing as
how they murdered my wife and three young children.
Let me get at them, boys, let me get at ’em ! ’
And Fleecy Jim pretended to struggle desperately with
those who now began to lay hold of him, and beseech
him to “ draw it mild.”
“Not until those two villains are lodged in a devilishly
hotter place than Australia. No man’s life is safe whilst
they exist—no, nor woman’s or child’s either, the cold-
blooded villains!”
Immediately there was the roar of many voices, furious,
excited, and revengeful in tone, striking terror into tue
souls of the panic-stricken men. Their limbs trembled,
and their faces assumed the ashen hue that pales the
features of those who stand on the drop.
e: Lynch ’em! lynch ’em!” was the universal cry or,
rather, scream—from every mouth. _
“Hold up your hands, all who are for it.”
Every hand was raised in an instant, except those per-
taining to the two culprits and to Slashing Bill.
The latter personage thrust his deep into his trousers-
pockets and exclaimed —
“ Lynching be jiggered! How do you know as this Lash
cove be speaking the truth? He’s a perfect stranger to
all ov us, bain’t he ?”
At any other time old Bill’s words would have been
listened to attentively, but now all that he said was put
down to being spiteful utterances against Fleecy Jim
because he had worsted him with the shears.
The disguised bushranger knew a hundred ways of
ingratiating himself with the mob, and there were but
few things that he could not do well. He affoided a most
lamentable example of talents and coinage misapplied.
In the present instance he had laid his plans so art.ally
that they were almost certain to be crowned with success,
and at no risk to himself. . .
As to Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, their terror and agony
were truly awful. , ,
Already they perceived the fools they nad been to try
to run away instead of boldly giving Fleecy Jim the ne,
and challenging him to prove his charge.
The young fellow, too, whom Lardy Bid. had staboed
with his shears turned out to be a genera 1 favourite, and
his wound, a deep but not dangerous one in the ana, bud
incensed the other shearers against them almost aa much
fjj Fleecy Jim’s statements had doue.
In vain both of them now loudly protested their
innocence. @ <
Their conduct no words could extenuate.


“ Lynch ’em!’”
“ Ay, ay, try ’em by Judge Lynch !”
“ String ’em up !”
Such were the shouts that rang all round them.
But in the midst of the din old Slashing Bill’s bull’s-
bellow of a voice shouted out—
“ Listen to me, lads. Hanging those two chaps may bo
very good fun, but what sort of a lark will it be when it
comes to your turn to be hung, eh ? The law’ll make
what You’re about to do as nothing more nor less than
murder; for you see Judge Lynch has no colonial
appointment, and I for one say, ‘ Thank God for it.’
We’re a law-abiding people out hero, and gives the
greatest criminal fair play.”
“Listen to the parson,” cried out some of the shearers
at this, but the majority looked grave, for the old man’s
words had somewhat frightened them.
Ned Kelly saw that his project of vengeance hung fire.
“Don’t be afraid of scragging ’em, my lads,” said he.
“ There’s a reward offered by the Government for their
bodies, either dead or alive. Five hundred pounds each
man, and the description of them is so exact that a five-
year old child wouldn’t mistake. The reward bills was
being stuck up, wet from the hands of the printers, all
over Melbourne yesterday afternoon, so you can have
your fun out now and the worth of the dirty corpses
to-morrow. I don’t mean to touch a penny of the
money; avenging my poor wife and children is enough
for me.”
“We never murdered no wives nor children,” roared
Lardy Bill.
“Never hurt a female or a kid in our blessed lives,”
echoed Lanky Jim.
“ What did you try to run away for then when you was
charged with the crime, you brace of ruffians ?” demanded
Bill Jenkins, whose wound had been by now bound up;
“ you’d have plunged your blooming shears into my liver
if I hadn’t put my arm in the way, wouldn’t you? and
now I won’t be able to work agin for a week of Sundays.”
“Hanging is too good for ’em; but since it baint in our
power to give ’em anything better, and since Fleecy Jim’s
made it as clear as mud that we can’t be pulled for it, let’s
clap a couple of halters around their necks and swing ’em
up to the beam in the woolshed. What do you say,
mates ? ”
So spake Bill Jenkins’s chum, Harry Ward, and his pro-
position met with unanimous approval.
Suddenly, however, someone exclaimed—
“ Let’s take ’em off to the other woolshed, lads. It’s
further from the Home Station, and we’re not so likely to
be disturbed by old Fairfax, or his son-in-law, M‘Pherson,
there. No one knows when they may pop into this un.”
_ Kelly was not at all averse to this move, it was in the
right dilution, as this second woolshed was at the foot of
a bill and scare r wheue he had planted his horse.
CHAPTER LII.
(To be continmd.)
PICTURE BOARDS.
PUBLISHED AT 3 -
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Woman.
Adventure.
The Beautiful Demon.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
On hearing the name of M'Pherson Fleecy Jim might
have been observed to start in a most peculiar manner, and
become almost livid ; there was one man present who did
notice it, namely, Slashing Bill, for hatred has sharp eyes,
and he hated the man who had beaten him in shearing, in
no small measure.
“I’d give something to be even with thee, lad,'’ he mut-
tered to himself, and then he began to persistently look
out for that something.
Meanwhile a rough stretcher was brought out, such an
one as a lame sheep was not unfrequently carried on, and
the two condemned men, almost dead with fright, were
placed thereon, with their ankles secured together, theii
arms strapped down to their sides, and the halters all
ready adjusted to their necks.
Then four of the shearers laid hold of the stretcher and
the execution party set out for the other woolshed, that
was situated a mile farther down the creek.
'.ARCT BILL IND LANKY JIM lIAVE A RISE IN THE WORLD
Piie path to this second woolshed was across a narrow
valley, through the centre of which flowed the creek, and
about half the journey had been accomplished when Lanky
Jim, who for some minutes had been regarding his de-
nouncer intently, suddenly exclaimed in a shrill voice:—
“ I’m blowed if it ain’t Ned Kelly himself! That man’#
Ned Kelly, I say ! ” he roared out.
“ So he is, by the living Jingo, Jim ! ” almost screamed
Lardy Bill.
Ail eyes, upon this, were, of course, instantly centred on
Fleecy Jim.
But instead of looking in the slightest degree confused.
Fleecy Jim burst into a contemptuous laugh, and then an-
swered the accusation with—
“ And couldn’t you really think of anything bettor to-
say than that ? ”
“Ah! I’m blowed if you ain’t Ned Kelly, though. We
mated with you for two years, and saw you every day all.
that time, and so if we aren’t able to swear to you we don’t
know our own names,” said Lanky Jim spitefully.
“Just listen to the fool, mates!” laughed FSsecy Jim
“ He calls me Ned Kelly, and says that he’s served under
me for two years, and seen me daily during all that time,
and so must know me ; and though I’ve bin working by his
side all day, and drawn his attention pretty considerably
on me during the last quarter-of-an-hour, I reckon,, and
yet he never Jets ou«t his grand knowledge until now 1"
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




44 1 shouldn’t wonder if you was Ned Kelly, for all that,”
aaid Slashing Bill, doggedly, as he thrust his hands deep
into his breeches-pockets under his striped blue shirt,
which was worn in true bush fashion outside of all, and
confined .around the waist by a broad and particularly
greasy leather belt. “ No, I shouldn’t wonder a d if
you was Ned Kelly,” the old man repeated, spitefully stamp-
ing his foot upon the giound, although, of course, he
thought nothing of the kind.
“ 1 think I’ve given you very good reason for knowing
that I’m more shearer than bushranger, old cock,” laughed
Fleecy Jim, good-temj eredly, thereby provoking a perfect
outburst of merriment at Slashing Bill’s expense. “ Why,
you old duffer,” he added, “do you think as how Ned
Kelly, the ironclad bushranger, need ever be reduced to
take to sheepshearing for a livelihood ? Why, everyone
says that he’s rolling in tin, and 1 daresay it’s true.”
“He came here to have his revenge out on us. We
was too honest to serve him any longer—we was altogether
too soft-hearted, we was, to do his murderous bidding, and
that’s why we left his band ; and that’s why he's got this
down upon us, and has hunted us to our destruction,”
roared Lardy Bill.
“ Oh, very likely, Fatty ; very likely indeed it is that
Ned Kelly would have run his own neck into the halter,
just on the chance of noosing yours. Why, you precious
brace of skunks, if I was Ned Kelly, you’d have split on
me the instant I entered the woolshed, for you know well
you’d have won a free pardon from the Government, had
you done so, for all past offences, and been granted a con-
siderable portion of the swag offered for Ned’s arrest as
well. Your yarn won’t wash, you rotten dogs, won’t wash
in the least, I say, except such parts of it as refer to your
two selves, for you clearly admit that you are what I
charged you with being—a couple of bushrangers.”
“D it, you are Ned Kelly, spite of all your bounce.
No wonder we didn’t know you at first, disguised as you
are,” screamed Lanky Jim.
“Disguised? Well, I rather like that,” retorted
Fleecy Jim, with another laugh. “ How the deuce can a
fellow be disguised with his face almost as bare as a
blessed baby’s? Do you mean to say I wear a mask?”
“ No,” answered Lardy Bill, “ your hair was your mask.
We never clapped eyes on you afore except you was
woolly up to the very eyes.”
“ Come, come,” said Fleecy Jim, “ this patter has lasted
long enough. If half the coves present thinks as how I
may be Ned Kelly, I’m quite willing to stay amongst ’em
until the police has been sent for to inspect me, and I’m
sure no man can say fairer nor that.”
“No, that I’m beggared if one can,” called out Bill
Reynolds. “ But,” he added, “ I’m precious sure that not
one on us believes what these two rascals say, no, not
even the old Slasher, though he do lay it on precious
thick out of spite. So bring ’em along, lads, and we’ll
soon stop their tongues from lying an’ slandering anymore.”
The suggestion was at once put into practice, and in a
few minutes the woolshed was reached that was to bo the
scene of their execution.
But, previous to this, Slashing Bill had quitted trie
r nteqe, vowing that he would be no party to a cold-
blooded murder, but that “he’d run up to the Home
Station an' tell Squatter Fairfax an’ Mr. M‘Pherson all
about it.”
“ Hurry up, lads, an’ we’ll get the job over before the
‘bloke can turn up,” was now the cry; and long ropes
having been attached to the short halter-oordc, their ends
were thrown over the beam of wood that stretched right
across the great woolshed from wail to wall a considerable
height above their heads, and the doomed men being
placed to stand side by side immediately underneath, four
men tailed on to the end of each rope, and calmly awaited
the sigunl for running the miserable wretches aloft, which
signal was to be given by Fleecy Jim.
“ Well, you precious rascals, have you any messages to
send to your friends? ” he cried tauntingly.
Lardy Bill was too nearly gone with terror to be able
to make any answer, but Lanky Jim, with eyes aflame,
even though his face was as blanched by terror a« that of
any corpse, hissed through his clinched teeth—
“lf I have any wishes to give, it is that you may have
a hotter place than is waiting for us two ; and as for last
messages, I’ll haunt you waking and sleeping. £ shall be
with you night and day, I’ll nevfcr leave you more. Your
run of luck is over, for the dying curse you, and the dead
will be always with you—ay, when you are hunted like a
wolf in the bush, when you see your daughter hung,
when you are hung yourself, and all through the long
days and nigiits you will pass in the stone jug. How like
you the prospect ? ”
“So that your beastly ghost hasn’t got a tongue, I
shan’t care very much where or how it haunts me,”
laughed Fleecy Jim.
“ Up with them ! ” he then shouted to the men who
were tailing on to the ropes. “ It'll be more fun to see
them dance upon nothing than to hear them speechify.
Now, altogether with a yo, heave, ho ! ”
The shearers required no second bidding.
Lanky Jim had just time to shriek forth curses, when up
went he and his companion, with a quick, jerky run.
It was an awful sight to •witness the contortions of the
pair, as they swung and wriggled and twisted about >n
mid-air, like hideous punchinelloes; their legs and arms
working all at once, their tongues lolling out of their
mouths swollen and bloated, their eyes leaping almost out
of their sockets, and a strange rattling issuing from their
compressed throats.
But these struggles for breath and life did not continue
for very long.
Lardy Bill was the first to stiffen out, being by far the
heavier man; but Lanky Jim was not long in following
him, and the two wretches were dangling quietly enough
when into the woolshed there suddenly came Mr. Fairfax,
Andrew M‘Pherson, and Slashing Bill the shearer.
CHAPTER LIII.
TAKING A BULL NOT BY THE HORNS BUT THE TAIL.
“_CuT down those men instantly!” exclaimed Mr. Fairfax.
“ How dare you to take the law into your own hands in
this fashion ? Do you know you’re all murderers ? Down
with them at once, and cut through the cords that are
around their necks ! Do you hear mo, men ?”
Not only did they hear, but they also immediately obeyed
their master.
As he moved forward to examine into the condition of
the two men, who by this time lay stretched out upon the
ground, Andrew MTherson (who was, in truth, Air. Fair-
fax’s son-in-law, and for the present a visitor atTarramea),
exclaimed—
“ Which is the man who accused them of their crime,
the man who says that his wife and children were murdered
by them ? Where is he ?”
Then at once a dozen outstretched hands pointed
towards Fleecy Jim, whose face had suddenly grown
blanched, whilst he edged away towards the gentle rise
leading up the hill towards where his horse stood.
“That the man?” gasped M‘Pherson, stepping back-
wards. “He is the miscreant who stabbed me thrice as I
lay helpless on the plain, when the fire had passed over and
spared me. I would swear to him amongst a thousand ! ”
Nothing daunted, Ned cried out laughingly—
“ Why the bloke is clean mad. Who do you take me
for ? I’m as good and honest a man as any here, and I tell
you you lie. I’m well known. Fleecy Jim ain’t no new
chum, is he mates ?”
“ No, no ! ” was the response. “We know him, master
—he’s right enough.”
“ I say he’s Ned Kelly! ” frantically roared M'Phorson,
as he rushed to seize him.
But Ned had already marked the programme of his
campaign.


During toe accusation he had sidled away to the base of
the hill, where some young bullocks were grazing.
The identification of Kelly by Lardy and his mate oc-
curred to the recollection of the shearers, and, backed by
M'Pherson's earnest accusation, induced them, after a
moment’s hesitation, to follow the rush made by MTherson
to secure Ned.
M‘Pherson was close Ou the bushranger, when the
latter, with hate and rage in his face, thundered forth an
oath and flung with all his force his shears at M‘Phcrson’s
body, and struck him in the abdomen. The weapon
penetrated the part, and the wounded man fell to the
ground, while his assailant, turning rapidly to face the
hill, knowing he was more active than those present, and
that, therefore, he could “blow” the lot in the up-hill
race, found himself among the frightened steers, who, of
course, always fly from the object of their fright.
Seizing one of them by the tail, the animal took fright,
dashed up the hill, and drew Kelly up after him, with no
effort on the part of the latter, who, by this novel loco-
motive, soon outstripped his pursuers, and was on the back
of h.is horse and off like the wind before his enemies
could catch horses to follow him.
lie—like the old song—
“ Upon the hill he turned
To take a last fond look
and, shaking his hand defiantly, roared out loud enough
for all to hear—
“ Not yet, I tell you ! And look out, Sandy M‘Pherson.
You’ll swing before Ned Kelly.”
He then speedily galloped off like mad towards the
spot where his police disguise was hidden.
CHAPTER LTV,
HEMMED IN BY FOES AGAIN. —A DESPERATE LEAP.
Half-an-iiour later the shearer was transmogrified into a
trooper once more.
If Ned had been a prudent man be would at ones have
made the best of his way back to Melbourne, and have
thought only cf Rose’s safety, the quick getting at the
treasure in the billion vault of the bank, and then as speedy
a flight from the colony as possible.
But, unfortur ately for Ned and for his adopted
daughter, the wolf’s nature in the man was now thoroughly
roused ; the fieice lust for blood was upon him, and after
a headstrong will had thrown itself into the scale against
prudence for a few seconds, prudence kicked the beam,
and the bushranger resolved to ride back to Tarramea, to
make sure that his vengeance was consummated.
Nothing would have induced the man-tiger to have
quitted Australia leaving Andrew MT’herson, Lardy Bill,
and Lanky Jim with a single breath of life in their bodies ;
and he had no positive assurance that either one of the
three were dead, for the two traitors might have been cut
down ere life was quite extinct.
“In this costume,” muttered the bushranger, “I can
suddenly appear upon the scene as a ti’ooper who has
casually heard cl the occurrence, and has ridden up both to
offer his services and gather information concerning the
triple crime for his own use. I don’t think old Fairfax
is at all likely to recognise me as the trooper who was at
his place a month ago, for I was bearded and mustachioed
like a bard then, and had a very differently coloured com-
plexion and hair as well.”
And thus reflecting, he once more turned his face to-
wards the station.
On his way he met a stockman, galloping like mad, who
at once reined up his sweat-reeking horse, and exclaimed—
“ You are the very chap I want. Come along with me
to Tarramea, for heaven’s sake! There’s been the devil
to pay, and no pitch hot there, this afternoon. Mur-
der has been committed.”
“What, the squatter tb« boss? That’s a bad job.
Good master, aren’t he ?”
- “ No. he ain’t the master. Mr. Fairfax owns the station,
but Mr. M‘Pherson married his youngest daughter many
years ago—wlio's been long dead, poor lady—and since
Mr. M‘Pherson has been almost ruined by a bush-fire that
destroyed his own station of Mittagarra, an’ thousands ov
sheep, an’ hundreds ov bead of cattle, an’ scores an’ scores
of valuable horses as well, an’ the growing crops, and
everythink else almost. Mr. Fairfax, his father-in-law.
have offered him and his daughter a home until he has
taken time to look around him an’ to start afresh ; that is
to say, if he ever lives to do it; for Ned Kelly has sworn
to do for him.”
“Ned Kelly! What, has that fellow cased in iron paid
you a visit?'
“Well, ev-dijone do think now that it was ne, though
some do sti'J swear that it was Fleecy Jim, and driven mad
by sunstroke. Fellers do run amucker when taken that
way sometimes, if it was Kelly he’s bin the death of two
of his old pals. He had ’em hanged, and now they’re as
dead as pickled pork. If they’d bin cut down sooner it
might hev been different.”
A glare of fiendish satisfaction lighted up Ned Kelly's
eyes as he thus learnt that at all events one debt of ven-
geance had been paid in full. He was settling scores
with his numerous creditors finely before quitting the
colony, he thought to himself. Tom Conquest, the
trooper, the wild dogs had already feasted on, he made up
his mind to that; then, secondly, here were Lardy Bill
and Lanky Jim, the men whom he had so trusted, and
who, in return, had tried to sell him to the traps, made
food for either crows or worms, ho didn’t care a rush
which; and now there only remained Andrew M'Pherson
to be disposed of.
“ I suppose Mr. M‘Pherson has been taken up to the
house ?” said he.
“Not yet,” answered the stockman. “lie’s so main
an’ bad, the stab being so deep in the stomach that they’re
afraid to move him before the doctor comes. Doctor
Birch, of Ballan, has been sent for, but I rcakon well be
there first. They’ve got ’im outside, propped up with
cushions an’ such like, on the shady side of the woolshed,
down close agin the w r ater ”
“ Come on, then,” said Ned, impatiently. “ It’s neces-
sary in the furtherance of justice that I should extract
from him what information I can whilst he’s the strength
to give it.” And he set spurs to his horse as lie con-
cluded.
Half-an-hour later Ned Kelly, in company with the
stockman, trotted gently down the hill which so short a
time ago he had ascended as a mere appendage to a
steer’s tufted tail, and rode boldly up to the spot where
Mr. M ; Phersou lay, surrounded by a sympathising crowd
of shearers and station hands.
We forgot to mention that, ere meeting with the stock-
man, Ned had stuck on to his upper lip a good full mous-
tache, cosmetiqued into a Stiff upward curl at the points.
It and the dashing police uniform made him look a very
different man to a casual observer from Fleecy Jim, the
shearer.
Everyone made way for him to approach, and no one
observed him in the act of unbuttoning his holster-flaps
as he came swiftly up
“I’m glad you’ve arrived, officer,” said Mr. Fairfax,
“ even though, truth to tell, I’d still rather it had been
the doctor. However, I daresay he’ll be hero presently.
Ned Kelly, the bushranger, has been executing wholesale
murder amongst us. He is disguised as a flash shearer,
and rides a brown horse not unlike yours, that he re-joined
in that clump of trees far away yonder. However, he has
got clear off, and the best thing 1 think that you can do
would be to ride after him. From the direction that he
seems to have taken, I fancy he means to head to the
Salt-bush region, to the north of Ballarat.
“Indeed!” answered Ned. “And what does Mr.
M‘Pherson think about the matter ?”


There was something in the tone of his voice that in-
stantly attracted every eye. „
“Tishim! He has come again! It s Kelly himself,
moaned the doomed man.
The bushranger laughed, A>r with his brace of reloaded
pistols he felt that he didn’t care a fig for the dozen un-
armed men opposed to him.
“Yes, it is Kelly," said he; “and he has returned to
finish the job that some officious fools stopped him from
completing an hour-and-a-half ago. Don’t come near me
any of you, for I’ve more than one life in these little
barkers, remember. ’Tis fifteen years ago, Andrew
MTherson, since I swore that I would be the death of
you ; but vengeance postponed aren’t vengeance aban-
doned. Come, you skunk, own that you deserve death
at my hands.” ,
‘•Spare me for—for—for my childs sake! murmured
the wounded man, faintly.
“For which child's sake? The one that was born in
the pitiless rain, and amidst the thunder and the lightning,
pressed to a dying mother’s breast? The thing that
would have perished but for me! Is that the child you
allude to ?”
“ No—no—no ! My daughter Lily.
“I have no time for further talk. You shall die. So
take this from the girl you destroyed, and this from the
man who, but for her loss and your villainy, might have
been something better than he is.” _ .
As he concluded, Ked Kelly fired both his pistols in
rapid succession at the prostrate form of MTherson, and
each bullet plugged into his writhing body.
With a double scream he rolled right over, writhing
and kicking, and plucking up handfuls of grass in his
death-agony. . , , ,
On perceiving that both his pistols were discharged,
the shearers and station-hands, headed by Slashing Bill,
would have thrown themselves upon the bushranger like
a pack of wolves, but he made to ride them down and
escape.
They recoiled before the horse like a flock of timid
,sheep, and Ned was in the act of getting off, when there
Buddenly swooped around the northmost angle of the im-
mense woolshed five mounted troopers, spread out like a
Can, and coming straight down upon him.
Ned almost tumbled out of his saddle with half real
and half superstitious terror, as he recognised in the fore-
most horseman of them all Corporal Conquest, whom he
had made so sure he had left dead in the scrub.
The shearers and station-hands raised frantic cheers of
joy and exultation at the sight of the five troopers, and
Ned saw that in all directions save one his retreat was
entirely cut off.
“At him, lads ! Show him no mercy! He is worth as
much dead as alive ! ” yelled out Tom Conquest
But Ned Kelly shouted back defiantly—
“ You haven’t got me yet!” and wheeling his horse
round he rushed him at the Creek, and landed him safely
on the opposite bank ; though the leap was a clear twenty-
three feet breadth of rolling yellow water.
CHAPTER LY.
A DUEL IN THE BUSH. —THE DESCENT OF A MOUNTAIN.
The daring and the success of the bushranger’s leap caused
ejaculations of surprise, not unmixed with involuntary ad-
miration, to escape the onlookers ; but these exhibitions
of opinion changed into frantic cheers as Tom Conquest,
the trooper, yelled out at the top of his voice—
“ If it’s to be a game of follow the leader, my lads, here
goes! ”
And hardly were the words out of his mouth when his
horse in turn had cleared the watery barrier, and landed
itself firmly on the opposite bank.
His four companions would fain have shirked following
so daring an example, had not the menances of Mr. Fair-
fax. who was mounted on * cob that could neither swim
nor gallop, and the jeers of his shepherds, shearers, and
stockmen, in a manner forced them to try it.
The first trooper who essayed the leap went souse into
the middle of the creek; the horse of the second gained
the opposite bank, but. landing on the extreme edge, the
ground gave way under its hoofs, and a desperate scramble
only making matters worse, it finally fell backwards on to
its rider, immersing him in the yellow flood, from which
he was rescued with more water stowed away in his internal
economy than he had treated it to during the course or
long years. _
The other two troopers availed themselves of tne con-
fusion to trot their horses a few score of yards down the
stream, where the banks were not so precipitous, then
cross.
But it was no use urging the beasts, they would not
take the water, and the current was so strong that any but
practised hands would have been carried down the stream
and very probably come to grief. So they quietly stopped
where they were, in full view of the duel, secretly enjoying
it and sympathising with Ned, whom they admired with
that vulgar sympathy the ignorant have for such heroes.
Finding himself followed by a single foe, Ned Kelly
scorned to continue his flight.
Wheeling sharp round, he rode straight at Tom Con-
quest, shouting—
“ I’d like to know how many lives the devil has given
you, and by thunder there couldn’t be a better opportunity
of lopping off one of them, at leas'".”
“ You infernal ruffian. He seems to have given you a
jolly good number, at any rate ; by Jove, I’ll get rid of a
few of them if I’ve the chance.”
And as he thus returned Ned’s challenge, the trooper
reined up his horse as stock-still as a post, and handled
his shooting irons with a business-like air.
The onlookers on the other side of the creek saw that a
duel to the death was about to ensue, and whilst some
were dumb in the keenness of their anxiety, others yelled
out some such encouragement as—
“Go it, Tom !” “ Keep cool old man.” “ Drop him.”
“ Pot him.” “ Shoot down the ,” and so on.
Happily the bushranger’s one weapon was empty, and
only five charges remained in the other. The trooper,
therefore, had one shot to the good.
Tom, too, was as cool as an ice-floe, whilst a perfect
tempest of stormy and revengeful passions filled Ned
Kelly’s breast.
He had hanged Lardy Bill and Lanky Jim, he had
settled (at all events, so he fully believed) MTherson,
and now the irrepressible trooper was the only foe that
he had remaining to wipe out old scores with ; but if he
was the sole one, he was at the same time the most
dangerous.
So he was resolved that he would kill him, come what
would of it.
“ Pop, pop, pop,” three misses in succession, whilst his
shako was torn off his head, and he felt the warm trickle
of blood coursing down his face.
How he cursed the restiveness of his own steed, and the
steadiness of that of his adversary.
How could he make sure aim with his horse plunging
like the very devil ?
Ha, another hit—no, no, only a graze, though the burn
was like that of a red-hot iron, causing the outlaw to
gnash his teeth in very anguish.
He would settle the trooper, however, though he sacri-
ficed his own life too.
Once his revengeful passions were aroused, he was
ungovernable, prudence vanished, and the ferocity of
the wild beast took possession of him. He was, in scrip-
tural phrase, “ possessed of a devil.” Like Samson, he
didn’t care to sacrifice himself so that he destroyed the
Philistines who were mocking him. “ True foes,” says
the poet, “ once met, only part in death.” And so felt
Ned.
He spurred his unwillng horse right down upt»n him, and


when within a dozen feet, levelled his pistol afresh,
resolved that his one rronaininp; charge should not, at all
events, prove a fluke
In all probability it would not have done so, had not his
horse, after standing as still as a marble one for a couple
of seconds, suddenly commenced to hump its back, and
buck like the very deuce, just as Ned’s forefinger curled
for the last time around the trigger.
How he regretted the noble steed that bore him seven
hundred miles through the bush, and upon grass feed too,
and never caved in.
The result was that the bushranger scored another wide,
whilst a ball from Conquest’s weapon at the same instant
furrowing up the glossy flank of Ned’s stolen mount, the
spirited animal left off dancing the “ Cure ” with all four
feet off the ground at once, and its head tucked between its
knees, and swerving to the left dashed off at a tangent
across the plain, perfectly indifferent as to whether its
rider coincided with its views or not.
Perhaps, however, ’twas fortunate for Ned that his steed
did thus take the law into its own hands (or shall we say
in the present instant, hoofs ?), for Tom Conquest, having
fired his last charge, drew his sabre with the amiable
intention of exploring therewith the exact position of
Kelly’s vitais, an investigation that he would have had
considerable difficulty in preventing, with a weapon in his
hand that he had never learned the use of.
So, the duel harmlessly ended, the game was changed to
a steeple-chase once more, and Ned cursed his delay when,
glancing back over his shoulder, he observed that two out
of the other four troopers had rejoined Conquest; so that
now three horses were entered for the ten thousand
pounds stakes, whilst he had staked his safety for a mere
flash in the pan, and, by the act of rash and suicidal folly,
considerably lessened his chances of coming off first chop.
Happily, his steed had still lots of strength and endur-
ance left; its hurts were mere scratches, calculated rather
to increase than diminish its speed, and Melbourne once
reached, Ned congratulated himself that he would be in
comparative safety, at all events for the brief time that
he intended to remain there, ere he quitted the Australian
Colonies for ever and a day.
How he wished that darkness was an hour nearer ; but
wishes were no good, and he had to make the best of cir-
cumstances as they were.
Death was most certainly behind him ; and whatever
chanced to be in his front he must encounter and overcome,
or else fall struggling to the last.
He now took closer and keener observation of the steed
that bore him, for it was now to him what a stoutly-built
bark is to its crew in a raging hurricane—the sole con-
necting link between life and eternity.
With thankful complacency he took in all its points one
by one—its small square head, finely-arched neck all tra-
ceried with swelling veins, long oblique shoulders, great
breadth of chest, ample quarters, well-bent legs, and long
elastic pasterns.
Its muzzle was as soft and black as velvet; its eyes as
brilliant as polished jet and its length of stride left
nothing whatever to be desired.
Buck-jumping was due to its bad breaking in, but did
not detract from its strength or fleetness.
“ It’s lucky I’m not an ounce over twelve stone,” mut-
tered Ned to himself, and then he added, with a frightful
oath, “No, I’m not exactly run down yet, and if ever a
horse’s heels 'saved a man s neck, this nag’s will save mine
to-night.”
He spoke of night as though it had already arrived, so
anxiously did he desire its coming, but in fact the sun’s
entire disc was still above the horizon.
And now the chase stretched across the great tree-dotted
plain, not at headlong and break-neck speed, for Ned was
too old a hand to burst his horse at first start, but at that
easy, slinging gallop for which Australian horses are so
famed, cautiously and carefully avoiding all obstacles,
chu as felled trees, stumps, and the likely neighbourhood
of wombat-holes, for he knew that if his good steed cam©
to grief, he would assuredly do so in its company.
In this manner on they sped, pursuers and pursued,
neither gaining nor losing on the other, until seven miles
of plain were scudded over, and more rough and hazardous
ground was entered upon.
Ned had now to observe greater caution than ever, and
keep eye, head, and heel ever on the alert, for the trees
began to grow much thicker, wombat-holes and honey-
combed ground were together dangerous traps for his
horse's legs, and patches of impenetrable scrub to be
dotted here and there.
One minute thick copse had to be dashed through, with
many scratches to face and hands, and sundry rendings o *
clothes in the rapid transit; the next the prostrate truv.«-
of a huge tree had to be taken at a flying leap, or swirled
round with a comet-like eccentricity of flight.
Then, in a twinkling perhaps, the fleeing bushranger
had to throw himself straight along his horse’s back, or to
duck his head forward almost as low as its withers
to save his brains from being dashed out against some low-
hanging tree branch, that stretched like a white and ghastly
skeleton arm right across his track.
Presently he came to a hill, up which he had to go,
although the ascent was nearly as steep as the roof of a
house; and even as his horse dashed up it in a succession
of goat-like springs, he could hear the resounding hoof-
strokes of his enemies not a couple of hundred yards in
his rear.
Was he now on an extensive table-land, or what?
He could hardly tell where he was, for he had been
headed away from the proper bush-track to Bacchus
Marsh, and could not tell with any positive degree of cer-
tainty whither he was steering.
Presently, however, his doubts were set at rest by
coming almost instantaneously upon a nearly precipitous
slope, leading down into a deep, black, sombre valley ax
least two hundred feet below.
He tried to wheel round to the right, but was headed
off by a trooper. To the left the same thing occurred.
He had no time to reload his pistols, his sword was a
weapon he felt no confidence in because he did not under-
stand its use, and every trooper was carefully trained thereto
so he felt that he must risk the descent at all hazards.
At it he went, therefore, speeding down the declivity at
a pace that was truly terrific, for his horse soon lost all
power of stopping itself, and Ned rightly guessed that the
effect of hauling on the curb would be to cause the crea-
ture to turn a complete somersault.
Each moment the velocity of his progress increased, and
he could hear the three troopers on the summit of the hill,
laughing at his dilemma; which was presently increased
by the sharp cracking of their pistols, and the buzzing of
bullets past his ears that sounded like angry hornets on the
wing.
At last there was a mighty crash, owing to his horse
running full tilt against a tree-trunk, without the possi-
bility of stopping short at the bottom of the descent, and
down steed and rider went in a writhing heap.
Ned was on his feet in a twinkling, but saw, with a min-
gled horror and despair that it was impossible to describe,
that his gallant steed’s course was for ever run.
The near foreleg was broken, and the animal unable to
raise himself.
What was to be done now ?
Ned looked back, and saw his three foes cautiously de-
scending the hill Ithat he had come down like a thunder-
bolt.
Ah! he would reload his pistols and stand at bay !
It was his only chance.
CHAPTER LVI.
A BATTLE WITH STONES.—OFF AND AWAY AGAIN.
Ned felt a grim satisfaction in the thought that he might
be able to settle two of his enemies, at all events, ere he


was overcome by the third; but he gave utterance to an
oath, and the devilish grin of exultation that had o’er-
sprcad his countenance changed mio an expression of the
most unutterable dismay when he discovered that some-
how or other he had lost all his ammunition.
Death or certain capture, which would mean exactly the
same thing in the long run, now seemed to stare him in
the face; but, noticing how dark it already was down in
"hat deep valley all amongst the close-growing trees, it
uiddcnly struck him that he might be able to hide from
Ids pursuers, for a while at all events, by dodging behind
1 he trunks.
He immediately put this plan into execution, looking
about for stones to use as missiles.
Nearer and nearer come the troopers.
They are at the bottom of the descent, but they seem
rather chary of entering in amongst the trees, for neither
of them, of course, guesses how utterly defenceless
Ned is,
They call upon him to come out and surrender himself,
promising him that they will spai'e his life.
“ You mean to say that you’ll leave the job that you are
not game to try to Jack Ketch and the drop,” answered
the bushranger from the deepest recesses of the wood.
“ No ; if you want me you’ll have to come and take me.”
“ The beggar isn’t going to crow over me. Come along,
mates. So many thousands of pounds are worth running
some risk for,” said Tom Conquest, enraged and excited
by Ned’s vaunt.
They could not follow Ned into the impenetrable scrub
on horseback, so they dismounted, hung their nags up by
the bridle on a neighbouring tree, and, cocking their
pistols, plunged into the thicket after Ned.
Surely the end had come ! Surely the wolf was run to
his lair as last!
The troopers’ eyes are as sharp as hawks’. They advance
with the utmost caution.
Kelly Lad knowingly led them on step by step until he
Lad placed some distance between them and their horses.
A stone is hurled, and whizzes past one of their heads.
They greet the unsuccessful throw with shouts of deri-
sive applause, for the act tells them as plainly as words
could do how helpless the hunted felon is.
“Be cautious! ” yells out Tom Conquest. “It may be
but a trick, mates.”
Hardly has the caution escaped his lips, when a better-
directed missile strikes him full in the face.
He reels, half stunned, and before he can recover
himself, Ned Kelly has commenced to practise the ruse he
had soon seen might be praticable. The troopers had
been twenty minutes in the scrub and were completely
astray as to the points of the compass. Kelly still drew
them until he escaped altogether from their sight. He
had-worked round to where the horses were hooked up.
He"was not long in springing upon the back of one, and,
leading the other two off with him, started off at a gallop,
the bush ringing with Ids defiant loud laughter.
Yells and shouts, the crack of whips, and the trampling
of many hoofs at this juncture, however, betoken that
numerous reinforcements are at hand.
The sound strikes ominously on the bushranger’s ear.
“ If he’s playing’possum in there, we had best surround
that patch of thick bush and completely hem him in,”
Ned hears a voice cry out, which he immediately recognises
as that of Mr. Fairfax the squatter.
So that even now if he escapes it will bo by the bare
skin of his teeth, and the waste of a single moment may
mean the loss of his life.
He would have iikea to have bestowed on Tom
Conquest one more crack on the head just by way of
making assurance doubly sure ; but self-preservation is
the first law of nature, and he would have to rids back
several yards to carry hi ? fierce whim into execution.
So ho heads straight in an opposite direction to that
where all the noise and turmoil comes from and forces
is horse (having let the other two go) on as fast as ever
he can through the trees and thick patches of Septo-
popermum scrub.
How glad he feels when ho gets clean out into the open,
after some five minutes of the most difficult navigation
conceivable.
The gloom of night is coming on now, and no mistake,
but he sees a broad level valley lying before him, and in
the distance a few lights, which he fancies are those of the
township of Bacchus Marsh.
Choosing them as a guiding star, though never for an
instant intending to go near them, he starts off at an easy
gallop, for he does not know what his new steed can do
lie hopes to get away unperceived by his foes, whom he
imagines still to be on the other side of the timber ; but
he isn’t a clear five hundred yards out into the open, when
a regular “ View halloo ! ” sounds in his rear, and looking
back he sees that now he has a score of enemies on his
track instead of three.
There are four troopers (he can make out their snow-
white shako-covers plainly enough), and the rest of the
pursuing force is composed of stockmen, boundary riders,
and two or three young fellows whose superior style of
get-up suggests to him the idea that they must be Mr.
Fairfax’s sons.
“What a formidable pack of hounds for the hunting
down of one poor, badgered fox! ” mutters Ned to him-
self bitterly. “And yet, not exactly a fox either,” he
adds. “By the Lord Harry! they shall find me consider-
ably more of a wild boar when they come up with me-'-if
they ever do ! ”
And lie increased Lis speed by a sharp application of the
spur, a few seconds later being gratified to find that his
new mount had both speed, wind, and bottom.
“Ha, ha!” thought Ned, “the race is not over yet,
and perhaps midnight shall, after all, sec me enter Mel-
bourne town! ”
CHAPTER LYIL
THE RACE FOR THE TEN THOUSAND POUNDS STAKES.
The “ view ” was breast high, the hounds were in full cry,
and the stockmen rode lighter, at all events, than did Ned,
for their costume was little more than Crimean shirt and
moleskin trousers.
It was a second Dick Turpin kind of an affair.
A backward glance showed Ned all his foes, stringing
out and urging their mettlesome steeds forward with crack
of whip and dig of spur;—a kind of from London to
York ride, and a dead horse and half-dead man as a final
tableau.
But there would be no alibi to save him, and there’s no
turnpike-gate in Australia to stop him ; and there -was the
difference.
He ripped off his coat an threw it away, his shako fol-
lowed suit, and then his boots. How he wished that his
nag could be freed from its heavy semi-military trappings.
Well, perhaps in time even that could bo effected; but
not just yet.
His best plan, he thought, after a minute or two’s re-
flection, would be to out-distance his foes as soon as pos-
sible, and then play some of Reynard’s many tricks in
order to get rid of them.
Away, away with a sudden spurt darts Ned, his heels
and his hands both atwaekwork. Mis horse shoots on
like an arrow, it is a killing pace ; but then, if he can’t get
out of sight of his foes, how can he play them any such
trick as doubling on them, or otherwise throw them on
the wrong scent? No ; his pres ent is the right dodge, L-_
is convinced.
His horse begins to roar
Confusion !ishe a bron-winded beast ? Anyhow, ho
must go on like the very devil, should he even burst his
gall. There’s another belt of thick timber three
miles ahead, opening out to the left, and Ned
thinks he knows a short cut through this to a bush


shanty known as the “ Bounding Kangaroo,” kept by a
pal of his, where he may be able to obtain concealment
and shelter for a few hours at the least.
As he goes ahead like a very sky-rocket, Ned thinks of
the many ruses he has read of in highwayman tales for
confusing and puzzling pursuers when hard run as he is
now.
A sharp quarter of an hour’s burst has put him at all
events out of sight of his foes, and given him at all events
a chance of eluding them.
He knows his surroundings and his way far better than
he thought he should have done, and strikes straight
through the timber for the “ Bounding Kangaroo,” which
he recollects to stand on the sou’-sou’-west angle, and
close to the boundaries of a sheep-run called Coolwo-
murra.
While he is thus heading, a dissertation on bush inns
will not be amiss.
The bush inn, then, is a peculiar characteristic of Aus-
tralian life, and there are two varieties, namely, those that
border on some track leading from one important town or
city to another, and which vehicles and horsemen and
pedestrians pass daily, and secondly, those that stand beside
less frequented paths and by whose doors a solitary
traveller does not journey perhaps more than once or
twice in the course of a week.
The former class of hotels sometimes do a rattling
trade, for once or twice a day a coach disgorges its passen-
gers into them for a hastily-snatched meal; and a dinner of
weak tea, bread, potatoes, and fried beefsteak, at half-a-
crown a head, yields a good profit in a country where beef
costs only twopence a pound, and the wheat and vegetables
are raised on land for which, most probably, not a tittle of
rent is paid.
Then the horses’ feeds are charged high in proportion,
and those who feel inclined to patronise the bar, as nine-
tenths of the male passengers invariably do, have to pay
through the nose for whatever they imbibe, for a shilling
for a nobbier of wine or spirits, sixpence for a glass of ale,
and a bob a bottle for lemonade are the lowest sums ever
charged for drinks. These inns too are not very expensive
establishments to keep up; and being generally long,
rambling, one-storied structures of wood—three-fourths
stable and one-fourth house, a couple of female servants,
and as many male, with perhaps a black boy thrown in, can
get through the work very comfortably, and £l5O or so
would amply cover the value of the entire stock-in-trade.
These are the reputable Bush Inns, Now let us regard
the other kind.
Far back in the grim and silent bush they stand, close
to dim and uncertain tracks that lead, at best, to some
miserable cluster of huts, dubbed a township, and very
probably miles distant therefrom. Be sure, however, that
there is a squatters’ station not very faraway, for from the
squatters, shepherds, stockmen, boundary-riders, and other
station hands does mine host derive four-fifths of his entire
profits.
These men are paid their wages half-yearly by cheque,
and being all of them single (squatters won’t often employ
married men) and there being no other way of spending
their money they resort singly and in couples to the Bush
Inn, hand Boniface their £2O cheques, and ask him to in-
foam them when they have drank the value thereof, which
he does not hesitate tc- do, and after keeping them glori-
ously drunk for about six days, ho generally kicks them
out on the seventh, and when the chill night air and the dew
have made them sober—if an attack of delirium tremens
does not intervene—they usually return at once to their
respective occupations for another half-year, when the
spree that we have just described is repeated, and the
process of sweating down a cheque gone through once more.
The landlord derives four-fifths of his profits from these
drunken station-hands; and he also gains a trifle from
wandering shearers, overlanders and swagsmen, but for a
score of years at least his secret patrons have b'mn the
uncrous bushrangers that have over run the colony.
At the lonely and disreputable Bush Inn they often
feast and carouse with little fear of interruption, paying
for everything with gold and notes, and scorning, or per-
haps, through motives of expediency declining,°to accept
of change.
Here at this kind of places they are also kept au
r.ourant with the affairs of the outer world, the movements
of the police, &c.; and the landlord and his men, ay, even
his womankind too, are at all times their most effectual
and efficient scouts, safeguards, and bush telegraphs.
The reader must imagine that this brief, but necessary,
digression has brought Ned Kelly up to the door of thy
bush shanty, a long, rambling wooden structure, with an
old croaking signboard representing the festive kangaroo
aforesaid swinging from the low-hanging branch °of a
venerable gum-tree that stood immediately across the way.
It had evidently once upon a time been an important
place, for it was surrounded by ranges of stabling, and the
road that ran past the door had plainly been both a
coach and a waggon track, though that it was so no longer
was plainly evidenced by the way in which the grass and
bush flowers had grown in and filled up the wheel ruts.
The house, too, bore an aspect of age and neglect; the
paint was blistered and burnt on the closed doors and
shutters, revealing a gaping crack here and there ; whilst
many of the windows were broken, and others awkwardly
boarded up.
Only one light was visible in the house, and that
gleamed forth through a cracked casement close to the
front door.
“Graph! no customers! All the better,” ejaculated
Ned Kelly, as he drew rein and hammered away at the
door with the hilt of his sword.
He had to repeat the summons thrice before it was
answered. But at last he heard heavy, slouching footsteps
coming along the passage, bolts and oars were withdrawn,
as though under protest, and then a brawny, sinister-
looking man of middle-age appeared in the doorway.
No sooner, however, did he catch sight of “ Ned’s
dangling sword and the semi-military equipment of the
horse that he bestrode, than with an oath ho darted back
and slammed the door shut again, and the next instant
Ned heard the bolts and bars being shot back into their,
places.
“ What’s the d matter with you, you blessed fool?”
roared Ned, incensed beyond measure at this apparently
unfriendly action. “ Show up again, and look lively about
it, or, by thunder, I’ll set your old ramshackle place alight,
and roast you alive inside for all the world like a crab in
its shell!”
“ What’s that you say?” growled a rough voice; and,
looking up in the direction from whence it came., Ned be-
held the landlord on the top of the low shingled roof,
surveying him critically and at his leisure from his pest of
vantage.
“ Come down, you old fool, and at*end to my wants,”
roared out Ned. “Do you take me for a d trap, you
timberhead ?”
“ Good Lord ! why, it's ten thousand pounds Kelly !”
retorted the man.
“It’s death to you, Jim Bent, if you don’t lend a
hand.”
“Say, man alive, what do you want done?” And the
landlord wriggled about on the roaf like a lively eel,
“ A quart of ale for my nag, and a stiff glass of grog for
myself, powder and lead for my pistols, and a something
by way of disguise.”
“ What’ll you stand if I do all th’s ?”
“I’ll stand 600 ounces of raw gold. You’ll only have
go and dig it up like potatoes.”
“ All right, Ned, I’m your man. You stay there. I’d
coll ct what you want, and bj with you in a brace of
shakes. Always you trust to Jim Bent.”
But the precious rascal was all this while thinking with-
in himself—
“A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. Hia


talk about buried treasure may be all a yarn. When I
went for it it might be gone. I’d sooner trust the Govern-
ment of the two, and so with moderate blessings I think
I’ll be content. I can shoot him down from a window, as
he is unarmed. He was a d fool, sure enough,
admit that.” .
So the next salutation that the bushranger received
from his friend and ally of years’ standing was a shot from
the window above the door, a shot that was quickly
followed by another, and then by a third.
“ You infernal scoundrel!” roared the bushranger, who
felt himself struck in tivo places. “ You rascally Judas,
I’ll burn you out as I said I would. A single lucifer will
set vour tinder-dry crib alight."
“*Ay, sheer off, I’ve an old world blunderbuss here
that’ll lodge as many slugs in yer carcase as there are to
be found in the heart of a spring cabbage,” retorred mine
host of the bush shanty, half in fright and half in bluster,
and rushing away from the window he, in a second or two,
returned and thrust out through the rickety open casement
a huo-e bell-mouthed weapon, that looked as though it had
occe°belonged to the guard of an English mail, which it
indeed had, in the person of Jim Bent s grandfather.
“ Now,” said he, pot valiantly ; “ attempt to set fire to
my crib, and I’ll blow you to smithereens. You havent
got your iron pottery on now, remember.”
“Curse you!” yelled Ned. “Yes, curse you, you
treacherous hound. By thunder, if I over to-
night I’ll do something more than threaten.”
“ But you won’t, my tulip,” retorted Jim Bent \ and, as
Ned Kelly wheeled his horse round to gallop away, the
traitor discharged the blunderbuss —or, at all events,
attempted to discharge it—full at his back.
Luckily for Ned, the cap missed fire ; and he would as-
suredly have returned to the inn to carry out his threat
had not the neighing and trampling of horses and the wild
uproar of many voices informed him that the noise of
the firing had served to lead bis pursuers in the right
direction.
The landlord of the shanty laughed aloud as he saw
Kelly check up his horse, and then wheel it round once
more, and, having by this time pressed down another cap
on the nipple of his mediaeval-looking weapon, he treated
himself to another potshot at the bushranger’s retiring
form, and almost foamed at the mouth with fury as he dis-
covered that he had scored another fluke, his amiability
being by no means restored to him by Ned hulling back
the taunt—
“ The blood money’s not for yoju, at all events.
It looked very like as though it was for somebody
ere night had again changed into day, however, for Ned’s
wounds, though they were not severe, were at all events
sufficient to confuse him and render him giddy.
The moon had come out too, a full moos, which in
Australia answers every purpose of daylight, so clear and
effulgent is its silvery radiance, and, far as the eye could
reach there seemed to be no covert or shelter.
Ned felt that he was almost on his last legs, but still as
hope springs eternal in the human breast, he continued
his headlong flight.
Hour after hour the moon, gleaming from out the
mdigo-hued heavens, revealed the fleeting shadow of one
poor haggard and despairing wretch being hunted to the
very death by at least a score of hooting, jeering toes.
At length his horse began to reel, and blood to mingle
with the foam spumes that he had of late been freely
•scattering over his glossy coat, like wintry snow-flakes.
The end was near at hand.
Agonising was the thought, for Melbourne was by this
time hardly five miles distant, though it might as well have
been a thousand leagues away as far as there -was any
possibility of his living to reach it.
Out upon the metal and he can see still clearer how
weak his horse has grown, his roaring might have been
heard a quarter of a mile away.
Ned glanced back. The “ field was pretty well weeded.”
Out of the full score of men who had started in pursuit of
him, only eight or nine still hang persistently on his rear,
but those eight or nine are a full half dozen too many.
And now he reaches the point where the Mount Alex-
ander road joins the one from Ballarat, and conducts a
splendid specimen of Macadam all the way to Melbourne.
Without for an instant relaxing his speed, Ned reflects
whether it would be any good attempting to double back
on the Mount Alexander road and seek his old haunts in
the ranges. , . x , ~
The question is almost at once answered in the negative
by his horse coughing up a volume of blood, and then going
to earth as dead as a doornail, pitching Ned heavily ovei
on to his head in the act
For a couple of minutes the bushranger lay on the road
stunned. Then he staggered to his feet and in a confused
kind of way looked around.
He saw rearing horses and scowling or contemptnouf
faces on all sides. He drew his sword w y ith a kind of dimly-
defined resolution to defend himself to the last gasp ; but
it is stricken from his hand as easily as though it had been
a child who had grasped it, and the next instant he is hurled
on to his back and the handcuffs are fastened around his
wrists.
CHAPTER LYIIL
A WILD BEAST SAFELY CAGED AT LAST.
It’s all over with him now. He has to be lifted on to
his feet and placed on a horse, to which he is secured by
a rope attached to each ankle, and which passes under the
animal’s belly. . , , . ,
Yes, it is assuredly all over wnth him now, tor the
excitement of the chase over, and despair at his heart, he
is a very child.
His captors taunt him and jibe him, and not a few curse
him for all the mischief he has wrought, and some think
it good fun to chaff him about the black cap, the con-
demned cell, Jack Ketch, and the gibbet. ?
u He rode very nigh, home of his own accord, didn t he,
mates?” chuckled one, pointing towards the flint-grey
walls of Pentridge Prison that upreared themselves not
more at most than a mile away othe right.
“ Ay, it was his father’s and mother's place, waren t it?
They died there, didn’t ’urn, universally loved and re-
spected—as the papers say—and was a-buned in their
own grounds like the high nobs, not in no common
ccmcntery ? ” grinned another, as he gave Ned a nudge to
attract his attention.
Ned glanced at them, but he could do nothing more.
Yet, if a look could have killed, his assuredly would Lave
done it at that instant.
The moon still shone brightly, and as the cortege slowly
wended its way towards the great prison—one of the
strongest in the world—a distant church clock could bo
heard tolling midnight.
Though he still shook with apprehension, Ned would
not suffer any more outward expressions of alarm to escape
him, and so the cortege continued on its way until the
prison gates were reached, whi h speedily rolled open to
admit so illustrious a prisoner, > ■ Ned soon found him-
self surrounded by all the gaol oihc- als in a group, some
of w r hom bade him a jeering weluotie.
“ It don’t require much pluck to laugh at a retlow when
he’s got his teeth drawn,” said Ned Kelly, in low deep
tones of concentrated passion. “ But bear it in mind, you
Pentridge fellows, that the tigers in a menagerie sometimes
kill their keeper.”
Ned didn’t intend his words to be prophetic, nor, at the
time, did he or either of the men who laughed at them
guess how terribly the weird threat was destined ere long
to be fulfilled.
“Where shall he be lodged, sir?” asked one of the
warders of the governor.
“ Qiye him number 18. His father tenanted it last-


You can show him his name that he wrote on the wall the
night before he was hanged.”
Ned bent upon the gaol governor a glance that intimated
as plainly as words could have done, that his days would
not have been very long in the land had Kelly senior’s son
the power to clutch him by the throat at that moment.
But the despot could afford to smile at a glance.
Ned’s ankles were released from their lashings, and he
was lifted down oft the horse. Two warders then laid hold
of him to walk him away.
He did not attempt to resist, for he knew it would have
been futile, but, looking around upon those who had
brought him in, bound and fettered, to this strong and
terrible place of durance, he said scornfully—
“ The game mayn’t be played out even yet. You may
be four by honours, but Tin blowed if you have yet scored
the odd trick. Y"ou can’t touch a penny of the Govern-
ment reward until I’m hanged, remember that, and the rope
aren’t round my neck yet, even though the darbies are on
my wrist.
This was Ned’s parting greeting, and he said not a word
more.
Another minute and the inner prison walls encompassed
him round about.
He stood in the centre of a large paved hall, with a
skylight in the roof at least sixty feet overhead, through
which the white full face of the moon looked down as
though with bitter mockery upon him.
This hall was a kind of guard-room, and was hung
round with weapons and staves, handcuffs and fetters.
There were two great iron stoves in it for diffusing warmth
around in the winter time, but it being now summer no
fires were lighted therein. From it seven gloomy stone
passages branched off in different directions, and, on one
of the two warders who guarded him taking down a bunch
of keys that hung in company with many others against
the yellow-washed walls, up one of these passages he was
forthwith conducted for a considerable distance.
Cells were to right of him and cells were to left of him,
and from the little tiny square iron grating let into the
door of each, many a wild and despairing face looked out
upon him as he passed them by.
But Ned had no desire to recognise old acquaintances
or for old acquaintances to recognise him at such a time
and in such a place, and so he kept his eyes directed
straight forward.
At last his guards came to a stop, and, whilst one main-
tained his hold upon him, the other inserted a key into the
huge lock of a door, and, turning it therein with evident
difficulty, pushed against the door and thus opened it.
“ Your dad’s library and study,” said he, as he disclosed
die gloomy interior to view. “ Splendid place for calm
reflection, Ned, and delightfully cool at all seasons of
the year. Added to all that, there’s no fear of burglars.
W e’ve got fine stout walls to maintain the place select
by keeping all bad characters outside.”
And with this time-worn joke the once ironclad and
dreaded bushranger was pushed roughly inside, and the
laughing warders hastened to close, lock, and bolt the
door upon him.
CHAPTER LIX.
IN PENTRIDGE JAIL.
It was indeed a change for the hardy bushranger to find
himself—he, used to freedom in the bush—a prisoner in
Pentridge jail, in the same cell, they told him, once occu-
pied by his late father before he was hanged.
They were careful to tell him this ere they left him to
himself.
Anyone who has seen a caged tiger or hyena in a mo-
ment of fury, may conceive what Ned Kelly was 1 ke.
r lhough heavily fettered, he moves up and down easily
by reason of his giant strength.
Is this to be the end of his career—to be hung in the
ime of his life?
4nd what w r as to become of Rose ?
If he could only see Rose! Of course her coming to the
prison could not implicate her, as she had already been
“ had up” and discharged for want of criminating evidence.
Above all, he must put oft being placed in the dock, ns
there was abundance of witnesses to give evidence against
him, and ensure his conviction without loss of time.
To this end he must feign to be more ill than he really
was, and so gain time.
There was another scheme well known to all his frater-
nity—to pretend sincere repentance.
This would make the chaplain friendly and ensure him
comforts.
Still, he did not wish to overdo his sickness, as he might
be removed to the infirmary.
The sickness he was too clever an actor not to keep up
when visited some hours later with food.
The governor of the jail himself, curious to see this
notorious malefactor, came with the warders.
Kelly seemed utterly subdued, and spoke in a respectful
tone.
The worthy head of the prison was quite taken by sur-
prise. The man was a craven after all.
He promised him such extras as his situation required,
and left him.
Ned Kelly was apparently so weak that his irons were
actually removed.
He then asked to see the chaplain.
He came readily. He was an old man of most benevo-
lent appearance, and no doubt simple as a dove.
Kelly began in low and apparently earnest tones.
He manufactured some story about his wrongs, and the
bitter sufferings he had endured.
Still he was rather glad that his career had been sud-
denly stopped before he could do further harm to society.
The good man congratulated him on his repentance,
which, if sincere, would procure him pardon in heaven if
not on earth.
“ One of my great sorrows is that I should have caused
an innocent girl like Miss Bellamy annoyance,” he said.
“ I wish I could see her to ask her pardon.”
“ I dai’esay that could be managed,” replied the simple
pastor. “I do very much as I please in this place.”
Kelly thanked him.
“ Unfortunate man,” he then continued, “ are you aware
that is the ceil in which your father passed the night
before his execution ?”
Kelly gave a violent start.
“ Oh !” was all he appeared able to say in his supposed
excitement.
“ Yes ; and have I passed many a day in conference
with him,” continued the chaplain. “ I cannot say he
was repentant; but he made a sort of confession, which I
took down in brief and wrote out.”
“ Indeed !” said Kelly, gasping.
“ Yes ; I have kept it ever since. Such things arc not
made public,” he went on, “ but you can read it if you
like.”
“I should be most thankful to know all about my
wretched father,” replied Ned Kelly, in a whining tone.
“ You shall have it,” responed the good clergyman, and
went out.
He had some difficulty in obtaining permission for the
visit of Miss Bellamy, but at last the order was given.
The chaplain, however, was to be present at the inter-
view and hear all.
Then a message was sent.
Meanwhile Ned Kelly was examining his cell with keen
anxiety.
It was oblong, and the lower part consisted of masonry.
Above six feet it was oak planking.
The light came in from the roof.
At the side below the window he could make out fous
round holes, about an inch and a half in diameter.
But, though given time and tools that might afford
room for hope, yet still what could be done without
either?


Til or well, he would soon be taken up before the
magistrates
His dinner was brought, which he ate slowly.
Then about an hour later came Rose, who looked her
part well. She was grave, but pitiful in her manner .
“You want to speak to me?’' she said, approaching
where he lay on a rough couch.
The chaplain seated himself on the one stool in the cell.
“I have asked to see you,” he went on, “to express my
deep sorrow that you should have been subjected to an-
noyance on my account—that, in fact, you should have
been taken for the daughter of so notorious a malefactor
as myself.”
“ It is of no consequence now,” she replied—both were
talking with their fingers all the time. “ I have, with the
permission of the worthy chaplain, brought you this
Bible ; I hope you will study it well, and that it will
profit you.” . . . j
“I will study it well,” responded the man with a wicked
and cunning leer.
“ Take the advice of the good chaplain,” she continued,
and handed him what looked like a small thickly-bound
Bible. ~ , . ,
It was a box full of the very finest and best burglar s
instruments.
e; IVcvell,” she now said, “ and may you repent
sincerely ”
“ Amen,” responded the hypocrite.
And Rose went out. She knew at once why she had
been sent for.
In case of accidents, Ned Kelly had long had this cun-
ning contrivance prepared.
It was devilish, but it was highly characteristic of the
Rose went out. The chaplain then approached the
culprit.
“This is the MS. I spoke of,” he said, handing him a
roll of paper, “ you can read it at your leisure. lam going
away until to-morrow,” he continued, “ you can then re-
turn it. I will see you before you go before the bench.”
Kelly could oniy bow his head. He was really too over-
come to speak.
Then he was alone.
He opened his box. It contained saws of the finest
tempered steel, which, though fine and small, would almost
cut iron. There were also files and a chisel.
Rose had expected to find him ironed, and hence hid
forgotten nothing.
Then concealing his precious instruments, Ned Kelly
opened the roll of paper.
It was headed thus :
“ The Dying Confession of Thomas Kelly, alias Red
Kelly, No. 135, a lifer.”
It consisted of about 144 closely written sheets.
“ I can read that at my leisure,” he remarked sotto voce;
“ I have other fish to fry now. Who knows ” (with a laugh)
“ mayhap, I may add a chapter or two?”
And then he leaned back on his couch and relapsed into
deep thought.
Should he escape ?
That was the ail-impoitant question now. All was
haphazard.
True Ned Kelly knew many men who had been confined
in Pentridge prison, and they had given him a pretty good
idea of the inside.
He had every reason to believe that this cell, which was
separate from the others, and used as a condemned cell
or for dangerous prisoners, overlooked the governor’s
garden.
If so, his cnances were great indeed.
There never had been an escape from Wiutle’s Hotel,
and therefore no provision had been made for. so remote
and apparently impossible a contingency.
It was a matter not to be considered.
Ned Kelly, the more he reflected, the more hopeful he
became.
What did he not owe to Rose ?
He had ever loved her for her mother’s sake, how much
more for her own? .
She was really no relation to him, and already a finely-
developed woman.
Why not marry her ?
The idea flashed through his mind like a ray of sunshine,
but he knew she regarded him as a child does a father.
At all events it would link her to him, and was at any rate
a more sensible idea than that in relation to the countess.
The thought passed away never to return.
But Ned Kelly was down in the mouth now, and not
inclined to be vainglorious.
Evening came, and with it the last meal of the day. A
cursory examination of the prison was made, and then ho
was locked in for the night.
The condemned cell had no trap in the door, as when
occupied by one about to die two warders watched him day
and night.
Ned Kelly was glad to find it was not a truly Australian
moonlight. It was rather dark than otherwise.
So much the better for him.
Placing his stool on the table, he was just able to reach
to the four round holes twenty inches apart.
Kelly was not so stout as he was doomed to be after-
wards, and it might be done.
The holes had an iron lining. These he easily removed
with his chisel.
Then the saws began.
The planking was stout, and about an inch thick, stout
and strong enough for any malefactor without superior
tools.
But these tools were manufactured in London by a man
who understood his business.
Kelly knew that he must escape that night or not at all.
A half-finished job would sure to be discovered by the
keen eyes of the warders.
Kelly worked with a will.
He found, to his rapture, the instruments worked
admirably.
Rose had taken from her pocket—she had not been
searched coming in with the chaplain—a flask of strong
brandy and a phial of oil.
He drank the former, and used the latter freely when
required.
He had begun at eight. He heard the clock strike
twelve.
The square of wood was out.
He peered through, and saw that it did look over the
private gardens.
But he saw another thing. There were grand goings-on
at the governor’s house.
It was lit up, and soft musis was heard. He had made
this out before, but thought it afar off.
Now, to get out.
Below the orifice was a shed with a sloping roof.
Now Ned had to wriggle through the hole as best he
might, his hands as it were pinioned behind him.
As soon as they were through he could help himself
somewhat.
The house was some distance from this part of the
prison, so that a slight noise would scarcely be noticed.
He stood on his stool and thrust his head and shoulders
through with difficulty.
It was a tight fit.
Still, at last his arms were free, and he prepared for a fall.
It was only three feet, and he was not bruised, only a
little shaken.
He then rose to his feet, and took a keen look
around to examine the situation.
Then he came to the conclusion that his only chance of
escape was through the governor’s house.
Here was a situation.
The garden was luxuriant, and he was able to approach
the residence unseen.
The music still went on.


Soon he came upon two persons talking—a male and a
female.
He peeped
One was a footman in gorgeous array, the other a pretty
parlour-maid.
The footman was a tall fellow, about the height of
Ned Kelly himself.
“ I can’t stop no longer, Mary,” ho said, as he gave her
c last kiss ; “ supper will be wanted.”
Kelly coughed.
The girl ran away, and the indignant flunkey, cockney
and ex-convict, turned to see who had had the audacity
to interrupt.
He saw a stranger before him.
“Who are y3U? You ain’t no right here. I’ll call
the steward,” said Jeames.
Ned Kelly simply felled him to the ground like an ox.
He then carried him back to the tool-house, where he
found plenty of cord.
Whipping off the man’s clothes, he then secured him
with a gag made from the end of a mop.
He then changed habiliments ; but this was not all.
He must be careful.
Doubtless on such an occasion as this there were many
extra waiters.
This was his safeguard.
Creeping up to the house, Ned, peering about, found a
oack kitchen, with soap, towels, and all requirements for
the toilet of the attendants.
The clothes had not fitted the man he had felled to the
ground.
Hence he was certainly an extra.
Kelly examined himself keenly, and washed every sign
of dust and heat off.
He then put on the podgy white gloves, and prepared
to enter the house.
There was great confusion.
The guests were hurrying to the supper-room to the
tune of the “ Roast Beef of Old England.”
The servants were also hurrying in with the various dishes.
Ned Kelly caught hold of a large dish indicated by the
cook.
“ Roast beef,” said that functionary, “to be placed be-
fore the governor.”
Ned Kelly knew him by sight of course, but also because
he was at the head of the table, which was profusely
ornamented.
The guests, nearly forty in number, were soon seated
and the signal was given.
Ned Kelly took off the cover for the governor to carve,
nd held it while he did so.
The man confessed afterwards that it was one of the
most trying positions he had ever been placed in.
His only hope was that everybody was laughing and en-
oying him or her self.
When the cover was on, Kelly watched the others and
began going round with wine and other drinks.
He thus gained the door, and slipping through was soon
m the passage.
There was a buffet near the drawing-room door. It
was deserted now.
He drank a tumbler of raw spirit, and then advanced to
to the front door. It was open.
The sentries were even enjoying some refreshment in a
room close at hand.
It was one o’clock when Ned Kelly was outside and
making hxs way back to Melbourne.
When the truth became known, the guests were
astounded by his audacity and good fortune.
CHAPTER LX.
IN MELBOURNE AGAIN.
Freej
Such was the thought that surged through the man’s
brain ard made his bosom heave.
Now, of course, his wisest line of conduct would hav@
been to obtain a horse and ride away.
But two reasons militated against this.
_ His love for Rose and his greed for gold led him towards
his possible destruction.
But Ned Kelly was one of those kind of men who never
diverge from a resolution.
He knew many men in the back slums who were more
to be trusted than one of his own gang.
They were receivers and worse, many of them ex-con-
victs, and not likely to split on the man who was looked
upon more as a demi-god than anything else.
He procured a disguise of an elaborate nature, and then,
mounting a big cigar, sauntered along the streets of Mel-
bourne with his hands in his pockets.
In this way he reached the house opposite the bank.
The blinds were down, and not a sign of life was
visible.
But the owner had contrived a very simple signal,
known only to himself and daughter.
A simple-looking nail-head, pressed very hard, rang a
bell in Rose’s room.
He waited four minutes, and then knocked in a peculiar
way at the door.
It opened at once, and Rose stood before him.
She was too astounded to speak, but took him into a
comfortable sitting-room.
Here she placed brandy before him. Evidently she
knew w ell. and acted in accordance with his well-known
tastes and instincts.
He drank a stiff draught
“ What news ?” he then said. “ Where are Carroty
Larkins and Dick Dawson ?”
“At work in the cellar,” she answered.
Ned Kelly simply nodded, rose, took up his pistols, and
descended with a light.
He was soon in the cellar, and was about to enter the
tunnel, when he saw Larkins and Dick Dawson come out
of it with scared faces.
“ What’s up ?” cried Ned.
They started back with an astonished look.
“ You here ?” said Dick Dawson ; “we thought you
was in the jug ”
The pair had heard of Ned’s capture, and had returned
to Melbourne to carry out Ned’s intended bank robbery.
“Escaped,” he answered, in a dry tone; “but what's
up—you seem frightened ?”
“Not a red cent in the bullion-room,” was the reply;
“ all the red store has been shipped.”
What Ned said need not be repeated. His words were
not blessings.
They returned to the house, and plans were now laid
for their dispersion.
Ned insisted that all should travel separately, as being
safer.
He proposed that all should make for Adelaide, which
is GOO miles from Melbourne, and in the seaboard of
Australia, where they were personally unknown.
Arrived there, he would propose a scheme. He would
not even hint it now.
Ned Kelly gave the two men some money, and bade
them lose no time in getting out of Melbourne.
“Don’t go drinking, my lads,” he said, significantly,
“ but get away straight.”
They promised and w&ce let out.
“ Now, Rose, get ready,” the self-dubbed father said ;
“we must not delay. But that no one would believe in
my coming here we should never be free to leave now."
Rose hurried at once to obey her father.
They had money, both in notes and gold.
“I wonder,” said Ned Kelly, in a sad and kinder tone,
“ when we shall meet again ?”
“Don’t be downhearted,” answered the girl, kindly.
“Soon, I hope.”
Little did they suspect what was really to happen afte*
that night.


Then they went out, and until they were at a consider-
able distance from the house remained perfectly silent.
“ Rose, my darling, I noticed as I passed along
that a vessel will sail to-morrow for London,” he said.
“ Hence you can take the mail-boat for Adelaide. Go
to the Ballarat Hotel, and enter your name as Mary
Parsons.”
“Yes, father,” she answered. “I have always obeyed
you, and always will as long as I live.”
Poor girl!
And so they parted at a sailors’ boarding-house, where
the captain of the sailing vessel was staying previous to
his departure.
Ned now, with a deep sigh, as if anticipating coming
evil, advanced on his way.
He was so cunningly disguised with a wig worthy of the
London stage that he did not in any way fear detection.
The bar of a celebrated hotel was open, though it was
four o’clock, and Kelly sauntered in.
He had consumed a hasty supper which Rose had pre-
pared for him.
But he was fevered from thirst.
Besides, the man was possessed of a devil. It was the
love of notoriety.
Many of his most daring crimes were committed to be
talked about.
He wanted to hear if his escape was as yet a matter of
conversation.
The bar he entered was at the back of the hotel, and
was kept by two men who were adepts at the knife and
pistol.
They had a rough lot to deal with.
But they would stand no nonsense. If the man refused
to pay they would leap across the bar, knock him down,
and then with pistol and knife defend themselves against
any confederates he might have.
Ned Kelly took a keen glance around. Loafers were
the chief denizens.
Recollect the bar was behind the real hotel, and almost
unknown to its regular customers.
It was kept by one of the most successful enterprisers in
the world in that line.
Ned Kelly took a second glance.
There were some police off duty congregated in a
group.
But it was clear that there was no one personally known
to himself.
“Don't believe it,” were the first words he heard as he
entered within the unhallowed precincts.
“Don’t believe what?” asked our hero with a rowdy
shake of the head.
“ Who’s who ?” was the response.
“ That ain’t any matter,” answered the other. “ I only
wanted to know what it is you did not believe—that’s all,
my pippins.”
“ That Ned Kelly has escaped,” the man continued in
rather a sullen tone.
“ No!” was the gaping answer
“ Ask the traps.”
But the police knew these men too well to be enticed
into a wordy encounter.
Then Ned threw down some gold and stood drinks to
his immediate neighbour.
He drank nearly a bottle of champagne.
After this a mad idea came into his head.
Slipping out, he went to a livery stable close by, and,
depositing a fair sum, obtained the loan of a really good
horse.
Mounted on this he returned to the Royal Hotel, and
paused at the door.
It was a hot night, and the doors were open wide.
“ Another drink, boys,” he said, and handed a ready cus-
tomer gold.
The drink was consumed, and then Ned Kelly, the
ironclad bushranger, spoke—
“ So you think that Ned Kelly has escaped ?” he said, in
a musing kind of way.
“ We do—we do ! ” was the cry.
“And it’s true, for I am he,” shouted the excited an* l
half-drunken bushranger. “ Good-night.”
And away he sped into the darkness of the night, will,
an exultant foolish laugh.
The astonishment of all was great.
The police affected to disbelieve the statement of the
drunken ruffian.
“ That was Kelly himself,” said a cool-looking loafer
smoking a cigar of large dimensions the celebrated bush-
ranger had given him. “ Knew him the minute he came
in.”
“ Why did you not speak before ?” irately cried one o«
the few police who remained.
“ ’Cause such as me takes no share,” was the grim
answer, “in that there reward. The traps keeps it to
theirselves.”
At which there was a general laugh on the par; of the
brotherhood.
Meanwhile, Ned Kelly, well aware that he had by his
own vainglorious imprudence set a frightful nest of hornets
at his heels, rode like a madman.
Luckily he knew the way well, and could avoid dan-
gerous thoroughfares.
He was determined to ride the whole way to Adelaide,
a distance of six hundred miles.
This man was one who never threw a chance away.
He would avoid all very well known regions where bills
might be issued.
He had dyed himself, and this dye he determined to
wash off at the earliest opportunity that offered.
He slept that night in the hut of a shepherd, who,
having an unlimited supply of whisky given him, was not
curious.
(To be continued.)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Blacls Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. Love and Adventure.
The Star of the South.— xV Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“ Tha Black Angel.’’ Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Live for Half-a-
Amerioan War. Million.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol's Eye.— Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Diamond,
isva’a Treason, or the Two Privateers. Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
"Tom Holt’s Log,— A Tale of the Deep Soa. Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful,
Rodney Ray, or the Life anti Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Kmd to
liuin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunder."




His guest was very swarthy at night, in the morning ho
was ruddy and fair.
But he asked no questions. .
Ned Kelly had, as the girls said, a way with mm that
was irresistible. , .
After a hearty meal, Ned thanked the man for his
hospitality, and once more started on his road.
He was in high spirits, had a good horse, and congratu-
lated himself on his wonderful escape from prison.
A few hours ago ho had never expected to breathe the
air of freedom, and he laughed to himself as he thought
over the way he had outwitted the police and gaolers.
Not one feeling of regret or remorse entered his mind.
The outrages and crimes he had committed were, he con-
sidered, matters to exult over rather than regret.
He had always been a bad unscrupulous man, and
gloried in it, depraved villain as ho was.
The law had no terror for him; he was brave and
feared nothing, and openly declared that he cared neither
for God nor man.
IVrl VJvvi UUi liiuiu.
Ned of course expected to be pursued, and knew there
was every chance of being captured.
But he had been in so many dangers and desperate
situations that he did not despair of eluding his pursuers,
in fact, he had begun to believe that he w'as protected by
Providence, forgetting that a man’s c_rimes are not always
punished swiftly, and justice if slow is nearly always sure.
The daring recklessness of the man often saved him,
when a more timid man would have been lost.
He had not proceeded far on his road along the rough
highway, when he was startled to hear horses hoofs behind
him.
As they came nearer and nearer, Kelly glanced round
as if seeking a hiding-place, but after a moments hesi-
tation decided to face it out whatever the danger might
be.
Without once glancing back he continued to advance
although he felt curious enough to know what the horse-
men were.
At last they came up with him, and Ned Kelly saw that
they were two young policemen evidently in pursuit of
himself.
They pulled in their horses to give them breath, for they
had been hardly ridden, judging by appearance.
“ Good morning,” said Kelly as he too reined in, with a
pleasant smile, as if highly delighted at the prospect of
company for a few minutes. “ Ton seem in a rare hurry.
Going in search of sheep-stealers, I suppose ?”
“We are going after bigger game than that,” replied
one of the policeman, “we are looking after Ned Kelly
the bushranger.”
“Ned Kelly !” repeated our hero. “ I thought he was
safe in prison. You don’t mean to say he has escaped?”
This in a horrified tone. “He ought to have been shot
when first captured. The news you have just imparted to
me will fill hundreds of people with alarm and dread.”
“ Yes,” replied the young policeman who had spoken
before and was evidently a more communicative man than
the other; “ but if 1 am not mistaken we shall soon capture
him again.”
“You think so ?” casually remarked Ned.
1 Yes,” the other replied. “I am certain ”
“ He is vary cunning and clever, from what I hear,” re-
sponded Ned Kelly ; “ and, if what I hear is true, two men
would stand a very poor chance with him. He can fight
like the devil, and the knife and the pistol are weapons
which he kr pws how to use better than any man in the
colony.”
“ We know all about that,” cried the policeman, rather
angrily, for his pride was hurt at Kelly’s insinuation that
they were no match for the ironclad bushranger ; “ but we
have no reason to bo afraid if we come across him. We
are well-armed and well-mounted, and, besides have the
feeling that we are in the right. Kelly fights with a rope
round his neck. He is the biggest scoundrel that ever
and must be hunted down like a rat. The highway -
men in England in the old days were saints to the roaa
who has made his name the terror of Australia.”
“If every man got hia deserts, few would go unpunished,”
said Kelly, with a laugh, turning away his face to hide the
hideous look of rage that disfigured every feature.
For one moment he felt inclined to draw his pistoi from
his belt and shoot the policeman through the head, but he
conquered the impulse, reflecting that it would do no good.
These two policemen might not be by themselves, others
might be following close behind. If Kelly was a bad man,
he was not a fool. No one could accuse him of that Be-
sides, he was afraid that the report of his pistol might at-
tract attention.
Nothing in his manner evinced that he had any hostilo
feelings against his companions.
He spoke craftily of his own escape, trying to find cut
how much they knew, and keeping a keen watch upon them
without appearing to do so.
The police seemed in no hurry to part company with him,
and presently Kelly fancied he saw them exchange signifi-
cant glances as much as to say, “ This is our man.”
But not a muscle in his face betrayed the conviction that
was in his mind, that they had discovered his identity.
He talked and laughed pleasantly enough, and wished
them every success in their undertaking.
“ If I were you I should not like the job,” ho said, pre-
sently, “ but perhaps after all folks exaggerate about Kelly’s
power and pluck.”
“ We do not underrate his powers,” said the policeman,
significantly, and then, as if by accident, he pulled his rein,
and Kelly found himself between the two horsemen.
“The rascal will not surrender without a desperate
struggle,” observed Kelly, with a look of menace in hia
eyes.
He saw that they were rapidly approaching a police-
station, and there was no time to be lost, and suddenly
pulling out a short black pip© asked one of Ms would-be
captors in a nonchalant way for a light.
“ Oh, I’ll get you one close by,” was the reply, as off No.
1 went to the police-station, which just hove in sight, to
get more than the light required.
No sooner had he disappeared than Ned, drawing a pis-
tol from his pocket, swore he would scatter No. 2's brains
if he did not at once dismount*
The persuasive eloquence of the muzzle of the pistol had
the desired effect, and down jumped the lad (for he was
nothing more), and allowed Kelly to take hold of the
bridle.
“ Gocd-bye, my friend,” he coolly said. “The prison
isn’t made, or the traps born, that are a matcii for Nec
Kelly.”
With a loud laugh, he rides rapidly away, leading Ihe
trooper’s horse with him, to “keep him,” as he said, “ in
good company.”
¥7hen No. 2 arrived at the police-station, great was the
chagrin and rage at the success of the ruse. The police,
on hearing of Iqis escape, rose with loud yells of anger and
disappointment, and, mounting their horses, started in
pursuit.
They were not only eager to reap the great reward, but
they now had a personal grievance against Ned Kelly, and
wanted to be revenged upon him for the success of his
“ dodge.”
In fact, they were cruelly mortified.
Kelly, now perfectly calm and self-possessed, urged for-
ward his horses as he heard the shouts of his pursuers
behind him.
He necessarily rode blindly along the first path that pre-
sented itself.
It was a race for life and liberty once more, and aii
caused by his own folly.
The policemen fired more than once, but the bullets
whizzed over Kelly’s head, and he gave a shout of de/isivc
and laughing defiance as his horses dashed fonvai d a!
and headlong speed.
The mon, as can be easily imagined, did not spare thel


steeds, and Kelly, hearing another shout of triumph,
looked back and saw that his pursuers were gaining upon
him. He resolved to keep the second horse with him, and
change steeds when his weight began to tell upon that he
rode.
He maac up his mind instantly that if they came much
nearer he would turn and fight.
A sinister light gleamed in his eye as he listened to the
yells and oaths of the enraged men.
His position was desperate indeed, but he did not
despair ;he never did —the secret of success.
He was flying along at full speed, without following any
particular direction, when he glanced ahead, and a smothered
cry escaped from his lips.
Just in his path, just before him, was a wide gully,
cutting off his retreat, and he must turn and face the
policemen, or take this awful, this terrible leap.
In an instant his mind was made up.
There was only one thing to be done. He would not at-
tempt ihe leap.
The pace had been a killing one. His horse was dis-
tressed, and those of his followers were not much less so.
He resolved, as he said, to “burst the lot,” and so
pressed his animal still more with spur and hand. He had
the satisfaction of gaining on his pursuers. He saw they
were flagging, and that the men were somewhat done up
from excitement.
He avoided the leap, and turned sharply towards the
scrub, and for a few minutes was hidden from view. He
rapidly changed horses, and mounting the led one, felt he
now really had the foot of the field. The time occupied
in the change had allowed his enemies to gain on him, and
u loud howl of delight pealed from their lips as they
thought they had him at last.
They were quickly deceived, for they now felt he was
leaving them at every stride.
Seeing further pursuit useless, they moderated their
pace, upon which Kelly likewise “ drew T it milder,” and,
mocking his friends with what the French call a pied-a-nez,
begged them to go and get the reward and drink his health.
“ Never saw such a thing in all my life,” said the first
policeman,
“Faith, and It bates Bannager Biddy,” replied the
second, who was an Irishman, “and Biddy bates me.”
And they rode away.
Kelly gave a deep sigh of relief, and laughed mockingly
as he continued on his way.
At present, at least, he was out of danger—but for how
long?
He did not allow his horse to relax his pace, but rode
hard till night came on, looking back every now and then
to convince himself that he was not being followed, until
it was too dark for him to see any object distinctly, when
he allowed his steed to take it easy.
He had entered the wild scrub, and was slowly moving
through the long grass, when he suddenly saw a faint light
in the distance, and knew that he was nearing some habita-
tion.
CHAPTER LXI.
THE INN IN THE BUSH.
He soon found that the light proceeded from a lonely inn,
one of those places frequented by roughs, ex-convicts, and
shepherds, and Kelly’s face brightened as he alighted from
his horse, and, pushing open the door which happened to
stand ajar, entered without ceremony.
“ Supper and whisky,” he said laconically, and the land-
lady, on hearing the order, hastened to set a good meal
before him. It was served in a private room, and pre-
sently her husband came lounging in and looked at the
stranger with some curiosity.
They were a well-matched couple—the man, a tall
herculean fellow of about thirty, and the woman a fine
strapping wench of five-and twenty.
“I thought it would be more comfortable for you here,”
observed the landlady, as she and her husband sat down
at the same table to discuss their own evening meal.
“ Thank you,” said Kelly curtly, but against his will he
found himself drawn into conversation.
He did not wish to appear churlish, nor had he any
desire to arouse the suspicions of the man and woman.
The name of the couple was Marsh, and they were
evidently natives of the Emerald Isle.
It needed little inducement to persuade them to speak
of the country they had left.
The woman at first tried to ply Kelly with questions,
but after briefly stating that his name was Jones, he
changed the conversation, and began to talk of Ireland, a
subject which appeared agreeable to his companions.
They appeared to be rather free and easy people, but
they were none the worse for that in the eyes of the cele-
brated bushranger, who began to ask questions in his
turn.
“ Why did you leave Ireland ?” he asked bluntly, as he
refilled his glass.
“We were given a free passage by the Government,”
returned the man, with a wink. “ A pig-headed jury found
us guilty of participating in a murder that took place at
Balia, near Castlebar, and we were shipped off for change of
air. When we were discharged from the Tench by order of
that same paternal Government, we settled down here to
try and turn an honest penny.”
“Balia, near Castlebar?” said Kelly, interrogatively,
looking at the woman with new interest aa he spoke ; “is
that where you came from ?”
“ That same,” responded the man.
“ Was your father named Kelly?” asked the bushranger,
addressing Mrs. Marsh, who sat with her plump elbows
resting on the table, and her eyes fixed upon his face.
“ That was her father’s name,” interposed the husband,
before she could speak; “ and who might you be, to know
so much about us ?”
“I am Ned Kelly, your wife’s brother,” was the quiet
reply,
“ My brother!” cried the woman, in astonished surprise
and delight, whilst her husband warmly grasped the bush,
ranger’s hand.
He was evidently regarded as a great hero by the inter-
esting pair.
They had heard and gloated over the bloodthirsty and
daring deeds of Ned Kelly, and were glad to welcome him
to their shanty.
He felt now that he was indeed amongst friends, and
could rely upon their truth and honesty as far as he was
personally concerned.
They regarded him with undisguised admiration.
That which appeared revolting to other people became
in their eyes manly courage and heroic bravery.
His sister clapped her hands with delight, and, throwing
her arms round his neck, gave him a hearty kiss, which he
took in very good part, congratulating "himself upon
having found such a comfortable and secure hiding-place.
He was no longer compelled to behave with caution, and
could show himself in his true colours.
“ This is the strangest thing that has ever happened t®
me in the whole course of my life,” said Mrs. Marsh,
The husband assented to this remark, and produced a
bottle of real whisky, in which the bushranger and his
relatives pledged each other.
“ I drink to our better acquaintance,” cried Marsh, lift-
ing his glass on high. “ 1 think we shall find it a very
pleasant as well as profitable connection.”
“No doubt we can put business in each other’s way,”
agreed Kelly, tossing off his glass and looking significantly
at Marsh.
Marsh put his forefinger to his rather rubicund nose and
winked solemnly at his brother-in-law.
The two men were ready to swear by one another from
that moment.
That night was a jolly one indeed for the two, and long
after the shanty was shut up they drank and talked and


laughed, and thoroughly enjoyed themselves; Marsh and find Kelly there, followed by the injured
ihis wife swearing that Kelly was the most wonderful fellow protesting against the unwarrantable a p P
t Mh“a7e Cr d”r i o°m\nTtei ! >g'. that have astonished '"“Why, he isn’t hero, they cried, on entering the room
Australia,” said Kelly, before retiring to rest, “ but iam wim very uwie wrvmvuy. nro vokin<*
not yet old, and intend to do many daring deeds which will “ Mho said he was . retorted a ■ P decent
put my past exploits completely in the shade.” grin. “ Nice fellows you are to come dragging decent
This was no idle boast; Ned Kelly meant to keep his females out of bed at this time of night
word The notorious bushranger was a man of iron reso- The men looked at him suspiciously u ‘ * 1
lution, and seldom made a promise that he did not carry eagerly searching every nook and corner
’ 1 But Ned Kelly the busnranger was not to be found, al-
Ollu. _ _ _ . . . r\ i • _ tilt » /s. -A- Ua! i nirrA
13UU l>ea iveny WUS uuouiaugci vTT*
He had been in the saddle all day, and consequently though they lingered for some time unwilling to believe
(Soon fell into a sound sleep, his powerful frame stretched that they had been baffled. .
out to its full length, and his massive head resting on his “ What have you gained by dragging a poor man ou o
hrn V rm ted, and disturbing his well-earned repose?” enquired
Sleep.*which is often denied to the innocent, came always Marsh, angrily. “ But to show that I don t bear ma ice,
at his bidding, and he could have dreamed away till day- I’ll stand drinks all round. ,
lifflit had not the silence of the night been suddenly broken This offer was well received by the police of course, wno
by an ominous sound—a loud knocking at the door. who were tired and thirsty. , , , ~
In an instant Kelly was wide awake and on the alert, “ Death and destruction to Ned Kelly, shouted the
and lifting his head he listened intently. leader, and the bushranger smiled, as he heard the words
He was joined a few minutes later by his sister and her in his secret hiding-place beneath. • r • i
husband. “ That’s it,” assented Marsh, “ and what I say is, 1 wish
“ Come,” said the woman, anxiously, “ there is no time you may get him.”
to be lost. The policemen are at the door and must be A few minutes later the landlord had the supreme satis-
admitted, but there is a hiding-place in which you will be faction of bolting the door on his unpleasant visitors,
quite secure from all fear of discovery. Como at once.” He waited until the sound of their horses hoofs had died
Kelly unhesitatingly obeyed. He knew intuitively «iat away in the distance before he released Ned Kelly trom
he could trust these people, and his instinct seldom played his place of confinement. _ , .
him false Ned had great difficulty in rising from his place of con-
“My horse? ”he said, anxiously. cealment. His legs were cramped, and he almost gasped
“Has been hobbled out down in the gully. Have no for breath as he stood upright,
fear ” was the reassuring reply of the woman, who was in “ I could not have stood it much onger, he said, as he
a curious state of deshabille. stretched himself. _ “I should have had to cry out if they
The police, impatient at being kept waiting, hammered had not taken their departure in the nick ox tunc.
ceaselessly at the door, swearing that if it was not at “It was the best we could do tor you, returned Marsh,
once opened they would break it in, and Kelly ivas hastily apologetically, “ and now let us consult as to what is to bo
conducted to the hiding-place beneath the floor of the done. You can’t leave the shanty to-night, it is not to be,
shanty thought of for a moment. Although to all appearances the
It was a very awkward and cramped position, but any- police have taken their departure, I know you are too old
thing was better than falling into the hands of the police a bird to think of venturing out so soon.
—of the hated traps. Ned saw the wisdom of these words. He therefore de-
“What the deuce is the matter? Has hell broke cided to remain where he was until darkness should once
loose ? ” enquired the landlord, in a sleepy voice, as he more veil the earth.
threw open the door with such suddenness as to send He knew that it would be madness to think of remaining
the foremost policeman sprawling in on his hands and at the shanty for any length of time, but it would be
k neeg _ equally absurd to venture out too soon.
“We have received information that Ned Kelly is con- “ Their suspicions will be lulled by to-monow, he said,
cealed in this house,” said the man, sulkily, as he rose to “ and the best thing I can do is to take your advice. 1 will
f keep dark until night comes on.”
“Ned Kelly?” repeated Marsh, still in a sleepy voice, Nevertheless the bushranger found the hours pass but
putting on a stupid look, and glaring vacantly at the police slowly, and was more than once tempted to venture out m
officers defiance of all danger.
“ I have said so once,” said the man, looking at him He grew snappish and sullen, and his relatives scarcely
suspiciously. “Why didn’t you open the door? We found him so agreeable as he had been on the previous night,
have been making enough noise to wake the dead.” It was a relief to all parties when darkness came on, and
“You’ve half-frightened me out of my life,” retorted the bushranger’s spirits rose and his temper consequently
Marsh. “ What with the old woman clinging round my improved when the hour of departure drew mar.
neck, and declaring that the bushrangers were upon us, I The forced confinement in the shanty was torture to a
did not know whether I was standing on my head or my man of Kelly’s disposition. He longed for soiv<s kind of
heels, and felt half-inclined to fire a pistol right into your action, and gave a sigh of relief as he bade his sister an
midst.” affectionate farewell, and followed Marsh to the spat where
“It is well for you that you thought better of it,” said the boy was waiting with his horse,
the policeman, grimly. “ How much longer are you going There was a smile on his fierce and brutal countmance
to keep us here ? We want to search the house.” as he bent down to shake hands with his brother-m law
“ Search my shanty?” cried Marsh, indignantly. “ You “ You have done me a good turn,” bn said, “ and Ned
are up to some games, boys, and want to help yourselves Kelly won’t forget it,” and without another word be hit
to my liquor," Marsh where he stood, the echo of his horse’s* hotfs
The police waited to hear no more, but impatiently gradually dying away in the distance.
pushing him on one side they entered the shantv-inn.
<* Search away as much as you like,” cried Marsh, “as CHAPTER LXIL
long as you keep out of my wife’s bedroom I don’t care.
Keep out of there, and I shan’t make the least fuss if you IN THr ' SCRUB *
pull the -whole place about my ears.” Out into the darkness rode Ned Kelly, his heart swel'ang
The policemen, half inclined to laugh, immediately with a pleasant sense of freedom, in spite of the dangers
made a rush for the apartment alluded to. expecting to which might encompass him on every side.


ITs talents and perseverance were indeed worthy of a
better cause.
Well directed, he might have been a hero, or what the
world so calls.
The bushranger did not keep the high-road more than
he could help.
lie rode at som* Mile (instance from it, keeping it
tolerably in view.
All that day ho travelled with few rests, nor halted until
night fell on the scene.
Then he looked round and saw a wood at a great distance.
Towards this he made his way. Suddenly he became
aware of a small crackling fire.
Kelly at once approached and saw that a fellow-traveller
hi d halted and made a fire.
“ Good night, mate,” said Kelly in his most cordial
manner, “ making yourself comfortable ?”
“ Yes ; come in and join,” replied the other.
Kelly needed not twice telling. First seeing to his
horse’s wants he joined the other.
He was a fine young fellow of about seyeu-and-twenty
years of age, a gold digger, but of a superior sort.
Kelly had cold meat, bread, and whisky, but no cooking
utensils.
The stranger was making water boil for tea, the universal
drink of the Australian.
The two fraternised, and for some time nothing was
thought of but eating.
Then they filled their pannikins with whisky and water,
loaded their pipes, and talked.
John Morney had come out to seek his fortune, and,
having succeeded tolerably, was going home.
“I left a mother, a sister, and one dearer still, to seek
my fortune,” he said, with a pleasant smile, “and now am
going home by way of Adelaide.
“t'o am I, mate,” replied Kelly, and told some story in-
vented on the spot.
The other listened and believed.
He was a straightforward young Englishman, without
any guile, and ready to believe any plausible tale that was
told him.
And so, with laughter and joke, the night passed until
it was time to retire.
They had their blankets, and, each seeking his spot
they wrapped themselves in them and sought refreshment
in slumber.
At least, John Merney did.
But not so Kelly,
An infernal idea had entered his head.
If this man was able to return to England he must have
made a pile.
“Sized his pile, I fancy,” said Kelly to himself, “pretty
well.”
Money, and the brutal gratification it procured him, was
all he thought of.
Why should he not take advantage of this windfall that
had come in his way ?
So he lay under his blanket, watching for the untor-
tunate and trusting traveller to sleep.
Kelly was armed with pistol and knife.
The latter he carried in a sheath, and it was a bright
and glittering blade.
Presently the man whose evil genius had brought him
in contact with Kelly, gave unmistakeable signs of being
asleep.
With the caution and cunping of a panther, Kelly put
aside his blanket, and crept towards the poor young man.
Relentless as the most ferocious of wild beasts, the
bushranger raised his deadly weapon, and struck at the
other’s breast.
A )ry, a gurgling sound, and all was over. The blow
was, indeed, well and surely struck.
Tien Kelly coolly proceeded to search the body of his
victim.
He found a rather heavy belt and a pocket-book which
he appropriated without hcsuuliou.
Then he caught his horse and rode off to some distance,
until he reached a dense part of i 'e scrub and wood, where
he again camped.
He drained his whisky flask then slept as soundly
as any innocent child might have done.
At early dawn he examined his plunder, found the belt
full, while in the pocket-book was a draught given by the
Union Bank of Melbourne on Adelaide, for £l,lOO.
Any sense of remorse that might have arisen in the
mind of Kelly was set at rest by this momentous discovery.
Kelly put away his plunder, and then rode on until he
came to a small shanty inn, where he procured breakfast.
Then mounting, he once more started on his way, eager
to accomplish his journey.
Kelly took care to avoid all except solitary travellers,
which, by keeping a good look-out, he easily did.
He did this all the more that express messengers had
placarded a new reward for his own apprehension.
That night he found himself near a small inn of the
rougher kind. This he resolved to enter, though deter-
mined not to stay.
If his hand was against every man, every man’s hand
was against him. The reward was stupendous.
While he was eating his supper he suddenly heard
horses’ footsteps.
His own steed was in a rude stable at the back. Quick
as thought—his knife and pistol ready— he concealed him-
self behind a partition.
“ House,” said a familiar voice, appearing on the scene,
“Here,” replied a gaunt old woman, appearing on the
scene ; “ what’s your will ?”
At the same time there entered Dick Dawson and
Carroty Larkins, who at once ordered supper.
Iho woman retired to obey orders.
“So you’ve come along, ray hearties?” said Kelly, with
a gruff laugh.
The men were delighted to see their chief. Questioned
by him, they declared that they had had no adventures
by the way.
It was now resolved to travel together.
Eating heartily, and securing tobacco and spirits, they
once more started for the woods, where they passed the
night.
As they approached the seat of population they were
very careful.
Police stations were carefully avoided, as a matter of
course, by these unparalleled ruffians.
The troopers were keenly on the alert. The whole
colony was ringing with the daring and impudent escape
of the bushranger.
His cool audacity was only equalled by his villainy and
bloodthirsty recklessness.
They might be sure, therefore, that a good look-out
would be kept.
As, therefore, they approached the towP, they were
doubly cautious, and when in sight concealed themselves
in a rather wild place, and waited for night.
Then, after some arrangements as to meeting, they
separated, each to take his solitary way into the town.
Kelly looked around keenly, and at last, making a virtue
of necessity, rode into the town.
He had disguised himself admirably, and had little fear
of being recognised, except by someone who had seen
him.
At all events ho must risk something to carry out hii
plans.
CHATTER LX 111.
ADELAIDE.
Ned Kelly was not known in Adelaide, though ho had
“ mates ” and correspondents there.
The confederacy of crime is something marvellous ail
over the world.
But among bushrangers and convicts it is a thing teallj
wonderful to contemplate.


They have their signs and passwords, which enable them
to recognise one another anywhere.
It is said there is honour among theives, but there is
nothing of the kind.
They betray one another every day openly and secretly,
as is very well known.
But where an organisation is powerful, and those ie:t
behind are always to punish the betrayers, men
think twice before they enter on a course of treachery.
Ned Kelly knew this, but he was too much of a cynic to
trust anyone further than he could help. He had had
some experience of late.
Ned Kelly went straight to a small inn and put up lus
horse.
This inn was in the purlieus of the town, and was very
quiet and tolerably respectable.
He dined, drank a glass or two of whiskey, smoked a
pipe, and then sauntered down the town.
First he went to the post office to ask for letters for
James Fairfax.
There were no letters.
Then he sauntered 10 the Golden Nugget, a house of
call for sailors.
Here he had made an appointment with Hick Hawson
and Carroty Larkins.
He was roughly enough attired now, and not likely to
excite suspicion.
In those days the system of photographing prisoners
was not known, at all events in the colonics.
He was, therefore, in no immediate danger.
He sauntered into the and looked around with
his usual scrutinising eye.
It was a saloon such as has never been seen except at
places possessed with the gold fever.
The costume was rough, but the faces and the language
was much rougher. _ •
Kelly sauntered through the group until he came to
where a knot of men in a peculiar style of dress attracted
his notice.
They were naif sailors, half diggers.
Most had plenty of drink before them, which they
tossed off freely, while their more unfortunate brethren
came in for a share.
Kelly thought he had never seen such a villainous lot
in his life.
They were six in number, while he occupied a table to
himself.
Apparently they did not notice him.
“I hate work!” said a thin, mean-looking fellow, with
uallow complexion and pock-marked face ; “I allays did.
“How did you come out here then?” asked a burly
kuffian, known as Salmon Roe.
“ Well, you see, they sent me, and I got more work
nor I wanted,” was the answer.
“ And now,” asked Salmon Roe, in a tone of contempt,
4 what do you think on, Poacher ?”
“ S’pose I must work,” was the disgusted answer ; “go
and dig in those gold mines.”
“Work!” laughed the leader of the sailor party.
44 Work’sforfools. I knowatrick worth two of them things.”
44 1 should,” groaned the man known as Poacher, a fair
specimen of the low, loafing, idle English peasant —they
are not many, but they beat anybody when
them; 44 like to know what to do lo keep from work.”
44 Dig for gold!” said Salmon Roe, amidst universal
approval. 44 Bosh ! let flats dig and wise men gain by it ”
44 How ?” asked the Poacher.
44 There must be no flies,” answered the burly ruffian,
4 -no flies here. I’m up to a big thing, bub no man joins
me without I knows something about him. I’ve done
Newgate and the Tench.”
44 I’ve been once in Clerkenwell, twice in Millbank, and
ain’t long kicked out of Pentridge,” added the Poacher.
L'acfi Ox too men gave some such satisfactory answer.
Car hero had, seemingly, after a heavy drink, fallen
asleep on the table.
“Listen,” said Salmon Roe.
Now we may as well premise that a large number of
vessels were at this time lying at Adelaide waiting to go
so England. . , ,
Thousands of pounds of gold were piled up m the banka
seeking a ship.
Some ships, unable to find a crew, were paying demur-
rage at the rate of £2OO a day.
Sailors ran away to the diggings as fast as they lauded.
They did not come back.
Many passengers were waiting to go home, but not the
highest terms offered could get a crew.
The harbour was choke full of vessels of all sizes, and
not a sailor to be had for love or money. The agents were
in despair, and the loss to the owners enormous, ihe
very captains, in some instances, caught the infection and
left their ships to take care of themselves, while they bolted
to the “ diggins.” .
“Now, mates,” said Salmon Roe, “this here is my idea.
Supposing we finds out a ship as wants a biggish crew—it
must be a ship as carries raw gold—well, we can ship
before the mast.
“Yes, yes,” was the universal ciy.
“ I can find twenty fellers,” went on the cold-blooded
rascal, “agents ask no questions—we ship. On we go-
gale of wind comes—ship goes down.”
“ She springs a leak, and we are obliged to abandon her
off the coast of South America. We man the long-boat,
and don’t take no provisions—oh, no !—and no liquor of
any kind, not a drop—or no, no brandy, no wine, no
’bacca, no nothing. We reg’lar starves ourselves ! Now,
what do you think on this little game?”
“ Right you are,” was the comment. “ You’ve got the
game marked out pretty. I’m blowed if we ain t just the
chaps to make you win it. AVho’ll lead ? Wffio s the cove
as is game to be boss in this here business?”
“ I’m your man,” said Kelly, jumping up from his re-
cumbent position. Here’s, the cove who’ll lead you to
swim in tin—to make you as rich as lords.”
“ Hold hard, mate,” said Salmon Roe. “ You’re mighty
ready, but we must know our pals. Who the devil are you
and where do you hail from ?”
“May be you've heard of Ned Kelly,” that worthy re-
plied, with a gleam of almost pride in his eye s * as he
spoke.
“Rather, but you don’t mean to say that you—you—”
“ I’m Ned himself, just out from the Pentridge Stockade,
and ready to lead you all to glory if you 11 follow me. 1
like your plan—it’s easy as melting butter over a fire. Now
say the word, and we’ll gh to work like men.”
Ned’s fame was enough to give him a good appointment,
even “down below,” and he was elected managing director
of the new company by acclamation.
“ Shaii. .id brandy,” cried Ned, casting gold on the
counter.
The order was obeyed.
As soon as some considerable drink had been imbibed,
the audacious outlaw ordered a private room.
He was flush of cash, and bade them bring the most
luxurious supper for money.
The astonishment and delight of the others to find
themselves in company with Kelly was something scarcely
to be conceived.
In the eyes of these bullies and ruffians he was a hero—
there have been worse heroes !
No resistance was made to his taking the command He
was, they thought, a king among men.
It was settled that the men should keep as q»'iet as pos-
sible, procure themselves a respectable kit, and be ready
at a moment’s notice.
Salmon Roe was to remain where he was in tomruunica-
tion with all his gang.
Ned Kelly, as Mr. Preston, was to put himself into good
clothes and look respectable.
Thou they were to look out for a ship.
Thus they parted


Nest day Ned Kelly dressed as a respectable gold-digger
presented himself at the bank, and, handing in the draft,
was at once paid.
The audacious bushranger had now a fund of nearly
three thousand pounds.
It struck him now that he had better go as a passenger,
and thus be useful to his confederates.
He waited until evening and then communicated his
idea to Salmon Roe.
That worthy highly approved of it.
The good ship Lenore, a fine vessel, had a cargo and
passengers, andTvas only awaiting a crew.
Next morning Ned Kelly called upon the agent, Mr.
Lawson, and booked a cabin passage in the Lenore as Mr.
Henry Preston.
The agent thought his client a very agreeable sort of
man, and when he had paid his money readily went out
to have a glass of champagne.
He in this way came to notice the bushranger's face, and
also that he had his left-hand glove on.
An hour later Salmon Roe, as Joe Perkins, very well
made up as a mate.
The agent, Mr. Lawson, received him very courteously,
though him rather rough and peculiar-looking man.
“ Me and some of my mates are tired of this digging
work,” said Joe Perkins; “a passage back to England
with good pay will suit us better than work.”
“ How many are there of you?” asked the agent.
“Twenty-two, sir,” said Joe.
“ When will you join ?”
“ Daybreak to-morrow,” was the answer.
“Yo will sign articles to-night?” continued the sur-
prised an d delighted agent.
“ Sar in sure,” replied the obliging mate.
And so it was settled.
The gang of murderers, plunderers, and robbers were
all engaged as able seamen.
Mr, Henry Preston that evening, dressed in swell style,
with plenty of luggage—rather new, it is true—occupied
a room in the Royal Sydney Hotel.
He had dined elegantly and well. He was up to every-
thing, and as doing the grand.
The waiter brought him the special evening paper.
He opened it languidly.
“Shocking Accident at Melbourne,” he read; “loss
of the brig with all hands.”
Ned Kelly leaped wildly to his feet. Then he sank
down again and read—
“On board was the daughter of the notorious Ned
Kelly, who, now it is well knowm, aided his escape with
such extraordinary pluck and cunning.
“ She was a worthy scion of her father, and society has
probably escaped from a great danger.
“ A girl who at the age of nineteen could have displayed
such consummate astuteness, might have developed into a
Lucrezia Borgia, or any other feminine monster in his-
tory.
“It is believed that the deplorable occurrence was
caused by the drunkenness of the captain and crew.
“ All that has been found of the ill-fated vessel has been
her figure-head, which was of cork and floated ashore.”
Kelly poured himself out a very strong glass of brandy
and drank kb off.
He was ghastly.
Literally the only being he had ever loved had gone to
her account.
His fancy for Lola Montez was a mere craving animal
passion, as far removed from love as heaven from the other
place.
CHAPTER LXIY.
BOARD THE LENORE.
Let us give an account of the Lenore and her inhabitants,
on board of which was to be perpetrated one of the most
awful and gloomy crimes ever even brought to tha charge
of Ned Kelly, the ironclad bushranger.
The captain, named Elton, was an excellent and superior
old salt.
The second officer, Mark Reynolds, was also an ad-
mirable sailor.
the crew, beyond those brought on board by Joe
Perkins—and they were sailors—were a poor lot.
Broken down seamen, foreigners, Lascars.
Then came the passengers.
There were no less than eleven families going home to
England.
Alas ! amongst them were three young wives and somt
dozen or more grown-up girls.
Could there bo no warning angel to give them a hint
of the awful fate to which they were apparently doomed ?
On board that ship there were three-and-twenty of the
most unmitigated scoundrels who ever disgraced this earth
by their presence.
They had doomed the ship.
To what fate would they doom these innocent members
of the other sex ?
It may be said as a trait in his favour, if it be true as
he asserted in his last moments, that when he sat down to
dinner with the passengers he shuddered at the sight of so
much youth and beauty.
“I would have retreated if I had dared,” he said, and
it is to be hoped it was true.
Mr. Henry Preston at the dinner-table was very quiet
and unobtrusive.
He sat at the lower end, and though he played his
trencher very well, he did not seek in any way to obtrude
his conversation.
He listened.
He wanted above all to take the tone of his associates
before he spoke.
Thinking him diffident, one of the passengers who sat
next him, a rich wool merchant, spoke—
“ Glass of wune ? ” he said.
“With pleasure,” replied Mr. Henry Preston.
The ice once broken, he conversed freely, but was care-
ful not to go beyond his depth.
He knew all about sheep, cattle, and so on, and was
therefore in no danger on these topics.
He was excessively polite to the ladies, and they soon
found it out.
Then came the card table.
Ned Kelly was clever at that; even when it did not suit
him to cheat, he played well.
“I have been up in the bush,” he said, modestly, “and
know a thing or two about cards. It would not be wise
tor anyone to play against me who was not sure of him-
self.”
“ We’ll risk it,” cried GolonelTaylor, laughing. “ Here
we are, three good hands. Let us try.”
And they did try.
All saw at once that Mr. Henry Preston was a dabster.
He never made a mistake. He always played the right
card in the right place.
He won, but no one grumbled. He had good cards sv.d
good play on his side.
There was usually a light supper on board these ships—
in those days it was Liberty Hall—and at the meal Colonel
Taylor introduced Mr. Preston to his daughter Ellen.
She was a most charming girl, fair, happy, and full of
spirits, returing to beloved England.
She felt interested in Mr. Henry Preston and chatted
with him freely.
His heart smote him. He was not a poor man, and
then came qualms of conscience
Why should he not expose the whole conspiracy, and
throw himself on the mercy of all ?
No! He must die if he declared who he was, and
death was not a pleasant prospect for Ned.
Matters must take their chance.
After they had been out some days, Mr. Prer-um o*ed


to take a fancy to go and smoke a cigar at night near the
bowsprit.
He would walk carelessly on until lie met Joe Perkins,
the second mate.
Then they had frequent talks.
Ned Kelly knew that to talk to any of these men of
foregoing their purpose was impossible.
There was nearly a quarter of a million on board, suf-
ficient for these men to look forward to an unending orgie.
But Ned proposed that they should secure the genuine
crew and passengers, take the money, and let the ship go.
“ Dead men tell no tales,” was the brutal answer ; “ we
don’t mean to kill the young females—till we’re tired of
them.”
And the low, brutal ruffian would say no more in
answer to the other’s proposition.
And so time passed on.
At table the captain often spoke of their course, and
gave reasons for their approaching the coast of Brazil.
One day he indicated that they were not more than
three hundred miles off the coast of South America.
“ We shall go no nearer,” he said, “and if the winds
keep as they are we shall get a better offing.”
That night Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe came to an
understanding.
The ship had been riddled all along the garboard strako
and elsewhere, the holes being stopped up carefully after-
wards.
The plan was this.
While the cabin passengers were at breakfast, the
honest crew were to be secured.
Then the mutineers were to rush in to kill and slay all
who resisted.
The treasure was then lo be captured.
The launch and jolly-boat would carry all they required,
and they could easily reach the coast of South America and
represent themselves as shipwrecked mariners.
Next day the mutiny took place.
The noise excited the alarm of all on board. The
villainous gang rushed into the cabin and shot d)wn
several of the elder men.
All knew at once what would happen—a rush was made
for deck, men fought desperately, girls tried to leap over-
board, and lovers even shot them down, rather than leave
them to the awful fate which awaited them.
What followed it is utterly impossible to describe in
these pages.
There followed an orgie of the most fearful kind, and then
some hours later, the Leu-ore went down with her dead
and living freight, while the mad and drunken crew started
with shouts of glee and triumph for the shore.
The Lcnore was reported in due time as lost with all
hands.
She was only one of dozens who at that time met the
same terrible fate.
The mutineers with their gold and provisions now made
for the coast of South America.
Salmon Roc was a good sailor even to being a navigator,
and ho and Ned studied the map.
Ned advised that they should land on some uninhabited
part of the coast, where they could conceal their treasure,
and then play the part of shipwrecked sail 01$.
Of course, their future course depended entirely on
circumstances.
The whole- party were agreed that a f tcr what had hap-
pened the safest place was England.
There could be no possible chance of their being sus-
pected as concerned in the loss of the Lcnore.
Not a soul on hoard would be alive to tell the tale—of
that they were wcl 1 aware.
The wind was fair, and soon lue coast of South America
was in sight.
Luckily they had not been able to put on board a very
large amount of spirits.
'The men were therefore to’crably sober.
A good lookout was kept, and tho boats were careful to
approach land without being aeon by any of the inhabi-
tants.
They were about thirty miles below Uio de Janeiro, the
capital of the Empire of Brazil.
The coast was high, rocky, and wooded.
Salmon Roe carried the vessels into a small land-locked
harbour, where there was at the bottom of the bay a
cavern.
“ I fancy, my friend, said Ned Kelly, in a low asido to
the mate, “ you’ve been here before.”
The other winked, that was all, but it was a very moaning
and voluminous wink.
It said a great deal.
It was decided on landing to hide away the treasuro in
the cave, to conceal also the long boat and launch, ana
start on a walk.
Every man was to secure a certain amount of money in
his belt. Their destination was to be Rio.
What they were to do there was a question. The solu-
tion was left to the two captains.
The idea was to run away with some taut and safa
vessel, and make for England.
It would be just as easy with care to land on the English
coast as on that of South America, and disperse, each man
with his pile.
Both Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe would have liked to
defraud their comrades out of the whole of the treasure,
but it was not possible.
So that night they passed their time in the cave and
slept, oblivious of the hideous and fearful crime which had
been committed on the high seas, and hopeful it would
never bo brought up in judgment against them.
Perhaps not in this world.
Ned had no wish to be the only passenger saved, so he
simply was to appear as second officer of the lost City of
Leith, a vessel which had sailed a fe.v days before.
The crew marched seven miles along the coast, until
they reached a large straggling village, where their appear-
ance excited a considerable amount of astonishment.
Several, however, of the men could speak every lingo
under the suu, and were able to explain. Their story was
believed.
Though they were all sailors, they were also fortunate
gold diggers, which made them none the less weleom?.
They wore entertained at their own expense at a large
wine-shop, where the leading inhabitants condescended to
join them.
Before the meal was over it was hot enough to take a
siesta, and so they arranged to stop until evening, dine,
have a dance, and start at early dawn.
Before they laid down Salmon Roe made a short but
expressive speech.
“ Messmates, at this here dance be careful about the
girls,” he said, impressively ; “ no nonsense and no knives.
If we rouse suspicion before we reach Rio it is all U 1*
with us. Drink as little as you can help.”
It was indeed terribly hard lines; but the men kn nv
that it was wise advice, and r„solvc«i to abide by it as far
as possible.
Then they slept.
After which they dined in thi best way they could on
fruits, vegetables, and a scanty supply of meat, such as a
true Briton very properly turns his nose up at.
Then they smoked and waited until the music began,
which announced the tcrtulia or ball.
The Brazilian women are half Snav'sh, half savage
looking, with fine eyes, but sallow comulcxiou? and heavy
figures.
This is usually derived from the circumstance that they
do the hard work.
But there were lots of young girls nob yet spoiled ; and
then sailors are not very particular.
Knowing the fierce jealousy of tho raco, Salmon. R)Q
was careful to warn his men again.
Then he left them to their chance.
The native women who knew tho white men, a& .-hey


called them, had plenty of money, were very gay, pleasant,
and cordial.
Several pedlars with jewellery accidentally came in, and
Jack was very ready to buy anything that a senorita
desired.
They were liberal too in the way of cool and pleasant
drinks.
For themselves they chiefly stuck to aguardiente , a vile
strong kind of brand} which poisons more than it intoxi-
cates.
Soon the fan became fast and furious, and the shouting
and laughing were tremendous.
Some of the younger Brazilians began presently to
look ominously dark.
They didn’t mind the girls accepting presents, dancing,
and consuming cool drinks.
They objected to the English sailors being too demon-
strative.
Arms round the waist they did not care for, but when
kisses were ravished there was a row.
Jack Mulligan, one of the younger of the sailors, a hot
Irishman, with a handsome but villainous countenance,
was dancing with a superb girl.
She was flirting tremendously, and had already got a
necklace and a pair of bracelets out of the fellow.
He was very excited with drink, and in the conclusion
of a dance behaved to her in a way that excited the
jealousy of a tall young Brazilian.
This individual, mad with fury, flew upon the Irishman
with a long and pointed stiletto.
Salmon Roe levelled a pistol, and, speaking in Spanish,
cried—
“ Caraio—stop ; justice shall be done! ”
Everybody stood still.
“ Jack, apologise to the lady and her friend,” said the
mate in English, with a withering glance, “or I’ll shoot
you through the head. If you think we shall ever get to
Rio like this you arc mistaken.”
Jack hesitated.
The mate put his finger on the trigger.
I can speak gibberish,” said Jack suddenly.
Then Salmon Roe turned to the young man, said his
companion meant no disrespect to the young lady and
her friend, but had had too much aguardiente. The lover was
satisfied.
A moment’s reflection, however, must have satisfied tho
Brazilian that to cope with twenty-three well-armou and
stalwart Englishmen would have been a slight mistake.
They accordingly cooled down, and the remainder of the
evening passed off well enough—the sailors being careful.
Avarice for once overcame the lust for drink and its con-
sequences.
They contrived to collect early on the morning, boug.it
up all the cheap coloured stuffs in the place, and gave
them to the children.
This, with a distribution of drinks and sweets satisfied
all. and the Brazilians and the pirates parted very good
friends.
They were careful to avoid further adventure by the
way, and when the hot part of the day came halted in a
wood, and there rested and took their siesta and meal.
They had provided themselves with food and drink,
wallets, and gourds.
They enjoyed themselves thoroughly, smoking their
pipes, sipping grog, and playing cards.
When the heat of the day was over they started again,
and soon alter dusk entered the great town of Rio de
Janeiro.
CHAPTER LXV.
JACK ASHORE.
The mercantile capital of Brazil is situated on a large,
wide-spreading bay, like an arm of the sea.
It covers a large amount of territory, and has a very
great number of inhabitants.
Its manners and customs are peculiar, and many of them
not by any means savoury.
But as our visit to Rio is only an episode in the history
of our hero, w T e have no time or place to go into parti-
culars.
The men were well received, but on intimating to the
acting British Consul that they had money of their own
were not interfered with.
They scattered themselves over several sailors’ board-
ing-houses, with arrangements as to meetings.
Mr. Henry Preston and Mr. Joe Perkins, second officer
and mate, went to an hotel of the kind frequented by per-
sons of their rank.
The men went to an inferior class of house, arranging
for communication.
Next morning after breakfast they went out to see about
passages for England.
In consequence of the gold fever, the shipping interest
was affected even at Rio.
Most ships had gone to Australia in search ot freight
and passengers.
It would not be easy to find a passage for three-and-
tvventy men.
“ What a nice-looking craft,” suddenly said Salmon
Roe, nudging Ned Kelly, as he pointed out a handsome
two hundred ton schooner yacht to their English guide
from the inn.
“ No bad judge,” replied tire guide with a smile ; “ that
belongs to Lord Barton, who has brought out a party ot
friends in search of sport. He . ais gone up the country
with his friends.”
“ Yes—a handsome vessel,” said Salmon Roe.
“Thecrew live on shore on board wages,” said the in-
terpreter; “it is cared for by the steward and ship-
keeper.”
The two men exchanged glances, and turned away as if
quite indifferent.
“That is the ticket,” whispered Salmon Roe.
“ Just so,” replied Ned Kelly.
And they went quietly back to their hotel to lunch and
think.
Both had made up their minds.
On further inquiry they found that Lord Barton would
not return for a month.
There was no hurry.
It was arranged that every man should have his fling for
a day or two before anything was carried out.
Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe agreed to do the respect-
able, and to keep within bounds.
To excite suspicion might have proved fatal then or at
a future time.
They lived quietly, played billiards, went to the
theatre, and then adjourned to the monte and other tables.
Some of the games were new to Ned Kelly, but with
that native and marvellous shrewdness native to most
Irishmen, he saw through them at once.
Of course he knew that luck will beat the best man.
but Ned Kelly was one of those never to be tempted into
“risky’’play.
He lost freely and won warily.
It is a perfect truth that one may ruin himself b}
caution, another by recklessness. .
In gambling there is such a thing as luck, which is
accident, but wariness is best.
Ned Kelly was always on the study.
He became quite a celebrity in the second-class
billiard and gambling rooms where a certain celebrated
gentleman now enjoying the hospitality c-S one of her
Majesty’s jails is said to have graduated.
But he never lost sight of business.
Salmon Roe studied the “ Nauecal Almanack.”
“The moon wont rise before to-morrow morn-
ing,” observed Salmon Roe ; “ that’ its the time. 1
“ All right,” said Ned Kelly.
It was not necessary to say any more.
Now, Salmon Roe had found out two things.


The first was that John Jones, of the yacht Light wing,
was very fond of his glass and very proud of his master
nd his yacht
Salmon Roe mud found Mr. John Jones’ favourite house,
and had met him several times.
Salmon Roe pretended to admire his master very much,
having heard of him everywhere.
*1 tell you what I’ll do,” said the supposed Joe Per-
kins ; “ show us over the yacht, and I’ll stand the biggest
supper as ten pounds will fetch.”
John Jones had agreed ; and when he did so, signed his
death-warrant.
Salmon Roe had given him money to find all necessaries
for a feast.
It was to be indeed a grand one.
In due time the two villains went on board, and, seating
themselves in the owner’s cabin, began the evening.
It was uproarious.
At length the steward and ship-keeper were helplessly
drunk.
The villains had heavily drugged their liquor, and now
proceeded to gag them.
Then they were pinioned, heavy weights tied to their
legs, and silently they were dropped overboard.
Then a signal was made, and like shadows in the night,
the rest came on board, all provided with seamen’s bags
and other requisites in which to conceal their treasure.
Then the yacht was quietly hauled out of the harbour,
no sails being hoisted until they were a good distance
off.
“ We must keep out of the regular track of vessels,”
said Ned to Salmon Roe, “as we dare not go into har-
bour.”
“ Just so,” answered the mate.
“ We must scuttle her off the coast,” continued Ned,
“ some dark night, and land on boats. Then each man
with his plunder will make for Liverpool.”
“ Yes,” continued Salmon Roe, smacking his lips with
anticipated glee.
“My friend,” said Kelly—they were alone—“ take my
word for it, and do as I shall do. I mean to give all save
you. Larkey, and Dick Dawson the slip.”
“ Why?” asked the mate.
“ Rely upon it, the moment they get to Liverpool they
will cut it flash,” replied Ned. “ They will show their
gold, dress up their wenches, and excite suspicion. The
moment the robbery of the yacht is known, the loss of the
Lenore will be connected with it.”
“ Right you are,” said the mate.
“ So ware hawks !” continued Ned, “a nod is as good
as a wink to a blind horse.” '
The mate agreed.
All sails were cracked on, and the hiding-place of the
treasure soon reached.
The yacht was amply provisioned with every luxury
that could be thought of.
Of course there was no difference between the cabin and
the forecastle.
Jack was as good as his master.
Still Ned was too wide awake not to keep up good dis-
cipline. There were plenty of smart seamen’s clothes on
board, and they were freely used.
A smart young seaman was dressed up as valet, the
mate as the sailing master, while Ned Kelly assumed a
garb suitable to the owner of the yacht.
Of course this was only in case of any unexpected acci-
dent hardly on the cards.
Ned had a good lookout kept aloft, and whenever a
vessel came in sight, the topmost sails were hauled down
and the course altered.
But it is a long that has no turning. They were
off England at last. ‘
But they waited before proceeding to action—waited
for a dark and tempestuous night, which soon came.
Then they m in under bare poles, put out the boats,
well-appointed as life-boats, and left the vessel scuttled.
Fortunately for them the night was so dark even the
coastguard was less vigilant than usual.
All landed, and then even the boats were destroyed in
the same way.
“Disperse,” had said Ned; “we shall meet in Liver-
pool."
And every man turned off in the direction of the great
seaport not very distant.
The four leading ruffians now determined to act with
extreme prudence and caution.
They would do nothing to excite suspicion, but pro-
ceed warily.
Salmon lloe was a native of the neighbourhood of
Liverpool.
lie told them they were sixteen miles distant, near to s
cross-country road.
There was a village about a mile inland, where there was
a small inn. There was no railway station for seven miles,
but a coach passed this inn twice a day for the statiou.
Their plan was to go to the inn, say they were passen-
gers for the coach, and give no account of themselves
whatever.
At all events they might say something vague—been
visiting friends, were due in Liverpool.
They would have to reach the inn about an hour before
daybreak.
Ned Kelly agreed to be guided in all things by his com-
panion who knew the country.
They started across the fields and soon gained the high-
way and the inn.
No questions were asked.
Customers were tolerably scarce in those ports, and
only too welcome to the Dun Cow.
Ned and Salmon Roe played the part of masters, Dick
Dawson and Larkcy of men.
Supper was ordered, and the two heads seated them-
selves in the parlour to enjoy it.
Fresh meat and vegetables were a rare treat to these
long-voyage mariners.
Then they lighted up their pipes and joined in the
general conversation.
Roth were careful to eschew any topic connected with
the sea and the colonies.
At last the coach came, and four places were found, two
outside and two in.
They thus reached the junction, and shortly after took
the train for Liverpool.
The men, who kept quite aloof, went to a small inn
while the other two established themselves at an hotel.
Ned Kelly determined to be very wary. He knew the
character of his comrades, and was perfectly well aware
how they would act.
He determined therefore to avoid those quarters fre-
quented by sailors.
When in their cups, the crew of the Lenore would bo
just as likely as not to speak of Australia and the bush,
ranger herd.
He and Salmon Roe, now assuming the names of Parker
and Grey, took the character of captain and mate, which
they could very well keep up.
Of course, they could not keep from drink and some
mild sort of dissipation, but they were very careful.
“ I don’t think,” said Ned Kelly the next day, “ I can
put up with the old country much.”
“ Why ?” asked Roe.
“ It’s too blessed slow for me,” replied Ned. u The
bush for me, my boy.”
The other laughed.
“ Still one might do a stroke of business even here,” he
said. “ The traps don’t seem up to much, except cold meat
and gab.”
Ned grinned.
He did not, indeed, think much of the police, who really
do seem, in too many instances, to be more for ornament
than use.
“ We’ll try the old park for a week or two,” continued


Ned, “ and then I shall hark away for the diggings once
more.”
After a late breakfast the two chums went out, seeking
the better part of the town.
They were not far from the custom-house when they
suddenly came upon two gentlemen.
“ Come out to Bellevue to-morrow, Lawson,” said one.
“Dinner at two sharp. I want to talk more about this
allair.”
“I will come,” rcSfloxacd the other. “Something
must be done to check this fearful state of things.”
Ned and Hoe both recognised the man.
It was the shipping-agent of the Lenore, with whom
one had engaged himself as an A. 8., the other as a pas-
senger.
Mr. Lawson gave a start-as he came face to face with
them.
He evidently recognised the men as having shipped at
his office in Adelaide —one as seaman, the other as pas-
senger—on board the Lenore.
He looked thunder-struck.
If the Leonore was lost, how did these men survive?
They passed on, however, without moving a muscle.
But Roe looked back presently.
The shipping agent was pointing at them.
“ He either knows us or suspects us,” remarked Salmon
Roc ; “ we’d better move on.”
“By Jingo, that's the Adelaide fellow, agent for the
Leonore. Hang him, what brings him here just at this
time, to spoil our little game?” said Ned.
“ He musn’t spoil it though,” replied Roe ; “ we’ll spoil
his game first. He spotted us certain. If he has time
he’ll put the police on our track, and then it's all up, and
scragging is pretty sure here.”
And he turned down a side street, round through
certain passages,and entered arougn but busy public-house.
They ordered refreshment.
“There’s a pretty game,” said Roe, speaking in a kind
of slang unintelligible except to their own lot; “ what’s
brought him over?”
“Our business, I fear,” replied Ned Kelly, with a self-
satisfied grunt, “ you heard what he said ?
“ Yes,” replied Roe.
“ Well, we’ll find out where Bellevue is,” growled Ned,
“ and we’ll silence a man who is so very clever.”
Salmon Roe grinned all over his face.
That evening they spent in a music-hall, to them a kind
of earthly paradise.
They contrived before going there to discover who
Lawson’s companion was.
He was Mr. Compton, a rich ship-owner, and Bellevue
House was situated near a rural and romantic village in
the suburban districts.
That was enough.
Kelly’s character was a peculiar one. He actually re-
velled in the thought of crime.
He would commit one, almost for the fun of the thing,
without hope of reward.
In this instance there was a motive.
Lawson, the agent, might at any time betray him.
If he could in any way connect them with the Lenore,
their identity would soon be betrayed.
Therefore —ergo—his life or theirs.
Salmon Roe was quite of his comrade’s opinion, and so
the matter was settled.
Next day at breakfast in a quu-t and co-y room, the
murder of the shipping agent was ai> \nged.
They took care to ask no questm»is at the hotel, uut
after breakfast went out.
Their first visit was to the house or t. man who dealt in
sabers’ rough dresses.
They indicated a desire to have a spree among the
roughs of the place, and borrowed a couple of suits of
Jack Tar togs. ,
They dressed in these and left their other clothes be-
hind them.
The Hebrew merchant let them out the back way.
which was his custom with his friends.
To trace them would not be very easy.
They took an omnibus to the extremity of the town,
and then walked.
It was quite a rural district even then, but now very
much built on.
They as a matter of course made for the first rural inn
they saw.
It overlooked the highway. .
Mr. Lawson probably had d'mc the same as themselves,
for ho soon appeared walking.
They allowed him to pass, and then followed slowly Ui
his track.
lie took no notice*
Presently they reached a spot where only the {oca:
church was visible. A few ancestral oaks stood hero and
there.
Salmon Roe had provided himself with a pistol, and
now hurried forward and placed himself behind a tree.
Mr. Lawson was walking slowly.
Ned Kelly contrived to head him.
“ Good morning, Mr. Lawson,” said the bushranger,
in a mocking tone.
The shipping agent stood back astounded.
“ You know me !” he gasped.
“Yes; and seems to me you know me,” was the sar«
castic reply.
“I’ll take care the police do,” was the angry and very
injudicious answer.
“ It is rather unfortunate to have a good memory,” said
the bushranger quietly ; “ one more word with you and i
have done.”
“Say the word, you fearful ruffian,” retaliated Lawson ;
“I have no time to waste on such as you.”
“Indeed!” replied the other; “1 think your time is
limited indeed, in this world; for when I tell you I am
Ned Kelly you know your fate.”
The agent made a dash at the audacious outlaw, who
with a mocking laugh disappeared.
Then the villainous countenance of Salmon Roe might
have been seen from behind a tree, taking aim.
With a wild despairing cry the shipping-agent fell to
the ground.
The assassins moved away as soon as they became con-
vinced that the man must die.
He, however, lived long enough to speak a few words
to those who found him
Next day the ruffians read the following in the Liver-
“Extraordinary Murder. —Mr. John Lawson, who
was sent to England to investigate the loss of the gold-
ship Lenore, was yesterday murdered at Elton, near
Liverpool.”
[Here followed details.]
“ Before dying he made the following extraordinary and
almost incredible statement: —
“‘The assassin I know not, but bo was one of the
men, I believe, who shipped as A.B. on the Lenore.’
“ ‘ The instigator, who shipped as a passenger under the
name of Harry Preston, declared himself just before cue
shot was fired to be Ned Kelly.
“ ‘The deceased was able to say no more, and so we are
in this position :
“We have the notorious and bloodthirsty oushrangcr
in our midst with no clue to his identity.
“ Mr. Compton, however, states, that did he see them
he could identify the two men who had been pointed out
to him by Lawson.”
“ This won’t do,” observed Kelly mi By
“ No, it won’t,” replied Salmon lb e. “ It’s my idea,
Lunnun’s the place for us.”
“ Just so,” continued Ned, “ and we'L start by the mid-
day express.”
Orders were given to that effect.
So cautious, quiet, and circumspec* had Deen their co»-


duct that no one suspected them, except perhaps the
Hebrew dealer in old clothes.
'• But it did not suit him to put the bloodhounds of the
law on the track of any of his customers.
It would have ruined him in the opinion of a very largo
class of the floating population of Liverpool.
The two men drove off to the station after a copious
breakfast, and secured seats.
They sent an enigmatic message to Dick Dawson and
ISTcci Larkins
They were not particularly anxious about them, but it
was necessary to be cautious with regard to those who
knew too much.
CHAPTER LXVX
LOKDON-TOWN.
Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe arrived in London in good
health and spirits. .
They had plenty of money, and meant to enjoy them-
selves in their own peculiar way—with caution.
Parker—as Kelly now called himself —was so well dis-
guised that it would have been almost impossible for any-
one to recognise him, however familiar with his appearance
under ordinary circumstances, and Salmon Roe had also
made a complete change in his attire.
Ned had now a good opportunity of beginning a new
life in England, if he had liked to take advantage of rt,
but he was such an unmitigated scoundrel that he enjoyed
and gloried in his bloody and immoral deeds.
Murder, robbery, and all kinds of wickedness were his
delight. He was evil to the very core.
There are some natures so evil and depraved that not
one redeeming quality can be found; conscience is
deadened by a long course of crime, and the power of
discriminating between right and wrong no longer exists.
Romance writers will doubtless describe hi ed Ke. ; y as a
brave, noble-minded, chivalrous man, driven to his ev.i
courses by the force of circumstances ; but we, who have
promised to make a plain statement of facts, according o
the best of our ability, cannot disguise the truth that 10
was one of the most unblushing villains in existence and a
disgrace to humanity. Despising danger, defying t.ie
written and unwritten laws of God and man, he has made
an unenviable name which will be remembered for many
ge Of r ?o\°irsVlbelly’s’gigantic stature and broad shoulders
attracted universal attention, as he swaggered along i bio
London streets with his congenial companion by his side
People constantly turned to stare after him in U
crowded streets, little thinking that they were gazing a. a
murderer whose hand was against every man. , !
Mr. Parker gave out that he and his friend had deter- ,
mined to make London their headquarters for a time at ,
bushranger made up his mind to continue his old
U*e, and he wanted to give the great city a turn. „
w My name will be as notorious here as it is in Australia.
(To he continued.')
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
the “ANONYMA” series of popular novels.
BOARDS. SS/-
Kate Hamilton. i Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
he had said to his friend Salmon Roe, or Grey, as ho now
called himself ; and, needless to say, he meant to keep his
At the present moment they were indulgingin the harm-
less amusement of looking for lodgings. .
“It must be in a respectable neighbourhood, sam ivelij -
with a grin. “Near church and rail. They shall nave
money down instead of references.”
The neighbourhood they had chosen for their temporary
abode was St. John’s Wood.
Grey would have preferred a less respectable iocaiuy,
but Parker had spoken and he must obey.
He was not quite so reckless and brave as the so-called
Mr Parker, and thought, not unnaturally, that they might
attract attention in that quiet and respectable locality.
“ Here we are,” said Parker, at last stopping before a
house with a small garden in front. “ Looks the kind o
crib that will suit us. A trifle dull, perhaps, but then you
know we can always go out in search of amusement.
Grey muttered something under his breath as he 101-
lowed Parker up the gravel path.
On knocking at the door it was opened by a trim
servant girl who looked at the two men with considerable
surprise. apartme nts to let,” said Parker. “ Can 1
see the mistress of the house ?” ....
The servant was about to comply with his request,
when a lady, evidently a widow, came forward with a
Bm “Yes, I have apartments, sir,” she said. “Do you
want them for yourself and friend ?”
She instinctively guessed that the men before her had
money ; at the same time she instinctively knew they were
not gentlemen. .
“ We should like to take them at once if they are suit-
able,” said Parker ; and the gracious landlady led the way
into the parlour.
Parker was not the kind of man to be long about
making up his mind. .
“ These will do,” he said, addressing the landlady ,
“ I’ll take them for a month.” .
“ What about references?” said the landlady, in a u:ut-
hesitating tone.
“References?” cried Parker. “Unfortunately, lam a
stranger to London, and can give no references. But
I’ll give you a month in advance, money down. Will
that suit you?” ... „ , ,
And he took out his purse, which was literally packed
with gold.
“ This is very unusual,” said the landlady, looking, how-
ever, with longing eyes at the money in the purse: “T am
always very particular.”
Agnes Willoughby. | Woman.
The Soiled Dove. „ : Ihe Beautiful Demon.
Skittles in Pans, a Biography of . „ . , _ . ......
a Fascinating* Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective*
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The Lady with the Camelias.
" 10 ?£ta: a ** °' L ° Te “ nd Pari. Lite at Twenty.




“'lake it or leave it,” replied Parker, rudely, “• I have
no time to waste. We are both tired, and have no desire
to stop where we are not wanted. There are plenty of
other people who will be glad to receive us. Come on,
Grey.”
Grey without a word, followed Parker out into the
passage.
They had got to the front door and had just opened it,
when tho landlady, having recovered from the surprise
Parker’s eccentric conduct had caused her, came after
them.
“ You are too hasty, sir,” she said, “ I shall be very
happy to take you as lodgers if you will pay a month in
advance.”
“I thought you would alter your mind,” said Parker,
with a loud coarse laugh, as he walked back to the par-
lour. “Now take your money and go, we want to be
alone.” and he threw some sovereigns on the table, which
the landlady was not slow to pick up.
Then with a curious glance at her new lodgers she
withdrew, leaving the two men alone, Parker comfortably
seated in a large arm chair.
“ Here we are in comfortable quarter's,” he said. “You
see what you can do with money. No enquiry as to cha-
racter as long as the tin is forthcoming.”
“I wish you hadn’t settled down in such a respectable
place,” said Grey, gloomily. “ I don’t like it. We can’t
do what we like here. It may suit you, but it doesn’t
suit me.”
“ I’ve an object in what I have done,” replied Mr.
Parker, with an unpleasant, sneering smile. “We can
live like gentlemen here without attracting the least sus-
picion. The landlady seems a very respectable woman,
and, of course, the neighbours will think that she had
references with us.”
“ Perhaps you know best,” said Grey, still keeping to
his own opinion, but not wishing to arouse Parker s
fiendish temper.
“Of course I do,” said Parker ; “ we will stop here until
London gets too hot for us. This is the richest capital in
the world, and I mean to share in its prosperity.”
“ Most men would be satisfied with what we have got,”
said Grey, “ and retire from business before it is too late.”
“ I never could settle down,” said Parker snappishly ;
“I must have excitement at any price. You ought to
know me by this time.”
“ It’s my belief that you will never be satisfied till you
are hanged,” muttered Grey to himself; but he said aloud,
“ You know I am always ready to do anything you ask, I’ll
stick to you through thick and thin.”
And the conversation ended, for the landlady entered
the room on some pretext or other.
She was a curious woman, and wanted to get into con-
versation with her lodgers.
But finding they were very uncommunicative and rude,
she retired in disgust, feeling that she had done wrong in
allowing them into her respectable house; but then she
was a poor widow and the money came in very handy in-
deed.
Mr. Parker was by no means mean in money matters
He threw gold about as if it were of no more value than
dirt. He had not worked for it honestly, and when it was
all gone could get more by adding crime upon crime.
That evening Mrs. Daniel was horrified to hear loud
sounds of laughter mingled with dreadful oaths, which
made her tremble in her shoes.
She dared notgo into the room to remonstrate with them,
for she was afraid, poor woman ; and so they smoked and
drank and continued to enjoy themselves in their own way,
unmolested by the mistress of the house. At all events
they paid.
Their mil ch was so unearthly and diabolical that the old
woman and her servant shuddered involuntarily.
The old lady was anxious about her furniture, too, for
it was being knocked about unmercifully by tbe two men
who were now red-hot with drink
More than once the two women thought that the mes
must be quarrelling and fighting, so harsh and savage were
their voices.
“ Who can these men be ? ” Mrs. Daniel asked herself.
It seemed to her almost as if hell had broken loose in
her quiet home.
Presently the bell rang violently, but the two women
were too frightened to move, and sat on their chairs as if
turned to stone; so Parker came out and put his head
over the banisters, and cried out in his loud stentorian
voice, which was rendered hoarse with drmk—
“ Mrs. Daniel, you are a quiet, lonely woman, we have
come here to wake you up a bit. Come up, we want to
see you. Don’t be afraid, I wouldn’t hurt a kitten. I
am the softest-hearted man that ever lived.”
“Ha, ha, ha!” laughed his companion, who was in a
more intoxicated condition than Parker. “ Come up,
Mrs. Daniel, and give us a tune ; there’s a piano in the
corner of the parlour.”
The house was a detached one, so there was no fear of
tee noise attracting the attention of the neighbours.
“A good idea,” cried Mr. Parker. “Come upstairs,
Mrs. Daniel, and we’ll make a night of it.”
But there was no response from the room below to this
mad request.
Mrs. Daniel commanded the servant girl to answer, but
she was, if possible, more frightened than her mistress, and
took no notice of her mistresses words.
“ I’ll come down and fetch you,” cried Mr. Parker, and
he rushed down the stairs four steps at a time, shaking the
house with his heavy tread.
The two women, uttering a cry Of terror, made a rush
for the back door.
But they were too late.
The two men-lodgers were upon them, and dragged
them back.
“Don’t run away,” cried Parker, with a fat chuckle
“ Don’t be afraid of good company.”
“Mr. Parker,” cried the landlady, “your conduct ia-
most disgraceful.”
The two men only gave a hoarse laugh in return, and
compelled them to follow them to the parlour.
Mrs. Daniel began to see that it was no use to resist
the two lodgers, and resolved to submit to them.
Drunk as Parker was, he had no intention of doing the
women any injury, but he wanted a bit of fun.
Had they been in the bush it would have been different,
for the servant girl was pretty and young.
Mr. Parker did not wish to be driven from London
until he had done something which should make his-
adopted name known throughout the great city.
The landlady was forced to sit down before the piano
and play a lively dance-tune, Grey holding a red-hot
poker over her head, threatening to do for her if she-
stopped playing.
Then the gallant Mr. Parker seized the servant girl
round the waist and danced about the room, his ferocious-
face red with excitement, and perspiration standing out
on his brow in big drops.
He was, as we know, far from an agreeable object, and
the girl shrank and shuddered in his close embrace.
Tho furniture had been piled up in one corner of the
parlour and many articles were broken, but Mrs. Daniel did
not venture to utter a word of remonstrance or complaint.
“ Play faster,” cried Parker, whirling the girl round the
room as if she had been a feather, and the exhausted
landlady fearing violence did her utmost to comply with
this request.
It seemed to the two women that lie would never stop
and the girl would have sunk exhausted on the floor if
Parker had not held her up with his strong arm.
But all things must come to an end at last, and Parker
released the girl and allowed her to sit down.
“ You both look hot and tired from your exertions,’
said Mr. Parker. “I’ll give you something which wil!
make you all right again.”


The two women, terror-stricken by the ferocious ap-
pearance of the two drunken men, offered no objection
when a huge tumbler of whisky and water was placed
before them.
It was nearly boiling and the two poor women drank it
down with tears in their eyes, much to the enjoyment of
the two men, who were only too happy to see the comical
misery of the others.
Then they were allowed to leave the room, Mr. Parker
having pressed half-a-dozen kisses on the unwilling lips of
the servant-girl, who would have slapped his face had she
dared to have done so.
The skin was taken off the roof of her mouth, and she
felt scorched all down with the fiery liquor, and her heart
beat painfully with the fatigue she had undergone.
Parker, fearing they might go and alarm the neigh-
bours, took the precaution to lock them in their room.
Then he returned to the parlour, and threw himself on
the floor, not taking the trouble to go up to his bedroom,
and in a few minutes the two men were fast asleep, and
their loud snores resounded through the house.
They had left the lamp burning on the table, and it
cast its subdued light on the disordered room, and on the
faces of the two men who lay in a drunken slumber on the
floor.
CHAPTER LXVII
SEEING LIFE.
In the morning Parker and Grey felt very much annoyed
with themselves for having been so imprudent on the pre-
vious night.
“It is all up with us now,” cried Grey; “they will
split on us directly they get out of the house.”
“No they won’t,” replied Parker, coolly ; “ I am going
to speak to them. If they do not swear to keep still
tongues in their heads, I will cut their throats. You must
have seen how frightened they were or they would have
thrown up the windows and called for help when I locked
them in their rooms.”
“ Won’t they swear anything, and then, directly our
backs are turned, go and split ?” said Grey, rather doubt-
fully.
“ What a fool you are,’’cried Parker, impatiently. “We
haven’t done any great harm to them. If you like, I’ll '
set fire to the house and burn them alive. That will put
them out of the way.”
“ No, they might escape,” said Grey, dolefully, “ I like
your first suggestion best.”
So the two women, who had not closed their eyes all
night, were released, and Parker, holding a knife to their
throats, made them swear to hold their tongues.
“ If you repeat a word as to what occurred last night,
I’ll cut your throats,” he said, looking at them with his
bloodshot eyes. “It isn’t the first time I have cut a
woman’s throat; remember what I say, if you are false to
your oath, I will kill you ; so don’t trifle with me.”
The women looked at him in speechless terror and were
only too eager to swear anything, and Mr. Parker put his
knife away, much to the relief of the two unfortunate
beings, who had thought their last hour had come.
“ I’ll pay for the things I smashed last night,” said
Parker, who felt himself master of the situation; “ I'll
give you your own price, I am not mean in money matters,
having plenty to spare.”
And so matters having been arranged to the two lodgers’
satisfaction, they sat down and ate a hearty breakfast, after
which they leftethe house, having procured latch keys so that
they could go in and out when they liked.
“ Do you think it will be safe to return to that house
again?” said Grey; “women are very treacherous crea-
tures, and they may betray us after all.”
“Let them—that’s all/' said Parker significantly. “I
know a thing or two ! ”
Grey was curious to know where Parker was going to,
but did not ask questions.
He would find out soon enough, he thought
Birds of a feather flock together, and Parker, who had
heard a good deal of London, instinctively made for a part
where he was sure to find men who were a,n»werablfl to the
law for many evil deeds.
But he knew that night was the time to see the worst
characters, for as a rule your true criminal avoids the light
of day.
He comes out in the night like an unwholesome reptile.
Parker was unlike most criminals, who are very often
cravens and cowards. He shouldered his way through the
crowded streets in the broad daylight, without the slio-htest
fear.
How they amused themselves in the course of the day is
of no importance; suffice it to say that when night came on
they found themselves in one of the lowest slums in Lon-
don, a place avoided by respectable people ; the streets
and courts were dimly lighted, and evil smells came from
the gutters.
The place is enough now—for improvements are
made very slowly ... London—but it is a thousand times
better lighted, and smells a thousand times sweeter than
it did a few years back.
There were gin-palaces with wide-open doors, and
women with sodden, expressionless faces drunk at the
bar, some of whom had babies in their arms.
Ribald songs were sung, and the language was simply
disgusting.
The drink in these bright gas-lit places was poison for
both body and mind.
And the landlords of these horrible places could laugh
and smile as they took the poor deluded wretches’ money
and dispersed their filthy thirst-producing liquor, and
could go to church on Sunday with a calm conscience
If the drink were pure and wholesome it would not
matter so much, but death and crimes are produced by
filthy adulterated compounds which are drunk by the
ignorant poor.
There is plenty of work for Christian men here, without
going abroad to convert woolly-headed, naked heathen.
The money that is spent in African missions might save
many poor English children from worse than death.
At last Mr. Parker arrived at the entrance of a court
and turned down under the narrow archway, still followed
by his friend.
This place had such an evil reputation that the police
gave it a wide berth, only venturing up it when obliged.
“ I suppose you wonder how I knew of this place when
I have never been here before ?” said Parker to his
friend.
“ I must confess it puzzled me slightly.” replied Grey in
his usual dry manner.
“ Well, the fact is, I was told of this crib when I was
in Australia,” said Parker, stopping before the door of a
very old and dilapidated house, which looked as if it
would topple down at any moment. It was shored up by
two stout beams which appeared very inefficient props to
keep up the building.
“ How will you get in? Do you know the signal?”
said Grey.
Parker nodded, and gave three peculiar taps on the
door, which after a minute had elasped, a wicket was
opened, and a very old man with dirty iron-grev hair put
out his head.
“ Who is there ? ” he asked.
“ A friend,” said Parker.
Then followed certain words in some strange slang only
known to the initiated.
The door was flung open at last, and the two men were
allowed to enter.
The old man, whose age must have been nearly ninety,
held a candle on high as he led the way up the long, wind-
ing passage. The walls were damp and clamcy and the
paper hung in ribbons. The ceiling war K*v, and, the
plaster having fallen on the mouldy floor, the bare rafters
were exposed.


The air was foul and fetid, and the candle burnt dimly,
casting but a faint light along the close, vault-like
passage.
They followed the man in silence, and soon came to a
steep flight of stairs, rotten and wormeaten.
The light was greatly needed now, for the banisters
had gone, and one false step would icean death or de-
formity.
The old man, in spite of his advanced age, displayed
great agility in ascending the rickety stairs, and the two
men cautiously followed in his footsteps until they arrived
on the landing.
Here the old man stopped to take breath, and gave vent
to a hollow cough which echoed through the house.
“You are strangers to the place,” he said, speaking to
Parker, suspiciously. “How came you to know the sign?
Are you one of us ? ”
“ How should I know the sign if 1 were not one of
you?” said Parker, impatiently showing the cloven foot
as usual.
“ One of our chaps might have split,” replied the old
man speaking almost as if he regretted having admitted
them, “I am afraid I have done wrong in admitting you
without the chief’s order.”
“You have done quite right,” said Parker, slapping
him on the back, “ Introduce me to the gang.”
“ You arc not a detective ?” said the old fellow. “ If yua
are, I warn you it will be certain death.”
“1 am not a detective,” said Parker. “I will undertake
to say that I have done as many jobs as any man living
in this country.”
He said this proudly, for he was, as we have remarked
before, proud of his crimes.
Somewhat reassured by Parker’s words, the old man
opened a double door, one of oak and the other of green
baize.
A flood of light shot out on the landing and almost
blinded the two visitors. A moment ago all had been as
still as death, but now the door was opened the noises
that saluted their ears are almost indescribable.
Before Parker and Grey had time to look about, they
were hurried into the crowded room.
“Who have we here?” cried a burly sandy-whiskered
man who was seated on a small barrel which was placed
on a larger one. “ How dare you bring strangers here,
Grassy, without consulting me ?”
“ They gave the right signal,” replied Grassy, looking
frightened. “ What was Itodo ?”
“ What was you to do?” cried Bob Lively, the captain
of the gang, “ you ought to have announced newcomers,
not gone for to bring in strangers on your own responsi-
bility.”
“ I didn’t mean any harm,” said the miserable old man,
looking frightened, while Parker stood in the centre of
the room, an amused spectator of the scene.
“ You didn’t mean any harm,” said Bob Lively, sar-
castically; “ you’re getting in your dotage, Grassy, and
the sooner the daisies grow over you the better. You
ought to have been in your wooden surtout long ago ;
you ain’t no use in this here world, and ought to be under
ground. Let the newcomers come forward and explain
theirselves.”
Parker stepped before the captain.
“What do you want me to explain?” he asked, with
insolent politeness “You speak as if you had a right to
bounce everyone here, and I for one won’t put up with it.”
“ I’m boss here, I’ll have you to know,” cried the man
who sat on top of the barrel, with an air of great import-
ance. “ And I’ll have you to know, also, that I am the
swell of this place, and will put up with no nonsense. If
you don’t own up who you are, I shall have you turned
out neck and crop ; so speak up quickly.”
“ i’ll show you who I am,” cried our hero, defiantly;
* l and what 1 think of you and your brag.”
And without another word he rushed at the man, and,
giving the barrel a shove, sent him sprawling on the loutr
table round which the men were gathered, spilling th>
drink they had before them.
Bob Lively rose pale and white with anger, and
bounded towards Kelly with the intention of doing great
things.
But that powerful miscreant was ready for him.
Drawing back his huge sledge-hammer fist he hit out
from the shoulder, and the next moment Bob Lively fell
upon the floor, with an ugly crack on the temple, stunned
and bleeding.
Then arose a hideous shout of from the nondescript
crowd.
“Down with the man who has floored the captain,
they cried, as they rose from their seats, and angrily sur-
rounded the audacious bushranger, who stood before them
perfectly calm and collected.
They looked at him in surprise, utterly amazed by his
dauntless bearing.
Not a muscle of his face moved, not an eyelid quivered.
“ Stand back.”
As Ned Kelly spoke he produced a six-shooter and
pointed it at the yelling mob.
They hesitated.
To attack him meant certain death and destruction to
some of their number. He had climbed on the table and
surveyed the crowd of upturned excited faces with a cool,
collected smile.
“ Ned Kelly’s your captain.” he cried. “The first man
who yelps ‘No ’ shall have the contents of my pistol. Let
him stand out and front me if he dares ”
The crowd of desperate men looked at him in fear and
admiration as he sat quietly toying with his “shooter.”
Then by general consent a loud shout came from every
throat, shaking the rafters of the old house.
“Three cheers for Ned Kelly the swell bushranger!”
they cried. “ Hip ! hip! hurrah!”
“ Drinks round,” yelled Kelly, who was now in hia
element.
The suggestion was received with acclamation, and he
was already as popular as he had been unpopular five
minutes ago.
The nobblers were soon brought in, and everyone drank
health and long life to the new captain, who held his glass
on high and drank to their better acquaintance.
“ Now bring in a pail of water,” said Ned, with a grim
smile, and his order was unquestioningly obeyed.
When it came he threw the contents over the prostrate
Lively, who still lay on the ground stunned and bleeding
“That will bring him to,” he said, coolly, as the beaten
bully picked himself up, and looked wildly around.
Lively saw at once that his reign was over, and re
solved to eat humble pie for the present.
When the opportunity came he intended to revenge
himself upon the man who had achieved his downfall.
The uproarious roar of laughter that rang through the
room did not abate his wrath, and he resolved to keep
his word at any cost.
Ned Kelly had made an enemy, and ho knew it; but
with his usual recklessness he despised the danger.
“You own that I am the best man?'’ he said, looking’
insolently into the face of the man he had punished so
severely.
“ Yes,” said Lively, sullenly, who was drenched to the
skin, and whose face still bore marks of the bushranger’s
sledge-hammer fists.
“Then down on your knees,” said Kelly.
None knew better than Kelly the value of the applause,
which greeted him. He was the monarch of the moment.
The crew of evil-doers are generally ruled by their
fears, although there are many exceptions, and Kelly re-
solved to make the most of his opportunity.
“You have struck me ; is not that enough ? ” cried Bob
Lively, who looked very dejected at that moment
“ Down on your marrow-bones and beg my pardon
roared Kelly, seeing his advantage, and determined to
abide by it*


Still the man hesitated, while the brutal crew looked on
with unalloyed satisfaction, delighted at the degradation
»f the man who had been their loader.
“Down, I say! ” cried Kelly, pointing his pistol at the
■nan’s head. “ Down or die ! ”
The man, seeing no alternative, complied.
The rough and brutal men laughed and jeered as they
beheld the discomfiture el tfee man who knelt at the feet
of Kelly, thoroughly cowed. He had lorded it over them
too long, and they were glad to witness his debasement.
However bad an Englishman may be, he likes to witness
a display of courage, and the gang rallied round Kelly to
ft man.
They felt annoyed and mortified, when they found out
what a craven Lively was, that they had submitted to his
rule so long.
Had he showed one spark of manhood they might have
pitied him ; but as it was, they regarded their late leader
with utter contempt. He had lost all claim to their
respect.
Kelly now had time to look about him.
The room was lighted by a large oil-lamp which hung
>om the ceiling, and cast a yellow gleam over the sur-
rounding objects.
There were cunning faces, stupid faces, repulsive faces ;
the pickpocket, with his narrow forehead; the profes-
sional burglar, with his thick-set figure and beetling
brow.
Every man in that room was ready to do anything but
earn an honest living.
The yellow light made the faces look even more repul-
sive than they”were ; and Kelly saw that he had fallen
among congenial companions.
So far as the others were concerned he had nothing to
fear; but he knew that Bob Lively was his bitter enemy,
and resolved to keep an eye on him.
Looking round the long room he was surprised to see
eue familiar face.
He recognised an ex-convict whom he had known in
Australia.
Unobserved by the others he beckoned to this man,
who, obedient to the sign, came forward and shook hands
heartily with the bushranger.
He was a thick-set, coarse-lipped man, and had a cast
in his eye. His teeth were jagged, and his forehead was
low and protruding, and he spoke through his nose with
a peculiar twang.
H e had lost two fingers on his right hand, and dragged
one leg after the other when he walked.
“Who would have expected to meet you here?” he
said. “To tell you the truth, I am heartily glad to see
you. I have a bit of business on which will bring grist to
the mill; will you assist me in a good lay ? You are a man
who, when once he puts his hand on a thing, will do it
without backing out.”
“I am on,” said Kelly. 44 1 am not under the necessity
of doing anything just now, for I am flush of coin, but to
oblige an old friend I will be in the job, whatever it is, and
there is Ned Kelly’s hand upon it.”
He seized the other man’s hand in his iron grip, and ho
nearly yelled with pain, but he controlled himself by a
violent effort, by clenching his teeth together.
“Do you know what I want you to undertake ? said the
ex-convict. - , . ,
“ Haven’t the slightest idea,” said Kelly. “ 1 promised
to help you, thinking you would not lower yourself by en-
gaging in any petty transaction.”
‘‘Neither would I,” replied the ex-convict, who was
known by the name of Joss. “Itis a burglary job lam
on lots at diamonds and gold, and all that sort of thing.
We shall get a mint of money if the job is well carried
“ It shall be well carried out,” said Kelly. “ W hen we
get away from here we will talk over the subject quietly.
There are too many present to share profits.” _ '
“Too many cocks spoil the broth,” replied Joss, with a
hideous leer, as he put his tongue in his hollow tooth and
made a disagreeable noise.
“ You have expressed yourself very clearly,” said Kelly,
with a grin.
And then suddenly looking round the room, he gave
vent to a loud oath.
Captain Bob Lively, taking advantage of the general
uproar, had slunk away.
“Your late master has gone,” he said He means to
betray us. Rush to the door and stop him before it is too
late.”
All the men obeyed, but in a few minutes returned
with blank looks on their faces.
He was nowhere to be found.
“ We shall have the police on us before we know where
we are,” cried Kelly. “ What does Bob Lively deserve if
we ever catch him again ?”
“ Death ! ” they all cried.
“ You are right,” said Kelly, and when we catch him wo
will carry out the sentence you have all agreed upon.”
“We will, we will! ” they all answered in wild excite-
ment. “ Death to the traitor and spy ! ”
“ Discretion is the better part of valour,” said Kelly.
“ Let us leave this shop before it is too late. He has
been gone longer than we think. I do not care to stop
here like a rat in a trap.”
They were all about to follow this sensible advice, for,
in the general excitement, they had not noticed how long
it was since their late captain had left the house, when
there came a long and prolonged knocking at the front
door.
“ The police are upon us,” said Kelly, looking at the
excited crowd.
Some were pale with fear, others seemed almost indif-
ferent, while a few boasted loudly that they feared not
the police.
“ Is there no way of escape?” asked Kelly.
“Yes,” whispered Joss, “I know a way. Leave the
others to their fate. We must look after ourselves.
Follow me. In this case every man must take care of
himself.”
All was confusion now.
CHAPTER LXVIII.
THE BURGLARY.
Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe followed Joss without a
word. The others might fight it out as long as they
escaped.
Joss led them into a room adjoining the apartment
in which they had spent the evening, and, throwing open
the window, jumped out upon the leads, still followed by
Kelly and Grey.
“I was determined that if danger ever threatened I
should not have my retreat cut off,” cried Joss, pointing
to a plank which was put across from the leads to an
opposite window.
“ A very wise precaution,” observed Kelly.
Greatly complimented by these words, Joss began to
cross the frail plank, which shook violently with the weight
of the three men.
Joss tapped at the window, and, receiving no answer,
dashed his fist through the pane of glass, and, putting
aside the catch, opened it himself.
They now found themselves in a room which was in
complete darkness.
At this moment they beard loud shouts, am- saw a
number of men swarming on the leadn.
They were all shrieking with terror, ana the three men
saw to their surprise that the opposite house was
flames, and that the poor wretches were trying to
With a loud derisive shout Kelly seized the plank and
prevented the miserable crew from escaping. Rather than
jeopardise his own safety he would leave them to perish
in the flames.


I* was a grand but awful sight. The house was old and
imrnt like tinder, and the flames seemed to lick the sky.
Some of the men desperately flung themselves from the
roof, alighting with a dull, sickening thud cn the flags
below.
Kelly and his two friends waited to see no more.
They had no time to lose if they wished to get away in
safety; there was no pity in their hearts for the poor
crime-stained wretches who had met with such a terrible
and unexpected fate.
Groping his way to the door, Joss found it locked; but
Kelly, flinging his broad shoulders against it, exerted all
his strength and hurled it open, and they all rushed head-
long down the stairs.
They then entered another room, and found half-a-
dozen painted and bedecked females, who manifested not
the least surprise at their intrusion.
Joss explained in a few words what had happened, and
Kelly threw them a sovereign or two, which were accepted
with the greatest show of gratitude.
They then left the house, and found themselves on the
banks of a canal, and coming to a bridge they crossed it,
and Joss, knowing the neighbourhood well, led them
down divers streets and turnings.
Kelly and Salmon Roe, feeling every confidence in Joss,
asked no questions, but trusted implicitly to him.
After a time they slackened speed, and, looking back,
saw that the sky was red with the reflection of the fire
they had just left.
“We are safe now,” said Joss, with a sigh of relief. “ I
am sorry for the poor devils, but we must look arter our-
selves.”
“We had a narrow let off,” said Kelly. “Had it not
been for your having that board placed across from the
leads to the window we should have perished in the
flames.”
“It struck me that it might come in handy,” said Joss,
with a smile. “We never know what may happen, you
know, and it is better that you should be prepared. I took
that advice from a clergyman, ‘ be prepared, and have no
fear,’ he said, and he was quite right. I have never had
reason to repent of the advice he gave me. He was the
prison chaplain, and a nice young man he was; you had
only to pretend to be converted, and you got off werry
easy indeed. Be converted first, and then pretend to be
ill. Win the chaplain’s good opinions, and then have the
doctor to see you. Give two or three heavy groans and
say you have a pain in your left side, and you’ll find your-
self all right. Prison hadn’t half so bad as some people
think, if you only do the artful. Cry and whine, and you
have no reason to complain. I believe I should have died
long ago if I hadn’t a-been locked up. My liver was that
swollen and my heart that bad that I didn’t give myself
three months to live, but when I was in prison my grog
was stopped, and 1 was compelled to live a very regular
life, which was very unpleasant, but very conducive to
long life and good health.”
“ You don’t seem in a hurry to get back to quod,” said
Salmon Roe.
“Not exactly; I like my liberty,” said Joss. “Them
officials with their brass buttons and tight coats are so con-
ceited and overbearing, and the oakum-picking is such an
uninteresting pursuit, and besides, no man likes to be
under lock and key. It isn’t natural a bird should like
being shut up in a cage, even if it is made of gold. A
lark will beat himself agin the bars and nearly always dies,
and the wild animals In the Zoo look restless and dis-
satisfied as they walk up and down a-grumbling and
a-growling.
Ned Kelly did not take much interest in the long-
winded speech of Joss; but, not observing the disap-
proval with which his words were received, he con-
tinued—
“ The job is to come off very soon. All my plans are
made; it is at the West-end. I ain’t got to rob a duke
or a lord only a plain mister who is worth about two
millions of money, who has got a large place with T dosa’t
know how many rooms.”
“ Can we do it to-night?” asked Kelly.
“ There is nothing to hinder us.”
“ Then it shall be done.”
“It shall! ” cried Joss excitedly. *• I have get a kind ot
partner who takes all the goods I bring him and keeps
them snug enough. He is considered to be a respectable
chemist, but that is only a blind. He has a back entrance to
his house, and a lot of very convenient outbuildings. We
can take his pony chaise and drive to our place in quick
time. lam ir with the butler, and we shall have no diffi-
culty in entering the house.”
Kelly was agreeable. The idea of the adventure pleased
him greatly.
Salmon Roe had a presentiment that they had been
through enough of late, and would have liked to retire to
rest, but he never said a word. He was not quite so strong
as his leader, but was afraid to aver that he was thoroughly
dead beat and tired out.
They walked along at a rapid rate, and soon came upon
a more salubrious neighbourhood, with rows of shops on
one side and private houses on the other.
Joss pointed to a green lamp, and signified that they had
arrived at their destination.
“ I’m glad of it,” said Salmon Roe. “ I never did like
walking. I’d sooner ride than trot on my legs any day.”
They stopped before the door, the green light from the
lamp casting a ghastly tinge upon their upturned faces.
Joss rang the night-bell, and then holloed through the
tube.
The door was opened in a very short time by a tall thin
man with red hair, whose face was white and death-like.
He appeared rather startled on seeing three men. He
had evidently only expected one.
Joss observing that he looked uneasy hastened to ex-
plain that they were friends of his who had offered to assist
him in his little undertaking.
Somewhat reassured by Joss’s statement he allowed
them to enter the house, and, leading them through the
passage, took them to a stable in a back-yard, where they
found a horse ready harnessed to a light trap.
“ You see I am all ready for you,” said the chemist with
a sickly smile.
“Yes, I see that,” said Joss, somewhat impatiently.
“Are the tools in the cart?”
“ Yes.”
“ You think that butler is to be trusted?”
“I am sure of that,” replied the chemist. “ You have
nothing to fear. If we get a good haul this time I shall
retire from the business. It is too dangerous to please
me. Every time anyone enters my shop I look up and
expect to see a policeman.”
“Your nerves is in a bad state,” replied Joss, as he
climbed into the cart and seized the reins. “You have
plenty of doctor’s stuff about. Why don’t you strengthen
your nerves by taking a gorge of quinine every now and
then ?”
And, having delivered this elaborate pleasantry, he
drove off with his two friends, all ducking down their
heads to avoid the top beam of the stable door.
The yard gate was opened and they left the place noise-
lessly enough.
Before they had proceeded a hundred yards the rain
began to pour down in torrents, soaking the men to the
skin.
But they were inured to hardship, and to ok no notice
of the heavy rain which beat down upon them, making it
difficult to drive safely.
It was just the night a burglar would have chosen—
dark and threatening, the lamps hardly having power to
light up the streets even for a few yards round th® lamp-
posts.
Very few people were about at that hour, and the cart
continued on its way, passing every now and then a police-
man who had found shelter under some doorway.


But the police did not look upon the three men in the
cart with suspicion, or, if they did so, were unwilling to
leave the friendly shelter and venture out into the driving
rain.
And therefore the three strange companions drove
along unmolested until they reached their destination.
Salmon Roe was left with the vehicle, which had been
driven on some rough building ground, and was sheltered
a little from the inclemency of the weather by a newly-
erected house and a high wall.
“ Follow me,” said Joss, laconically, and Kelly obeyed
unquestioningly, never doubting the honesty of his
friend, so far as he was concerned.
They cautiously made their way along a narrow lane,
which was so dark that they had to advance with great
care.
Joss had not exaggerated in describing the house he
was about to rob as a mansion.
Not a light was to be seen in any of the numerous win-
dows, and, after looking up and down the lane, Joss
knocked at a side door.
They had not long to wait, for the door was opened
almost immediately, and they found themselves standing
in the grounds of the house.
* You are laie,” said the butler, who appeared to be in
a great state of trepidation as he led them towards the
house. “I have been waiting here so long that 1 had
given you up.”
“ Better late than never,” muttered Joss. “Is every-
thing quiet ?”
“ As the grave,” said the butler, with a shiver.
He was evidently a weak-minded man, and half repented
of his compact with the burglar.
They were now inside the house, and Kelly locked about
him curiously.
“What next?” he whispered, as they paused on the
landing.
“ We shall have to beard the lion in his den,” observed
Jose, with a grin. “The master of the house sleeps with
the keys under his pillow.”
“I’m game,” said Kelly, coolly; and kicking off his
boots he quietly opened the door of the richly-furnished
apartment, in which an old man lay calmly sleeping, with
lamp burning on the table near the bed.
Kelly advanced with extreme caution, and thrust his
hand under the pillow, his fingers closing on the keys.
At this moment the sleeping man stirred uneasily, and
ia another moment he sat up in bed, staring at Kelly,
with a wild look on his face.
“ Curse you,” hissed Kelly, and he struck the old man
a heavy blow with the butt end of his pistol.
It descended with a terrible crashing noise, and all was
silent in that chamber from that moment.
The wretched butler, who stood outside the door,
shivered in his shoes.
- The old man, though rather harsh in his way of speaking,
was a very good master.
The bushranger felt not one atom of compunction. It
Vas matter of indifference to him whether the man died
#r not.
All he cared about was the plunder, and this the treacher-
ous servant a«'*'n indicated to them.
It was indeed a haul.
The old man—we may as well say that he did not die—
was a great amateur in diamonds and precious stones
generally.
He had a most splendid collection.
Next day all England rang with the news.
'The mansion of the well-known millionaire, the great
traveller and explorer, had been broken into, and his
splendid collection stolen.
He himself had received a fearful blow from the butt
end of a pistol, but it luckily had not any serious result
The police had been called in, and were making enquiries
in all directions.
Of course. '«ith the usual result
Long before bills were printed, the missing articles were
on the Continent.
There was also an account of a fire in a thieves’ den ia
Whitechapel.
“ Several persons perished, but the only noticeable part
in connection with the wretched affair was that one of the
survivors has set afloat the absurd canard that Ned Kelly,
the Australian bushranger, was present.
“It says a good deal for the reputation of this umniti*
gated ruffian that even the assumption of his name should
have led to such scenes as those described by our re-
porter.”
The reading of the paragraph gave considerable satis-
faction to Kelly, who felt himself tolerably safe.
CHAPTER LXIX.
HED MEETS HIS MATCH.
Next morning at breakfast-time Ned, elated with the
grand success of his burglarious experiment, treated him-
self to an extra grilled kidney, with a bottle of champagne.
The landlady, Mrs. Daniel, had found out that though
her lodgers were rather rough individuals they paid well,
and to her that was the one great consideration.
She therefore determined to put up with their eccen-
tricities so long as their money was forthcoming.
But Kelly was too well acquainted with the female
character to risk anything.
He knew that if the scene of the other evening were
too often repeated it would be talked about.
He therefore agreed with his companion that they shoulo
at home lead as quiet a life as possible.
Joss came about twelve o’clock to see them. He haf
disposed of all the plunder, and brought the results.
He was dressed as quietly as was consistent with his
nature. He, however, was too cunning and cautious to do
anything to attract attention.
“ What would you like to do to-night?” he said.
he had settled down to a smoke and a drink.
“ Don’t know,” answered Kelly. “ What’s slap ?*
“ Care about theatres ?” asked Joss.
“Not much.”
“Try Cremorne,” suggested Joss.
Joss gave a fervid and rather eloquent description of
the place, and it was agreed that they should go after a
late and sumptuous dinner.
They then hired a vehicle and drove far away into tl?a
country.
To men of Ned Kelly’s calibre quiet is almost impos-
Bible. They must be doing.
After the drive came the dinner. It was the best that
to their ideas could be got for money.
After this the three started for the well-known gar-
dens, then about in the height of their popularity.
We presume that few of our readers require to be told
what Cremorne was like.
A nobleman’s park and mansion had been turned into
an hotel and gardens.
There was a large ball-room, open-air dancing places,
refreshment bars.
The company was usually more numerous than select,
though many persons were in the habit of going solely for
the fun of the thing.
To Ned Kelly it was simply paradise.
Though his coarse nature was not susceptible of enjoy-
ing high-class music, he was sensual enough *o appreciate
the sort that was played at the gardens.
Joss led them to the high-class refreshment bar, and
there induced Kelly to spend money.
This Kelly was quite ready to do. There was nothing
the man liked so much as to be admired and talked
about.
They then adjourned to the ball-room.
Here a difficulty arose. Except a rough kind of Jig—
such as is often danced in the diggings—Ned Kelly knew
ijlthing about dancing.


Still he was one of that kind of men who never, under
any circumstances, own themselves beaten.
“ You dance, Parker? " said Joss.
“Yes,” said the lied Bushranger, with the utmost
coolness.
“ Then ullow me to introduce you to my friend Mrs.
Cora Grant,” resumed Joss, “ one of the most charming
widows in London.”
Probably she was a widow, very likely she was not. It
matters not to us.
She was very beautiful, of that subtle order of beauty
which enslaves men so easily.
Dark, with violet-blue eyes—a dangerous colour be it
known—petite, with a charming figure; she was also
beautifully and elaborately dressed.
There was a look of innocence in her smile that was
something terrible to see.
Such women it is who ruin families.
She accepted the invitation of Mr. Parker to join their
-party, with the greatest of pleasure.
“I am very much of a rough traveller,” said Ned Kelly,
as he walked round the large ball-room, “ and not much
up to dancing. I do not known even what that tune means.”
“ That is a waltz,” replied the fascinating widow, with
a seductive smile, “ it is not very difficult.”
Ned Kelly at that particular moment would have gone
up in a balloon at the request of his angel.
But Cora Grant was an experienced lady. She knew
the more vigorous sex well.
Herself a very clever dancer, it was not difficult for her
to pull her partner through.
But she was also quite aware that to be seen dancing
with such a man more than once would excite ridicule.
So she took him round the gardens, showed him all
that was worth seeing, and made the time pass lightly and
pleasantly.
Of course, during the evening, questions arose as to
supper, which appears to be the end of all these festivals.
In those days, as a matter of fact, suppers were the aim
and object of the owners of the place.
But it was not the aim and object of Cora Grant to sup
there.
“ I have a pretty little cottage in South Hampstead,”
she said, “and should be pleased to see you and your
friends to supper. It is rather late to get it ready.”
“ We’ll order it as we go along,” replied Kelly, in his
rough way. “ I suppose money will do anything, even in
this stupid old country ?”
“ Yes,” shj^answered, with a great affectation of indig-
nation. “ What do you mean ? ”
“In my country the gentlemen always treat the ladies,”
answered Ned Kelly with a laugh.
And Mrs. Cora Grant condescended to accept the candid
and easy explanation.
Ned Kelly, like very many other clever men, was easily
led away by a Avoman.
About an hour before the closing of the garden' l , a party
of about nine started for South Hampstead, calling on
their way at a celebrated hotel and restaurant, where
ft most extravagant supper Avas ordered.
The little house at Hampstead was of the usual style,
glaring finery, but no real comfort, but quite good enough
for the Red Bushranger.
Only from hearsay had he knoAvn anything of such
places, he was used to the bush.
Noav, wary and cunning as Ned Kelly was, he had on
this occasion over-stepped the bounds of prudence.
""'He had drunk too much.
This may happen to any man, but let the evil-minded
»nd wicked beware most.
Then is the old proverb realised, and the nature of the
human being revealed in all its nakedness.
Ned Kelly, the dreaded bushranger, the man of many
crimes, the assassin, and the thief, succumbed.
The supper was something wonderful. The Australian
mad said no expense Avas to be spared.
The supper over, the whole party, now increased tn
over a dozen, began to play cards.
Here Kelly was as a rule at home.
Few men could beat him.
Whist was one of the games which required too muc*i
from him.
It demands highly superior faculties and memory,
coolness, judgment of character, rapid calculation, and the
strategy of combined movements.
Cora Grant placed them all at a table and herself sat
behind Ned Kelly.
He was doubly intoxicated with drink and passion.
She looked over his cards. They were playing one of
those games that depend perhaps more on luck than skill,
but where sometimes a card, properly selected, may in-
fluence the game.
Kelly sipping his wine from the hand of his charmer,
took her advice, and the money began to flow.
Ned Kelly did not care.
With the death of Rose the last manly relic of good
feeling had died out.
Had that strange but eccentric girl have lived, he might
like many another, have been saved by a woman.
Perhaps had the bushranger have noticed the way in
which Joss played, after looking at Cora Grant, he might
have been aware how he was being cheated.
But like Samson he was in the hand of a Delilah and*
and he succumbed.
At last Ned Kelly got rusty.
“ I have lost twenty quid,” he said, “ and a little
over; now come let us have a drink and a smoke.”
And all present took the hint.
Ned Kelly was free and easy enough, but he did net
like being cheated.
And he had a very strong conviction that he had gcJ
into a rather hot trap.
Green indeed is the man who thinks he can cope with
London rogues and vagabonds.
We need go no further into the details of that specimen
of London life.
Kelly felt the loss of his tAventy “quid,” as his funds
had been much reduced owing to his reckless extravagance.
He must soon replenish his purse somehow or other. So
thaC he succeeded in accomplishing this object, the means
were not matters of import; any method, “from pitch-
and-toss to manslaughter,” would suit him
CHAPTER LXX.
A LONDON HELL.
Joss knew the ins and outs of London, and Kelly wanted
to be shoAvn about. In the great city, which is really the
capital of the world, not nearly one half the crimes that
are daily committed are ever brought to light by the
police. ,
Witness the multitude of people who inspect every
corpse recovered from the Thames, to identify the bodies
“found drowned.”
We boast of our police and detective force, but they
seem to be utterly poAverless to stem the tide of crime.
Undiscovered murders are daily on the increase and
every man in the community must shudder when he re-
flects hoAV many miscreants are at large carrying their
awful secrets in their heart, and haunted by the remem-
brance of their wickedness and fearful passions.
It is to be regretted that so many men Avho deserve to-
suffer on the scaffold for their hideous crimes rdiould
escape and breathe the air of liberty.
The sun shines on good and bad alike, ..nd it is a won-
der that these awful miscreants can walk about in the
light of day, and talk and laugh, and eat and drink, as it
they Avere no worse than other men.
While so many fiends in human shape are still loof»“
upon the world we have no reason to pride ourselves ob
our police organisation.
Wo are heavily taxed, and the stolid policeman tread*-


the pavement with his thick clumped boots. He is gene-
rally a stupid individual, very often a mere boy, with no
more intelligence in his head than a Dutch doll. He
principally distinguishes himself by arresting drunken
people, and never on any occasion except when obliged
does he attack a desperate ruffian.
There are exceptions, but they all serve to prove the
rule.
Our detectives are a very intelligent body of men, but
recent events and disclosures present to us that they can
be, and arc often, bribed, and gold with them seems to
cover a multitude of sins.
“I propose to take you to a gambling shop,” said Joss
to Kelly ; “ they are supposed to he shut up in this here
moral city, but I can show you a place where lots of the
stuff changes hands in a night.”
“ Go ahead,” said Kelly, “ let’s have a go at ’em.”
And so it was agreed that they should venture into the
gambling house that night.
English people are very often too fond of holding up
our country as the place which is most purely governed
in the world. To hear them talk you would think that
English prisons were empty,- that men never kicked their
wives and starved their children, and that the workhouse
yas a very comfortable place indeed, where you dined off
roast beef every day and had a servant in livery to stand
behind your chair.
You call Paris immoral, but let us look at home. We
denounce the Russians as barbarians, but do not many
horrible atrocities occur at our own doors ? The Greek
brigand is called a monster for cutting off the ears of his
victim, but in a country where people throw vitriol and
set fire to houses and burn people in their beds, in order
to pocket the insurance money, it would be as well to
hold our tongues, remembering the old adage.
There is more vice, more misery, more charity, and
more wealth in the groat city, than in any other capital
in the world.
Kelly, with his usual keenness, saw that there was
something to be picked up, and resolved to prolong his
visit.
Joss and Salmon Roe took a cab to the West-end, and
discharged the cabman in a quiet street.
Then, after proceeding at a rapid pace, they stopped
before a house the windows of which were in complete
darkness.
“ Here we are,” said Joss, “ They have got padded
shutters, which deaden the sound and hide the light.”
“ I should think the police must know of the existence
of such a place,” said Kelly.
“Perhaps they do and perhaps they don’t,” replied
Joss, evasively. “Perhaps they find it worth their while
to hold their tongues. The police are very obliging
gentlemen if they find their interest to be identical with
yours.”
Kelly looked surprised.
He had always considered London to be a place where
such things as large gambling houses would not be allowed
for a moment, but he found out his mistake when he
entered the hall of the gambling house, a spacious and
well-lighted place, with a grand staircase, and handsome
marble pillars.
“The place is supposed to be a club,” whispered Joss,
1 but it is nothing of the kind ; anyone can come here if
they only have money.”
Kelly made no answer, but followed Joss into a largo
salon crowded with excited men.
The bushranger looked about him with idle curiosity.
It was a mixed company, but there were few in that
room who would not have started back in horror if they
had known the name of the man who was quietly standing
in their midst.
They were gambling, it is true ; but the low and vulgar
vices of the atrocious criminal Kelly would have made
them avoid him like a pestilence, lie knew this well
• nongh, and a grim smile passed across his harsh lace as
he strode up to one of the tables and offered to take pari
m a game which was about to commence.
1 he men who were playing baccarat made no
and he took his place at the table.
Kelly won at first, and soon had a good pile of gold
and notes before him, greatly to the satisfaction of hi«
companions who stood looking on.
But at last luck changed, and Kelly began to lose ai
fast as he had won.
The game required no skill whatever, and the bush-
ranger frowned as he saw his sovereigns swept away. He
felt half inclined to draw his pistol and make a clearance,
but he remembered where he was and prudently resisted
the impulse.
There was a lantern-jawed, unwholesome-looking man
at the table who seemed to be making a pile of money,
and this individual attracted Kelly's attention. The bush-
ranger gave him a keen glance and mentally set him down
as a flat who had had a sudden run of luck.
The game played gave him no mental occupation, and
he had, therefore, plenty of time to watch the man by his
side, and to observe how his winnings increased.
The stranger was the only man there who did not ap-
pear to be the least excited by what was going on. He
played calmly unconscious of the envious eyes fixed upon
his lean face. His features never brightened, nor did he
appear in any way moved by his wonderful good fortune.
He seemed to take everything as a matter of course, and
Kelly, fuming over his losses, could not help feeling
amused at his behaviour.
He made up his mind that the fellow was an idiot, as ho
saw the dull eyes carelessly resting on the glittering gold
before him.
“ He is as innocent as a baby,” thought the bushranger,
and then turning to the stranger, ho said aloud, “ You
seem to be in luck’s way.”
“ I calculate I have made my pile,” returned the Yan-
kee, fixing his light, thin lashed eyes upon Kelly’s face,
and softly rubbing his bony hands together as he spoke.
“ You don’t seem, however, very pleased over your
success,” said Kelly, feeling puzzled.
“ I came here to be amused,” replied the Yankee. “It
don’t matter to me a red cent, if I lose or win, I onlv
want to pass the time, and mean to give all 1 win to a
charity. I win money from the bad and give it to the
good.”
“ You don’t keep a penny for yourself?”
“Oh, dear, no,” leplied the American stranger. “I
don’t touch a farthing of tl;e money that I win; it is all
for the poor.”
Kelly looked at the man again, and a new light broke in
upon him.
The man was not such a fool as he looked. There was
more in him than met the eye.
He was doing the greenhorn for some purpose or other
—that was what Kelly believed.
The man’s luck now attracted universal attention, and
everybody gave him threatening glances.
But the man was blind to the rage that was manifested
on almost every face.
At last Kelly was compelled to give up the game. He
had no more money in his pockets, and left the place with
his friends.
“ Cleared out ?” said Salmon Roe.
“That there tallow-faced Yankee was a ’cute sort of
chap, 1 should venture to say,” remarked Joss. “ .Never
saw such a run of luck in my life.”
“ You are right,” said Kelly ; “ but before long he will
not have a farthing left. I’ll have all the money he has
won, if I have to pot him for it.”
“ You can’t do that in the Loudon streets,” said Joss.
“ You forget that you are not in the bush.”
“ I forget nothing,” replied Kelly. “I hams told you
my intention, and mean to keep my word.”
And he abruptly left his companions, ami returned io
the direction of the gambling-house


He concealed himself in a doorway and waited. He
was not kept long.
The successful gamester presently came out and walked
away.
He took a Keen look around, and then moved off rapidly
towards the city.
The night was quiet, and the hour one at which few
people were about.
Kelly glided after him until he entered a narrow street.
The hour was late, and the street as silent as a grave-yard.
Tutting on a false nose, which he always carried for the
purpose of disguise, he crept up stealthily to the Yankee,
and, plunging his knee suddenly into his victor’s back,
proceeded to garrot him, exercising great strength and great
brutality in carrying out his purpose. The wrench he
administered was so powerful, and the pain inflicted so
severe, that the man fainted, upon which Kelly robbed
him of every shilling, and left him apparently lifeless on
the pavement.
Kelly slipped away just in time to avoid being seen by
a policeman.
Ha walked some distance, and then calling a cab was
driven to the hotel.
Joss and Salmon Roe asked no questions, but when
they read of the robbery in the papers they were what
they called in a “ blue funk.”
Roth began to think their comrade rather a dangerous
Siiaracter to associate with.
“Ain’t pleased?” said Kelly, with a loud laugh, as he
watched their countenances.
“Dangerous,” replied Joss; “we’d better keep close
for a day or two.”
“ Let’s try Wapping,” suggested Kelly.
But Joss would go nowhere until they had shifted their
lodgings and changed their dress.
The robbery had excited much excitement in London
and a large reward was offered.
“Better get back to the diggins,” observed Salmon
Roe in a growling tone, “ yen’ll make it too hot for us
here.”
Kelly laughed, but he had no desire to affront his com-
rades, as they might prove dangerous.
They intimated to their landlady that in consequence of
important news they had to start at once for America, and
taking their belongings easily found quiet lodgings in the
City-road.
All agreed to be very careful and do nothing to attract
particular attention.
The mate, however, secretly determined to seek a ship,
as he was afraid of the wild ruffianism of Kelly getting
them into trouble.
But at all events he determined to stick to him while
he could.
CHAPTER LXXL
WAPPING.
That night the three friends started to the rough part of
London frequented by seamen of all classes.
The two men Joss and Roe begged Kelly to be careful
»ind to avoid exciting any undue attention, as there were
many persons who would be looking for the robber of
the Yankee gambler.
They went down to Thames-street in a cab and walked
the rest of the way.
Their destination was one of those free-and-easy dancing
houses where the returned sailor spends his hardly-earned
wages in drink and debauchery.
Cooped up in a ship for perhaps many months, limited
in his drink, and never seeing one of the other sex, it can
scarcely be wondered at that the Jack Tar should, once he
puts his foot on terra firma, launch out wildly.
The public-house they entered was a very low one.
Passing through the bar they entered a long low room,
where to the sound of a scraping fiddle dancing was
going on.
The trio were dressed in a half-and-half sea fancy
dress, so that they looked like merchant captains in tneir
best garb. ,
As all classes are in the habit of frequenting these cribs
their appearance excited neither surprise fior astonish-
ment. , , ,
ULICIIU J J
They went to a table in a corner and at once ordered
drink and tobacco.
The attendance was motley indeed. In addition to the
English sailors present there were French, Italians,
Lascars and others, while the feminine gender was repre-
sented by a very mixed collection of gaudily dressed
females, who had a free run of the premises in consider-
ation of their inducing “Jack ashore ” to squander his
wages in poisonous spirits and adulterated drinks of every
description, which were so manufactured as to create the
thirst they were purchased to slake.
Ned Kelly was in his glory.
He at once invited several to drink, and soon bis table
was crowded by guests as well as covered by bottles of
drink.
Kelly as a rule was boisterous in his mirth and made
very coarse jokes.
Both Joss and Roe were excessively nervous, as tneir
comrade’s loud talk attracted attention.
Besides, his allusions were so very colonial that any
keen-witted man must have noticed them.
Fortunately the great majority were too much occupied
with their own affairs to take much notice.
Suddenly, however, a man pushed through the crowd
and sat down.
He was a queer-looking fellow, with a burly form and
merry head and countenance.
“May I drink, boss?” he said, looking Ned Kelly fall
in the face.
“ Fire away,” replied the bushranger, recognising one of
his own gang, Stingo Bill.
The man did not require second telling, but poured him-
self out a full glass.
Ned Kelly was luckily sober, or he might have done
something rash in his temper.
As it was he was cool and collected, and, while the man
was drinking, exchanged a meaning glance with his
friends.
They knew at once that danger was In the wind.
Kelly now bustled about with the drink, and then sent
a few shillings to the musicians with orders to strike up
an extra lively tune.
Kelly then selected a partner. As he did so he made a
sign to Roe, who followed him.
“Keep your eye on that fellow,” he whispered to the
other ; “ he’s a sneak, and will betray us if he can.”
“ What will you do?” asked Roe.
“Be off as soon as I can,” was the answer ; “ he don’t
know you, so get him in tow as soon as you can, and I
will give him the slip.”
Roe nodded his head, and Kelly joined the dancing
mob.
Roe began talking to Stingo Bill, whom he at once at-
tacked about Australia.
This was a subject on which the man was at once ready
and willing to talk.
Still his eyes fixed on the bushranger.
“ Seem interested in that feller,” observed Salmon Roe,
in a sneering tone.
“ Yes,” said the other, “know’d him in the diggins ; his
mug is worth money.”
“ Who is he ? ” asked Roe.
“ That’s tellings,” was the man’s answer.
And Roe at once knew that he intended to betray his old
associate.
He looked around in search of Ned Kelly He was no-
where to be seen.
Stingo Bill himself seemed engaged in the same keen
examination, for suddenly missing the bushranger he darted
for the door.


But Ned was nowhere to be seen.
With a loud imprecation Stingo rushed into the street,
»nd finding a policeman told his story.
was not believed, and only considered the yarn of a
drunken sailor.
Meanwhile Neel Kelly had left the neighbourhood and
gone to some other place of the same kind lower down
Jie river.
He began to find that he had to pay the penalty of his
notoriety.
Even in London he was known, and his presence could
not be kept much longer concealed from the police.
Once it was believed in ho would not be safe a moment.
Toat evening over supper a long consultation was held,
and the trio came to a decided conclusion.
To leave England as soon as possible was the decision
come to.
“We won’t go direct to the Colony,” said Kelly, who
could be as cunning as he could be reckless, “ but ship as
A.B. on an Indiaman. We can then work back to the
diggens.”
His friends agreed with him, and next day they went
straight off to the docks and made enquiries about a ship.
They were decently dressed, and, though their coun-
tenances were not very favourable to their behests, they
seemed fit subjects, and all three were successful in ob-
taining places on board the Revolta East Indiaman, bound
for Bombay.
She would sail in a fortnight.
For the present she was in the hands of the stevedores,
and the actual seamen were not required.
Joss proposed a visit to the little house at South Hamp-
stead
Ned Kelly was quite willing, but he was determined
not to be taken in again by Mrs. Cora Grant.
Meanwhile, the police, putting one thing and another
together, began to believe that the notorious criminal was
in England,
The loss of the Lenore, the audacious carrying off of
the yacht, the murder of the agent, Mr. Lawson, were
things wliich seemed to concide rather strangely.
Besides, Kelly w r as missed from his old haunts in
Australia.
Still his presence in England was so stupendous a fact
that few cared to believe it.
The colonial authorities had communicated to the
British Government the fact of Kelly’s absence from
Austrulia, and their suspicions that the notorious outlaw
was in the Old Country, The English police duly received
this information.
Still, on the extreme quiet, the police set inquiries on
foot, and it was lucky for Kelly and his associates that
they had changed the venue and gone to live elsewhere.
But it could not last for ever.
The party at Mrs. Cora Grant’s was always more
numerous than select. Some of the most heavy swells in
London went to honour the cottage with their presence.
Men with more money than wit.
Ned Kelly, even at his best, was not an agreeable or
pleasant mam but he did all he could to conceal his short-
comings.
It is easy enough to play the part of the horny-handed
son of toil who has been fortunate enough to make his
mark and win money.
On this occasion Kelly was very careful at cards, and
though he did not win much, was ab3* to avoid losing.
“Do you know, Cora,” observed a rather fast specimen
of the press tribe, “ that it is going about that Ned Kelly
the Australian bushranger is actually in England?”
Not one of the trio moved a muscle.
“ Indeed,” replied Cora ; “ don’t you think the idea
very absurd and far-fetched? ”
VWell,” continued the pressman, “one never knows.
He escaped from prison under wonderful circumstances,
and has not been heard of in the colony ever since. Of
course it is rather improbable, but one never knows.”
The three men drank in every word, though all the
time appearing to be wholly engaged in card-playing.
Kelly made up his mind that he would get out of
England as soon as possible. He did not feel quite so
safe as in the bush.
But he was careful to show no interest in the matter,
though at supper he got into conversation with the literary
gentleman, who thought him a fine specimen of the lucky
gold-digging class.
It was late when the party adjourned, and the thre j
men went home.
“ We’d better look out,” observed Salmon Roe to Ned
Kelly ; “ the police are clearly on the lay.”
“ Yes, but before I’ve done with them,” retorted thj
bushranger, sneeringly, “I will teach them a thing or two.'
Joss and Roe exchanged glances,
They were terribly afraid of Kelly doing something
rash and foolish which would bring them into serious
trouble.
Next day, while seated at breakfast near an open win-
dow, Joss suddenly drew back.
“ There goes Limber, the detective,” he said; “he
seems to be very intent on business. He’s a dangerous
character, and, if he is on our track, will find us.”
“ What’s to be done ? ” asked Kelly, who had no desire
to have anything to do with a first-class English detective
if he could help it.
“ Get out of this,” replied Joss; “ I tell you what, we’d
better clear out and get in a poor quarter. This is likely
to be hot enough to roast us.”
“I leave it all to you, Joss,” said Kelly; “but mind
and be careful.”
“Well the quarters what some folks calls is poor but
honest,” continued Joss ; “ brickeys and bargees—and that
sort.”
“ Anything for a quiet life,” drily replied Ned Kelly •
“ your Mr. Limber is not the sort of man for me to make
acquaintance.”
As Joss was personally known in London, he was the
first to clear out of the apartments.
After all, the life of a criminal is but a hunted life—
hardly worth living.
As soon as the three had made an appointment they
went out, agreeing to meet in the evening.
Ned Kelly was very careful to avoid any places where
suspicion might be aroused.
In the evening he started off to the rendezvous which
Joss had made with him.
It was truly in a strange district where the poor rather
than criminal class lived.
In such a human bee-hive as that selected by Joss, it
was possible for them to hide.
It was quite a new life and a new experience of exist-
ence for Ned Kelly.
CHAPTER LXXII.
PRICE CF A WIFE.
The White Elephant was a large old-fashioned public-
house situated near the banks of a canal, and was fre-
quented by bargees, and a very rough lot they were.
It was close to the towing path, and next door to the
dirty-looking inn was a general shop which sold everything,
from a pair of braces to an ounce of shag, and it was at
this store the men laid in provisions for their journeys.
They were a sturdy lot were these bargees, ruddy-faced
athletic men, as strong as lions, and very fond of showing
off their strength.
The public-house was kept by a retired prize-fighter,
whose nose was broken, and whose face was battered in
such a hideous way that it was painful to look at him.
He was regarded as a wonderful man by his customers,
and they worshipped him as a great hero.
Bargees are as a rule not a very select class, although
there are among their number many decent fellow
enough.


They are not much given to con versa) ion, ami as a lule
only open their months to eat or drink or give vent to
some blood-curdling oat! 1 ..
lirant the boxer, the landlord of the White Elephant,
was a middle-sized man with a broad chest and a width of
shoulder which would have been ample for a man six feet
two high.
He served at the counter with his shirt-sleeves tucked
un to his shoulders and displayed a pair of arms which a
blacksmith would have been proud of.
Jt was his delight to tell of his fights and adventures
over again, ai d the buyers found great amusement in
listening to him.
lie had been a soldier, had served in the fore and aft
regiment, and of course had much to talk about. Ills
adventures were all the more remarkable, perhaps, because
half of them were not exactly true, lie invented them on
the spot, and, having a ready wit, always managed to get
up a ht-arcy laugh.
ilccr with a dash of gin in it was the favouri'e drink at
this establishment, and the men seemed to thrive on it, for
they were a robust set of fellows, and when they got drunk
they slept themselves sober again, the only ill effect being
a splitting headache.
So retimes they would be in a playful humour and kick
their wives and thrash their children; but, as a general
rule, they liked to fight among themselves.
The reason we have been at such pains to describe this
house and the landlord and the customers is, because
Kelly is about to appear there.
He had made a solemn promise to Joss, who was begin-
ning to get frightened that his recklessness would gat
them all into trouble, that he would be very careful in
future, but ho had made this promise so many times before
that Joss felt very doubtful about his really keeping it.
The three men entered the place dressed in a very rough
style, for had they been attired iu better clothes than
the other customers they would have instantly attracted
too much attention, and would have been regarded with
distrust.
As it was they did not attract much notice, for the men
who were at the bar were listening to one of the landlord's
everlasting yarns.
The place was r iusually crowded on that evening, and
loud shouts of laughter were heard on all sides.
As usual, the landlord’s story was well received.
Kelly, having called for drinks, seated himself on a
bench with his two companions, their drink standing
before them on a barrel.
Joss felt pretty comfortable now. He could breathe
more freely, for he thought it extremely unlikely that the
police would track them to this house.
“ It was the hardest fought round I ever bad,” said the
landlord. - “ I felt that Jim Rogers was getting the better
of me. I was that punished that I felt quite groggy, and
my little holder advised me to throw up the sponge, but
I did nothing of the kind. No man will ever get the
better of me, not while Hives, I thought, and I rushed in,
hitting out with all my might, for I felt kind of spiteiEi.
Yes, I bit out with all my force, catching Jim a vu
the face which broke his jaw. He tell to the gi- -
covered with blood, and * was declared 1 J, eH W
goes about now with his mouth on one side and . ■
fo ta.lhli.eUy «8 ycu can hardly m,totend and 1 c
actually bears malice agin me, when it ms done in a lair
eland-up fight.” . .
Kelly and his friends liked the game tor they joined in
the laugh with the others, and Kelly pulling out a sove-
reign offered to stand drink all rouud.
None were too proud to accept the offer, and Kelly
was as popular as a man could be.
It is extraordinary how a man is looked up to among a
certain class, if he only stands *reat freely m a public-
house.
The landlord was not left out, and related many more
talcs ; the one that gave the most amusement was of
a native who for treachery to the Engks- nad been*
blown to pieces at the cannon’s mouth.
Kelly's liberality increased as the drink went round,
and he ended by making everyone in the place tolerably
intoxicated, landlord and all.
Then the landlord got quarrelsome and wanted to fight,
as he always dii when he was iu liquor, but the bargees-
treated it all as a joke, for they did not like the risk o! au
encounter him.
“Ain’t one of you got pluck enough to come forward'
and have a rouud,” cried the landlord presently. “ are you
all a set of curs and cowards ?”
No one responded, but Kelly’s eyes flashed and h*
would have rushed upon the man had it not been for
Salmon Roe, who begged him to come away and be quiet.
Rrant caught sight of his enraged face, and coming for -
ward asked Kelly if he was a man, and had pluck enough*
to have a fight with him, just, you know, to see which i?
the best man.
Kelly made no reply, but with a growl like a wild beaat
seized the landlord round the waist and lifting him ou
high hurled him out of the open window with such torce
that he lay upon the flags almost stunned. True, the
window was not very high as it was on the ground floor.
When he entered his house again there was a subdued
look on his countenance, and he did not offer, to have
another friendly round with Kelly.
He had met his match for the first time iu his life, and
stared iu wonder at the man who bad GO easily beaten
him.
( To be continued.)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. Love and Adventure.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
” The Black Angel.’’ Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tala of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Hive for Ha’f-a-
A nerican War. Million.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Hiamond.
Dove’s Treason, or the Two Privateers Lord Scat erbrain, or the Rou«h
Tom Holt’s Log. —A Tale of the Deep Soa. Hiamo.id Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life ami Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Huin. v
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lor rimer.
Robert the Rover.
Tha Mutiny of tne “Thunder.”




“ You are the first man that ever served me in that
way,” he said, as he wiped his face. “ I didn’t seem to
have no chance with you at all.”
The bargees were delighted with Kelly’s feat of strength,
and crowed round to shake hands with and congratulate
At this moment a very poorly clad woman entered the
public-house looking about her timidly. She was a
healthy, handsome young person with a fine complexion
and a bright pair of eyes. Her figure was very well pro-
portioned.
Kelly eyed her with sudden admiration. She was just
the sort of woman he liked.
“ Hulloa, here’s Bill’s wife,” they all cried, “ she’s come
to fetch her old man,” and she was offered drink, which
she refused.
“Bill,” said the woman, pleadingly addressing one of
the men who was more intoxicated than any of the others,
“ do come home, I am sure you have had quite enough to
do you good. Don’t waste all your money.”
“Go away,” cried Bill. “I don’t want you to come
after me. Get back, or it will be the worse for you if you
do not obey me.”
But the woman still begged of him to leave the drunken
crew and come home.
“ Get home,” cried the man, clenching his fist. “ Get
home, or I will strike thee.”
The woman hesitated, but, glancing up in his face, she
saw that he meant to keep his word, and so she left him
with a deep sigh.
“ I wish I could get rid of her,” muttered the man to
Kelly. “I’d sell her for half a sovereign, and think it a
good riddance.”
“ Do you really mean that?” said Kelly, looking at the
man in a strange sort of way.
•* I do,” said the drunken bargee, with a stupid look.
“ Why should you doubt me, mate ?”
“ I will give you a sovereign for her,” said Kelly. who
could hardly believe that the man was in earnest, for the
idea of selling one’s wife seemed such a strange one to
him. He had never heard of the sale of such “cattle ”in
Australia ; perhaps because “wives” were not so plentiful
in the market as in England.
“ Hand over the money and she is yours,” said the
man, “ I tell you afore you give me the money that she
is a bad bargain,”
“ That’s my look-out,” replied Kelly; and so the money
changed hands.
Soon after this Kelly, Salmon Roc, Joss, and Bill, and
two bargees left the public-house.
Kelly left his companions on board a barge, promising
to be with them presently, and went with Bill to fetch his
recently-acquired property.
The man was very intoxicated, and staggered from side
to side, Kelly having great difficulty to help him along.
At last they reached a small cottage, and after flinging
open the door he staggered into the room, Kelly follow-
ing him.
The woman was seated in a corner, and rose and thanked
Kelly for taking the trouble to bring her husband home.
“ He has corned to fetch you,” said the drunken bargee,
with a vulgar leer; “ I have sold you for half-a-sovereign,
and you are his property —he is your new lord and
master.”
“ Don’t be stupid, Bill,” said the woman, smiling at
what she considered a mere joke.
“ A bargain’s a bargain,” replied Bill doggedly, “ and
you now belong to him.”
“ You see that your husband is tired of you,” said
Kelly, with an ugly smile ; “ I have more money than he,
and will make you very happy.”
And he put his arm round her waist, Bill having, in the
antime, fallen asleep.
Release me ! ” cried the woman, and exerting all her
tli she gave Kelly a push and ran away from him—
,isgustecl
Kelly recovered liimsell' in a moment and rushed after
her in a furious passion.
She entered another room and, slamming the do-or,
double-locked it against him.
Kelly put his broad shoulders against it, and burst the
door open to find the room empty.
She had climbed out of the window, which was not very
far from the ground. Kelly was after her in a moment,
and lifting her in his arms, carried her along, taking the
precaution to place his hand on her mouth.
She struggled and kicked but all in vain. She was a
strong and powerful woman, but Kelly only laughed when
she tried to escape.
The place was totally deserted, and Kelly had no fear
of being molested as he walked along the towing path.
He soon reached the barge where he had left Salmon
Roe and Joss. They were greatly surprised when they
saw him with the woman.
Everyone laughed when he related what had happened
to him—buying a wife.
Then more drink was consumed, and the woman looked
on in fear and trembling. She knew very well that her
husband was intoxicated and would regret what he had
done when he woke up sober, but that did not make her
position any the better.
It was night now, and Kelly walked up to the woman
and seized her by the wrist.
“What are you going to do with me?” asked tho
woman in her abject terror.
“You are my wife now, so come along, 1 ’ said the
brutal ruffian, dragging her along by the hair of the head
in his rage, for she had dared to resist him, which with
Kelly was unpardonable.
“Never!” cried the woman, and rage giving her
strength, she struck Kelly with her fist.
With a savage oath the ruffian lifted the woman in his
arms, and, mad with rage and disappointment, hurled her
over the side of the barge ; and the next moment she was
struggling in the water.
No one in the barge offered to give her any assistance.
Had they wished it they would not have beon able for
they were too intoxicated.
Kelly looked cn at the drowning woman with a cruel
smile as she glanced up at him imploringly. But Kelly
did not notice, and stood there with folded arms.
At this moment a dark figure came rushing along tho
towing-path.
It was Bill, who had woke up and remembered that ho
had sold his wife.
Regretting that he had done such a foolish thing, he was
now in search of her. half mad with fear that something
awful had happened.
Kelly recognised him at once, and uttered an exclama-
tion of surprise when he saw the man, without a moment's
hesitation, plunge in to the rescue of his wife.
He was always at home in the water, and was soon by
his wife’s side, and, being an expert swimmer, brought her
to the bank. Then shaking himself like a dog, ho menaced
Kelly with his fist, and Kelly only returned a shout of
defiance.
The man would have rushed upon Kelly, but his wife,
fearing for his safety, persuaded him to go away, and the
man took her advice, feeling very much ashamed of him-
self for the way he had acted, and vowing that he would
never again take too much drink as long as he lived.
After a good sleep Kelly and his friends left the barge.
The Red Bushranger had again found his match in tho
person of a bargee.
CHARTER LXXIII.
THE DEUUT DAT. THE “ WELCHER ” DODGE.
As a matter of course, after the events recorded in the
last chapter, Ned Kelly moved out of that neighbourhood.
He resolved to be more careful for the future, and no*
do anything to axciio marked notice or attention


It was the end of May, and England was at its brightest.
The great racing carnival of the year approached nearer
and nearer every hour.
It was not likely that Ned Kelly would miss seeing the
Derby, as he happened to be in England. He had heard
so much about it that he felt curious to see the,sport, and
had arranged to go down in a wagonette with Joss and
Sdmon Roe and afewmen he had picked up God knows how.
The wagonette was punctually waiting at the Spotted
Dog in the Strand, at the appointed time, and Kelly, who
had made up his mind to enjoy himself, was seated beside
the driver.
Everything being ready the wagonette started and soon
joined the crowd of vehicles all going in one direction.
Kelly gave a sinister smile as he reflected that he was
running a g'eat risk. He was riding through the streets
of London in the broad daylight after perpetrating so
many hideous crimes.
The man was perfectly reckless, and the thought of the
risk he was running gave him unalloyed satisfaction. It
added to the luxury of the hour.
He did not really know what fear meant, and, having no
conscience, felt as happy and light-hearted as any one of
the thousands who were going to the Derby.
Kelly had not forgotten his crimes, but they did not
interfere with his selfish enjoyment.
The day was a hot one, and the dust blew in heavy,
choking clouds.
The road to Epsom has been so often described by so
many able pens we have no desire to go over the beaten
track, and will simply say that they arrived safely at the
race-course.
They took up a position not far from the grand stand.
Ned Kelly was, as a matter of course, fond of the good
things of this life, and had taken care to bring down a
large hamper full of eatables and drinkables.
He had an Australian appetite, and could always do Jus-
tice to a good meal.
The party laughed and talked, and ate and drank, and
enjoyed themselves to the utmost.
The bushranger was an inveterate gambler, and although
he did not understand horse-racing, determined to have
something on the race.
He was guided by chance, and selected a horse hap-
hazard, not caring much whether he won or lost.
His friends thought him a fool for risking so much when
he knew so little of horse-racing, but they wisely held
their tongues, and did not express their opinion, except
by slily winking at each other.
There was one false start, and then the horses dashed
away, everyone craning their necks.
It was a very good race.
Ned felt his blood run furiously hot through his veins
jb he watched the horses, which came towards him like the
wind.
The jockey in the orange jacket was in front. He was
riding the favourite.
A crowd of horses all together came behind so close
that it was impossible to tell who was the second.
There was a confused Babel of shouts.
“ The favourite ! the favourite !” was roared by a thou-
sand voices. “The favourite has won !”
It was an awful and cruel moment for many of the
spectators. How many hearts beat with hope that must
be dashed to the ground ! How many men looked on
with haggard faces, panting for breath, their hearts beating
wildly and painfully—dishonour, ruin, and death stared
them in the face ! It was a moment of agony for many,
almost equal to the tortures of hell.
On came the favourite.
■The crowd of horses behind began to thin out, and
come along in a thin line.
D looked as if the favourite had it all her own way,
bot «t this supreme moment a rank outsider driven skil-
fully came up to the scratch, coming up with the foremost
horse hand over hand.
The excitement was intense.
The noise died away and the people /noted on as il
turned to stone.
“Scarlet wins,” cried Kelly, “the horse I backed har
won. - ’
And he was right. lie had won by a fluke. He had
won by luck and went and got the money.
He was returning to his friends in a very jubilant frame
of mind when he was surrounded by a crowd of men.
One of the “ dodges ” of the blacklegs and blackguards
who frequent race-courses is rather a remarkable one and
not generally known. These ruffians watch some unknown
repectable or disreputable party who wins from the book-!
makers who swarm in the ring. When the lucky individual
gets his money he is immediately spotted by the sharks
who surround him, and, shouting “A welcher! awelcher!”
proceed to hustle and otherwise attack the astonished
stranger, who immediately becomes an object of hatred
and contempt to the sympathising crowd, who join the
pack that seems ready to tear the unfortunate man limb
from limb. The noise and shouting effectually drown
the frightened wretch’s remonstrances, and in the end he
finds himself bruised, and stripped of his money and per-
haps his coat and hat into the bargain. His watch most
certainly is von est. Under the welching accusation which;
finds universal credence he becomes the typical dog on the)
race-course, and every hand is against him. Lucky if he'
escapes with sound limbs. Kelly was singled out by the'
fraternity, who had seen him win a pot of money, and 1
nearly came to grief.
“A welcher ! a welcher !” they cried, and stones were?
hurled at the astonished Kelly, and he was struck with sticks..
His first impulse was to draw a pistol and shootj
among the crowd, but he was not a fool, far from it. No,,
he would only fire when obliged ; he had no desire to be l
arrested at that moment, so he resolved to run for it, and
took to his heels followed by the mob.
“A welcher! a welcher!” they cried, following close on
his heels, and throwing all kinds of missiles after him.
Kelly was a good runner, and bounded along ao the
top ofTiis speed.
He rather enjoyed the chase than otherwise. On, on
he flew, never once looking behind him at the mob, which
yelled and howled, panting for his blood.
Ned soon came near a police-station, and a good-
tempered policeman standing at the door beckoned him.
Kelly was surprised, thinking that he must have guessed
his identity, but he did not hesitate and rushed up to the
policeman.
“ Get inside, you’ll be safe there,” said the policeman.
Kelly, without a word, obeyed, and the door being shut
was indeed perfectly safe. The crowd outside gave two
or three spiteful kicks, and soon went away.
“ You was chased on account of being a welcher? ” said
the policeman, but I dont blame you at all. If fools will
part with their money, serve them right.”
“I am nothing of the kind,” said Kelly. “ I came down
with a party of friends, and was attacked for nothing.”
“ You all say that,” said the fat policeman with a
chuckle ; and two or three other policemen present, see-
ing the joke, laughed too.
Soon after Kelly left the police-station, but not without
giving the fat policeman half-a-crown for himself.
When outside he burst into a loud laugh.
“If those men knew that there was ten thousand
pounds offered for my apprehension,” he muttered,,
“wouldn’t they be mad for letting me through their
fingers!”
He returned to his iriends, who could not understand,
where he had got to. and explained what had happened.
It was now time to think of returning home, and they
all climbed into the wagonette, noisy, rollicking, and
flushed with drink—a well-matched company, with all 1
their faults, follies, and crimes.
Indeed, it would have been difficult to fina j iaore<
ruffianly set of blackguards.


They were all innately coarse and low, and even people
with low notions of morality and probity must have
shuddered to see their brutal faces, seared with evil
passions and unrestrained indulgence in all the wild ex-
cesses which made up their daily life, and rendering
the shortcomings and delinquencies of ordinary trifles
light as air in comparison.
Kelly was in high spirits, ribald songs as they
rode through the gathering dusk, the air sweet with per-
fume, and the stars twinkling in the pale blue sky.
Surely such an evening might have suggested solemn
thoughts even in the minds of the most hardened
offenders ; but Kelly sang on untroubled by the still small
voice of conscience.
He was utterly depraved—a disgrace to the human
species.
His almost herculean proportions loomed up against
the clear sky, and his companions looked at him with
the admiration which brute courage and brute strength
almost invariably create in the vulgar mind.
Kelly was worthless, base; but in the eyes of his boon
companions he was a hero.
It was seldom indeed that he was in such a sociable
mood, and they were delighted to find him so complaisant.
His songs were applauded to the echo as he drove along,
not unmoved by the flattery—men of his culture seldom
are—and his stentorian voice once more rung out in some
rude ditty, more lively than select.
The driver, who had been well primed, lashed up his
horses, making them dash forward at their utmost speed,
but Kelly sung on, unheeding the warning even of many
a well-intentioned pedestrian who paused to look after the
swaying vehicle in surprise and dismay.
“ Hullo ! ” exclaimed the bushranger, “where the deuce
are you going ? Stop, I say ! ”
Afore easily said than done. The horses had their bits
between their teeth and were tearing along the hard road
at break-neck speed,
“ Good Lord ! ” ejaculated Joss, “ there is safe to be a
spill. Confound it, you fool! can’t you stop 'em ?”
The driver made no reply. All his attention was cen-
tred on his horses ; and perhaps in that moment of peril
even Kelly remembered his million vices.
It is hard to say. Who can judge such a man or under-
stand the secret workings of his heart?
On dashed the horses, now thoroughly beyond control,
and the driver tried in vain to pull them in.
“ Sit still, as you value your lives! ” he cried; and
Kelly and his companions obeyed.
The bushranger writhed on the tenter-hooks of his own
imagination, and felt the crash before it came.
He knew that this wild ride must end in a spill, and
•trembled for the safety of his own precious neck.
When they arrived at the foot of the hill there was a
•loud crash and one of the front wheels ooming off, every-
one was flung out.
They all had a severe shaking and a few bruises ; but
the only one who was really injured was Joss, who lay on
a pile of stones, stunned and bleeding.
The others had been pitched on to the grass which grew
■on the side of the road.
It was to be regretted that Kelly had not been killed.
The world would have been well rid of such a scoundrel.
But the ruffian seemed to bear a charmed life.
Is he dead ? ” asked Kelly coolly.
“Not quite,” replied Salmon Roe, who was bending
over him.
Kelly drew out a flask containing brandy and put it to
his lips ; but the man could not be resuscitated.
“Let’s take him to a doctor, poor devil,’’said Salmon Roe.
“Don’t let’s bother about him, but leave him here,”
said Kelly heartlessly; “we can’t trouble ourselves about
him.”
“No,” said Salmon Roe; “he’s our pal, and I don’t
mean to leave him here to die if I can help it. There is a
village at no great distance.”
“ You’re getting precious soft-hearted all at once,” said
Kelly, sneeringly. “ I don’t think it’s much use taking
him to a doctor. We had better take him to an under-
taker’s shop and get him a suit of timber, he looks as
if he’ll want one soon. He’ll be dead before an hour.”
And haring delivered himself of this brutal and
unfeeling jest Kelly subsided into sulky silence.
They bore the injured man along the lane, Kelly leading
tfcp way and holding the wagonette lamp in his hand.
The village was soon reached, and a crowd of people
came round them to see what was the matter. It was
explained to them in as few a words as possible, and
inquired of the villagers where the nearest doctor was to
be found.
“ That’s the doctor’s” said a man, pointing to a hand-
some house with a carriage-drive.
The doctor was at home and saw to the man at once.
He was not so bad as Kelly had thought, and under the
skilful treatment of the doctor soon came to his senses
and stared wildly round the room.
“Where am I?” he said, and then glancing at the
doctor he gave him a look of recognition.
The doctor looked at him with a puzzled expression on
his face ; he evidently remembered seeing Joss before. In
fact he had reason to remember, for that gentleman had
committed a burglary in his house, and had struck him
down and left him for dead.
“ Villain!” cried the doctor. “You are the man who
tried to murder me. I will send for the police and give
you into custody.”
And he went towards the bell with the intention of
ringing it.
But Kelly laid a detaining hand upon his arm.
“ You must be mistaken, my dear sir,” he said. “ That
man whom you accuse of such an awful crime is a pal of
mine, and I’ll swear would be incapable of hurting a
child.”
“ If he is a friend of yours, I am sorry to see you in
such company,” said the doctor drily.
“ It is a case of mistaken identity.”
“ If it is a case of mistaken identity, it can be easily
proved,” said the doctor, and he would have rung the bell.
But Kelly hit him behind the ear with all his might, and
the doctor fell without a groan.
“ Come away,” said Kelly, “ while there is yet time.”
Joss still felt weak, exhausted, and ill, but he managed
to follow Kelly and Salmon Hoe out of the room, and
noiselessly opening the front door, they walked softly
down the carriage drive.
“ A narrow escape,” he remarked, when they arrived at
the nearest railway station. “ A very narrow squeak,
indeed.”
They took the first train back to London, and arrived
there without further adventures by the way.
CHAPTER LXXYV.
COUNT ANATOLE RICHE.
We need hardly say that when men live in the reckless
and spendthrift way that was adopted by Ned Kelly and
his associates, that money maketh to itself wings.
They began to find it necessary to pull in their horns.
They were not exactly impoverished, but had to look to
their purses.
One evening Ned Kelly paid a visit to a well-known
restaurant and billiard-room in the neighbournood of
Leicester-square.
His friends had gone off on the spree to an East-end
theatre.
Ned Kelly played with tolerable luck, but the betting
was slow and he lost interest.
Severn! times lie had heard a sepulchral voice give him
a hint during the game.
It was like a shadow whisper.
“ No, zat is not ze game—just a little higher—and you
pocket—ze ball—fools’ game—give me ze cannons.”


Ned never moved a muscle, lie knew the man who-
ever he might be, was right.
His advice was admirable.
" No, mon ami, not ze pocket zis have—ze cannon first,
and you vins.”
And Ned Kelly iid win.
After the game was over he turned and looked at his
mysterious adviser.
Short, podgy, with a thin cadaverous face, hollow
cheeks, one might read in his countenance recklessness
and crime.
He bore the unmistakeable signs of having been a
gentleman.
It is said that even sin and shame cannot extinguish the
last relic of birth.
Just as no amount of money or tasty culture can turn
the low-born into the mere semblance of high birth.
Of course it comes in course of time, but it requires a
generation or two to effect the change.
Lord Chesterfield said it required three generations to
make a gentleman.
The Frenchman was shabbily dressed, but be wore his
clothes with a grace that was wonderful,
“My good fellow,” said Ned Kelly, “I really thank
you—you are a dabster at the game.”
“I no comprehend vat you say,” answered the other;
“ but I know vot you mean. I can play.”
“ Then why not play?” asked Kelly.
The Frenchman gave one of those inimitable shrubs
r i a. i • . ....
the shoulders which few but subjects of his country
could copy.
“ Ze urgent, ze money,” he said.
“ Well, I owe you one,” retorted Kelly. “ Will you
feed and drink ?”
“ Vid plaisir,” answered the other.
And they at once removed to a cabinet parliculier , as the
Gallic stranger called it, a private room as we designate it.
“ Such accommodation is getting more common than
people believe in London.
Ned Kelly had a vogue idea that every Frenchman was
a professed cook.
He acted accordingly.
“ Order what grub, you like,” he said, “ and drink—
only I want drink—whisky.”
The Frenchman’s face was a study.
He had been literally starving for nearly two days, a
crest or two excepted.
He had spent money in the Eeredo, and of course was
admitted.
But genuine food and he had been strangers for some time.
It was almost a ghoul-like glance tie gave at the waiter
as he ordered the supper.
It was what Kelly called “ gollopsious.”
Even the rude bushranger recognised the superiority of
the Gaul.
He had never tasted such supper before.
“Down on your luck, mouuseer?” he said, when the
supper was cleared away, aud they were smoking and
drinking punch
“ D low,” was the response of the Frenchman ;
“ and you no believe me Count Anatole Riche, of von of
ze—von of ze biggest families in France.”
“ Oh,” said Ned Kelly, slightly taken aback, “ a real
count?”
“ I inherit von bi g fortune," the man went on ; “I go ze
pace as you say. Igo at last to Homburg, and I lose all
—every Napoleon 1 have. I come to Londres, but my
mauvaise fortune come vid me. lam ruin,”
“Sorry for you,” said Kelly. “ A few weeks ago I was
flush, and could have helped you ; now money is getting
low. I should like to earn some.”
“ Hein /” cried the Frenchman, “we are alone. If you
see von safe there full of ze gold and ze argent, you no
turn your—vat you call it—back to it.”
“ Count," said Kelly, “ I’ll trust you. I'm game for
anything to make money.”
“ Z ® n y» u is ln 7 man—ae chap I look for ze W time "
knovv^ 16 ranchman. “I tell you zometing y«u not
“ Fire away, mounseer,” replied Kelly. " I say frankly
1 in game to cut a throat or blow up Buckingham Palace'
u there is money to be made by* it.”
Soperlote cried the Frenchman, in a tone of ini-
mitable affected surprise.
“ Yes—l’ve heard is the word you use,” replied
Kelly. “I m ready.”
It is not essential to our purpose to tell the whole story
of what Count Anatole Riche proposed, it is sufficient
that Kelly assented.
But it is necessary the reader should know what the
count exactly proposed and which was 'righteously carried
out.
At this time Ilomburg, near Frankfort-on-the-Maine,
was celebrated as possessing, in addition to unrivalled
scenery, a Kursaal or gambling-house, or, rather, fairy
palace, surpassing any monarch’s residence
The rooms in which rouge-et-noir and roulette daily
(Sunday included) took place were immense, lofty, anil
decorated as highly as the most lavish expenditure and
highest art could suggest.
The beholder, on entering these halls of Eblis, was
sti uck dumb with astonishment at the magnificence that
surrounded him, and which he was entitled to enjoy
gratis.
gold room, thirty feet high and one hundred and
fifty feet in length, was imperial in luxury and more gor-
geous than Eastern magnificence can depict.
Curtains of ruby velvet, edged with rich gold lace, ter-
minating in heavy and immense bullion tassels, draped the
numerous and immense windows.
ihe ceiling contained scenes from the amorous poets
representing myriads of goddesses and Cupids floating in
azure fleecy clouds—the said goddesses and Cupids clothed
—or rather unclothed —in a manner suitable to the atmos-
phere they appeared to revel in.
The halls, sheeted with glass and panelled in pink with
gold frames, and crystal de roche chandeliers studding the
room, and shining in the day like rippling water, and at
night like millions of diamonds.
Soft music, proceeding from the Austrian band (com-
posed of the first musicians in the world) ravished the
oars, which promenaders, generally fancifully but beauti-
attired (for La Toilette reigned supreme in this
Arabian Nights’ palace), both inside and outside the rooms,
enjoyed to their hearts’ content.
The silver room, where la roulette was played, was
equally splendid in its appointments, and the stakes
permitted were from two shillings to the maximum cf £:LO.
When the bank lost to one player £B,OOO it was closed
for that day.
The orange and other rooms were simply all that un-
bounded wealth and the highest art could make them.
The grounds were like all we hear of Paradise—serpent,
woman, and everything else to lead poor man to his fall.
These charms, less the serpent and his female friend,
were a discretion, as the bread is at French restaurants.
The rooms were crowded day and night by foreigners of
distinction, by cads from English counties, and calico*
from French ones.
Swindlers from every nation-the oppressed Poles in
particular—swarmed.
Pickpockets were as plentiful as blackberries, and a little
murder or two often diversified let distractions and ennui,
occasioned by an empty purse and pressing claims.
For instance, a fortunate player goes out for a stroll in
the adjoining woods. While contemplating the beauties
of nature somebody else is quietly contemplating him, and
is cautiously stealing upon him, much as a panther creeps
upon the unsuspecting antelope.
A sudden blow on the back of the head from a heavy
life-preserver—a fall—a silence—and the player has lo*t
his last stake - his life.


His assassin hastily plunges his hand in the dead man’s
pockets, which are rifled of their contents, and the whole
affair kept a profound secret by the Administration, as if it
it transpired the scan dale would be prejudicial to the tables,
arid to the of Hesse Homburg, which drew an
enormous revenue from the tables.
Another favourite way of replenishing the purse was to
“ stalk ” a winner in the aforesaid woods, pot him through
the head, and leave a pistol in his hand or just within
reach of it on the ground, suggesting that deceased had
committed suicide.
When Kelly went home that night he took Count
Anatole Riche with him.
His companions were rather surprised to be introduced
to a “ furriner,” but they were well aware that Kelly
always had a motive for what he did.
They thought they knew a thing or two about cards,
but the Frenchman astonished them.
It was agreed that they should travel comparatively as
strangers.
Next day Count Anatole Riche went to a swell West-
end tailor, and rigged out in first rate style.
It was arranged beforehand that he was to be the big-
wig of the party, the others to play the part of rough but
honest citizens.
That evening they went to the opera, the most novel
sensation in which Kelly had ever indulged.
Next day they started for Homburg.
No one -who has not been on the Continent can realise,
even in the faintest form, the beauty of those places of
resort.
They are now suppressed by the Prussians, and the
passion for public fair and open gambling has relegated
itself to private (plundering) circles.
Hundreds of men and women, too, who have succumbed
to the attractions of what are popularly called hells—
casinos in polite parlance—have been drawn into the net
by their captivating beauty.
The house itself was a wonder, but the gardens were
simply unique.
Well might an enthusiast have cried with the poet
Moore—
Oh, if there be an Ehjsium on earth, it is this! it is
this!”
Nothing, perhaps, was ever done more correctly to imi-
tate Paradise than was done to make grounds at Hom-
burg, Wiesbaden, and Badon attractive.
As a matter of course, everything eatable and drink-
able was of the most exquisite quality.
“Jamais!” said the Frenchman, as he introduced his
friend, “have you a jar din like diss?”
“ It’s pretty jam,” observed Joss, who was one of thoss
men who never appear astonished. “ I likes Cremorne
better,”
“Ze barbate ,” exclaimed the count, holding up his hands.
Of course our Englishmen knew nothing of the games
played at the tables of Homburg.
The first evening, therefore, in accordance with the
advice of the count, they simply sauntered about, staked
a trifle, and looked on.
Then they retired to their hotel, and after supper went
into the full details of their nefarious plot.
Let no one fancy we are romancing. What we are about
to relate is positive fact, well known to everyone who has
frequented any of the great gambling shops on the Conti-
nent.
Of course, to Ned Kelly and his rough associates the
place appeared fairyland.
ihe count took his boon companions out for a drive
next day.
Above all things he wanted to steady their nerves, and
was careful about drink.
Ze champagne and ze grog is de (liable if you want
to do von little bit of business,” he said; and, then
went on, “ I see von day a piece—a farce you
call him—cool as ven cucumber. Dat is vot ve be ”
“ Who taught you English ?” suddenly asked Kelly.
The Frenchman—scoundrel, gambler, robber, thief—
turned pale and shivered.
“No ask me zat qvestion again,’' he growled. “My
sisters Engleesh governess. She dead now—jamais! I
von’t be asked qvestions.”
All guessed his meaning, and the subject was never
alluded to again.
It was seven o’clock in the evening when they started
for the gambling-houee.
Sooth to say, Homburg wa? the favourite resort of
those rich foreigners who were and were not bitten by th*
insane mania for gambling.
Kelly and his comrades felt awed almost when they
entered the room.
The bushranger had been careful to save money enough
to keep up appearances.
The room in which roulette was played was brilliantly
illuminated by gas.
Some eight croupiers sat at as many different stations
to pay out and rake up the money.
It happened that at that time a man had been very
lucky.
He had broken the bank.
People crowded in to see him.
Breaking the bank is a very simple process. The
owners of the casino will never go beyond eight thousand
pounds.
When that sum is lost the head croupier cries—“ La
banque est fermee /” and proceeds to cover it over with a
green cloth.
This had happened that afternoon.
Ned Kelly and his companions sat down on on* side of
the table.
Next to Ned Kelly was a lady of rather talkative dispo-
sition.
She was American.
_ “ That’s the big boss,” she said, pointing to the other
side of the table, “ who’s broke the bank three times.”
“Kelly looked , and saw before him the man he thought he
had killed in London streets.
He shivered all over, but made no sign.
In these places there are four rooms—orange and blue
the golden, the other the silver.
Our adventurers had selected, as a matter of course, the
golden room.
Bullion and bank-notes were scattered in rich profusion
on the table—coin enough to tempt a saint.
Count Anatole Riche played with care, but he wa*
watching the table all the time.
The entire stranger was winning at a great rate.
But to return to the plan of the Frenchman’s cam-
paign.
Ihe rooms, brilliantly lighted with gas, were always
crowded wuth company.
The bank was always at the centre of one of the lon®
sides of a parallelogram-shaped table—a mammoth dining-
table in fact. This bank was administered by a “ pay-
master,” j j
Behind him, perched on a high stool, sat a chef de parti,
watching the paymaster and overlooking the whole table,
ci oupiei s and all, and on each side of the said paymaster
sat an assistant croupier to rake in lost and pay out won
money.
7^ n j^ e °PP OS^e s^e to the chef de parti sat another
chef doing exactly the same thing, and flanked by similar
assistants.
Every employ* was watching every other employA
The bank contained a large amount of money always
exposed, in gold or bank-notes, ready for distribution
amongst the winners,
Th J s ™ oney was the prize the Frenchman proposed
th at he, Kelly, an d his band should bag, and on this wise
1 hey were to assemble in the rooms on a given night,
one of the gang was to be placed at each gas-lamp, and, at
a given signal, the whole were to be simultaneously ex-


tiuguished, and the contents of the bank grabbed and
pocketed. Kelly stood sentinel behind one chef de parti
and the Frenchman over the other.
Joss was to be seized with a violent fit of sneezing as
the signal for operations.
All were at their posts. Ruffians and hardened villains
as they were, the moment was a trying one ; something
like that felt on the battle-field before the first shot is
discharged to open the ba' tie.
Their hearts beat, and their hands trembled a little.
Kelly was like steel; no nerve, no heart, no conscience.
Born bad, he kept bad ; he yyas morally dead. He stood
firm as a rock, awaiting, with stern determination and
nonchalance, the supreme moment.
The table was fully occupied, the players eager, the
money piled up beside the bank, when Joss’s violent
sneeze resounded through the room.
in a moment the lights were out, the room in utter
darkness, and dismay amongst those present as if another
Belshazzar’s Feast had been interrupted by handwriting
on the w T all.
Women cried out, men swore, petty robberies were
committed and pockets picked, but the great haul was
accomplished. The bank was robbed of £5,000 and the
robbers got off easily in the dark.
When lights were re-introduced and the gas turned on,
blank surprise, coupled with consternation, sat on every
countenance. ' ’
The croupiers and officials looked dazed, while the im-
pecunious lot of semi-scoundrels, titled or plebeian, re-
joiced that someone had done the bank.
Old Blanc, the proprietor, simply smiled, ejaculating, in
reply to the violent commiseration of his visitors—
“ Doucement, douce ment, mes amis, qa se remettra hientot,
ce n'est rien ; allez, continuez, amusez vous; mais ilf aid changer
le gaz centre Vhuile .”
And this was the reason why oil-lamps for the future
illumined the Homburg rooms.
The coin had vanished, and so had a good many of the
habituds.
Fortunately lor Kelly and his friends, a good many
others took advantage of the darkness to take their de-
parture richer than they came.
As soon as the coup was over the conspirators went
quietly away to the hotel.
They were five thousand pounds richer for their little
game, but Kelly was not satisfied.
“ Count,” he said, “ I know a thing or two.”
*' Vat is von ?” asked the Frenchman.
“ That infernal Yankee has sized his pile pretty big,”
•was the answer. “ I think we might relieve him.”
“ Mafoi!" remarked the Frenchman, “ I fancy zat he
have too much money.”
“ Well, we’ll put an end to that,” answered Ned Kelly
•** He lodges in this hotel.”
“ Cre-Nom / ” cried fount Anatole Riche, using his fa-
vourite exclamation. ! ■
When the waiter came in to take orders after supper
they found that the American gambler was a certain
Elijah Buccles, cel orated for his luck.
He was said to ave won seven thousand pounds.
Probably, like a good many other speculators of this
kind, he kept it among his luggage.
If bo Kelly and party determined to have it.
CHAPTER LXXY.
THK BOBBERY AND ITS Hi SUIT.
Fortunately for Kelly and his party no one suspected
them. Count Anatole Riche was so perfect a gentle-
man that all looked up to him.
His English friends were rough and ready, but so
highly respectable.
There were a good many chevaliers d'industrie about,
but though the police watched them carefully none of
them appeared more than usually flush of cash.
So the thing blew over.
Meanwhile the French count and his comrades kept
very quiet. They looked in at the saloon soon after
it was opened, and risked small sums of money.
Nothing was done to excite suspicion.
Kelly was no less reckless than usual, but he submitted
to be guided by the more wily and cautious Frenchman.
The American continued with varying success, some-
times making great hauls, and at others losingsmall sums.
Whenever he stayed there was great excitement.
People crowded round to watch.
Late in the evening of the next day the man began
with a run of luck.
He had broken the bank in several establishments,
and was regarded somewhat with dread.
His luck was singular.
It was clear he was in vein. The colour on which ha
staked turned up continually.
The excitement was great.
At last, as before, the croupier declared play over, and a
green-baize cloth was thrown over the table.
He had broken the bank.
“ You are lucky, Mr. Buccles," said Ned Kelly aa they
went out together.
“ Well, pretty fair,” was the calm reply. “I generally
am.”
“ You are staying at the same hotel with us,” continued
Kelly.
Yes,” answered the American, who spoke with scarcely
any nasal intonation.
“Shall we shuffle the cards to-night?” continued the
bushranger.
“Don’t care if I do,” replied the stranger. “You’ll
sup with me first.”
This was agreed on, and a supper was served such as is
only to be found in such places.
Everything was of the best.
Expense was no object, and all was delicate and deli-
cious in the extreme.
They supped in Elijah B.’s rooms.
Then cards, with cigar, spirits, and wine were produced.
All were keen, shrewd players.
Kelly and the Frenchman played against Buccles and
Salmon Roe.
There was no thought of unfair play. With such hands
it would have been folly,
Kelly soon found himself losing money and equally his
temper.
At last he threw down the cards.
“One might as well try and play against Old Nick,”
he said, half laughing.
Elijah laughed, as he rose and put his money away in
his desk.
After drinks all round they parted.
Kelly was sullen and moody.
“ Seems hard,” he muttered, “ for that fellow to have
all the swag.”
“It is,” said Salmon Roe.
All exchanged glances. There was a murderous look in
their eyes which all understood.
The man’s winnings were principally in notes, for con-
venience of carriage.
“ I’ll do it,” said Kelly.
A long conference ensued.
Kelly would take all upon himself. He would commit
the robbery and fly.
In his portmanteau was a favourite disguise of his,
I included a false nose and whiskers, which entirely
chang a the appearance of his face.
All the "'thers went to their rooms, locking them-
selves in.
Kelly opened his portmanteau and took from it a
bunch of keys.
He had noticed that tne room preceding the bed-room
of the American was unpi vided with bolts, but had a
stout lock and key


When all was still he went out in his stocking-feet. In
his hand he carried the keys, while he was provided with
a knife and some chloroform.
He goon unlocked the door, which, however, he again
iscured before he entered the bed-room.
The door of that was unlocked.
He listened with intense interest and attention. The
naan breathed heavily.
Kelly had a handkerchiet over his nose and mouth.
With a sponge saturated with chloroform he applied it
to the man's nose.
The desk was now rummaged, and the contents secured.
It was a considerable sum.
Kelly now went cut, and locking the door after him
took away the key.
There was a train at daybreak, and by this Kelly
would go-.
The difficulty wa* to get out of the house ; there was a
night-porter in the hall.
Carrying his bag in his hand, he crept down the thickly
carpeted stairs.
The porter slept soundly in an armchair, Kelly had his
boots off.
Stealthily and warily he approached, opened the door,
and in a few minutes was in the street.
He was drassed like an ordinary tourist, only his nose,
whiskers, and wig so utterly disguised him, no man could
have recognised him.
It was broad daylight, and the station was open, so that
he excited no attention.
llaif-an-hour later he was whiiTng along in an express
train, with nothing to identify him by.
Even his carpet-bag was taken from inside a portman-
teau, while he had secured a second passport.
In this way lie reached London.
His companions were to join him by various and devious
routes.
Their plan was then to visit America, where they could
spend their money without exciting any suspicion.
On reaching London, Kelly, as Mr. Desmond, went to a
quiet hotel.
The robbery made a great stir, and one day Kelly heard
it said that the police had a clue to the thief, who they
believed had gone to London.
He at once decamped, procured a fresh disguise, and
went to a sailors’ boarding-house.
Here he was in his element.
But his usual luck here deserted him. The second
eegming of his arrival, when under the intluence of drink,
he showed a lot of notes.
That night his room was entered by four men. He was
etupid y drunk, and they made a clean sweep of all save a
few pounds and notes in a pocket-book under his pillow.
The rascals, doubtless, were astonished at the amount
of their haul.
'1 hey were no more seen in that part of the world.
The rage and mortification of Kelly may be more easily
imagimd than described.
Of course, to state the facts would have been madness.
Ihs comrades who. except the count, all duly joined
him, could scarcely credit the news. Their crime had been
done for nothing.
Still, they had plenty of money, and for several weeks
led a roaring life; and then, finding funds running low,
again looked out lor a ship and easily found one.
CHAPTER LXXVL
AGAIN AT SEA.
At fast the time came when they were to join their ship.
To Kelly it was a matter of rejoicing.
He had had quite enough of England by this time, and
would only feel too glad to be on the high seas once more.
His scheme was to get to India and thus put the limbs
©f the law off his traffic.
As soon as he got to Bombay or Calcutta he would lie
quiet for a short time, and then make his way again to
Australia, where at ail events he knew what to do for a
living.
The vessel they had found berths on board was the
Earl Russell East Indians..' n -
She was a hue large saJ ! '*g vessel, roomy and well
provided.
Her crew was numerous sad usual of a mixed order,
good, bad, and indifferent.
Some of them were excellent sailois and trustworthy
men.
The cargo was of great value.
The J,'r«e men joined in the docks Che day the Earl
Russell dropped into the inames.
The passengers were numerous, and as usual with vessels
of her calibre, of high character, Olivers aud civilians, ladies
aud gentlemen.
Some were returning to their posts, others going out for
the first time.
There is a mighty amour of confusion at first starting
on board ship, but soon al 1 settles down into regularity.
The three men easily contrived to be in the same watch.
They could thus keep together, and enjoy the amusement
of conversation.
One evening— they had been about a week or more—
Kelly—the men seated around in the bows, the sky clear
and the wind fair—told them some rattling adventures in
the gold fields.
“Shouldn’t I like,” said one of the men, “to go and
pick up the chips.”
“Its fine,” retorted Kelly. “Better than working,”
he added, with a grin.
“Why did you leave it?” asked the other, a fellow
known as Sandy Sara.
“ ’Cos I had made a lot,” continued Kelly, “ so came;
to England to spend it. Mean to go back some time.”
“I should like to try it,” the sailor remarked with some-
thin" of a sigh.
“ We could run away with the shin, sell Her, and then
make for Australia,” observed Kelly, with a banterin'*
laugh.
Several men looked at him with something of surprise
in the expression of their countenances.
“ It s not wise talking mutiny,” said one, drily.
“ Only joking, mate,” laughed Kelly.
** It’s bad joking,” the other continued.
Kelly made no response. He was satisfied. He had
laid the train.
lime would show if it would come to anything.
The three men had determined, if they could* get ad-
herents cnouga, to mutiny and seize the ship. There
were many places where they could ruu in and sell the-
cargo.
I iracy is not quite so extinct as many people imagine,
and many vessels never heard of are captured aud de»;
troyed by these pests of the oceau.
They lurk about certain obscure islands, and hide in
places almost unknown to ordinary cruisers.
Meantime, all went merry as a marriage-bell in the
cabin.
I here was the usual flirtation, card-playing, and amuse-
ment, People become intimate under such circumstances
who, perhaps, are fated never to meet again.
There were several young ladies, but the belle of the
whole party was a Miss Liston.
She was about eighteen, aud afl the young men were in
ecstasies about her.
Among her most devoted admirers was Captain Frank
Armstrong, with good connections and a fine position.
Miss Liston was going out to join an aunt, she herself
having lost her parents at an early age.
She was under the chaperonage ol a Mrs. Colonel
Warden, who, however, was not very severe in her style
of government. J
So that the young lady behaved witn propriety aha hnA
no wish to interfere. *


So before the voyage was a third over, it became clear
■Captain Frank Armstrong would be the winner.
On one or two occasions when Kelly was at the wheel
—he was not at all a bad sailor—he had seen the beauty,
>aml adin red her in his coarse way.
That evening he again broached the subject of running
away with the ship.
He, Joss, and Hoe naa sounded a good many men and
found them not ftt all unwilling to join in
During his campaign on board while beating up for
recruits, one of the sailors confided to him the plot, and
he had it from the third mate, that there was a quantity of
-dynamite on board which was labelled “ hardware ” and
not declared or entered at the Custom House when
shipped, which rendered the captain and owners liable to
a heavy fine. As he heard the news Kelly's eyes
brightened with a fiendish glare. Here was a chance of
sending the whole “boiling” as he styled it “up in a
balloon ” whenevet he chose it. He induced the man to
show him where it was stored. This was easily done, as
the casks of “ hardware ” were piled just close to the foot
of the mainmast and covered with a tarpaulin. All right,
thought Kelly, who determined to murder every “ human,”
as the Yankees say, if necessary, lower a boat well provi-
sioned, place a good fuse in the “hardware,” and haul off
to safe distance and wait for the blow-up of ship and
cargo. *
Satisfied at this safe conclusion to the enterprise, he
became not only contented in mind, but positively jocund.
Like a man who had made a grand and successful
“coup” in the Stock Exchange, he felt a placid content
and feeling of certainty.
But they had to use great caution and discretion, as
some of the men were good and true—right loyal British
sailors, who would not be tempted to commit any act of
treachery and murder.
Still incited by the cunning ringleaders, a very power-
ful body was recruited.
The men who could not be induced even to listen to
such a proposition, would have to be secured and put out
-of the way.
The mutiny must take place at night, when the passen-
gers would be asleep.
Even if the cargo was not available, the goods belonging
to the passengers would bo something, while they were
•well aware that there was a good assignment of bullion on
board.
It was determined by those in the scheme to wait until
they were in the neighbourhood of some islands, said by
•Salmon Roe to be much frequented by Malay and other
pirates.
They have every requisite for enjoyment, as it is under-
stood by sailors.
Dutchmen from Batavia have houses there supplied with
luxuries. hey make enormous fortunes.
Salmon Roe made Ned Kelly's mouth water with the
description of these islands.
At last the time approached.
Ned, as a matter of course, was to be the ringleader and
give the signal.
The crew were not very far from forty in number, and
twenty were in the swim.
A fearful crime was being as coolly concocted as any
ordinary business arrangement.
It was evening.
A splendid night, and the passengers were chiefly on
deck—all who Avere not playing cards.
The man at the wheel Avas a steady-going fellow, and
well up to his work.
Suddenly there came a darkness on the sky to the south
and cast, and the captain became aAvare that a cyclone Avas
about to attack them.
Ali hands Avere at once called to shorten sail, as the
•signs of a storm increased every moment.
Everything Avas bustle and confusion for a moment, and
then all were ready.
The captain stand, trumpet in hand, on the quarter-
deck, ready to give orders.
Before he could speak the blast was upon them.
It shook the vessel all over, and she went down almost
on her beam ends.
“ Let go everything,” was the cry.
The sailors swarmed up tue rigging as the orders were
obeyed.
Halyards and all other ropes necessary to the fulfilment
of this order were let go.
The sailors who were ordered to go aloft ran up as
swiftly as possible to furl the sails, and were intent on
their duty.
Mutineers or not they valued thoJt j'wn lives.
Almost everything was snug and cuut when suddenly
there was a great cry—
“ Man overboard!”
On board a ship there is no more horrible cry than
this.
The passengers and crew were as it were paralysed.
Then young Captain Armstrong threw off his coat, heeled
off his boots and leaped into the sea.
The head of the sailor who was overboard was just
above the water.
Captain Frank Armstrong made for him, shouting aloud
all the time—which was scarcely audible—and caught hold
of him by the hair just as he was sinking.
He held him off, aware how dangerous it was to allow
a drowning man to clutch you.
The sea surged awfully high. The young officer scarcely
hoped to live through it.
Still he held on the man.
Then came the welcome sound of a boat being dropped
into the water.
Then the young officer was dragged into the long-boat
with the half-drowned sailor.
It was a heroic act,, but little did Captain Armstrong
guess the result it would have.
The two were soon on deck, and the sailor being much
worse than the captain, was attended to first, in the cabin
by the surgeon.
“ Narrow escape, my lads,” said the surgeon, when the
seaman, a good-looking scapegrace of niuetee a, “ very
sharp squeak.”
“ Who saved me ?” asked Jack Mathers, in a sharp,
hurried tone
The young officer was pointed out.
“ Sir,” was the reply, “ may I ask as a favour to speak
to you and the captain alone ( I have a terrible secret to
reveal.”
All thought the youth mad, but his wish was gratified
at once.
He looked carefully around.
“ Nobody can ever hear?” he asked.
“ No,” answered the captain, rather harshly.
“To-night at tAvelve, sir, there will be a mutiny,” he
whispered, “ twentv of the men are in it and Ned Kelly
is the leader, so you know what you have to expect.”
The two men were unable to speak.
“ It is true, sir, continued the young man very earnestly,
“I am one of the mutineers, and Avould never have
spoken had not this gentleman here have acted as he has.
I was led into it, sir, from no Avish of mine.”
“Boy,” said the captain, “you shall be rewarded not
punished; but really you must be mistaken—Ned Kelly
is in Australia.”
“No, sir, there are several woo know him by sight,”
was the answer.
“ That Avill do,” continued the captain in a firm tone ;
“ the fact of the mutiny is enough. Now, Captain Frank,
get all the passengers ready. Can 1 trust you?” to the
half-droAvned sailor, whose name Avas Jack Palmer.
“ Sir,” Avas the astonished reply, “ did not that gentle-
man save my life ?”
“ Yes, at the peril of his own.” responded the captain
earnestly, “it Avas a brave deed.”


M It was a very lucky one for him and you sir,” con-
tinued the man, who was tolerably fairly educated.
“ How so ?” asked the captain.
“ It will save all your lives, I believe,” responded Jack,
“the men mean to mutiny to-night at twelve—you know
what will folkrw.”
“ Great heavens 1” cried the captain, “ are thev all in
it?”
“No, sir, about twenty are in it; I am lost. I swear
I was over-persuaded, threatened like ,”he went on.
“ How to get at the men who are not in it?” said the
captain, turning to the cavalry officer.
“ Sir,” put in Jack Palmer, earnestly, “that I am alive
is thanks to this gentleman. I will risk my life freely to
save you—let me go aft and I will speak to the boatswain.
He will speak to the men, whose names I will give him,
or you can send for him here.”
“All right my lad,” replied the captain, “you shall go
scot-free.”
And he passed the word for boatswain and carpenter to
come aft.
Of course this excited no suspicion.
Jack Palmer fully explained matters to the boatswain,
and gave him the names of all the good men and true.
This was rather a hard nut to crack, but somehow Jack
was able to impress their names and characteristics on the
minds of the boatswain and carpenter.
The mutiny was to take place at eight bells, when the
watch was changed.
The mutineers were as a rule, only armed with knives,
and few only with pistols.
They depended -wholly on a surprise.
This matter settled, the boatswain and carpenter re-
turned forward.
The captain now contrived to summon all the mnlc
passengers under some pretence or other, and let them
know what they had to expect.
It was settled that the ladies should receive a hint that
some of the crew were inclined to be rebellious, and be
advised to retire to their state rooms at eleven.
The men would then arm themselves and be ready for
immediate action.
The loyal crew would come aft and be armed to resist
the others.
Meanwhile the wind continued.
The vessel even under bare poles was managed with
difficulty.
There were two men at the wheel, and two spare men
waiting to relieve them.
The captain searctly ever left the deck. Dinner was
was very nearly a farce.
It was not only the storm that affected everybody, but
the anticipation of what was to come.
A long discussion ensued between the captain and some
ef the passengers as to the best course of action.
Some were in favour of letting the mutineers know
that their intention w r as known.
But the majority thought it wise to give them a strong
and wffiolesome lesson.
And this opinion prevailed.
After dinner the usual routine went on. There were
card-tables set and music.
At eleven the ladies retired, and the gentlemen crowded
round the table with grog and cigars. Not a word was
said in reference to the expected raid on the captain.
At half-past eleven the lights were all extinguished
except in the steward’s cabin.
All were armed with either pistols or guns of some kind
or other.
A good lookout was kept.
Then eight bells was sounded.
All were ready, and then the loyal part of the crew
made a rush aft and were at once handed arms.
“Death to the mutineers! ” was the cry which met the
ear? of Ned Kelly and his followers as they made a rush
tor the cabin.
A deadly volley repelled them.
“Sold! ” shouted Ned Kelly, with a fearful imprecation.
“ Somebody shall suffer.”
“Who can it be?” asked Salmon Roe, who was sevex-ely
wounded in the left arm.
“That confounded young sharks Jack Palmer,” hissed
the bushranger ; “but I’ll settle hiia.”
Meanwhile, all had fallen back to the forecastle to
consult.
The surprise had been a failure.
What was to be done ? The passengers, with the loyal
crew, were nearly as many in number as the mutineers,
well-armed and provisioned.
It was indeed a terrible sell.
“ What’s to be done ? ” asked Salmon Roe, while the
others growled in an inaudible tone.
Luckily for them, Ned, Roe, and C >ss were armed with
pistols of the very best make.
They carried a good many lives in their hands.
“ Don’t know,” surlily cried Ned.
At this moment one of the sailors from the other end
advanced with a white handkerchief on the end of a
cane.
“Now then, messmates,” he cried, “a word with you
all—don’t be foolish.”
“What do you want?” asked one of the mutineers.
“ Speak up at once, Jim.”
“ The captain offers these here terms,’' the man went
on, “free pardon and no questions asked—if you give up
the ringleaders.”
“ What of them ? ” the other asked.
“ They will be given up at the first port and tried for
mutiny and piracy,” was the answer.
“ Come back in ten minutes,” answered the man, “and
then you’ll get an ans-wer.”
The man retreated.
Ned, Roe, and Joss had heard all, and stood aloof with
their pistols ready.
Give up they would not. They would slaughter right
and left rather.
When the man who had been spokesman approached,
they waved him back.
“Lower a boat and set us adrift,” said Kelly, “with
what grub you can find and some water, then make your
own terms.”
The storm was abating rapidly, and the men thought
that perhaps this would be the best plan.
There was a boat outside the bows.
Food and water could not easily be obtained without
the connivance of the steward, so the amount was rather
small.
Still, a certain amount of biscuit and some tin bottles
with water were put in the boat.
The night was still very dark, and the sea ran high.
But Ned was determined not to be handed over to the
officers of the law.
Somehow he might be recognised.
The boat once lowered, the three men had their be-
longings lowered into it.
They had some small useful boxes, and in these were
certain luxuries not usually to be found in the impedi-
menta of a sailor.
These chiefly consisted of bottles ot sp-srits.
Just as the boat was ready to start, the man with the
handkerchief returned.
“ Have you decided? ” asked the man.
“Yes; we throw ourselves on the mercy of the cap-
tain,” was the answer ; “ the others have taken to a boat
and escaped.”
He approached the emissary of the officers, and ex-
plained that the three ringleaders were armed heavily with
pistols and other weapons, and that they w r ere afraid to
attempt their capture.
“ Return to your duty,” said the captain ; “they cannot
hope to live in such a night.”
And the men returned to their dntv.


CHAPTER LXXYIL
ON THE WIDE WATERS.
The three men who launched themselves, as it were, in a
cockle boat, at the mercy of the waves, must, of course,
have been desperate.
To Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe it was not so much ;
they were used to the sea
But to Joss it was intolerable.
He was a very poor seaman at the best, and in such
weather it was awful and terrible.
“ I wish I’d never seen sea,” he groaned, as they
pitched and tossed on the top of the waves. “We shall
all be drownded.”
“Not if we’re born to be hanged,” said Ned Kelly,
with grim prophetic humour.
Joss made no reply, but sank his head between his
knees and groaned.
It was not a pleasant position.
The boat was both for sailing and rowing, but at
present all they could do was to ship the mast and bide
their time.
The wind had expended its force. Clearly they had
only had the tail of the cyclone.
But the waves were very high.
Presently, however, Salmon Roe intimated that it would
be better to hoist a sail.
This was done, and the boat did not pitch and toss
nearly so much.
The night soon passed.
But not one of the men in that boat had the ±east idea
of where they were, or what would be their fate.
They might be cast away among savages, or picked up
by a passing ship or drowned.
But the -.Yeather moderated still more towards morn-
ing-
Then the heat of the sun became intense and they were
compelled to quench their thirst.
But their supply of water was very short, and they knew
that on this their life depended.
They blended it with some spirits and thus allayed one
of the most painful wants of nature.
Ned and Roe had to take it in turns to steer, as Joss was
of no use in that way.
They were in a decided fix. If they were picked up
by a ship, their story would be a difficult one to tell.
After considerable hesitation, they determined to tell a
part of the truth should the vessel be outward bound.
They would assert that the Russell had foundered, Earl
and that some of the crew and passengers had taken to the
boats.
They had cast loose the one in which they were at first,
throAvn m their luggage and had only just time to push off,
wlien the vessel went down.
About an hour later. Joss and Roe being asleep, Ned
Kelly sighted a sail.
It was that of a tall ship and was coming directly in their
path.
He woke them up, and all three at once indulged in the
luxury of a drink of water.
Then they kept a sharp lookout on the approaching ship,
They all kneAv that their story would appear fishy, but they
could not help themselves.
At all events they would secret their pistols and bottles
of spirits.
On came the ship, it seemed to them with singular
slowness, but they kept direct across its bows, and a
little after mid-day were sighted.
As a matter of course they were taken on board, and
their story listened to. .
They were also admitted as supernumeraries with the
crew. _
“ Roberts,” said Captain Hamrnus to his first officer,
“ I don’t like the look of those fellows. Odd lot—very.”
“ Well, sir,” replied the other, “ I am very much of
your opinion. I will keep my eye on them.”
Bub the three men were very wary. They took care
to do nothing to excite suspicion.
They were very free in their talk about ordinary
matters, but very reticent as to their antecedents.
The vessel, the Prince Albert, on board which they were
was bound for Calcutta.
This was awkward, as their own vessel was the same.
They must contrive to get on shore as soon as possible
after their arrival, as, if the captain who had saved them
once learned that their own vessel was safe, explanations
must follow.
They were all of them tolerably flush of money, so that
they cared nothing for their pay.
At last the time came when they were in sight of Cal-
cutta, which, as everyone knows, is situated on the Hooghly
a branch of the Ganges, about a hundred miles from the
sea.
From a small fishing village it has in about a century,
under British sway, grown into one of the greatest and
most flourishing cities in the world.
The minute the vessel cast anchor, Salmon Roe went
aft and spoke to the second officer.
“AVe want to go ashore,” he said, gruffly.
“ When there is leisure,” was the answer.
“ We ain’t signed no articles,” replied Salmon Roe,
“ and don't want no pay. Stop us, if you dare.”
The second officer shrugged his shoulders, called them
idle skulkers, and bade them to a very warm region, but
not to bother him.
The men were in mortal fear, for not a hundred yards
off they had recognised the vessel from which they had
deserted.
There was too much bustle and excitement for them to
be noticed, so they got a boat and went on shore without
drawing much attention.
Salmon Roe was an old salt, and had been in Calcutta
before.
He no sooner was on terra firma than, handing their
packages to the native porters, he bade them lead on.
He at once avoided the English town, which consists of
houses built of brick in a handsome style, and covered
Avith Avhite plaster which takes a fine polish, and made for
the black town, on the borders of which the sailors’
boarding-houses were situated.
Ned Kelly and Joss had perforce to trust to Salmon
Roe. They knew nothing whatever of the place.
Every temptation that a sailor can dream of teems in
Calcutta, and the three soon found themselves enjoying
themselves thoroughly.
But all three were well aAvare that there would be con-
siderable talk about them, and that they would be looked
for.
The best thing they could do would be to find a ship
and get back to Europe as fast as they could.
But man proposes, and Providence disposes.
That night the temptations of the so-called boarding-
house kept them up late.
The place Avas croAvded with men belonging to ships in
the harbour, amusing themselves as best they might-
dancing, smoking, and drinking.
Suddenly Salmon Roe gave a great start as he saw
several sailors come in at the door.
They were men belonging to the crew of the Earl
Russell Indiaman from Avkich they had escaned.
He made a sign to his companions, and led the Avay
into the interior of the place.
They all understood that the better part of valour was
discretion.
If recognised, there would be very little hope ot their
escaping scot free.
There had been so many ships missing under suspi-
cious circumstances that would, if caught, be
certainly made an example of.
They procured sleeping quarters and retired to re^t
Next day they would try and contrive some way o
getting out of Calcutta, if they shipped in a coaster.


There seemed to be no safety for them there.
In the morning, after a meal, they took care to close
quarters.
Salmon Roe having made some alterations in his apparel,
knowing the town was then sent out to try his luck.
He went to the quarter where the shipping agents were
to be found, and visited several
But no ship was to sail for several days.
Now what they wanted was to get out of Calcutta as
rapidly as possible.
At any moment they might fall in with the officers and
crew of the Earl Russell.
But nothing could be done.
Salmon Roe thought he would go out and consult with
his friends before deciding anything.
lie stuck his hands into his pockets and set out on his
return journey.
Suddenly he jostled against a man of powerful frame
and of tall figure.
He wore a semi-Oriental, semi-European costume, but,
though swarthy, he was no native.
“ Zeph !” cried Salmon Roe in amazement.
“ Sal!” was the other’s cry.
“Yes; what are you doing here?” was the first
speaker’s demand.
“Let us go where we can be private,’’responded the other.
And he led the way to one of the many refreshment
places provided for the thirst.
“ In the name of wonder,” asked Zeph, when they were
provided with their favourite stimulants. “ what brought
you to Calcutta?”
“ A ship,” replied Salmon.
“ Of course, but we parted in London, and you were
bound for the gold diggins,” said the other.
He was a huge, herculean man, evidently of the sea-
faring persuasion.
“ Well, I didn’t like it,” growled Sal; “ too much hard
work for me, so I eut it, and you ”
“Wo.'!, you know,” said Zeph, “I was some years in
Madagascar, and speak that and many other lingoes. I
went out there, joined a fellow who called himself an
Arab prince—pirate he was—and became his first officer.
To cut a long story short, we quarrelled, I had my party
and he is, and he and his party went by the board. lam
up here recruiting.”
“ Where’s the vessel ? ” asked Salmon.
“ She’s hid away safe enough,” answered Zeph. “ But
what I want is real good fellows, these Arabs ain’t much
use. I want men who will side up to a gold-ship and
cry, Stand! ”
“I'm one,” said Salmon, “and I’ve got two other prime
ones quite ready.”
“That’s your sort,” observed Zeph; “but there must
be no nonsense about them. I’ve got a native vessel
close handy—a dhow they call it—and pretty spicy crew.
Four more would make things look ship-shape.”
“We’re ready,” said Salmon. “ When do you sail ? ”
“To-morrow, if I have my complement,” returned tut
her.
THE “ANONY
PICTURE
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Adventure
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure,
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
MA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2-
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Woman.
The Beautiful Demon.
“ We’ll ship,” returned Salmon. “ Where are you
hanging out ? ”
“ Grogan’s, in the Black Town,” answered Captain
as he was called.
“So are we,” exclaimed Sal; “ dine with me and my
pals ? ”
“ Done,” said Zeph.
And a rendezvous was appointed for the afternoon,
where in the cooler part of the day men could venture
to allay the pangs of hunger.
They then separated.
Among the many islands inhabited by Orientals of
various heads, pirates have existed from time immemorial.
They are sometimes designated by the name of slavers,
but in reality they are sea-thieves.
They are gradually being extirpated, since swift, small,
steam cruisers are able to hunt them up, but many mys-
terious disappearances can only be accounted for in this
way.
By open violence or cunning they surprise ships and
leave no clue k> their foul deeds.
About the time of which we speak, several underwriters
were convinced that many of the missing vessels they had
to pay for were the victims of foul play.
On the voyage home from India the vessel had passed
near so many uncivilised and savage places, where small
vessels could be perdue , that it was not easy to obtain a
clue.
When Salmon Roe informed his companions of the
singular adventure he had, they were delighted. It was
just the thing for them.
The greater part of the visitors to the place they
resided at, were sailors belonging to the ships in harbour.
A great many did not live there, and for money they
could be as private as they liked.
Ned ordered a dinner regardless of expense. He in-
tended to impress Captain Zeph as well as he could.
He was just the sort of man after his own heart he
expected.
Certainly in addition to his Herculean proportions,
Captain Zeph had the quality of ugliness to a most mar-
vellous extent.
Coarse features, huge sandy whiskers, a nose flattened
to his face, and little piggish eyes, did not make an attrac-
tive-looking man.
But there was an affectation of frankness about hit
manner which with some would pass for blunt honesty.
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




Hat Ned never believed in a man’s honesty. It was
not a commodity he gave any one man credit for.
Still he thought this specimen of tiie human race would
edit his book very well.
When dinner was ove\. and they were smoking and
drinkii, their plans w c ,re talked over.
The great majority of the crew were Arabs, with enough
Europeans to command them.
“I aint partikler fond of playing second fiddle," said
our hero, “but I don’t mind shipping.”
“ The white? svill share and share alike,” replied Cap-
tain Zeph.
“Yes, T know,” continued the other, “I suppose
you’ve heard tell of Ned Kelly?”
“ Yes,” answered the other.
‘Well, when I tell you I’m that cove,” the bushranger
responded, “ you’ll think I deserve to be toasted.”
Captain Zeph stared at Salmon Roe.
“ It’s a fact,” said that worthy,
“My hand on it then,” cried Zeph “ then we’ll be
heard of.”
And so the unholy compact was made.
It was at a late hour when, accompanied by bearers with
their luggage, the four men went to a landing place, and
were taken on board a native boat, which before daybreak
glided down the river.
Late the same night, they were on board of the pirate.
It was a well-built brigantine with every requisite for
speed.
It was made more for running than fighting, as it could
not venture to contend even against the smallest man of
war.
Rut still it carried one heavy gun carefully concealed from
observation, and a crew very disproportionate to its size
The plan of Captain Zeph was to sail up to some unsus-
pecting vessel, with a very small crow to be seen, ask some
question as to longitude and latitude, and then contrive to
run aboard.
Sometimes he had been beaten off, at others he had
triumphed.
Indiamen on the voyage home were not tempting enough
prey now.
The gold ships of Australia were the great temptation,
and on their track they agreed to go.
Captrin Zeph saw at once that Ned Kelly was a master
mind and at once promoted him to be his equal.
The lieutenant nominally was an Arab named Ali, but
that was only in the sailing of the ship.
These natives were to be paid wages—very liberal
wages.
The European crew—English and Dutch—were seven-
teen in number, and when an attack was to be made were
the only ones who were seen on deck.
CHAPTER LXXVIII.
THE JAMES STIRTON.
Amply supplied with olives, and well appointed, the
vessel, commanded by Captain Zeph and manned by his
villainous crew, made goodly way.
They took no notice of any vessels they came in sight
of.
What they wanted was to secure a large amount of
treasure at one haul, and then to run for some safe place
and enjoy the results.
Ned Kelly proposed they should run to within a hun-
dred miles of Adelaide, and then, furling all sail, look out
for a homeward.bound vessel, which would be sure to
have gold on board.
Then they could set sail, keep it company at a distance,
and watch their opportunity.
Captain Zeph was quite agreeable to .anything that Ms
ft orthy friend proposed.
So after a very favovorable run they reached the spot,
at once proceed d to lie to.
A good lookout was kept
Two days passed, however, and not a vessel was to be
seen except of a character such as was of no use to
them.
The third day broke, and then the welcome sight came of
a fine vessel, with all sail set, bound on her way for home.
Doubtless she had a goodly crew a?nd the usual nu-
merous passengers, happy to return to their native land,
where anxious friends awaited them.
The Arab Chief, as the pirate called his vessel, had sail
put on, and steered in the same direction as the ship.
The day was fine, but the weather looked rather
threatening.
On board the homeward-bound vessel there happened
to be a very numerous body of passengers and a rather
fair crew.
The first immense excitement of gold-diggings was going
down a little, but still large fortunes were being made.
As in everything else, there will always be discontented
people; and a good many men who had not found their
expectations answered began to leave for home.
The suspicious losses of so many vessels—far beyond
the usual average—had made owners and captains more
careful in selecting crews.
The James Stirton was rather fortunate in this respect,
‘and had a crew that could be depended on.
There were, of course, some scarcely worth their salt;
but still, as a rule, they were better than usual.
The captain was named Lascelles, and his mate Newton.
The passengers were not very numerous—about twenty
—but the cargo was valuable.
It consisted of gold and wool.
It was midday, and most of the passengers were on
deck , merchants, travellers bent on seeing Europe, and a
few ladies.
The captain is standing near the bulwarks, looking
through his glass.
“What do you make of her, Newton?” he suddenly
asked, after a good look at the Arab Chief.
“She looks a rakish kind of craft,” responded Newton,
“ can’t make her out.”
“ We’d better be careful,” the captain continued, “ a
pirate in these parts is not a very likely event, but some
mysterious disappearances have taken place which I really
cannot account for.”
“ Yes,” said the mate, gravely, “ something must be
wrong somewhere. That letting loose such a lot of vaga-
bonds on the colony, has a deal to answer for.
“ No—what with bushrangers and sham sailors, one does
not know what to do,” said the captain, in a musing tone.
“ Good job the Rosario has come on the coast.”
The Rosario was a very sharp sailing sloop of war, which
had been sent to cruise about and try and solve the myste-
rious disappearance of so many ships.
“ In my opinion,” said the skipper, “ she wont do much
good, the missing ships have been scuttled and destroyed
by their crews. Look what a lot of duffers have been
shipped.”
“True,” responded the mate, “ but still I believe there
has been other foul play too.”
The captain nodded, and then turned to answer questions
put by some of the passengers.
Still both he and his officer kept a sharp lookout on the
other vessel, whioh was apparently going in the same
direction.
Night came on.
The sky was very cloudy, and it was quite likely that
the weather would be nasty
A sharp lookout was kept, and the strange vessel was
almost forgotten.
Soon the wind rose, and they were compelled to make
all snug alow and aloft.
Not a sign of moon or stars was to be seen. This con-
tinued until about midnight,, when there was a break va
the sky and light fell on the face of the deep.
The strange vessel was close on board of them, and
hailed as if angrily.


‘‘Ship ahoy!” shunted a stentorian voice in rather an
angry tone. “We’re shor* of water, and want jou to
spare us a little. We’ll round to under the leesido and
jump on board to lend a hand.”
This was a proposal that embodied some danger to the
smaller vessel, as a collision in the then state of the sea
would have been dangerous to the pirates’ craft.
The weather lulled and the wind fell with the sudden-
ness that it rose.
The captain of the homeward-bound told the chief
mate to give the water supply wanted, whereon the latter
shouted to his new friends to “ come abroad ” and lend a
hand to tranship a couple of water casks.
The pirate stood off, lowered a boat, filled with a demon
crew, armed to the teeth, who were soon seen swarming up
the sides of the ship.
Springing on to the maindeck, they quickly rushed into
the poop where the captain and chief officer were stand-
ing.
Zeph and Kelly, leading, presented their resolvers at the
heads of these two men, and swore a blasphemous oath
that they would °end their souls to the shades below if
they didn’t order ill hands below and allow themselves to
be secured.
Stunned by the suddenness of the attack, and seeing how
utterly the ship was in the hands of the numerous marauders,
they stood paralysed, but eventually passed the word to go
below, which, indeed, was not very necessary, as meet of
the Jack Tars (who on these Colonial lines are anything
but the heroes of romance they are popularly represented
to be) had already “ made tracks ” into the forecastle, not
caring much what became of the ship and cargo so Ion" as
they were pretty safe themselves, while some of them had
sudden thoughts of joining the piratical band.
Amongst the passengers great consternation prevailed,
and the ladies were almost in a state of catalepsy from
fear.
The captain and officers had grand apprehensions of
what was coming, but kept their fear to themselves.
The first thought of the pirates was, of course, the gold,
which Ned Kelly and Salmon Roe knew was always secured
in certain lockers.
Of course no difficulty was found in securing it and
conveying it on board the Arab Chief.
“ Now my friend,” began Captain Zeph, “ what passen-
gers have you on board ?”
“ A sail close at hand i” cried one of the pirates.
“ The Rosario sloop of war,” shouted Newton. “ Up,
lads, and at them.”
A blow from the butt end of Kelly’s revolver floored
him ; but all saw a smart-looking vessel, evidently a cruiser,
at no great distance, and no time was lost in getting on
board their own vessel and steering off.
“We must run for it,” said Captain Zeph, who
was not at all pleased with the turn affairs had taken.
“ The Rosario is a fast sailer.”
Every stitch of canvas the vessel could carry.
Whoever had built the Arab Chief had thought before
all things of speed.
She could outsail almost anything.
Still the Rosario was, it was well-known, a vessel
which, having been a year on the station, was by no
means a craft to be despised.
There was nothing for them to do but escape or sink.
To fight the cruiser was out of the question.
The English man-of-war, having communicated with the
James Stirton, at once started in pursuit.
The Arab Chief was indeed a prize worth having, and
the officers of the Rosario determined to chase her, if it
was round the world.
On board the Arab Chief the crew were in a tellable
•tate of anxiety.
The wind was pretty stiff, and she bent to the breeze.
Her sails were good, and every rope of the best.
An hour passed and there appeared to be but little
difference in the speed of th* «hipn
They were about three miles apart.
“What do you make of it, Zeph?” asked Kelly.
“ There is little difference,” responded the pirate 1 “ but
she sails better than I like. I wish I oould give her the
slip.”
“ How is it to be done ? ” asked Kelly.
“I should like to know,” mused the other; “1 am
afraid we must make for land, beach her and scatter.”
Still they kept on for some hours, and stal there ap-
peared very little difference in the speed of the two
vessels.
Salmon Roe’s brow contracted.
“ She’s gaining on us a little. It’ll be a long time afore
she comes up,” he said; “ but she’ll do it in the end.”
“ Then we must give up out craft,” remarked Zepb
with a sigh.
The gain was so small on the part of the cruiser, that
they had a good time before them.
They made direct for the coast of Australia. Salmon
Roe undertook to direct.
He knew of a bay where they could run in and anchor
close inshore.
It was their only hope.
Morning came, midday, and still the cruiser came on.
The gain was very small, but still it was sufficient to in-
dicate that in the end they must come up.
But now the coast of Australia is clearly visible, and all
depends on time.
The wind is steady, and the Arab Chief keeps on her
way steadily.
On board the Rosario they begin to guess what the
scoundrels are about to do.
'* They will beach her and escape,” says the officer i
command to his lieutenant.
.“I’m afraid so,” replied the other. “It is a splendid
craft I wonder where on earth she hails from.”
“ Some of the Malay Islands,” answered the captain.
“ They have hiding-places somewhere. Would that w©
could catch her.”
Meanwhile everyone was .preparing on board the Arab
Chief for the finale.
All secured their share of the plunder, weapons, and
ammunition.
None sought to overload themselves.
It was three in the afternoon when they approached the
shore.
The vessel was directed into a small bay, surrounded
by low land, grass, and trees.
All sail was taken in, and the boats put out in haste.
Not a moment was lost.
The Rosario was coming up hand-over-hand, and they
all knew it.
As soon as a landing was effected, everbody dashed into
the bush.
It was not their plan to keep together. Most would
strive to reach a port, and there enjoy themselves while
their money lasted, when they could make for the diggings
or get a ship.
There could be no one to identify them,
Kelly determined, however, to keep to the bush for the
present, as he had no wish to have his return to the
colony suspected.
They were some distance from any village or town, only
shepherds' out-station huts being scattered here “Hid there,
and miles apai£.
But Ned Kelly knew they would not travel many days
in the direction of Port Adelaide without falling across a
bush inn.
They dropped it at many a solitary shepherd’s hut, who
was but too glad to share his mutton damper and tea
with his visitors, who gave him the “ news,” or what he
thought to be such.
As to danger from any quarter, he never dreamt of it,
as he had nothing to lose, and thus realised the Horatiau
lines of the impecunious traveller laughing before the
robber.


The variety of costume adopted at will by the denizens
of Australia is so common that if one were to appear in
the dress of Elvino, or Somnarabnlo, or Robert the Devil
in the opera of that name, it would scarcely excite a
parsing remark.
So our vagabond party, tno’jgn dressed half-and-half
sea and land costume, attracted no attention on that head,
except that “some fellows passed here in rummy togs,"
and there the matter ended.
Thus Kelly, Zeph, and Roe steadily progressed towards
the capital of South Australia, and were not displeased to
hear that “ diggins ” had recently been discovered in that
colony as well as in Victoria, which adjoins it.
CHAPTER LXXIX.
THE TEMPLE STATIC*.
The three “ pals ” journeyed for some hours, guided by
landmarks known to Ned.
His eye was keen and unerring, and he never was known
to miss his way.
It was quite evening when they reached an inn, which
was nothing but a one-storeyed rambling building, with
deal counter and seats.
All men were tired, thirsty, and hungry, so that their
first task was to obtain refreshments, which, though
coarse, were abundant.
They enjoyed themselves heartily, and then found an
outhouse where they could rest
They were asleep in a very few minutes, and did not
wake until late in the morning.
After breakfast the four held a conference as to future
proceedings.
They had money and could afford to enjoy themselves.
Ned Kelly had disappeared altogether from the ken of
colonial people, and might have been killed in some ob-
scure quarrel for what people knew.
The question arose —should they venture into a town or
should they make their way to some populous gold-digging
locality, where they could amuse themselves and per-
haps do a stroke of business ?
After spending some time and much money in Adelaide,
an irresistible inclination to return to the scene of his
former atrocities came over Kelly.
But he thought the Adelaide diggings ought first to be
visited, and something made out of them.
So off they set, determined to get plunder somehow.
Kelly was totally unknown there, but shortly after the
arrival of the three villains jobberies were plentiful, and
the bodies of some mineis, known to be successful, were
found in strange places.
But how did they get there? the reader will naturally
enquire.
Perfectly easy.
But Kelly and his companions must have horses to take
them to the diggings.
Well, there was an easy way of obtaining these. They
would help themselves.
At the inn they heard that a squatter had recently es-
tablished himself at a place called Temple Station.
He had gone in for wool on a large scale and had a very
extensive run.
He had built himself one of the usual rough-and ready
residences, where he lived with his family.
He had, they said, erected wool-sheds, with the usual
ba* ns, &c.
He necessarily would have many horses.
These worthies proposed to heh? themselvgc t®
without, any consent on the part of the owner.
They start e f after breakfast for Temple Station, which
they found without difficulty.
It was a very extensive one, and a number of men were
employed as stock-keepers, shepherds, and the like.
'these squatters lived in a rude kind of splendour,
and, above all, were hospitable.
The three men declaied themselves bound for the
diggings.
They had concealed their wallets with their plunder
in a fhicket at some distance from the house. They did
not care to excite suspicion.
Mr. Temple asked no questions, but gave them tha
usual hospitality.
This they frankly accepted, and after a rt> t Unvy went
off, but concealed themselves in the thicket, they
could see all that went on.
At various times during the day men came riding in and
put their horses in the paddock, going to different work on
the establishment.
But it was not until quite eveningthat all labour ceased.
Then they all went to the final evening meal
The paddock was quite away from any of the occupied
buildings, and this the villains had noted.
Two kept watch while one went in and selected three
animals, the best of course.
These they saddled and coolly led forth.
The saddles and bridles, when taken off the horses, are
usually thrown into a wooden shed near the paddock, and
often left in the woolshed.
Kelly and his fellows waited, of course, for night before
starting.
All walked quietly until they were a good distance from
the station, when they mounted and away as fast as they
could make the animals go.
The anger of the defrauded squatter may bo imagined
when the morning revealed his loss.
Still, ho sent word to the nearest police-station and
described the three men.
At all events they should he hunted out of the locality.
No doubt they were bushrangers.
By this time the news of the outrages at these diggings
was circulated through the colonies, and reached Mel-
bourne.
They were quite of the “ Ned Kelly ” series, and the
moment Conquest read of them he shouted out—
“By Jilpifcer, that’s Kell}'! I’d swear to his play any-
where. I'll have him yet, or he shall make cate’-meat of me.
I’ll get myself sent off to Adelaide to help the authorities.’’
And ho was off by the next steamer to Adelaide the
following day.
He was soon on the road to the scene of Kelly’s little
game, and saw Mr. Temple,
“By heavens!” he cried, “it is that unhanged rascal
Ned Kelly.”
Mr. Temple was terrified.
He had particularly noticed the scar on his hand by
which Kelly was known far and wide.
Hope resumes its sway in Tom Conquest’s breast. He
will yet win the reward.
He at onoe rides off, and again is the patient and ener-
getic officer on the track of the renowned bushranger.
Ignorant that his presence is known in the colony, the
man goes forward for the diggings.
He has been there before, but people come and people
go, so rfat he is sure to find no one who would know lam
personally.
He and his companions do not ride into the diggings ;
they get rid of their horses before, as they might excite
suspicion.
The diggers are very much scattered some claims being
rich, others poor.
Just to do as every one else does, the men take up
a deserted claim.
They selected one out of sight of others, and then
pretended to work.
But it is all pretence, an excuse for being in posses-
sion of gold which they freely spend in the evening in
the grog saloons.
Here they find plenty of ready gamblers, and pass
many a nirht in the wild excitement of cards and dice.
Ned Kelly is fortunate enough to meet no one whom
he has ever seen before.


He finds himself, in fact, strangely forgotten. His
absence of nearly a year has brought other names into
Botice.
Ned Kelly is delighted for the time, but he soon deter-
mines that the colony shall ring with his name once more.
His egregious vanity cannot let him rest.
But be will have his fling first.
There is a police-station at this place, but Ned Kelly
and hit companions are careful not to go near it. They
keep very quiet and are careful not to drink and be
quarrelsome.
The police are carerul not to interfere with those who
keep themselves quiet.
Tho *h-**e men live ki a hut alone, where, unless someone
comes in sight accidentally, they smoke, and play, or sleep.
Should a stray passer-by appear they at once appear to
be very busy.
Their gold they have found a snug hiding-place for.
Occasionally they take a stroll round and look at the
others washing.
Strangely enough, they are unfortunate at cards. Cheat-
ing is too dangerous with men of the class of the gold-
miners, and their luck is very much against them.
What with their extravagant expenditure, champagne
and other luxuries, their ill-gotten geld is disappearing
rapidly. # .
One of their favourite resorts is a sort of low music hall,
where white men drink, smoke, and play, dances and songs
amuse them.
The songs and dancing are not of a very refined character
it will be imagined readily, but with rough natures it is
sufficient ,
At the same time, seme of the diggers are highly edu-
cated and refined gentlemen.
The society they move in just rubs off a little of the
finer edge, that is all.
One night at the grog saloon, Kelly is playing for eeM
and partners against a man whose luck has been extraor-
dinary.
Kelly’s dander is up.
He will break this lucky gambler or ho will lose his
whole pile. ....
His companions back him up in bis opinion and agree
to stake any amount . .
The stranger is a coct and collected Yankee who is im-
perturbable.
Kelly loses his temper, and the game goes very much
gainst them.
lie cannot quarrel, as the man makes no bragging or
boasting, but simply wins.
“I can't understand it, banged il can,” preset.* says
Kelly. ,
“Ho you mean to say I ain't straight? asks the
Yanl ree, coolly.
“ No,” replied Kelly, dashing down the cards, ‘ but 1
risk no more.”
And he and his companions moved away. They could
not play any more.
They were very nearly ruined, and sometumg must be
done to replenish their exchequer.
Should they work?
“ Work be blowed! It’s only chicken-hearted muffs
that work.”
No, they woefid see if something else could not be done
here or elsewhere.
CHAPTER LXXX.
HOW TO KEEP IT DAKK.
FoRICHES axe made and lost at the gold diggings, but the
host paying game is that of store-keeper.
John Abrahams’ store was one of the most extensive.
He sold even thing, and turned his money over and over
again.
Money was plentiful and people did not object to pay
through the nose.
Abrahams had a daughter, whom be loved very dearly
and it was for her that h<? was scraping money together.
He had made up his mind t*'at she snoulCi, when ne died,
be left with a large fortune, an d worked oease! ia 3sly te
carry out this idea.
lie was never satisfied with his gams, went on so-
cumulating wealth at a surprising and -pid rate.
The old fellow scarcely ever -ett his store. Things
didn’t go so well when he ■~«»s away, he would often say,
“ I must be there to ’ k after my interests.”
His dar r often begged of him to take life more
Thev had money enough, why not retire from
business and spend his declining years in comfort and
quietness?
But the father only shook his head and said—
“lf I left off business I should die. Some people aro
content to be idle, but lam not one of them. Without
work I should be the most miserable man in the world. I
should rust, and the rust would «at into my life as it does
into metal, until it cuts it in two.”
The mind ought to be employed and not allowed to
rest
Abrahams’ daughter had many admirers—a few for her
beauty, a few because she was good-natured and pleasant,
and a great many because of her money.
But the man who had succeeded in making an impres-
sion on her heart and winning her father’s good opinion
was a young German of the name of Fritz.
Sober, hard-working, plodding, and industrious, he
saved what he earned, while the other miners as a ruse-
spent their hard-earned gold in dissipation.
A He had been as successful as he deserved to be, and
left what he saved in the hands of Abrahams for safety.
The old man was very glad to see that Rachel’s future
husband was steady and saving, for he knew he would not
squander the money he had scraped together.
Ned Kelly, Captain Zeph, and Salmon Roe, were
out of luck, and hearing of the old man’s wealth deter-
mined to roll the shanty.
“It’s better than digging for gold,” said Kelly. “It
will be easy enough to break into the store and carry off
the money.”
“ Serve him right,” growled Salmon Roe. “ Why does-
the old fool tempt one like that? A man that keeps
his money hid away like he does deserves to lose it.”
Ned Kelly, having once come to the determination of
relieving the old man of his gold, made up his mind to
carry out his intention at once.
Nothing could be gained by delay.
He might get frightened and hide his money in a safe
dI&co.
So the first dark night was taken advantage of, and fiW
four scoundrels made their way to the store.
All was still.
Unsuspicious of danger the old man slept soundly, fared
out by his day’s work.
It was a long rambling building, not very strongly
alt.
After some time and trouble the bushranger succeeded
in forcing open the door, making some noioa over the job,,
but not enough to attract notice.
The tents of the miners were a little distance off.
They all entered the store after looking about them to
see that all was right.
They had their reasons for not wishing to be interrupted
by the miners, who would have shown them scant mercy.
The store was crowded with goods, and Kelly, stumbling
over something, awoke the old man, who slept under fhe-
counter.
“ Thieves !” he shouted.
The next moment Kelly's hand was on his throat.
“ Tell me where your gold is hid and your life shall b*
spared,” said Kelly, who was not actuated by humanity,,
but wanted to know where the old man kept his money.
If they killed him tkey might eaych the hut hi vsrfa
the concealed gold.


To allow the old man to answer he loosened his hold on
his throat.
“Never I’’said the old man*. “you shall not rob my
•» »
Siui'k
“Do you not vcbie life?” cried Kelly, mad with pas-
sion. “I swear that I won’t harm a hair of your head
if you are not a fool.”
“You shall never know from my lips where it ia con-
cealed,” said Abrahams.
Then suddenly releasing himself from Kelly’s hold, he
■cried out desperately—
“ Murder! murder! Help! help! help!”
“Fool,” hissed Kelly, through his clenched teeth.
Then there was no subdued cry of agony, a dull, sicken-
ing thud, and all was over.
When entering the store stealthily Kelly armed himself
with an axe (he had prohibited the use of firearms, unless
they were attacked), and this more for the purpose of
breaking open any locked box than for the object of mur-
der ; but when he saw the whole scheme likely to be
frustrated by the Jew’s outcry, he did not pause to smash
in the head of the unfortunate man by one blow from his
powerful arm.
The corpse fell without a groan to the ground.
Kelly had added another murder to the list of his crimes.
“ Now for the gold, boys,” he cried. “We must find
it, if we pull the old hut down.”
They had a lantern with them and began the search.
The men cursed and swore as they looked about, turn-
ing over boxes and packets.
“ It will be daylight if we don’t find it soon/’ said Kelly.
“ Look alive, or we shall have come here for no purpose.
The obstinate old ass has died with the secret, and the
game will be lost.”
And in his hideous rage he kicked the corpse again and
again.
“ Hush 5 ” said Zeph. “ You’ll wake the girl.”
“Perhaps she knows where the geld is,” said Kelly.
“ Let’s wake her up and compel her to reveal the secret.”
“ Women shriek so,” replied Captain Zeph. “It would
be safer to leave her alone. She might alarm the
diggers, and I don’t want to dance upon a tight rope yet
a-bit. Them miners are up to lynching as if they was
born to it.”
“ How she has slept through all the racket I can’t make
out,” remarked Zeph. “ But them girls do sleep sound.”
“ Perhaps she is awake and afraid to cry out,” observed
Salmon Roe, looking about him with the lantern ; “ them
women are so precious artful.” •
“ Hullo !” said Kelly, throwing open the lid of a small
barrel which apparently contained flour, and, diving down
his hand in the white stuff, he pulled up a handful of
gold.
The cunning old man had just put a coating of flour
over his treasure, thinking that it would effectually prevent
robbers from finding the money; but he had not prevented
Ned Kelly the bushranger from reaping the benefit of his
labour.
They soon secured the gold, and were about to leave
the hut, when a door of the closet in which Rachel slept
was flung open, and she stood before them, looking pale
and beautiful.
“ Murderers! ” she shrieked, catching sight of Abra-
hams’ body, “you have killed mv poor father, but shall
not escape unpunished. I will alarm the diggers. My
father’s death shall be avenged ! ”
Her cries were terrible to hear, and Kelly, with a fear-
ful oath, rushed out of the hut, followed by his compan-
ions, who shut the door of the hut in the girl s face.
When the diggers* arrived the bushrangers had got
clean away.
They found the girl kneeling beside her father s dead
body, her face white and marble-like, her eyes wild and
dilated.
“My father has been foully and cruelly murdered, she
eaid,hei voice clear and distinct; and many a rough uigger
turned away to hide a tear, affected by the sight o. the
poor orphan kneeling beside the remains of her father.
He had been mean and avaricious, a n d had cheated and
lied to get his money, but he had always been good to
her.
“ And I swear by heaven and earth to seek out the
murderer until I die. I will not rest till ha is punished.”
She knelt beside her father in her grief, with one hand
pointed up to heaven, unconscious, in her agony of sorrow,
that she was only clad in her night-gown, and that the
rude eyes of the diggers were upon her.
They left her to her sorrow, not wishing to intrude
longer upon the young and beautiful girl who had forgotten
everything in her wild, ungovernable grief.
The diggers were rough men, but such a scene could
not but touch a soft place in their hearts, and they swore
to assist the girl in her just vengeance.
On the following day the murder was the talk of the
place, and the news was known for miles around.
It was not that murders were uncommon in those parts,
but it was the brutality of the crime that aroused general
indignation.
Rachel was known and liked, and it seemed a foul deed
to rob her of her father.
“ That wench means mischief,” said Salmon Roe, with
vague uneasiness. “It is astonishing how these women
will stick to an idea when it once enters their head. She
swears to avenge her father’s death, and it’s my belief
that she will keep her word.”
** Will she though ! ” cried Kelly, with an inexpressible
accent of rage and menace in his voice, while his thick
lips parted in an evil smile. “ The girl is playing with
edged tools, and had better have a care. If we allow her
to play with our lives and liberties, whose fault will that
be d’ye think, pals, eh?” grinning a devilish and meaning
smile, while he drew his hand significantly across his throat.
Any other man than his boon companion might have
looked at the bushranger with repulsion at that moment,
but his fierce and threatening gesture seemed to inspire
that worthy with sentiments of the deep'est admiration.
Salmon enjoyed himself a reputation for bravery, but he
felt that he was nowhere in the presence of Ned Kelly.
“ You mean that she must be put out of the way 1' ” said
Salmon Roe.
Ned Kelly nodded.
“ She will swear to the murderers anywhere,” observed
Salmon Roe. “It would be rather awkward if she came
upon us unexpectedly and denounced us to the traps.”
“ The job must be done without loss of time,” said
Kelly. “We have only to wait till night comes on.”
This they did, and then sallied out of tke deserted hut
in which they had taken up their quarters.
Their very temerity in lingering so near the scene of
of their crime had averted all suspicion, and it seemed
only natural to the diggers that these men should have
established themselves in the forsaken shanty of an
unsuccessful miner who had departed for parts unknown.
Resolved to remove all trace of evidence against them,
they determined to make away with Rachel. Consequently
about ten o’clock that night, when all was prepared, and a
horse and cart borrowed (nominally to fetch some flour
from a neighbouring store), the villains approached the
dead man’s residence, and saw by the light reflected
through the window that someone was up.
This they soon discovered to be Rachel, whose lamenta-
tions were loud and incessant.
Roe knocked at the door, and begyed her to step out
and speak for a moment to a friend of her late father,
who was most anxious to see her for a few seconds, as he
had something important to communicate to her.
She, bewildered with grief and half-stunned by her
terrible loss, rose and tottered outside the store, when
she was suddenly garotted by an iron grasp and rendered
instantly senseless.
Kelly was the ruthless executioner, and he chuckled as
he squeezed the breath of life out of the fair form which


quivered with a few convulsive struggles ere her spirit
returned to Him who gave it.
The body lay almost passive in Kelly’s grasp.
His pals, looked almost frightened, and certainly they
trembled with nervousness and admiration.
“ Ain't he a rare un ?” muttered Zeph.
“ Why, the Old Un is nothing to Ned. He’ll put him
out when he gets there, mark my words. But, come on ;
don’t let us be jabbering here when some bloke might
wake up and spoil our game.”
“ Without uttering a word Kelly bore the still-warm body
to t.lw» cart, and, with his brother fiends, sprang in and was
off.
They drove quickly and cautiously to the outskirts of
the diggings, to one of the numerous abandoned pits with
which the ground was honeycombed, and on the bottom
of which lay many a murdered corpse of those whose return
with fortune was anxiously looked forward to by many a
fond mother and friend in the far-away home.
Here the body was removed from the cart and launched
head-foremost into the abyss—for the pits, fifty feet deep,
can truly be so described.
A dull thud, the rattling of the stones as they accom-
panied the falling corpse, all in a few seconds.
The moon shone serenely upon the resolute but mur-
derous countenances of the three fiends, who now felt the
only evidence against them in this world had been safely
disposed of.
“ That job’s settled,” ejaculated Kelly, with a grunt of
satisfaction, as he told his friends to “ light up,” and the
three smoked their pipes with a calm feeling of content-
ment and satisfaction, much in the same way as, about
thirty years ago, Mrs. Manning, who murdered her visitor,
O'Connor, cooked a goose in the kitchen wherein, with
her husband’s aid, she dug a hole and thrust the bod*,
found there subsequently by the police.
CHAPTER LXXXL
FLIGHT.
The murder of John Abrahams and the disappearance of
his daughter excited great commotion in the Adelaide Creek
diggings.
Ned Kelly and his comrades fancied that they were
looked at askance.
On the second evening after the murder they were leaving
the saloon, v> hen passing round at the back they heard a
man say—
“ Tom Conquest is coming up from Melbourne. He
swears Kelly’s here. He knows his style of game—least-
ways that’s Tom’s opinion—expect him every minute ; he’ll
soon make these fellows out.”
Kelly at once determined to leave without a moment's
delay.
He explained the character of the man to his companions,
and should . hey come face to face with this trooper, he
would be sure to know him.
“ I propose we get horses, ride away direct to Mel-
bourne,” he continued; “ there we can get disguises and
hide till the hue and cry is over, and perhaps do some
business.”
The men agreed. They had no desire to be caught by
the police.
An hour later they were on their way out of the diggings,
but not by the main path followed by the gold escort, but
bv the scrub.
They left without beat of drum and moved as rapidly as
possible.
After going some distance they heard horse’s foot steps,
and peering out from some bushes saw a body of mounted
police riding up.
Sure enough they were headed by Tom Conquest.
Ned now niade up his mind to strike off in the wilder
regions, making his way to inhabited districts only after a
time, when they would again have to “ hobble ” horses.
But that must not be too soon* or it might set the dreaded
foe on their track.
It was easy to procure food from tlie shepherds scattered
over the country, many of them ex-convicts.
With these men it was best to be on friendly terras.
The third night they ventured to approach a station and
repeated their horse-stealing feat in a very simple manner.
Salmon went up to the Home Station looking for work,
while his chums lay perdu. He spotted where the saddles
and bridles of the stock-keeper were often huddled to-
gether, so that when night came he could steal out of the
hut where strangers were often allowed to turn in, and
carry off to his companions the saddles, &c., required.
Nothing is easier than to rob any station of such articles.
They now hurried to put a long distance between them-
selves and the scene of their latest crime.
On reaching Melbourne they sold their horses to a
dealer for a trifle, saying tfhat they had no need for them
any longer and entered the town at night.
They easily obtained fitting disguises, after that they
took up their residence at a decent hotel.
Now they had time to look around them and to calculate
what was to be done.
Ned Kelly thought, after amusing themselves for a day or
two, they might try and get together some of his old
followers whose haunts he knew of, and attempt some great
robbery of gold from an escort, and perhaps attack and rob
one of the local banks, which often held large sums of
money.
There was a bank at a place called London, the centre
of a district.
It was a strong brick-built building, with a station not
half a mile away.
His plan was to rob the place in the open day by means
€>f an armed band.
The bank manager, his clerk, his wife, and servant alone
lived there, while there were but two houses in sight.
The others considered the plan a most audacious one,
but were not to be outdone in daring by their associate.
In the hotel there was a large dining-room, billiard-
room and coffee-room.
Without making any very great display, they lived well,
and having exchanged their gold for specie, spent it
openly.
In the same hotel was a man of the name of Eintoul.
lie was a diamond merchant, and was spoken of as a
very successful man.
This man they made friends with, and found him acces
slble enough.
He had a kind of office in the hotel, where he carried on
the trade of bullion dealer as well.
He bought gold, and intimated his intention of shortly
going to England with his treasure.
The three men occupied two rooms in the same passage
as himself.
He carried up his treasure at night and locked it aw.;y.
He was very careful, they knew.
But they at last hit upon a plan. In the daytime it
was easy enough to enter his room.
Salmon did so, and examined it carefully.
What appeared the door of a locked closet was in
reality a door of communication with the next room,
occupied by them, too.
They easily contrived to remove the bolts which wen
on the other side, and then to make it look as usual.
Salmon kept in his room all th« evening so that no one
should enter.
Then at midnight all went to bed.
They were collected in the one room, and listened
keenly.
The man, Rintoul, moved about for some time, and
then all was still.
They pushed the door and listened.
The man was sleeping soundly, b ' slumber
uot be relied on.
"shoy must silence him for e


There was a dim light from the window. Ned Kelly
approached the bed and placing a slip-knot quietly and
cautiously round his neck, coolly strangled him. He then
lifted the body out of bed, and tying the rope to the head-
rail of the iron bedstead, threw the body forward on its
face, to mate it appear a case of suicide.
Scarcely a gurgle was heard, scarcely a sound, and
there he lay dead.
Of course these men found no difficult” in ransacking
bis boxes, the contents of which they trans erred their
own.
Tnen they left the wretched corpse and returned to
their own rooms.
They were to leave next day very early, so m,ne were
surprised when they came down to breakfast, and, hastily
consuming it, went out with each a heavy carpet bag.
Going some distance in a car they hired another vehicle
to drive them to a given point. The man had good horses
and drove them rapidly.
Suddenly he received a severe blow on the head, was
nurled into the road, and Kelly took the reins.
Some distance off they left the carriage, and made off
by devious ways known to Kelly.
Avoiding ail habitations, they travelled incessantly un il
they were a considerable distance from the seat of their
crime.
They obtained food at out-of-the-way places, nor stopped
much until they were in a wild and almost inaccessible
.•ountrv.
After leaving the haunts of civilisation and entering the
stcrUfV. ck-oy determined to be in hiding some time efore
they ventured to do anything to throw the police upon
their track.
They selected a hiding-place at no great distance from a
shanty inn, where they ventured to procure food and drink,
but always took care to visit when it was unteuar led by
otbvs.
flat happening to fall over, in the person of stock-
man, one of his old associates, Kelly let him know that ha
was about to do a daring exploit and wanted a dozen well-
armed and mounted men to join.
The whole country was now in a state of terror and
alarm.
These atrocious crimes, attributed by public opinion to
cne man, caused a universal feeling of dread, and people
asked themselves—what next?
The police were urged by the Government to find the
miscreant, but ins cunning was too great.
Besides, in those days there was such extent of bush
that, with a population scattered about sympathising with
crime, he had many accomplices.
Stiil Kelly, on this occasion, determined jo be quiet for
\ little while.
When he had accomplished his next raid he would go
off to a distance and where he was not known at ah, and,
contemplated removing depredations to the colony of North
Australia, and its capital—Queensland.
To do this he must abstain from crime, so as to attract
no attention to himself.
Ned Kelly, in the district where he had concealed him-
self with his associates, had made himself a rough hu
It was so situated that anyone could be seen at aqu r-
of-a-mile off, when be could get into inaccessible hi
places.
But hin comrades were always ready to give him warning,
and the owner of the hut where liquor was sold was rot
one to betray a customer.
The time fixed on for the attack on London, as the spot
where the bank was situated was called, rapidly ap-
proached. :
Kelly had made appointment with his men at a point
aix miles from the place.
It was a very wooded spot on the banks of a small
rive?.
It was in the centre of a number of sheep runs, and was.
accounted rather a populated place.
Ke’ilv had provided himself w.th a u d «ore a
wig of grey liair.
No one who did not know him would have for one mo-
ment believed in the deception
One young man had gone forward as scou*. *nd when
they got within a short distance from the spev came and
told them that the coast was clear.
In a few minutes more sixteen heavily armed men sur-
rounded tho bank, Kelly and five ethers alighting an
entering.
A country town in the colonies is not unlike the same
place in remote districts in England.
Being Britishers, it is only natural the colonies should
reproduce the localities they left in the old country.
The bank in both places is a quiet, private-looking
house, and, with the exception of the word “ bank,” might
be taken for the village doctor's residence.
A few loiterers are always at the cottage doors; and the
apothecary’s is always full of gossips. The arrival of
anyone is an event. His appearance and business are soon
ferreted out, and form interesting topics of discussion foi
days. The locality is generally characterised by a stagnant
calm, and generally remains in profound repose.
About mid-day several horsemen were seen quietly riding
down the High-street, smoking short pipes, and quietly
regarding the inhabitants.
They passed the bank and approached the police-station,
where two of the mounted force were also engaged in the
arduous duty of “ blowing a cloud.”
Suddenly pulling up in front of the officers they suddenly
presented their revolvers at their heads, desired them to
remain still, sent Salmon inside for the arms, desired the
men to retire inside the station, and left one of their gang
to mount guard over the prisoners.
This operation was performed very quietly, and the
horses’ heads turned towards the bank
Kelly, Zeph, and Salmon dismounted at the door. Kelly
entered first, and, presenting a piece of paper which the
clerk took for a cheque, suddenly drew his six shooter—an
operation imitated by his assistants—and swore, if the
astonished clerk did not deliver up his cash and the keys
of the safe, his passage from this world would be more
speedy than he would desire. The manager at this mo-
ment came out from the inner office, upon which Zeph
pointed his revolver at the midriff of the electrified banker,
and desired him to “look sharp and cash up” without
delay.
Binding tho clerk and the manager and placing them in
different rooms, the doors of which they locked, the baud
rode off quietly with their booty.
Of course, in a short time the victims made known the
robbery, when the consternation was at fever height.
“ It’s Kelly ; no one but Kelly would chance it,” was
the universal cry.
The police, who had also been similarly locked up,
looked very small and very vexed.
The instant they were gone the terrified wife and
daughter of the manager appeared and liberated the two
unfortunate men, one of whom, the clerk, rode off to the
police station, where he learned how the occupants of that
building had been treated.
Returning to the rendezvous tne plunder was divided
and the band broke up.
Kelly returned to his place of concealment, and making
appointments with his immediate companions4n a fortnight
started alone to a shanty inn kept by bis sister and Joe
Marsh.
Kelly’s sister had been some time in the Colony of
Victoria, and married to an ex-convict who was doing a
good business in a bush “ pub.” Here he knew be could
be quiet for some time.
He was doubly cautious now, as he ha a good bit of
gold with him.
He travelled at night, resting in the day, and going
by devious ways.
He at lenrrth reached bis sister’* bouse hut before be


entered he concealed the greater part of bis treasure in
the hollow of a tree.
He wovdd not even trust his relations too implicitly.
Still he was very liberal with his money, and expressed
a wish to stay a few days. He ha a resolved to return for
a time to Adelaide.
This they readily agree-’ to, and the* he requested
Marsh to go to the ne-csf store and buy certain things for
Tb,ose were a complete suit of clothes of the well-to-do
«c[uat, 4 ir class, a square portmanteau, and some clean
linen.
Also a pair of spectacles.
Marsh laughed, but next day rode off to the store, a
considerable distance, to make these purchases.
He was further to buy a good stout horse that would
carry a good weight.
It was only the next day that Marsh returned with the
requisites.
Marsh had been very careful, and the things were a
fairish fit.
Next day, after a copious breakfast, Ned Kelly, present-
ing a very respectable appearance, started on his way.
He had no hesitation in reeking the high road. He had
got rid of the carpet-bag and put his things in a large rug,
which was strapped behind him on his horse, a powerful
big-boned thing which could bear even a greater weirht
than Kelly.
lie did not, on reaching the highway, show any hurry.
He was satisfied that his disguise would defy detection.
He, however, was well armed, and prepared at a pinch
to defend himself to the last gasp.
He travelled quietly, stopped at roadside inns, and was
treated with all the respect due to bis supposed position.
He was pleasant and agreeable.
When he met a trooper he scarcely looked at him, he
was so respectable.
In this way in time Adelaide was reached. He went to
a quiet commercial hotel, giving the name of Caleb Jones.
His first act after going to his room and ordering dinner
wi.'s, to look at a file of the Meih'n-rne Argus.
Ned Kelly could scarcely spell his own name, but he
could read print.
He easily found the account of the murder, and of the
lank robbery.
Both were ascribed to Ne-d Kelly,
He was delighted, especially as the police were severely
blamed, and spoken of in terms of bitter reproach.
Kelly chuckled, and, having dined, went out and walked
about the town looking at the big b 11s which were every-
where posted up in regard to himself.
Ho was delighted.
He returned presently to the hotel, and joined the
guests in the public room.
One after the other Salmon Roe and Captain Zeph came,
end all met as strangers.
Gradually they made acquaintance and became great
chums and companions, going out together, and dinino- at
the same table.
1 hey were free but not lavish with money, spending
it like men who had plenty, but who were not reckless.
CHAPTER LXXXH.
TOil CONQUEST IN ADELAIDE.
Tee three men, as we Irave said, were very careful to do
nothing to excite attention.
The colony was ringing with the news of the awful
atrocities committed by the arch fiend and his associates.
Everybody seemed to believe that these crimes were
the outcome of Kelly and his gang.
Every honourable mau wished to put an end to their
monstrous iniquities.
Their disguises were admirable.
Iho one great danger was that cf getting intoxicated
and talking too much.
Kelly, or Jones as he called himself, was tolerab'v on his
guard, for, with all his brutality and coarseness, he was
shrewd.
The others were very inferior in intellect.
Koys, he said one day when they were having a
rather rich and copious breakfast at some restaurant s of
repute, “ whatever your little game may be. don't take
too much drink, except at night.”
“I can’t turn sniveller all at once,” replied Captain
Zeph ; “it ain’t salubrious.’ 1
“ No more can I,” added the other.
“ Well,” continued Kelly in a stern and commanding
way, “the first time I catches you drunk I’m off. My
neck is my own property.”
“ Who talks about getting drunk?” was the answer of
Captain Zeph. Can’t a fellow enjoy himself ?”
“Yes, in reason,'’ was the dry reply, and the breakfast
proceeded and the subject dropped.
In those days, when money was so rife, of course every
amusement that could be thought of was provided.
Dancing saloons, gambling houses, theatres, and ques-
tionable music-halls were established and tolerated.
After breakfast the four men adjourned to a billiard-
room kept by one of their own kidney, though he never
suspected that these three gentlemen who spent their
money so freely were of the fraternity.
The man had seen too much of colonial lie net to be
aware of the fact that they were “ swells,” brit not gentle-
men.
Australian men of the educated classes are as refined
and polished as anyone.
Still, the audacity of the conduct of this trio was of
itself enough to throw people off the scent.
Over the fireplace in the billiard-room was the usual
police bill offering the £lO,OOO reward for Kelly.
James O'Connor was too anxious to be on good terms
with the police to decline putting up such a poster.
The three men were too used to this sort of thing even
to notice it.
They secured a table and called for champagne, after
which they began playing.
The game was of no particular interest to them because
the betting was among themselves.
Money was pretty well in common, though Kcuy was
very much richer than his associates suspected.
Presently some other people came in and began playing
at another table.
One of these Kelly knew by sight.
He was one of the largest wool-growers in the colony
and seemed to have a charmed life.
Whether he speculated in one thing or the other, he,
like the character of ancient days, found everything turn
to gold.
His name was Marsden.
If he had one fault—it was his belief in hia luck.
In business this was very well, but he carried his con-
fidence into cards and billiards.
An almost imperceptible sign passed between Kelly and
his confederates.
It meant, “ Game to be stalked.”
The three lazily finished their game and then laid down
their cues.
They professed to be greatly interested in the game
played by Marsden and his friend.
After the game had gone on some time and Marsden had
made some good points, Kelly spoke.
“ Something like play,” he said to Roe.
“ Back your opinion,” cried one of the players, & man of
the name of Black.
“ Certainly,” responded Kelly; “ twenty to four on th«
striker.”
The striker was Marsden.
“Done in fives,” the other continued.
And Kelly won.
“You seem a dabster at this game,” observed Mr
Marsden, when the game was over. Will ycis. play me? *


'• 14 weald be robbing you,” coolly rejoined Kelly. “ 1
could give you twenty out of every hundred.”
Now Marsden, though a decent fellow and a gentleman
at "heart, was awfully proud of his prowess at billiards.
The room was filling, and a great many friends of
Marsden were present.
“ You think so ?” was the sarcastic reply.
“ I am simply certain," was Kelly's cool rejoinder.
“ I will lay you a thousand to five hundred,” exclaimed
the rather exasperated citizen.
“ Done,” responded Ned Kelly.
The excitement was great.
The bushranger ordered a cup of coffee with a soupQon
of brandy in it.
He lost ihe toss.
Ilis adversary had to begin. We are not going to enter
into the details of a billiard tournament.
Marsden played a goodish game, but Kelly was too
much for him.
He won the thousand pounds, and a good many odd
tocts besides.
“ You are too much for me,” said the wool-grower, a
little sulkily. “ Shall we play another game ?”
“ Level betting,” cried the bushranger.
It was agreed ; and, after an interval for refreshments,
the tournament was renewed.
Kelly won easily.
His power if calculation was something wonderful. He
scarcely ever missed a stroke.
He won again.
“I presume,” remarked Mr. Marsden, vrith a sneer,
“ you are a professional.”
“Professional what, may I ask?” asked Kelly, in a
bullying tone.
“ 1 mean no offence,” was the reply, “ only you are a
most remarkable player.”
“ Have I cheated? ” was the next curt question, put with
assumed dignity.
“No—no,” the other said. “You couldn’t if you would.
Let us dine at Hotel, and try our luck at the
cards.”
“Anything to oblige,” coolly replied Kelly, “only—
few men can beat me at the pasteboard.”
“Frank confession is good for the soul,” laughed the
wool-dealer.
“ Have you a pack of cards,” asked Kelly, “ and do you
play piquet ? ”
“ Yes, and our friend the marker will let us have a
pack,” said Marsden.
“ Well, I will just play you one hand at piquet,” con-
tinued Kelly, “your friend shall look on, and I will beat
you right off ”
“ How ? ” was asked.
“ You shall see,” said Kelly, seating himself at a small
table.
The cards were produced.
“ I will not play for money,” drily remarked the bush-
ranger, “ unless you particularly wish it.”
“ A hundred quid,” answered the millionaire.
“ Geptlemen looking on,” then observed Kelly, “will
say nothing. I will explain after.”
All nodded.
The cards were dealt. To anyone not understanding the
game of piquet any explanation would be useless.
Suffice to say that Marsden got as good a hand as a man
could wish.
Kelly had dealt, talking all the time, telling rather a
good story in bis rich Irish accent.
Marsden held four aces and a run of eight.
Marsden turned to e friend to show him the almost un-
paralleled hand.
Kelly went on talmng, telling a comical story of a very
warm character.
“ I’ll bet a hundred to ten on my cards,” cried Marsden.
“ Don’t,” drily answered Kelly, who had learned the
trick of a Frenchman in the Tench, “look at your hand.”
Marsden did look, and found he had the worst piquet
hand possible. ...
Kelly while they were talking had changed uands with
him.
The audience roared.
The feat seems impossible, but the writer has seen it
d °‘‘You could not do that again,” cried the discomfited
wool-grower.
“Tryme,” said Kelly, drily.
“You shall come to the Scrap to-night,’ responded
Marsden, “ and if you can do that again—l’ll stand supper
round.”
“ Done,” answered Kelly.
The trick is not at all an uncommon one, but it has a
load of historical interest. It was played upon the late
Emperor Napoleon before the Empress and his whole
court.
After this they went to the Scrap.
CHAPTER LXXXIIL
THE SCRAP.
What was familiarly known in Adelaide society as t*“*
Scrap was a private gambling-house.
It was on a tolerably large scale but no* select, as money
was the only entrance fee required.
The large room was crowded with men, women, and
young girls, and having indulged in a few pleasantries with
the female portion of the company, Kelly walked over to
his friend the wool-grower, and tapped him briskly on the
shoulder.
“ Well,” he said, “ here I am to give you ydnr revenue
I am a man of my word, and never break a promise under
any circumstances.”
Marsden was quite willing, and the two took their places
at the table, Kelly commencing to talk, as he so well knew
how to do, and rattling out anecdote after anecdote, to the
great amusement of his companion, who, however, watched
him as he shuffled the cards, with the determination not
to be taken in this time.
“You won’t catch me napping twice,” he thought, look-
ing excessively cunning.
It was a picturesque scene, and would have made a fine
subject for an artist who wished to point a moral.
No one looking at the faces of that rough company could
doubt that crime leaves an unmistakable mark upon the
human countenance.
There were those present who knew nothing of the
character of the men and women with whom they were
associating, but they were in the minority.
“What’s the row?” cried Marsden suddenly, attracted
by a noisy discussion going on in another part of the
room.
Quick as lightning, KeHy saw his opportunity, and was
not slow to take advantage of it.
He deliberately substituted his own cards for those
Marsden held in his hand, and this done sat calmly waiting
for him t ) continue the game. The furious fight iu the
room had diverted attention from the card party.
“ Confound it! ” exclaimed the wool-grower, looking at
his cards with a bewildered “ Why, you havo
never done me again—it isn’t possible.”
There was a loud roar of laughter from the group who
stood watching the players, and Marsden was reluctantly
compelled to own that he had lost his wager, _
“Nobblers all round,” he cried, to cover his annoyance,
and all those iu the immediate neighbourhood were sup-
plied with glasses of whisky straight, which effectually
put an end to the laughter and chaff he so much disliked.
Marsden was very watchful when commenced the
next game, fearing that Kelly might hj to nlay the same
trick again; hut the bushranger reassured him on this
point.
“ Enough is as good as a feast,” he observed, “ a repe-
tition would make the joke too stale. I have done you.


twice ; I am perfectly satisfied. This game’s on the square,
but I mean to win it just the same; so keep your eyes
skinned and mind what you’re about.”
Marsden obeyed the injunction, but soon found that the
luck was all on Kelly’s side, and, after losing a consider-
able sum of rose from the table and declined to
play any more,
Kelly was leaning back in his chair taking great gulps
of raw whisky, ai>u rapidly becoming intoxicated, when a
line strapping wench came up to him with an impudent
smile and challenged him to a game of ecarte.
Kelly was agreeable enough.
He was rather partial to the society of females, and did
his best to make himself agreeable to his companion as
the ga-.ie proceeded, fixing his bold bloodshot eyes upon
her with evident admiration for this remarkably fine and
rather coarse-featured young woman.
She seemed bent on encouraging him to drink, and he
certainly needed very little persuasion, gulping down the
fiery liquor with a perseverance worthy of a better
cause.
He began to play rather knowingly in consequence,
actuated by old habits and instincts, and forgetting his
gallantry towards the sex.
Suddenly a very trifling incident occurred, but it had a
wonderful effect upon the bushranger.
He was sober in an instant, although he was careful to
feign drunkenness.
The girl who faced him had an expression of counte-
nance and a tone of voice that strangely startled him.
Where had he witnessed these peculiarities V He looked
keenly and enquiringly at his vis-a-vis. A thought sud-
denly flashed across his troubled mind.
Could it be possible ? Yes, the voice was certainly not
that of a woman. The truth suddenly flashed upon him
He was playing ecarte with Tom Conquest , the detective!
His only chance was not to betray the discovery he had
made, but to quietly wait his opportunity and make a
bolt of it, leaving his companions in the lurch.
His dismay was great, and he hardly knew how to
act, being doubtful as to the detective’s next move.
He felt like a hunted animal at bay.
He no longer tried to win or make use of any of his old
tricks
His one thought was how to get out of the room.
“Stop a bit, old girl,” he said, as he rose from the
table, leaving a pile of gold behind him. “ You’ve been
having all the fun in your own hands, but I’ll be back in
a minute. Just look out for a turn of luck. You have
won the last three games, and it is now my turn.”
He tottered unsteadily to the door, and the moment he
was out in the open air drew himself erect, as sober as if
he had been drinking nothing but water all the evening.
Kelly had escaped from the danger that menaced him
—the Damoclesian sword which had been suspended over
his head, and he troubled himself very little about his
companions.
But he had scarcely had the time to warn them if he
had desired to do so, and the attempt would have only
brought himself into danger, and he was not the man to
risk his own safety for the sake of others. Every man for
himself was his motto.
u They will get along all right,” he thought. “I do
not believe that Tom Conquest knows them by sight; but
at any rate it if not my fault if they are taken. They
must look after tawraselves.”
To tell the truth, Kelly was heartily sick of his asso-
ciates, and glad to get rid of them for a time at least.
He was not one of those criminals who shrink from
solitude and tremble at the thought of solitary communion
with their own heart. Perhaps this was because he was
so thoroughly case-hardened, so lost to all shame and
compunction.
It is hardly possible to sympathise with such a man, and
ye' (Ms most probable that he was scarcely conscious of
the extent and magnitude of his own villainy.
The rain came down in torrents, soaking him to the
skin, and the bushranger, enraged at having been com-
pelled to evacuate his comfortable quarters, swore a
savage and blood-curdling oath that he would be
upon Tom Conquest.
He felt, indeed, that he had a narrow escape, and but
for that chance movement c n the part of the detective he
would have never seen through hr.s clever disguise.
“ Curses on him ! ” he muttered between his clenched
teeth, as he looked at the sullen sky. “ The meddling fool
shall live to regret what he has done this night. I swear
that this night has sealed his doom Ned Kelly will give
him his death-blow,”
While he was thinking of the vengeance he would mete
out to another it never occurred to him that the guilty
must some day meet the doom of guilt. lie never reflected
that there must be a terrible recompense for ail his revolting
crimes.
Every action of his life gave his guilt a blacker dye ; he
was always on a new scent for blood.
Ned Kelly’s was a strange and incongruous nature.
He considered that he had a right to prey upon his
fellow-men, but whee they tried to hunt him down it never
occurred to him that ne deserved to be hounded and killed
like any other cruel and inhuman beast.
“ A bitter curse go with him—a scathing curse! ” mut-
tered Kelly, st.ll thinking of Tom Conquest.
It was a dark unhealthy night, and it was a toil to breathe
in the black air.
Ned heeded not the rain. He was red-hot with drink,
and his blood ran through his veins like liquid fire.
Some people have frightful dreams, but the most imagi-
native person could never dream of the horrible atrocities
Kelly Ixad committed during his past life, and was yet to
commit before the close of his strange eventful history.
It was waste of breath, but in his fierce frenzy of rage
and ungovernable passion it gave him relief to find vent
for his venom in words.
His cankered heart was full to overflowing rdth bitter
wrath.
“A debt repaid ceases to be a debt,” muttered Kelly,
“ and I shall never rest satisfied till I have paid Tom Con-
quest in full.”
So thought this fool who had blundered through tin
book of guilt, spelling his villainy—a slave to his own vrl(
passions.
All the fiends in hell would have had more tender
scruples than he.
The bushranger must have had a constitution of iron,
or else his wild life and fearful temper would have wrecked
his body.
He would roam earth for vengeance upon those who
dared to cross his path.
We wish that we bad a less ghastly and revolting tale
to tell, but this is no wurk of fiction—every word set down
is the simple truth,
Kelly went through the blind elements intoxicated with
rage, and longing for someone upon whom to vent his evil
passions.
It is difficult to determine how a man differs from the
brute creation.
The bushranger knew that he could hazard no delay. He
must get to some place of safety where ho could hide for
a day or two.
lie would of course be searched for in all directions,
and must hide until the hue and cry were over.
Most men half as guilty as he would have found a fiery
whirlwind in their conscience, but nothing could equal the
hell within him.
“Sold! sold! sold!” he cried exu’tingly. “ NeA
Kelly has yet to find his match. Tom Conquest or any of
his crew shall never get the reward. Sooner thoo get into
their hands I’d give myself one leaden pill,
or go over a precipice—do anything to balk them of their
blood-money.”
He strode over the soddened grass making no sound


bis keen eyes on the alert to catch the first glimpse of a
pursuer, and his cars strained to take in the slightest
sound ; but all was still, not a leaf rustled on the trees,
nothing was audible but those faint murmurs of the night
which can be so distinctly heard by a sensitive ear at such
an hour.
lie found himself in a small green dell built all round
with high sloping hills, and paused as he became aware
that lie was nearing a small hut, hesitating whether to
l urn his footsteps in another direction, or advance boldly
and demand shelter for the night.
Ho was not long in coming to a determination, and
walking quickly towards the door of the hut knocked re-
peatedly until the door was opened, and a man in a
slouched hat looked out at him with an angry frown.
“Hash!” said this individual, waruingly. “Do you
want to disturb the uneasy slumbers of a dying man f "
Kelly responded that ho had no desire to do anything
of the kind, but would be glad to find shelter from the
rain for a few hours at least, and after a moment’s hesi-
tation the man stood aside and allowed him to enter the
hut.
Kelly gave a glance at the haggard face of the sleeper,
and it seemed to him that his features were not
altogether unfamiliar; but he soon dismissed this idea from
his mind, having something else to occupy his thoughts.
He smiled, as he wondered what the man who stood
near him would have thought if ho had known who he
was—for Kelly was feared by some people more than the
most ferocious wild beast, and he was rather proud than
otherwise of this distinction.
There was a sinister smile on ois ups as ho sat listening to
the heavy rain as it beat upon the roof of the rough hut, occa-
sionally glancing at his companion, who volunteered a
remark now and then, and seemed disposed ioi conversa-
tion if Kelly had given him encouragement.
Put the bushranger's hurried flight had made him feel
moody and sullen, and his short answers soon made the
man relapse into silence, which remained unbroken until
the sleeper turned uneasily in the bed, and presently opened
his heavy eyes, staring hard at Ned Kelly, and passing
his wasted hand over his heated brow, while an expression
of utter bewilderment stole over his pale features.
“ What! ”he gasped, sitting up lor one moment, and
then falling back breathless and exhausted, “ Ned ”
Kelly knew the man now, and made a warning gesture.
“ I know your friend,” he said, turning to the other
n n, who was looking at the two in surprise.
Truly he knew him only too well.
They were old companions in crime, and had been
partners in many a vile and cruel deed, which surely
must haunt the guilty sinner on his dying bed.
At the sick man’s request, Kelly seated himself near
the brd, and, seeing tnat he had taken notice of bis
warning, breathed more freely, for ho did not care about
reposing confidence in too many people. It is a great
mistake, as criminals have found to their cost.
The rain had ceased, and, at the sick man’s request, the
door was thrown open, for the night was hot and close.
Saunders —for such was the name of the friend who had
remained at the hut to muse the sick man—stood looking
out into the darkness out of earshot of the two who were
conversing in whispers.
“Do you remember the time when I saved ,ycir life at
the risk of my own ?” ssid William Donovan, feebly, look-
ing up at the dark, harsh features he remembered so well.
He had a strange kind of liking for the bushranger, ami
perhaps his devotion to the man so unworthy of it was the
one tender point in his dark career now drawing to a close
“ Yes,’* assented Kelly, “you did do me a good turn on
that occasion, and I haven’t forgotten it; but why remind
me of that now? You have some motive, of course, or
you would not waste your breath ?”
“ I have,” said Donovan, faintly. “ I have a motive
which I will explain at once, for there is no time to be
lost. You can see, of course, that the hand ol death is
upon me?”
“ You look devilish queer, but doctors tell us that while
there's life there’s hope, v returned Kelly, evasively. “ Let's
bear what you have to say. Perhaps it will be as well to
get it over. Is it anything that concerns me ?” with quick
anxiety on his own account. “ There is no plot hatching
against me, is there? You have nothing of that notion to
reveal, I hope ?”
The sick man shook his head.
“ No,” he returned. “It is something rery different
It does not concern your safety in the least; but after
saving your life, I think I have a right to expect your
assistance in this matter.”
" Well?” asked Kelly. “ Col to the point, can’t yon?
What’s the use of beating about the bush ? What do you
want me to do?”
“What I want you to do is. to take the money I Lave
saved to my wife and family. Don't mistake me, you will
find it worth while. I don’t expect you to put your-
self to all this trouble for nothing. Saunders would do it—
he has been a true friend to me —but he is afraid to go to
England, and I therefore look to you to carry out my last
wishes.”
“It shall be done,” said Kelly, now thoroughly interested.
“ How did you obtain the moaey, and where is it to be
found ?”
Donovan briefly explained how he had obtained posses-
sion of the treasure he wished to divide between hie
family and Ned Kelly. It is enough for the reader to
know that he had waded through blood to obtain hia 111
gotten gains.
(To he continued.)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD,
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
T c e Puf ,Ck An^el > a Talc of the American Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
The Star of the «=nnth \ v ®, and Adventure. Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
,n , °. r *“* south.—A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of a Scapegrace,
ilia Lkek Angel. Adventure. The Cloud KinsT
Aawri4 e n r Waw rOSS,_A °* th ° Gr ° at T^®° lden Recf > “ “ Dive for Half-a- Mildred's Cross, or the High Road to
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.-Adventures in Search One "in a Thousand.
of the ‘‘Black Angel.” of a Big Diamond. Andrew Lorrlmer
Love s Treason, or the Two Privateers. Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough Robert the Rover*
lom Holt s Log —A Tale of the Deep Sea. Diamond Polished. " The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




But such men are not necessarily without natural affec-
tions hi their own kith and kin, and the thought of leaving
his family well provided for soothed his dying moments.
He told Kelly where he had hidden his gold, and re-
ceived the bushranger’s solemn promise to attend to his
last wishes.
What was an oath to such a man as Ned Kelly? He
did not care how often he perjured himself if it suited his
purpose. All he wanted was to get possession of the gold.
He would have left the hut at once, but thinking it
better to keep dark for a few days, made a virtue of neces-
sity, and expressed his willingness to remain with Dono-
van until the end if he desired his company.
The dying man was truly grateful for this proof of
Kelly’s friendship, and never thought of doubting him for
a single moment.
He had no misgivings, and believed that Kelly would
carry out his wishes at the earliest opportunity.
“ You will keep half of the money,” he stipulated, and
Kelly smiled covertly as he agreed to the arrangement.
It was amusing to find a man who knew his real cha-
racter credulous enough to believe any promise he might
make.
He would not have been such a fool as to trust Dono-
van if their cases had been reversed.
“ Good,” thought this shrewd and cunning villain looking
at the pale features of the dying man, for whom he had
not the slightest spark of pity.
Donovan lingered longer than they expected, and it
was fearful to hear him swearing and yelling in wild
paroxysm of fever.
Saunders often put his hands to his ears to shut out the
terrible sounds, but Kelly paid very little attention to
these ravings of a disordered brain but calmly smoked his
pipe and stared at the raver. He thought it rather a bore,
but it would soon be over.
He would have been glad to leave the hut, it is true, but
as he could not do so he behaved like a philosopher—a
very easy thing to do when it is someone else that suffers,
and not yourself.
Suddenly the wild cries ceased, and the dying man lay
calm and still.
“Ned,” he whispered, opening his heavy eyes, “it is
growing dark. I cannot see. Come nearer.”
The sunshine was streaming into the hut, but Donovan
grasped blindly for the bushranger’s hand.
“ Here I am,” said Kelly, bending down. “ What do
you want V”
“ You will keep your premise?”
“ Yes.”
“You swear it?” asked the dying man eagerly.
“ I do,” returned Kelly, without the slightest hesita-
tion. “ Make your mind quite easy on that score.”
The dying man, satisfied with this promise, sank back
upon his pillow and fell into a heavy slumber, from which
he never awoke. When the sun once more streamed into
the hut, it shone upon a dead face, and Kelly turned away
from the sight not in pity or grief, but because in sug-
gested unpleasant thoughts.
CHAPTER LXXXIV.
COMING TO TERMS.
Kelly had no intention of making any of his friends a con-
fidant in the confession made to him by the dead bush-
ranger.
He would find and carry off the treasure of the miner,
and whether he sent any to England or not would depend
very much on circumstances.
He knew the spot indicated very well. It was near one
of the wildest parts of the heights.
In the dead of night he crept into Adelaide and went to
the house of « Jew well-known for buying and asking no
questions.
He was always to be seen day and night by his customers.
Knocking, he was at once admitted.
He was a little, wiry, sallow-faced Englishman, doubt-
less, if his antecedents were known, an ex-convict like oo
many others.
“ Rather late for business, sir,” he said, with a smile,
rubbing his claw-like hands together.
“Never too late for that,” laughed Kelly. “I should
like half-an-hour's chat, so pull out some first-rate swizzle.
The old man led the way into a small sanctum, fi.led
with all sorts of goods.
But there was a table and two chairs.
Dick Pond opened a cupboard and brought out a bottle
and two glasses.
Kelly poured himself out one, smacking his lips as he
did so.
“ Good stuff,” he said, “and now to business.”
Opening his waistcoat he unloosened a belt from around
him.
His gold was in his box at the hotel, but his share of
the diamonds ho carried about him.
“What do you think of these?” he asked, as h®
showered the diamonds on the table. To provide against
contingencies, Kelly had changed the produce of his many
robberies into diamonds. He was a shrewd judge of then*
value; nearly every shilling he had plundered was thuK
invested, and it was only when he required cash for hi*
current expenses that he drew upon this novel Bank oS
“ Exchange” by selling a precious stone
The man snatched at them with the avidity of a vulture
securing its prey.
“ What do you think of them ? ” Kelly asked with a
quiet chuckle.
The man looked up rapidly and fixed his eyes with a
meaning glance on Kelly’s.
“ Will you truck ?” was the cool reply.
“At a price,” said the ether, drily.
“ Speak out,” continued Kelly.
The man fetched some scales, and examining each one
separately weighed a number together.
He then named a price, upon which Kelly with a rou_h
oath proceeded to return them to his belt.
“Don’t be in such a hurry,” said the trader, looking a
little white about the gills.
And filling a glass each the bargaining was renewed.
At last they came to terms.
Kelly intimated his wish to remain concealed in the
trader’s house until the next evening, when he would want
an outfit, arms, and a good horse.
Mr. Pond readily agreed to let him have a room and all
requirements, after which, it being very late, Kelly rt tired
to an upper room, where he locked himself in.
He slept heavily, and it was late when he awakened, and
opening his door called out.
The man soon appeared, and ushering him into a sit-
ting-room on the same floor, gave him breakfast.
After the meal was over, Kelly asked his host if he
could send a letter for him by a trustworthy messenger.
“ Yes,” said Pond.
“ Y r ou must write the letter,” laughed Kelly, “my edu-
cation has been neglected.”
“Mine ain’t much,” replied the other, with a grin,
“ but I can manage.”
“Only a few words,” continued the other. “‘Going
on a journey. Home in a few days,’ with the address.”
The man having procured materials, wrote as directed,
and sent the letter by a girl.
She was acute and cunning.
There was no fear of her being followed or cross-ques-
tioned by anyone.
Kelly was not disposed to go out in the day-time, So be
found time hang heavy on his hands.
The man, in the intervals of business, kept him com-
pany, smoking, drinking, and playing cards.
Thus night came.
Pond now produced a complete miner’s outfit, with
high boots, Kelly being further disguised with bushy
whiskers and a shock wig.


This, and a slouched hat, altered him so much that no
ana could have recognised him, except, perhaps, Tom
Gonquest.
Having paid his host very liberally, he went out into
the street aed mounted his horse.
Kelly had no intention of lingering, but rode hard that
nicht until he reached a wild and rough district, where,
however, he found a stock-keeper's hut and a small out-
house.
He had with him whisky, tobacco, and a wallet of food;
so after fastening his horse, he aroused the man.
“Who the is there?” presently cried a sleepy voice.
“ Be off, or I'll drop you.”
“Two can do that, my friend,” sarcastically replied
Ned Kelly. “ I’m a traveller lost my way—got tobacco
r.nd schnaps—will pay f>>r a shakedown.”
The man made no reply, but presumedly, having peeped
out, was satisfied.
The hut was a small square building, with a fireplace,
some stools, a rude couch, and a pantry-cupboard.
The man gxowlcd out something as he showed Kelly a
stool.
Kelly first produced a flask of whisky, then some
tobacco, and finally some food.
The man was glad of the drink and smoke, but declined
the food, of which Kelly partook freely.
The fellow then, who saw that Kelly had a blanket and
cloak, showed him a shakedown, and the tired traveller
retited to rest.
Sleep to him was the one necessity of all others.
In this place, at all events, he would in all probability
be safe.
He slept rather late, and found the stock-keeper abroad
when he woke, attending to his business.
Kelly went out and saw to his korse, after Avhich the
man, who was a rather superior person, returned.
“ You’ve a fine animal there,” he said in an admiring
way. “Going far?”
“ To seek my fortune,” replied Kelly, with a laugh.
“ I’ve had a snack,” the other went on, “ but waited
breakfast for you. ’
So he led the Avay into the hut and soon cooked some
mutton, made a damper and some tea, Avhich meal Kelly
enjoyed very much.
His constant exercise and his life in the open air gave
him a gigantic appetite.
The man tried to learn something of his guest, who Avas
unusually reticent for a gold digger, but Kelly could
always spin any yarn; and James Sinclair could make
nothing of his guest.
But he liberally paid for his accommodation and rode
off, himself and animal well fed.
“ Strange fellow,” said the stock-keeper to himself;
“ can’t make him out at all.”
He guessed afterwards avlio he was.
MeauAvhilc Ned Kelly, avlio kneAV the country well, hur-
ried forward in the direction indicated by the dying
miner.
AVhcn once his greed of gold was excited Ned Kelly
kneAV no hesitation. Money AA r as his god.
It Avas but little out of his way to visit the shanty inn
kept by Marsh and his sister,
lie thought no would have one quiet evening there be-
fore ho adventured among his fellows.
Still he avoided all places where he might fall in Avith
his felloAV-creatures.
It Avas toAA r ards night when the outlaw reached the
neighbourhood of the tavern.
Ho x'o do up and, dismounting, fastened his horse to the
post.
Mr, and Mrs. Marsh were in the bar, and a number of
cough customers Avere present.
Ned Kelly Avalked up in his most swaggering way and
called for a drinL
It was supplied.
He then asked if he could pass the night, as he had
travelled far that day, and would want to travel farther
the next day.
He was told to come in.
The woman had recognised him at once, and he was
quite welcome.
When they were in the private room they shook hands.
Both had heard of him since his departure, and, like all
depraved natures, were more pfcoud o< him the worse he
acted.
They got an assistant, an active Irish girl, to attend to
the bar, while Maria h’erself cooked some supper for her
brother.
Ned Kelly and his brother-in-la av at once drank and
smoked together, such being about the sole amusement of
such people.
An hour later a supper was laid before him, which be
enjoyed.
“ People about here safe ?” asked Kelly.
“Stock-keepers, stray travellers, bullock-drivers,” re-
plied Marsh. “ Nothing to fear.”
“ I’ll go in the bar and stand drinks,” replied the outlaw,
laughing ; “ can spare a little coin.”
And he did so, asking the men to drink for the good of
the house.
It was the custom of the country, and none refused to
accept the stranger’s hospitality.
Presently Kelly proposed a quiet game of cards for a
mere trifle, and, all agreeing, Avas soon the king of the
castle.
His merriment was infectious, his stories were broad
and exciting, and Avell calculated to win the admiration of
the rough-and-ready creAV he had to deal Avith.
After the house Avas closed, he spent an hour with his
s : ster and brother-in-IaAV, and then turned in.
lie had a good bit of ground to cover before he reached
Golden Point, but Kelly could bide his time.
As he rode along he communed Avith himself, and tried
to think of some great coup by which to satisfy his lust for
gold and add to his nefarious reputation.
The man Avas desperate and yet cautious, fond of notoriety
and yet reckless.
After breakfast, making a handsome present to his sister
and promising to return soon, he started on his way.
For several days he met with no adventures and so
neared Golden Point.
It Avas in the height of its prosperity, and exhibited a
heterogeneous mass of tents, huts, and a still more hetero-
geneous mass of people—diggers, dealers, and store-keepers.
They Avere a rough lot, all intent upon one thought—
that of making money.
Everybody went armed, everybody drank, everybody
played cards.
Ned Kelly rode up to one of the rough-and-ready houses
which gave entertainment to man and beast, and made
himself at home at once.
He was in no hurry. He Avould look about him.
Bo had not been half-an-hour in the house before he
recognised one or two of his old comrades, but Avas careful
to keep out of sight. They might be inclined to earn the
reward.
He determined, as soon as he had rested and refreshed,
to move away.
He easily secured a position where he could see without
being seen, and enjoyed his meal, his pipe, and his glass.
As night came on, the inroad of miners became greater,
and Kelly thought he would make a move.
Pay on delivery, was the maxim of these places, and he
had no bill to settle.
Rising, he moved quietly away, Avcnt out and procured
his horse from an ostler.
It was dark, and Ned Kelly had to discuss Avith himself
hoAV to spend the night.
As he prepared to mount, a hand was laid on his
shoulder. He started round,
“ Ain’t you a Avord for your old pal, Joe Long?” he
said, in a loav tone.


“Why, who’d a-thought of seeing you, Joe?” replied
Kell*, recovering himself.
“ Prospecting,” growled Joe ; but it ain’t a bit of good.
Work never did agree with Joe Long, and it don’t do.”
“ Out of luck here ?” said Ned.
“ Ves.”
“ Got a crib of any kind ?” asked Kelly.
“Yes, a quiet sort of place," said Joe Long; “only
prog’s scarce.”
Kelly gave him gold and bade him get whatever was
wanted, He’d wait by a tall tree which he pointed out.
Joe Long took the money and soon came out with
supplies.
He then rejoined Kelly and led the way.
In the thick darkness that clothed the scene that night
the human figure was almost lost and confounded with the
outlines of huts and stones and trees.
But Joe Long knew the way as well in the dark as by
daylight.
Presently, quite out of sight of the other huts, Joe
Long halted by a hollow tree, and took from the inside
a lantern.
This he lighted and again led the way until they came
to a hut.
The vague horizon of darkness that a few feet from the
lantern still encompassed them until their feet actually
trod the ground in front of the cabin.
It half-burrowed in a small hill.
All was lonely, silent, motionless, uninterrupted, basking
in the cold light of the stars.
Joe Long entered and hung the lantern upon a hook
that dangled from the rafters.
He then proceeded to light a fire by which to cook some
bacon and other food.
After a while Joe, having given his old pal a supper,
began to enjoy himself.
“ What are you doing up here ?’’he asked Joe presently.
“Last place should have thought of seeing you.”
“ Looking around,” answered Ned carelessly, “ Town’s
rather warm. But I mean to do something big soon, and
you shall have a chance.”
“ Thank you,” said Joe, and, producing an oi l prek of
cards, they proceeded to play.
Then Kelly rose and, leaning against the doorway, looked
out upon the night.
In front was profundity and blackness ; above the vault
was serene and tranquil.
He came in and prepared for bed.
After one glass and one pipe he wished the other good
night and retired to rest.
CHAPTER LXXXY.
THE TREASURE.
The man Joe Long was plump and short, rather closely
cropped and shaven.
He was not a man to manifest any very great activity,
but on the next morning he was very busily engaged in
preparing breakfast.
As a rule all men who connected themselves with Kelly
were faithful and devoted.
He was summary in his jurisdiction ; but, though firm,
he was just.
“Joe,” he said, when the other placed a breakfast before
him, more copious than refined, “ I think 1 shall start the
band again and do something big.”
“ That’s the style- ' ” cried Joe.
“ I’ve got some important business in Adelaide,” con-
tinued Ned Kelly, “where some friends of mine are stay-
ing. I must go there, and then, let mo see, a fortnight
hence exactly we’ll meet at Blackwater Gully.”
“ All right, guv’ner,” said Joe, “ you’ll let me have
some rhino ?”
“ Certainly,” was the answer. “ Try and get a dozen
of the best men together. Have you seen Sliko Bawn
lately?”
“ He’s in camp somewheie,” replied Joe Long. “ Seed
him two days ago.”
“ Well, after breakfast,” continneu Kelly, “Fit take a
look round Find such of the beys as you can trust, and
let ’em know I’m about. Know a safe place for supper?”
“Jim Wilkins keeps a saloon,” responded Joe; “he’s
all right.”
“I suppose he is,” drily remarked Ned. “I’ll even
trust Idm. Invite ’em all to a feed. Call me Captain
Crisp.”
The other laughed.
Few men, even to the most innocent, called themselves
by their right names in Australia in those days.
So it was arranged.
After breakfast Joe Long went back to the diggings,
while Kelly made for the scrub.
It was a very hot day, and as a rule everybody suffered,
except the placid orange-coloured Chinese and the snakes,
the weather apparently making the latter more vicious
and their bite more deadly.
Tile rivers in many places had dried up in their beds,
in some places cattle peris!)ed, while the pretty, graceful
shell parrots dropped dead from their perches among the
burnt-up foliage.
In the distance ran a fine range of hills, towards which
he made his way, a shimmering, hazy white-heat hanging
like a cloud over the fiat.
An hour later he entered the scrub.
He began to look around him. The man had described
the place where he concealed his treasure minutely.
Soon he came to a clump of trees.
He got within their shade, and began to study every one
in turn.
On one were several notches.
This one he examined keenly, and found that it was
htdlow. A lot of dry grass and moss had been thrust into
a hole.
This he removed, and found, as the other had told him,
a wallet of gold.
IJe at once fastened it to his horse’s saddle-bow and
prepared to return.
He had no intention of letting Joe Long know anything
of this “ find,” so determined to conceal in some safe
place near to the hut.
It was midday when he got back, and, tired by the
heat, lay down.
An hour later Joe came with provisions, and the tw<
had a meal and a sleep.
Towards evening it got cooler, and so the two ven-
tured out to join their friends.
Mike Bawn and about a dozen more of the old ones had
been found.
They were only too glad to see Kelly and to enlist under
his banner once more.
Joe Long went down first to arrange matters with Jim,
and Ned Kelly slowly followed.
His associates, however, had been warned not to be
too demonstrative.
He sauntered in, and was soon shaking hands with
many of his old pals, as “ hard nails ” as any in the colony.
But no names were mentioned, and after several rather
exuberant drinks the guests were ushered into a private
room, where a copious rude supper was provided for
them.
The diggers in those days thought more of quantity
than quality, either in eating or drinking. •
Jim Wilkins had heavily laden his board, and every-
thing was in profusion.
Enigmatical enough was the conversation between
Kelly and his friends, but they all understood.
The meeting at Blackwater Gully was arranged for that
day fortnight, and all were told to be there armed and
prepared for action.
Then the tables were cleared, and the whole party de-
voted themselves to one of the usual gambling orgies,
which were the delight and pleasure of the diggers,


Wht»o at last all wore tired and exhausted, Jim Wilkins
closed the Red Lion Hotel, and the inmates dispersed.
Mike Baw'u accompanied Joe Long and Ned Kelly to
their lint.
Mike was a aark, terrible desperado of powerful, almost
gigantic frame, with a countenance at once tierce and
brutal.
lie was, however, a fit lieutenant for the desperate Ned
Kelly.
They reached the hut,
“ Seen Tom Conquest lately?” asked Mike Bawn of his
chief.
Yes,” was the dry remark, “ I have.”
“ 1 hope I shall have my turn,” continued Mike Bawn ;
“ only let me capture him. lie caught and hung my
brother ”
“ 1 know,” said Kelly.
“ Tit for tat’s alius been ray motter,” grinned the giant.
“ If I ever gets a chance and let that chap escape, then I
expect Sol’s ghost will haunt me to my dying day.”
“ Wait,” continued Kelly. “ When you bully boys
meet me again, 1 shall have something to say about Tom
Conquest.”
The giant growled.
His was not a nature to have any patience.
He thirsted for the other man’s blood.
But he knew that Kelly was right, and that they must
bide their time.
So the subject was dropped, and something else spoken
of.
As a matter of course they drank and played cards,
after which they sought refuge iu sleep, that sleep that
knits up the ravelled sleep of care.
Kelly, early in the morning, after acting with extreme
generosity to his associates—the golden link was the most
potent of all—bade them farewell.
Their rendezvous was arranged, and it was also settled
that time was not to interfere with their arrangements.
Then Ned Kelly mounted his horse, and stalling from
the city of tents, headed once more for Adelaide.
He had his treasure all safely secured about him, ami
was prepared to be circumspect and careful.
Ned Kelly was under the impression that, apart from
his own old associates and gang, he was utterly unknown
to anyone save Tom Conquest and the father of the girl
whom Tom Conquest loved.
He was, therefore, rather reckless with strangers.
In fact, so far as he was personally concerned, he feared
no man.
He determined to take his return journey to Adelaide
extremely easy.
Something might turn up.
This monster without —since the death of Rose—a re-
deeming quality within his soul, started.
He was well armed. The road to him was well-known.
Between the diggings and Adelaide was, however, a
considerable ride.
Kelly was ready to believe that because he had already
escaped so often with impunity, he might continue to
do so.
Therefore, except the most ordinary precautions that a
man takes under the circumstances, he took none what-
ever.
He wished to get back to Adelaide as quickly as pos-
sible, so that ue might rejoin bis companions and then
make rapidly for the Black Water Gulley, and carry out
some audacious plan of robbery.
He had determined to outdo himsell in some act of
audacity, cruelty, and impudence.
His disguise was a very good one, and then there was
his keen self-possession and cunning.
Tho first thing he did was to “ swap ’ his horse. This
was a v*ry common thing iu the colony, ?iid uobody
thought anything of it-
Then he started.
Kelly was careful whenever he could get hold of a
colonial paper, to read what was going on—generally with
a view to what was said about himself.
As a rule, however, he heard enough conversation on
the subject without reading.
Well mounted, and well supplied in every way, Ned
Kelly started on his return journey to Adelaide.
Distances in the colonies are not counted as they are in
the Old Country.
Men think nothing of hundreds of miles in the colonies,
and a hard ride of seven hundred miles—which has been
done on a memorable occasion by a very well-known per-
son—did not excite astonishment.
Bjut Kelly was in no hurry.
As soon as he was clear of the diggings he made for the
high-road, and for the place where it diverged on one side
for Melbourne, on the other side for Adelaide.
The bushranger now was particularly cautious.
He wished to excite no attention, to do nothing to
draw notice on him
For this purpose, he had to restrain in every way the
exuberance of his character.
Despite the great success of the gold-fields and the
money spent by the diggers, hotels were on a very roiuh
scale except in towns.
The road-side inns remained barbarous, though with ex-
pensive accommodation.
Kelly, who knew every inch of the way, travelled slowly
and as if in no hurry.
He spoke freely to those he met, and inquired the news
of all ordinary comers.
More frequently than was agreeable he heard his own
name coupled with every possible and impossible crime
committed in the colony.
An evil spirit pervaded the man.
He desired to be heard of, but he chose to select his
own character of crime.
It annoyed him to have some petty charge laid to him,
something mean and contemptible.
One of his chief sources of disguise was dyeing his face,
and this he practised with great success.
All the first day he travelled without finding any place
of public entertainment.
He had at night to find himself camping out in the woods.
It was no hardship to a man like Ned Kelly, or to any-
one else eleven months in the year. It is more agree-
able to camp out at night than occupy a feather bed.
When the hour for repose came, he simply withdrew
into a thicket.
Ho was careful on such a day to secure a supply of water.
He had some cooked meat, damper, and tea, with a
rough blanket.
Into the scrub he went.
There is nothing disagreeable to a strong and energetic
man in passing a night thus wise.
Only to natures like his, the mere fact of loneliness
means misery.
What man of evil cares to bo left with his own thoughts,
to his own devices?
No matter ! it had to be done.
Kelly was always careful of his horse for his own sake,
and saw to his steed.
Then be located himself in a grove of gum trees, where,
without a fire, he contrived to make a very tolerable supper.
After this he lighted his pipe, and passed an hour o?
two in the disagreeable task of reflection.
What bad Ned Kelly to think about?
His own evil deeds, and his own evil origin.
No pleasant reflections ; and yet, like many another so-
called hero, he complacently thought of tho many audacious
deeds he had done, and which had excited, in some disgust,
in others admiration,
“They shall talk of me more,” he said to himself, as he
rolled himself into his blanket.
Such a determination would be all well enough if ui ao
honourable cause; but, with those of the outlaw bush-
ranger, they were simply terrible.


Night passed
At a tolerably early hour the uan was on the move, and
by nightlgot into a main-road, where he met travellers, and
once now and then, a terribly rough stage coach.
For him, however, there was no society until, at least,
he reached, towards evening, a Und of hamlet, where the
coach changed horses.
Here he determined to pass the night.
He could be sure of an excellent supper, and probably
of a certain amount of company and amusement.
As soon as he had thrown his reins to a rude kind of
ostler, he intimated his intention of passing the night
there.
He then walked into the public room, which no matter
how rough, was amply provided for.
“Supper!” was the first order, and then bowing to
sonic lour or five strangers, “Drinks—if the gentlemen
will allow me V ”
Amongst a certain set this sort of introduction is the
right sort of thing, and those present were not of a kindred
to refuse.
They nodded with a laugh, and the usual drinks popular
in the colony in those days, were brought in
Kelly said little, being satisfied to pay and then eat his
evening meal as ordered.
After that he became mere social and joined very scon
in a game of cards.
It was “ spoiled five, ” which indicated that the players
were Irish.
Ned Kelly was vefcy clever at this as at every other game,
and put money in his purse.
Still he was careful not to do anything to alarm his new
acquaintances, and the night’s festivities wound up by a
stiff bowl of punch.
“ You’re a broth of a boy, and know what cards is,” re-
marked a rather curious customer, as they rose to leave,
“ come to my room, and let us go our level best for a liver
or two.”
Ned Kelly never refused these sort of challenges, and
the usual adjuncts being sent to the room, the two ad-
journed.
The man was an enthusiast and rather reckless, conse-
qucntly suited Ned Kelly.
They played for several hours, consumed a considerable
quantity of whisky, and finally retired very much satisfied
with themselves.
Kelly was as usual the winner, but not to a very alarming
("v-fent, and Simon Gordon the traveller, was not at all
annoyed.
•• I’m off to Adelaide,” he said, “I’ve business there,
perhaps I shall take a trip to the Old Country. Some
t hink the murderer of my brother-in-law,” mentioning the
deceased merchant, “ has gone there, for I’ll be bound to
follow him up.”
Ned Kelly stared with a look of real and unaffected
astonishment.
“ Hadn’t heard,” he said.
Then fie ’ Ito listen to the details of his own fearful
crime told with bitter emphasis.
This rather sobered Kelly, who for a moment thought
it was what is vulgarly called a plant.
But he presently saw that the other was perfectly genuine,
and accepted the proposal to travel the rest of the journey
together.
“ My traps is gone on,” said the traveller, “ and we can
ride together.”
Thus sheltered under the protection of his victim’s re-
lative, Ned Kelly made his entrance into Adelaide, going
direct to the hotel where his colleagues awaited him.
They were by this time big men at the hotel, and Kelly
was proud to introduce his new friend to them.
Simon was a shrewd man of business, but also fond of
pleasure and his ease.
He enjoyed any kind of relaxation. He was therefore
glad to have anyone who was well acquainted with the
means of revelry.
There was no ship quite ready to start for England frosn
the usual cause, and 1 lie traveller had to wait.
Kelly smiled grimly as he suggested to his friends an-
other voyage to England.
But none were prepared for such a contingency just yet.
They had considerably broken into their money bogs and
must replenish.
The “ how ” now arose.
Mr. Simon Gordon was not a man out of whom much
was to be made. He was an easy-going pleasure-loving
individual, but by no means a man to lose all his subsi<*nco
very easily.
He was hospitable, spent money freely, but was no easy
fool to be fleeced.
They soon found this out
But he w r as ready and willing to pay his share in all
amusements.
A friend of his had a villa in the outskirts of the town.
He was a successful merchant of the rough-and-ready sort,
and was always glad to play the hospitable.
Gordon took the whole four out there and introduced
them to Mr. Stanton and his family.
There was a buxom wife, a son, and several daughters.
Kelly always did make himself agreeable with the
women, and singled out one girl, Mary Stanton, to whom
he paid marked attention.
She was a merry, light-hearted girl of seventeen, buxom
and healthy.
Kelly, despite his roughness of nature, could put on a
great deal of the Irishman’s blarneying ways when he
liked.
He cruld tell capital stories of the Old Country and else
where-
in his rough way he could sing a capital song without
the need of accompaniment.
Mary Stanton thought him a wonderful man. Simon
Gordon spoke of him as a rich and independent gentle-
man.
But of course on the two occasions on which Kelly
visited Laurel Lodge he made no attempt at any serious
manifestation of feeling.
About a week had passed, and Kelly began to think of
his rendezvous at Black Water Gully.
He was in the bar of the hotel at a window overlook-
ing the street when he saw Mr. Simon Gordon coming
along the side walk towards the house in conversation with
a stranger.
Opposite the hotel the two halted, and the stranger
looked over.
He was conversing earnestly with Simon-
Kelly knew him now in a moment, though he was not
in uniform.
It was Tom Conquest.
Kelly lost not a moment, but joined his companions
who were in the billiard-room.
He gave them a whispered direction and then left by
the back way.
He at once went to the man who had bought the dia-
monds, where he procured a rough dress and -where he
also remained until night.
He then started to walk out of Adelaide, which he de-
cided to give a wide berth to for the present.
He made for a small roadside inn, where at a later
hour ho was rejoined by his companions, who had also
swopped their better clothes for the rough garb of work-
ing men.
Conquest had come into the hotel and been closeted with
Simon Gordon some time.
The man was a human sleuth-hound, and one of the few
whom Kelly feared.
Still he felt himself pretty well a match for him, and
took a singular pleasure in foiling and defeating him.
He determined at a future time to show him his mastery
over his acuteness and intelligence.
Hitherto they had been equally matched, and Tom
Conquest in the deadly contest had nothing to boast of.


CHAPTER LXXXVI.
TEMPORARY RETIREMENT.
Kelly, however, felt himself growing rather tired at
times of his life of constant anxiety and watchfulness,
and felt half resolved to find out some means of putting
an end to the annoyance for a while.
lie would no 4 , submit to being hunted from place to
place like some ferocious animal whom the police had de-
termined to exterminate.
“ I can’t stand it much longer," he told his friends. “ I
,shall do something desperate if this kind of thing con-
tinues.
“It ain’t a pleasant sort of caper,” assented Joss.
“ A confounded shame,” growled Captain Zeph. “ But
how are you going to prevent it ?”
“ Ay,” said Salmon Roe ; “ the reward is high, and it
aeems to put them on their mettle. We can’t dispose of
them all, you know—that isn’t possible.”
“Do you take me for a fool, all of you?” asked Kelly
roughly.
They were sitting on the banks of a stream, resting after
a hard day’s tramp, and the bushranger was not in the best
of tempers.
His companions were well aware of this fact and ex-
changed glances, but they did not venture to speak.
When in one of his sullen humours he was dreaded even
by his associates.
It was impossible to say why they attached themselves
to him, unless it was for motives of mutual interest, and
because he possessed more brains than the whole three.
He was certainly most remarkable in thus winning ad-
herents and awing them into obedience of bis slightest
whim. , „ , ...
He could often read the secret thoughts of those with
whom he was brought into contact, and he observed that
his companions were not well pleased at his behaviour. _
“Can any of you advise me?” he asked with a sardonic
smile. “ Perhaps some of you may have a good suggestion
to offer, by which I may rid myself of those bloodhounds
for a time ?”
“ We are waiting to hear what you nave got to say,
said Zeph apologetically. ,
(i You haven’t half-an-ounce of brains in your three
neads ! ” said Kelly contemptuously.^ 1 1 suppose you know
that there is a price upon my head ?”
“We do,” they returned meekly, answering the un-
necessary question ss Kelly loaded the pistol, but if they
thought he had any intention of using it against them they
were utterly mistaken. The bushranger knew the value of
friends too well for such an act of folly.
“We have managed to live a long time without em,
added Salmon Roe, trying to make himself pleasant and
agreeable. “ People can’t be all alike in this world, but I
wouldn’t change positions with you for all that. I shouldn t
feel very comfortable if X knew that there was ten thou-
sand pounds reward offered for my nut.’
I’ve often wondered why you fellows don t round on
me,” said Kelly with a reckless laugh. “ I shouldn’t hesi-
tate if X were in place. It is a great temptation, boys,
you must allow.”
They laughed, glad w see that Kelly was recovering
from his ill-temper.
“You have trusted us,” said Joss, “and we shouldnt
tMnk of selling you for twice the money.”
“ Saw do you know I have trusted you ? ” retorted
Keilf. T trust nobody, and I believe in nobody but my-
self. A man is his own best friend.”
Kelly relapsed into thought for two or three minutes,
while the others lazily reclined on the grass.
“ I hare hit upon something,” he said, suddenly. “It
is a grand idea, and will put the police completely off the
«cen«. What put it in my head I can’t make out.”
“ What is it? ” they asked in one voice.
“ Listen,” replied Kelly.
“ Firs away,” remarked Salmon Roe,
“We are all anxious to hear what you have to propose,"
said Captain Zeph.
“ It is bound to be something 'cute," observed Joss,
raising his knees, as he gazed at Kelly with real or pre-
tended admiration.
“ Don’t interrupt,” said Kelly, angrily.
“No offence," said Roe to himself, taking a good pull at
the black pipe in his mouth.
“ Well, then," said Kelly, “ you all know that at this
time of the year squatters and wool-growers are short of
I lands.”
“ what’s that to do with us? ” asked Zeph.
Not condescending to reply to Zeph’s question, Kelly
continued—
“ They are short of hands, and will be glad to get them,
however inexperienced, if they are strong and handy.”
“ I daresay they would, but where are they going to
find them? This is rather an out-of-the-way part, this
is," said Salmon Roe.
“We must offer ourselves,” said Kelly.
“ Ourselves ! ” repeated the other.
“Yes, offer ourselves,” returned Kelly. “As farm-
servants we shall never be recognised; the police will be
completely baffled.”
“It will be a rather quiet life for us,” said Zeph,
thoughtfully; “ but I suppose it won’t last long ? ”
“ Not longer than necessary,” replied Kelly. “ I only
want to fool the police for a week or two. They will gel
tired of searching for me, and will be thoroughly shunted.’
“ There is no station about here, is there ? ” said Salmon
Roe. “ There isn’t a house for many miles.”
“There is only one shanty about here, and that is about
ten miles off,” replied Kelly. “It is owned by a very
rich man, who has no occasion to work for his living at
all, but can’t bear to be idle. He has got lots of stock,
and a thundering pretty daughter.”
“You seem to know all about him.”
“ I have been in this part before. Let us start for the
place without delay."
The other men who were very comfortable where they
were, for they had camped for the night, did not feel in-
clined to move, but they got up reluctantly and followed
Kelly who had leaped the small stream.
They were all strong and active fellows, but they had
great difficulty in keeping up with Kelly who walked at a
rapid rate.
Before they had done half the distance they were per-
spiring in streams. The heat was intense.
Ned noticed their discomfiture but this increased his
enjoyment, and he redoubled his speed,
Zeph grumbled to the others, but the grumbling did not
reach Kelly’s ears.
They soon arrived at their destination, and at once
addressed the master of the place.
He was a man in a loose jacket and a large straw hat,
and was in the act of smoking a well coloured pipe vlien
Kelly accosted him. .
“ Well?" he said laconically, surveying Kelly, and then,
turning his attention to the others, looked at them up and
down with great coolness and deliberation.
“We are in want of work,” returned Kelly, “ and I
know there is always plenty to do at this time. Will you
give us a job?”
“I think it can be managed,” said the squatter,
unsuspiciously satisfied that they were all stout strong
fellows, a great recommendation in his eyes. _ “If there
is anything I do dislike it is to see hearty active men out
of employment through no fault of their own.”
“It’s hard lines certainly,” said Kelly. a We are ail
truly grateful and will take care that you not repent
your kindness.”
Mr. Stephens nodded, being a xaan of few words, and
showeu them what they would be required to do.
He was not displeased at having secured such men,
little knowing their real character or dreaming that he was
standing beside the notorious bushranger.


They all acted their parts with excessive cunning and a
coolness which nothing could move, having been well
drilled by the astute Kelly, who desired to keep quiet for
a few days ami knew no other way to secure his object.
A more observant man than Mr. Stephens might have
been struck by the bushranger’s harsh and marked fea-
tures, but he employed a number of men and did not
think jt necessary to trouolc himself about their peculiari-
ties of manner and appearance.
All he desired was tuat they should do his work as
speedily as possible, and do it thoroughly while they were
about it, and if they satisfied him on that point he asked
no more being an easy going man, who took life as it
came and was careful not to give himself more trouble
than was absolutely necessary.
He was just the man Kelly would have picked out for
Ms purpose if he had been given the choice. The bush-
ranger hated the inquisitive and curious like poison.
“ 1 hope this won t last long,” said Joss, discorite-.i/jdly,
when they were alone after the second days work. “ Hard
work goes against the grain. It ain’t often I have tried it,
but I'll be if it ain’t enough to make a fellow wish
himself in the stone jog.”
“You’ve got good grub and a bed to lie on,” returned
Salmon Roe, with a grin, “ eat and thank your stars.”
“Thanks be hanged,” said Joss. “I’d sooner be in
jail than stand this life much longer. There you know
you are obliged to do work ; but there is no need for this
slavery as far as I can see. Is Kelly getting funky— ”
“ What’s that,” asked the bushranger, clapping his
hand on the speaker’s shoulder, to his great dismay for he
had not known that Kelly was so near.
He commenced a lame apology but Kelly cut him short
at once.
“Dry up,” he said, “there is no need for excuses, I
am as sick of this life as you can possibly be and am
only waiting till I see a way out of it. Have patience for
a little while longer boys.”
“ Oh, you are thinking of cutting it then ?” said Joss,
with an air of relief.
“Did you think I was a fixture here?” asked Kelly.
“ We’ll be far away from here before long never fear.”
And with this assurance they had to be content, well
knowing that Ned Kelly would remain where he was as
long as he thought proper, unmoved by any remonstrance
they might make.
Kelly found it very difficult to continue steadily to
fulfil his self-imposed servitude in the station, but the
necessity of lulling all suspicion and throwing tiie author-
ities off the track made him submit for a time to the
irksome yoke. It could not last much longer, for his
“ company ” were beginning to get rebellious and restless
under the decent discipline of labour.
The bushranger was becoming a great favourite with
the master, having managed to take every duty, however
slight, off his hands, and it coon bee me evident that Kelly
could soon, if he liked, be promoted to the post of over-
seer.
This of course created no little jealousy amongst the
other men, and Kelly himself scarcely knew how much he
■was disliked, until one day he had a little difference with
the man who had been everybody before he made his
appearance, when he found that the sympathy was
decidedly not on his side.
“ Why should you be put over ray head?” saU the man
as they stood in the stock-yard after tho day’s work was
over, “ What the deuce brings you here to interfere with
an honest man’s work? Its tramps like you that
gets us the sack. You crawling crackman, that’s what
you are, its my belief. I wouldn’t leave an old knife in
your way, if I wanted to keep it.”
“ Hold your jaw,” fiercely howled Kelly, “or I’ll make
an old knife of you. Why, the marks of the darbies aint
off your arms yet, you old lag ! ”
“They ought to be on yours, I believe, if the truth was
told,” was the reply, “ and i‘m bluwcd if 1 don't think
you’ve had the ‘ Irons ’ on your heels already. Let’s seo
you walk, do. Why you’ve got the ‘ lifer’s ’ stroddle—hah!
hah! Get up. You aint game. Well, I’ll help you.
You’ll get used to have the metal off your ankles in time,
and approaching Kelly, he roughly pushed him off the rail
of the stock -yard upon which he was sitting.
The man, whose name was Jim Shiite, put his ugly face
close to Kelly’s and tpat at the bus: ranger, who was
utterly taken aback by the msult.
Shute, thinking that he was thoroughly cowed, then
struck him across the face, much to the delight of
all the spectators with the exception ot Kelly’s three
friends, who expected to see the man stretched lifeless at
the bushranger’s feet.
Kelly, with a roar like a wild beast, felt for his pistol,
but some friends of Jim's, knowing that a row was coining
off that night, had taken the precaution to remove it from
his belt.
“ Don’t feel for your barkers,” said Shute, “ but have it
out fair, like a man.”
Before he could utter another word he was seized in the
powerful grasp of the euraged bushranger, and hurried
towards a small stream, in spite of his protestations and
struggles.
He was like an infant in that powerful grasp, and none
of his friends offered to interfere, although they had only
been too eager to get up the row.
There was something about Kelly which made them
respect him at that moment.
He did not look like a man who would be trifled with,
and they therefore contented themselves with watching tho
proceedings from a respectful distance.
Ned, with a mocking laugh, forced the man’s head under
water, holding it there till the blood ran out of his nose.
Had not Mr. Stephens appeared upon the scene the man
would most certainly have been killed.
He had been a witness of the whole scene, and his ver-
dict was, “Serve you right! ” when Shute came to make a
formal complaint, but he privately lectured Ned for thus
giving vent to his temper, however much provoked.
His little lecture made Kelly grin when his back was
turned, but he took it in good part, promising not to let
his temper run away with him again.
“ Look here,” said Joss, shoving the bushranger on one
side, “ don’t look startled by what I am going to tell you.
I know that this is a rather useless caution, but it is
best to be careful, situated as we are.”
“Cut along,” said Kelly; “I prefer anything to sus-
pense. Out with it, man ! ”
“ Well, I’ll tell you what it is,” said Jim, “ that Shute
suspects who you are. I saw him looking at you with a
nasty smile a few minutes ago. 1 believe he means mis-
chief.”
“ Curse him,” said Kelly; “ why didn’t I smother
him ? If ho suspects me, how is it he does not speak
to Stephens?”
“ Because he thinks that trick won’t pay. Some of tho
other men would want to go halves with him. He has got
some other idea in his head.”
“ Well, all we can do is to keep our eyes on him for
the future,” returned Kelly, and then the subject
dropped.
But that night, as the four friends sat talking together,
Jim Shute crawled close up to them and listened atten-
tively to every word they uttered.
What they said fully confirmed his suspicions, and
rising, with a smile upon his face, he slowly stole away,
vanishing without the slightest sound.
“ What’s that ?” asked Kelly, suddenly lifting his head
as the thunder of horses’ hoot's fell upon his ears. “ Hui-
loa! look out! Shute has gone off to set the traps
on us—the ruffian !”
“I told you so,” said Joss, while tho others looked at
each other with consternation. “ Our best plan is to slope
before it is too late.’'
“ Yes, Jet’s clear out,” cried Captain Zeph and Salmon


Roe in a breath, “ This is no place for us now. We have
stopped too long,”
“ Net *c fast,” saia Kelly. «I’ve got a dodge worth
two of th-> My idea is to rouse the house and
denounce as a horse-stealer. It will give us breath-
ing ti'ft- at »’.] events, and we can easily find some excuses
lor iu*« joining m the pursuit.”
• That’s trumps, said Jim, admiringly. “ What a
nut you have got.”
Mr. Stephens was soon aroused, and great was his anger
and indignation to find that two of his best and most
valued horses were missing.
Several started in pursuit of the supposed thieves, and
Kelly and his associates remained behind with others to
protect (?) the women. Mr. Stephens was at the head of
the pursuers.
The bushranger laughed grimly as he watched their de-
parture.
“ Now, boys,” he cried, when the sound of the horses’
hoofs had died away in the distance, “ Let’s go and pre-
pare Miss Stephens for a little journey. I’m going to take
her away in pledge, and I expect that the old man will
offer a very handsome ransom for his pretty daughter. In
any case we shall find her useful in keeping the traps at
bay, an 1 if the worst comes to the worst she’ll be a plea-
sant companion.”
“ But where shall we take her?” asked Roe, not dis-
pleased with the idea, but fearful that they would find a
petticoat rather in the way.
“ The Grey Scrub Flat is the place,” returned Kelly as
he went up to secure the girl, who was quietly slumbering
unconscious of the terrible danger that menaced her.
Kelly, showering blows upon the door, aroused her from
her sleep, and she sprang up in bed startled and alarmed.
The bushranger soon made her understand what he
wanted her to do, and, fearing that he would carry out his
threat of entering the room if she hesitated, hastily attired
herself, shivering with horror, and longing inexpressibly
tor the sound of her father’s voice.
Several horses were nearly saddled when Kelly led the
trembling girl out into the open air.
“Stephens will wish ho had not been in such a hurry
to go after his stolen horses,” said Kelly as they rode away.
lie led the horse upon which the unhappy girl sat, pale
and trembling, and motionless as a statue.
She was almost, paralysed with grief and horror at this
outrage.
She looked at the long, rambling structure, and won-
dered if it could bo possible that they were indeed
taking her away from her home where she had lived for so
many happy years without dreaming of danger.
Who shall picture that poor creature’s unutterable
sickness of heart!
She was not a fainting woman, and was fully alive to all
the horrors of her position.
If she could have lost consciousness she would have
escaped much misery.
“ Cheer up,” said Kelly, consolingly. “We would not
hurt a hair of your head, so there is no occasion for you to
look so frightened. My comrades and 1 arc devoted
to the ladies, eh, mates?”
“ We dota on ’em,” said Joss with a leer.
“Literally adore the ground they walks upon,” said
■Captain Zeph, while talmou Roc smiled approvingly in
chorus.
“ Oh, if you have the slightest spark of pity, restore
me to my home,” said the girl, finding voice at last.
“ All in good time, my dear,” said Kelly, unmoved by her
distress. “ You will have to exercise a little patience while
your father is making up his mind how much you are worth.
You cannot expect that wo shall part with you for
nothing, after all the trouble wc have had to carry you off
during the absence of your worthy father, for whom
we shall always have a great personal friendship. But
business is business, and we cannot part with you until
we get something in exchange.”
The girl looked at the dark, forbidding face, ana saw
how impossible it was to move him to pity, but she made
another wild appeal, another vain and fruitless attempt to
move his stony heart.
“My father wULreward you well," she cried, “ He will
ask no questions If you will only take me back at once.
In the name of heaven take me back if you are not fiends
in human shape.”
The tears of anguish rolled down ner fair etieek as she
spoke, but these guilt-stained men witnessed her distress
unmoved, and felt no pang of conscience.
It is not true that conscience makes cowards of us all.
These men were utterly without mercy, and could laugh
with careless mirth at human misery.
Death never comes to those who wish for it, or poor
Kate Stephens would have fallen to the ground a lifeless
corpse.
She began to sob bitterly, not to move their pity, but to
relieve her overcharged heart, which seemed full to over-
flowing.
“ Those tear* are scarcely complimentary,” said Kelly.
“Do you kno\. a’l lo I am, my pretty lass?”
Kate made no reply, but continued to sob bitterly.
“ I am Kelly the ironclad bushranger,” said Kelly, with
some pride of manner.
lie was proud of his unenviable notoriety.
The girl gave a low startled cry of horror and dismay.
She had heard that name before, and knew that a man
like Kelly would shrink from nothing, however infamous.
How blind her father must have been to employ such
men.
it seemed to her now that everybody ought to have
seen through them at first.
They were riding swiftly through the black darkness,
and with desperate strength she suddenly tore her horse’s
bridle away from the bushranger, and, turning her horse ’s
head, galloped in the direction of home.
It was a bold stroke, and for a moment the men were
taken utterly by surprise.
“ Curse the young hussy !” cried Kelly, angrily. “Wo
must lose no time, or we shall lose her after all. She
knows how to sit her horse.”
They turned their horses’ heads and followed in pursuit
of the unhappy girl, who shuddered as she heard the
horses’ hoofs.
Closer and closer they came; but she urged her horse
to the top of its speed, and managed to keep a little in
advance, hoping against hope.
Suddenly Kelly determined to put an end to the chase,
and, drawing out his pistol, fired recklessly, caring very
little which he shot, the woman or the horse.
The girl gave a wild cry as the poor animal fell to the
ground wounded.
Kate herself was uninjured, and struggled to her feet to
find herself in the grasp of the terrible bushranger.
“A pretty dance you have led us, girl,” said Kelly,
angrilj', “ You might havo known that a wench could
not outwit four men. It would have been better for you
if you had taken things quietly instead of putting us out
of temper.”
“ Fiend !” cried Kate, indignantly, and her black eyes
shone like stars, “do your worst.”
Kelly looked at her with undisguised admiration in
spite of his anger.
Pie liked a woman with some spirit.
She shuddered as he placed his hand on her arm, shrink-
ing from him in very evident disgust.
“ Come,” he said, “you will have to ride on my horse
since you were foolish enough to compel me to shoot down
your own. As I said before, you have gained nothing
by your foolish display of temper,”
“ I wish that 1 could strike you dead,” sa’d Kate
clenching her little fist in impotent rage. “ Why are
such wretches as you allowed to lire in this bright and
beautiful world?”
Kelly scowled at her savagely.


He felt that Miss Stephens was going a little too fur.
Re didn’t mind a of temper, but he objected to
personal abuse.
“Come!” ho said again, rather harshly this lime, and
ricking her up unceremoniously, placed her before him on
his horse in spite of her wild struggles.
The girl could not Lear to feel his strong arm round
her s’im waist, and shrank from him in unutterable horror
and loathing.
She did indeed regret her attempt to escape. It had done
her no good, but only made her position infinitely more
disagreeable and unpleasant.
Kelly looked at her half-averted face with a smile, and
held her closer as he felt how she shrank from him.
“It wculd have saved us a great deal of trouble if we
had done this at first,” he said. “We ought to thank
you for suggesting the idea.”
Kate made no reply.
She was too indignant to be able to command her voice,
jmd she knew that those evil men only sneered at her
tears.
It was a terrible position for a young girl, sweet and
innocent, and poor Kate longed for death in her misery".
She felt that she had very little mercy to expect from
these men, and her only hope was that her father would
return home, and finding her gone, immediately start in
pursuit of his lost daughter.
“ Where are they taking me to ?” she thought, as they
rode along, the deep silence unbroken save by the clatter
of the horses’ hoofs.
“ This must be a very romantic ride for you,” said
Kelly, breaking the silence. “It will be something to
remember when you are old and grey, if you shoukTlive
so long.”
“ I shall remember it as the greatest degradation I have
ever endured,” she returned with an indignant blush.
Before Kelly could make any reply he heard the sound
of men, and hastily clapped his hand over the girl’s mouth
ff.s she was about to cry out.
Then the four men drove their horses behind some
bushes, which effectually concealed ;hcm in the darkness.
Hardly had they done so when a party of horsemen
came in view.
It was the party that had gone in search of Jim Shute.
Stephens was at their head.
They had evidently come up with Jim Shute, for there
were two horses with riders being led along.
Jim Shute was nowhere to be seen, and the bushranger
felt no doubt that he had been hung or shot.
The young girl’s feelings may be easier imagined than
described.
To see her father so near and not be able to make known
her presence to him, was terrible.
If she could only have given one cry.
She struggled so desperately that Kelly had the utmost
difficulty in keeping his hand over her mouth.
r lhe horsemen were soon out of sight again, and gra-
dually the sound of horses’ hoofs died away in the
distance.
“You little she-devil!” said Kelly, when he thought it*
safe to speak; “ you nearly spoilt all with your tongue.
I’ll teach you to defy Ned Kelly! ”
And with these words the brutal ruffian struck her in
the face with his open hand.
“Coward!” cried the girl, her eyes flashing with
indignation and mortification. “Coward! to strike a
woman! ”
“You fir.d oetter be careful,” said Ned Kelly, signifi-
cantly. “ KenaeEther you are in my power, and I can do
what I like to you. If I had not got an object in view von
should be my wife for a week or two ; but I want to get a
price for you. If your father thinks you worth paying
for, you shall be returned to him safe and sound. If no£
riljkeep you here till I am tired, and then turn yen
"Vkift as a warning to those who trifle with Ned Kelly.”
“Monster I” cried Kate; “why not kill me at once?
I ask you in the name of mercy to put me out of my
misery! ”
The girl was not afraid of Ned Kelly’s fist, biii site felt
a dread that the licentious bushranger would never let her
return before he had accomplished her ruin.
She had heard tales of women being insulted and cruelly
used by bushrangers.
How could she defend herself from them ? She was a
poor weak girl, in the power of men whose deeds were so
notorio us.
The country rang with tales of their misdeeds.
All that night they galloped on, and Kate knew that
she was leaving her home farther and farther behind.
At last morning broke.
Kate looked about.
The country was unfamiliar, and she knew she must be
far from home, for she had often had long rides with her
father.
The sun shone upon the level scrub-land, and upon the
face of the terror-stricken girl and the villains who had
torn her from her home.
She was as white as death and exhausted with the long
ride.
Grey Scrub Flat was reached at last.
This was their destination.
Kelly and his pony stopped before the door of a tumble-
down shanty.
A man came to the door.
He was a shepherd. Kelly knew him well, he had often
done the bushranger a good turn when that gentleman
had made it worth his while.
“ Hulloa,” he said, looking in surprise at the girl,
“ been wench-stealing ? Why, I’m blessed if it isn't old
Stephens’ daughter,” giving her a pitying glance. The
two had met before.
“We want to stop here for a day or two,” said Kelly,
“ With the girl ? ”
“Yes.”
“ Couldn’t you go somewhere else V”
The man was not all bad. He had helped Bielly to
escape from justice often because he had doue him a good
turn once, but he had never joined him in his crimes.
“ Shut up,” said Kelly, roughly.
And the men dismounted from their horses, much to
the annoyance of the shepherd.
“ It ain’t safe to stop here.”
“Why not?” asked Kelly.
“Because Stephens will search high and low for his
daughter,” replied the shepherd.
“He’ll never think of coming here,” said Kelly, and
pushing the girl before him, he entered the hut.
The girl, who had seen the shepherd before on her
father's laud, threw herself at his feet and begged him to
take her back.
The shepherd would only have been too glad to comply
with this request, but he could do nothing against four
men.
“ You have some feeling,” cried the girl, “ you will not
let them ill-use me, you will take me home and my father
will reward you,”
“H e couldn’t take you home if he wished to, you little
fool,” said Kelly, with a grin. “ You forget that we are
four to one, and the first move he made against me would
be his last.”
The girl saw that Kelly was right.
She would not waste her breath in idle pleading, it
could do no good. ,
The rough owner of the hut felt his heart ble-ed for this
defenceless woman in the power of these men.
He was afraid she would meet with a fate ten thousand
times worse than death.
Ned Kelly could have brought her here only for one
purpose, and that purpose was so horrible that the shep-
herd shuddered.
The girl was doomed.
Ihe shepherd resolved to defend her with his Uie, If


Ned Kelly tried to treat her with indignity, lie gave a
sigh of relief when Kelly told him of his real intention,
and aske i him to go off at once to negotiate with old
Stephens.
He was only too glad to consent to this, for ho knew
that the old man would pay any sum for his daughter.
“ You shall have your share,” said Kelly, in conclusion,
and the shepherd started off at once. Before leaving he
was warned that if the party were betrayed, Ned would
shoot the girl on the spot, and that scouts would be placed
on the lookout for all comers.
The girl was locked in the hut, and, worn-out with ex-
haustion, fell into uc uneasy sleep.
Kelly and his men, the weather being fine, laid them-
selves down under the bushes.
Presently Joss, who had taken a great fancy to the girl,
sneaked away and made for the hut.
Opening the door quietly he crept softly in.
The girl was lying with a happy smile on her face, inno-
cent and beautiful.
Joss looked at her with delight.
He muttered, “ I don't see -why Ned should not allow us
to touch her, because he doesn’t want her himself. Ho
is a dog in the manger, that’s what he is.”
He stooped to kiss her, and the girl awoke to see the
hideous wretch gloating over her.
She gave a wild shriek,
“ Shrieking won’t do no good,” said Joss.
Again her shrieks rang out.
In another moment Kelly came rushing into the hut,
red with passion.
He seized Joss by the collar and hurled him out of the
hut.
“Keep your ugly carcase out of that hut,” cried
Kelly. “Do you think I have run away with her for
your pleasure ? She is to be returned to her father un-
harmed, providing he pays the money for her.”
Joss muttered something, but he did not molest the girl
again.
He knew better.
Kelly did not care much what became of the girl, but
he guarded her from Joss, because he enjoyed keeping
that gentleman in check.
In the evening the shepherd returned with a handsome
amount.
“ This is half of what you are to get,” said the shep-
herd. “ When she is returned to her father you will get
the other half. Old Stephens is a man of his word.”
Then Kate was given back to her father, uninjured and
unpolluted by the bushranger, and her joy was great, and
she returned thanks to God upon her wonderful escape.
CHAPTER LXXXVH.
BLACICWATEK GULLY.
Kelly and his companions now knew that to remain in
that neighbourhood would indeed be the height of folly.
He must put hundreds of miles between himself and
the enemy.
They rode hard and fast, nor halted until they had
reached a wild and desolate district, miles away from the
scene of the late outrage.
They stopped only to rest their horses, nor halted any-
where except in wild and almost inaccessible districts.
Several days after leaving Gray Scrub Flat they came to
a small glade belted by strong-limbed trees.
They were within an hour of Black Water Gully. Here
Kelly proposed to halt.
It was a beautiful spot.
How peaceful the sun fell through the trees . How
beautiful was the forest green ! How happy and uncon-
cerned the birds flew in and out of the branches !
But the bushrangers took no note of this. They had no
eve for nature. , ~ ,
* Having hobbled their horses they supped, and waited
far night to set in.
Then Kelly led the way in the direction of the wild
valley of Black Water Gully.
Approaching carefully, Kelly soon found that it was
tenanted.
Under the shelter of some lofty trees were collected a
ruffianly band, among whom Kelly at once recognised
Mike Bawn and others.
A whistle brought them all to their feet, and soon the
gang was revealed, all very delighted to welcome Ned
Some hours were passed in revelry, and then all sought
much-needed repose.
Early in the morning Kelly held a council of war, to
which his immediate associates and Mike Bawn were
admitted.
“My notion,” said Kelly, “ is to go up to Ballarat, and
watch our chances. We can either see what turns up, or
do a great stroke—rob the escort, and follow it into Mel-
bourne.”
“ Better tackle it on the road,” replied Mike, “ if we’re
strong enough.”
“ If we make a big haul,” continued Kelly, “ we can
be off to the ranges, where all the troopers in the world,
black or white, would never hunt us up.”
So it was agreed.
To go to Ballarat in a body would, of course, have been
the height of folly.
They would have to disperse, appoint a rendezvous, and
meet as if casually.
That day, however, they journeyed together, halting at
night at a shanty, where they found a rude and motley
group.
This was just their style, and they added to the rioting
and noLrj,
They were all bound for the diggings, except a few who
were stock-keepers or shepherds.
At the end of the day’s march the band separated, Kellj
zeuvining with him his three inseparables.
They would not excite any particular suspicion.
They camped in a wood by the wayside, and enjoyed
themselves as usual.
Suddenly they heard horses, and peering out saw six
troopers led by a guide, a man whom they had passed
during the day.
He bad, doubtless, in some way recognised some of
them.
Everyone flew to his gun, and then rushed for his horse.
The police came bounding on.
“ Spread ! ” cried Kelly.
« On! on ! men ! ” exclaimed the officer in charge.
“ We have the ruffians now,” and he fired a pistol in the
direction of Kelly.
The bullet whizzed harmlessly away into the forest,
but the bushranger was more fortunate, wounding the
other severely.
He then rode away; swerving his horse round, he
dashed into the forest.
The flight of Ned Kelly was taken as a signal by Ins
men, who, scattering instantly, followed his example,
hoping to find concealment in the forest or different
gullies, with which they were well conversant.
Two of the men gave chase to Kelly.
Swiftly the bushranger rode, his body bent low in tho
saddle.
The track he had chosen was evidently known to mm,
and the police found it extremely difficult to follow.
The trees seemed to opem and to close upon the fugitive,
like a green sea, making shooting uncertain.
Twice the pursuers tried it, the balls en ricochet from
the tree-trunks. _
Soon it was apparent that the fugitive distancing
them. They saw him turn back, and hear,?, his taunting
laugh of defiance. x
Suddenly he threw up his head and shouted to them
over his shoulder. _ ~
“ I know the place ! ” cried the astonished officer to r.|B
trooper. “We are approaching One-treo Gulley; **


crosses our path. He’ll never attempt the leap, no horse
could do it.”
“ I don’t know, sir,” answered the man. “If that man
is Kelly, lie may, if the horse is sound; he’s done it be-
fore—it h known as his rtup.”
“ Theu he has escaped us,” ejaculated the officer, as he
perceived the splendid horse rising to the jump.
The trooper levelled his pistol and fired at the horse.
But in his anxiety ho did not touch him. The animal
reached the opposite side.
Neither of the men dared to follow. It was a desperate
leap, only to be taken by an utterly desperate man.
The troopers gazed after the retreating form in admira-
tion It was a daring deed indeed.
Kelly rode off at a rapid pace. Ho knew that the
mounted police would have to go a long way round, but
he determined to give them no chance of molesting him.
The rendezvous was in a deserted claim, which had
been given up some time as exhausted
He rode hard until about twelve and then halted.
He had come by devious ways, and knew that he could
not be pursued.
He halted, took a pull at his whisky-flask, and then
slept soundly, his hobbled horse feeding within fifty yards
of him. The grass was so plentiful that the beast did not
require to roam in search of food. His hard day’s work
and Kelly's weight had told somowhat upon his inclination
to ramble.
At about an hour after dawn he rose, chewed some
tobacco to keep off the hunger, and started on his way.
Bushell’s Creek had once been a popular digging, but it
had long since been exhausted.
At all events better claims turned up, and it had been
deserted.
Still two or three half-ruined huts remained
Yet it was very still and quiet.
Had it not been for the windlass of a shaft, a coil of
rope, and a few heaps of lime and gravel, which were the
only indications of human labour in that stony field,
there was nothing to intercept its monotonous dead
level.
Kelly reached it about nightfall, and made himself at
home in one of the huts
He sat waiting for his follow’s.
They came in about an hour, and none of them had
seen anything of the police.
They had given them the slip.
The question now arose as to whether it was a wise
thing to go to Ballarat.
Kelly insisted that in that motley city of canvas they
were safer than anywhere else.
The crowd, the ever-changing crowd, the places of
entertainment and refreshment were ail means of hiding
themselves.
And as usual the rest of the gang gave way to their
leader.
Next morning early they started for Ballarat, which 1
they reached towards the evening.
A general dispersal took place, ail agreeing to uaeot !
the Big Nugget in the evening.
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES
PICTURE
BOARDS.
Anonyma, on Fain but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left hen Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, on the Little House In
Piccadilly.
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
(To he continue I.)
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
Woman.
The Beautiful Demon.
It was a notoriously large digger restaurant, known all
over the colony.
Though roughly built, a mere huge shanty, it was a
wonderful place.
Already people were finding that fortunes arc made, not
digging for gold, but by food, luxuries, and necessaries
for the really hardworking diggers.
Men earning money in such an easy and precarious
way as gold-digging, are ready to pay any price for what
suits their appetite or fancy.
At the back of the huge canvas caravansari were some
rude stables, and to these Ned Kelly committed the char b e
of his horse.
lie then swaggered into the Big Nugget and ordered
supper of one of the waiters.
It was at once provided.
It was indeed a Babel of voices, and even of languages,
for few were unspoken in that place.
Kelly got into an obscure corner. Except when ex-
cited he did not care about attracting too much attention.
It was not at all a wise thing to do under the circum-
stances in which he was placed.
While he was supping the others dropped in, and joined
their chief at Instable.
The scone was one as picturesque as it was wild.
In the canvas city they found on the outskirts a butt
which had been left by a recent tenant, rudely furnished.
This they hired with its rude furniture, and late at night
retired to its protection.
It was solitary, and they could (O salt without fear of
being overheard.
_ There were so many people at the gold diggings at that
time, that nobody thought of asking anyone about their
business.
Diggers were accustomed to idle for days together, and
it excited no surprise when men spent days and nights in
the saloons.
They wore never closed. When people came in the
morning they generally found the sleepy-looking “all
night” bar-keeper on the point of withdrawing for the day,
on a mattress in an out house.
A Chinese or other porter would be seen washing cut
the stains from the bar-room and verandah.
No one could believe, unless bo went at that time, in
the existence of so much lemon-peel and cigar-stumps.
But Kelly and his friends were not of those w r .c carea
to show early.
OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2-
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




They preferred to have their breakfast comfortably and
wander round.
Their object was to learn when the gold escort would
leave Ballaratfor Melbourne and then organise their forces.
About midday they went to the Big Nugget and found
some of the others had arrived.
Ned Kelly found the Ballarat gold escort would depart
In five days for Melbourne.
The Big Nugget was waiting for the escort.
That night he ordered a meeting in a gloomy and re-
tired gully, a mile out of Ballarat.
It was known as Dead Man’s Hole.
There was some terrible tale connected with it at the
time, but which is now forgotten.
It was in a wild and desolate region, where few were
likely to penetrate of their own accord.
A fire was lighted in a sort of hollow at the side of a
hill, and round this the band collected, one of the party
keeping a good watch on the hill-side.
Kelly counted fifteen heads.
lie then made thmn a little speech, in which he laid out
his plans fully. . ~ A ...
They were astutely arranged, but required determination
and resolution to carry ovit.
Any failure would invoWe very serious result
The gold escort would, iu addition to twenty mounted
troopers, have returning diggers, men who, as a rule,
would fight desperately.
The whole thing would hvae to be a surprise and a
well-organised one.
Kelly gave his orders, and then the gang dispersed ana
returned to their different locations in and around
Ballarat. , . , .
Kelly, though not personally known to any but hie own
associates at the diggings, was described with such minute-
ness on the bills, that had he not have been most careful
with his disguises he must have been recognised.
Not so much, however, had been heard of him lately,
and it was generally suspected in the colony that he had
made himself scarce.
This was very much iu his favour, as people ceased to
look out for him, and other topics of the day cropped
up.
Kelly was in reality very much annoyed, as his great
and crowning defect was vanity.
Not to be spoken of at all was to him a great source of
disgust.
Of "ourse he dared not obtrude the subject for fear of
exciting suspicion
But they should know he was alive in a day or two,
succeed or not.
On the fourth day, that before which the escort was to
leave, Kelly fetched his horse, paid for its keep, and started
with the mate.
They were to go in couples.
About two days’ journey from Ballarat was a place
known as Troy, where there was one of the roadside inns.
jt was situated near a very dense centre of bush,
through which the road passed.
Ii consequence of the previous attempts to rob the
escort, the leaders had adopted the plan of having scouts
abroad.
They wont in front and examined every inch of the
ground, which was thus rendered tolerably safe.
Kelly was at his wits’ end to concoct some way of cir-
cumventing the troopers and their convoy with tire least
danger to himself and party.
Meanwhile all preparations were being made in Ballarat
or the journey.
The waggons were ready, the gold was ready, and the
troopers wero ready.
“ 1 sho-A-i V'Ke to be safe in Melbourne,” observed the
officer in charge, one Johnson, to a successful digger about
to accompany them. “ Never feel safe as long as Kelly is
unhung.”
aVs b«en in the colony a year,” responded tho other
with a sneer, “ and I’ve hear tell till I’m sick of this mau
Kelly. What’s he ever done ? ”
“ He’s the biggest blackguard England, the colony, or
America ever produced.”
“That’s pilin’ it up,” was the dry response.
been in California and heard of a man named Slade,
a man whose heart, and hands, and soul were steeped
in the blood of offenders against his dignity—a mau
who awfully avenged all injuries —affronts, insults, a
slight of whatever kind—on the spot if ho could, years
afterwards if lack of opportunity compelled it; a man
whose hate tortured him day and night till vengeance ap-
peased it, and not an ordinary vengeance either, but hia
enemies’ absolute death, nothing else; a man whose face
would light up with a terrible joy when he surprised a
foe.”
“Never heard of him,” said the officer.
“A high and efficient servant of the Overland, an out-
law among outlaws), and yet their most relentless scourge.
Slade was at once the most bloody, the most dangerous,
and the most valuable citizen that inhabited the savage
fastnesses of the mountains.”
“ Curious character,” said the officer in rather a doubt-
ful tone. “ Can hardly believe it.”
“ True as fact,” was the answer of the successful digger.
“ I’ll tell you one of him. He was train master of one of
the Californy-bound emigrant trains. One day on the
plains he had an angry dispute with one of his waggon
drivers, and both drew their revolvers.
“ But the driver was the quicker artist, and had his
weapon cocked first.
“So Slade said it was a pity to waste life on so small a
matter, and proposed that the pistols should be thrown
on the ground and the quarrel settled by a fist fight.
“ The unsuspecting driver agreed, and threw down his
pistol, whereupon Slade laughed at his simplicity and shot
him dead.”
“ Pretty sharp that,” replied the officer ; “but I could
tell you stories of Kelly quite as warm. He is a hot member
if there ever was one.”
“ We must look out for this fiery gentleman,” continued
the traveller. “ I for one do not mean to be robbed witb
impunity.”
And so the time passed.
The day came for the start.
It mas to be early in the morning.
Captain Johnson, the leader, had selected twenty picked
men, while the travellers who would accompany them were
seventeen stout fellows.
The bullion was extensive, being worth about sixty-
three thousand pounds.
The captain sent forward a vanguard to feel his way as
it were.
They were to peer into the bushes, sound thickets, and
so on.
The roads in the colony are not like these in the old
country, but cut right through the woods, very rough, ex-
cept the main roads between large towns, which are
well kept enough.
All the first day was passed without adventure. They
were amply supplied with food, and when night came they
camped in the wood.
Sentries were placed, fires lighted to cook with, and then
each amused himself as best he might until the hour of
repose came.
Captain Johnson had men carefully posted, with order
to challenge any attempted intruder.
But that night passed away without interruption, and was
an early hour they started on their march.
As they advanced on that day they came to some very
thick forest, through wh : ch a road had been made.
It was very dark here, the roadway being somewhat
narrower than at other places.
“Eh—what is that ?” suddenly cried Captain Johnson.
An I no wonder the exclamation was made. Kelly had
planned a novel mode of attack. He first of all made


such a barricade across the road the escort would have to
pass, as would arrest their progress for some time, aud
bring the whole party under the range of the “firing
party,” as wc may fairly style the bushrangers, who were
planted in trees of thick, almost impenetrable foliage, and
had time to take deliberate aim at the unsuspecting escort.
At the moment the captain made the above exclamation,
a volley from the muzzles of twenty guns saluted the
travellers, who, seeing themselves attacked from all
quarters simultaneously, and not knowing but that their
enemies were much more numerous, were seized with
instant panic, and bolted off into the bush.
Two of the troopers lay wounded on the ground, but,
fortunately, though Kelly had “marked him for his own,”
Captain Johnson was untouched.
The horses reared and plunged, but could not get
away from the escort wavgon.
The harness was good and tough, but more than one
trooper was non fst , it being supposed (charitably) that
his horse bolted. At least, one of the force was heard to
exclaim—
“ This is hot enough for me, and to protect other
people’s gold too.”
At a preconcerted signal from Kelly, down dropped
the gang from their perches, and, with guns levelled,
threatened the remaining troopers with death if they
moved hand or foot; and, to tell the plain truth, they
didn’t seem inclined to test the sincerity of the threat.
What did the safety of the escort matter to them ? If
it arrived safe, they got no more pay than if it was lost.
But it was otherwise with their captain.
Calling in his unwounded remnant of troopers to follow
him, he singled out Kelly, who had dropped from his
hiding-place close to him, and, rushing forward, revolver
in hand, lired, but missed his aim.
Kelly sprung upon him with a yell of a wild beast, and
threw him on his back.
Ilis gun and pistols had been emptied in the contest,
and he now relied on his knife.
This was uplifted to settle the mortal career of his
opponent, when the loud tramping of horses was heard,
accompanied by shouts in a ringing voice
“ Keep it up,” it said, “ I’m all there ! Skewer the
scoundrels! ”
It was Tom Conquest at the head of a patrol, who had
been scouring the neighbourhood.
Ned Kelly did not stop for his arrival, but made off,
adth all his belongings.
“ We’ll meet at Barber’s Creek.”
CHATTER LXXXVIH.
barber’s creek.
As scon as they had escaped from the scene of conflict,
Kelly and his friends decided to disperse, making a rendez-
vous at Barber’s Creek.
The bushranger sullenly spurred his horse,which bounded
on, leaving his associates to take their separate ways. He
was in one of his vile humours and seemed determined to
take it out of the unfortunate animal he bestrode.
The horse, maddened with pain, dashed onward at a
headlong pace, snorting with rage and agony.
The poor animal was covered with foam, and more than
once tried to throw Kelly, but he was an accomplished
horseman and stuck to the saddle.
Kelly was wounded, but he fought against the pain with
all the fierce energy of his nature which gave him a kind
of fictitious strength in spite of the loss of blood.
He looked like a ferocious and terrible demon in his wild
paroxysm of ungovernable rage.
He urged the horse forward, flying along at full speed,
without following any settled directica.
It was a magnificent sight, the struggle for supremacy
between horse and rider
Kelly justly prided himself on his horsemanship, it was
%n accomplishment cf which he was very vain.
“ You won’t try to unseat Ned Kelly again in a hurry,
you ? ” he cried, at last, with a savage, smile.
He was beginning to lind the amusement rather fatiguing,
and his face looked drawn and haggard, all.ii-.bng a striking
contrast to his broad shoulders and muscular frame, nut
although suffering intense pain, he never gave a single
groan, so great was his strength of wi'l. He set his teeth
hard and swore occasionally, and this was the only out-
ward sign of the bodily anguish racking his giant frame,
with the exception of the ghastly pauor which showed
through the bronze of his dark skin.
The cruel, burning pain of the wound, however, in
creased rather than diminished as he rode on, and he
found it difficult to arrange his ideas, and soon began to
yell and blaspheme, gnashing his teeth with impotent rage,
while a patch of red on his check bones made the ashen
hue of his face appear even more startling than before.
Ilis throat was parched with thirst, and his voice became
hoarse and cracked, as he raved on, swaying from side to {
side, until at length he fell from his horse and lay
motionless on the long grass.
So he lay face downwaids as he had fallen, until a man
walking briskly along with a gun on his shoulder, and
followed by a couple of kangaroo-dogs, stumbled over the
prostrate form.
“Hullo!” cried this individual, bending down before
Kelly, and lifting the bushranger's heavy head upon his
arm, while he tried to force some spirits, from a bottle he
carried about him, between the tightly-clenched teeth.
The man had noticed the horse feeding near, and
naturally came to the conclusion that Kelly had been
thrown.
“Is he dead, I wonder?” he thought, looking at
Kelly’s pale face with solicitude, but he uttered a second
startled exclamation when he lifted his hand to find it
covered with blood.
He saw that Kelly was insensible from the effect* of a
gaping wound, aud that the life-stream was slowly welling
away.
The man had some slight knowledge of surgery, and
at once set to work to staunch the blood.
By the time this was accomplished, and he had suc-
ceeded in forcing a few drops of the spirit down Kelly's
throat, the white face began to look less terribly sug-
gestive of death.
Perhaps if his preserver had known who it was that *e
had saved from death, he would scarcely have felt so much
relief when the wounded man opened' his eyes and asked
abruptly—
“ Who the are you?”
It was rather an unceremonious way of addressing one
who had just acted the part of the Good Samaritan, but
the stockkecper merely smiled as he returned—
“ I am Bob Don, if that will make you any the wiser.”
Ned looked at him suspiciously for a moment, wonder-
ing if he had saved his life merely to obtain the reward
offered for his apprehension.
He had no faith in disinterested kindness, but Bob
Don’s face was frankness personified, and after glancing
at his merry twinkling eyes, Kelly gave a faint sigh of
relief.
The man might be a fool, but he was not a rogue.
“ You want to know how I came hero?” said Kelly,
seeing that Don was ready to swallow any explanation ho
liked to offer.
Don assented.
He did consider it rather curious, he admitted, but
Kelly had better defer all explanations until a more
favourable opportunity, as he must be stiil weak from loss
of blood.
Kelly caught eagerly at this large hole.
He wanted to invent a good lie while he was about it,
and he did feel giddy from the effects of his wound and
the rather heavy fall.
“ Can yon manage to tet into the saddle? ” asked D
the unsuspicious “If so. TU take veu to my hut and


let you have a spell of rest. I see that it won’t take you
many days to get up your strength. You look better
already ’ ’
“ Ho* 5 f ? ” asked the bushranger, laconically.
“ Three miles,” returned Don ; “ and it’s my belief you
could walk it if it came to the push. But there’s no need
for that when you have got the horse handy.”
Re looked at Kelly’s huge frame with admiration as he
spoke. He was not a very big man himself, but admired
well-developed limbs and physical strength in others.
“I’m blowed if I ain’t quite unsteady on my pegs,” said
Kelly, as he rose with the assistance of his new friend,
who helped him to climb into the saddle, and led the
horse quietly along, little thinking of the “big prize” he
had within his grasp.
Bob Don was not a man who cared particularly for
money. His chief satisfaction would have been the know-
ledge that he had been able to rid the land of a brutal
ruffian.
He had not the slightest idea, however, that he was
addressing the terror of Australia.
He volunteered the information that he was a stock-
keeper, and owned a large run, as he walked along at the
horse’s head.
He had been a snepherd, but when, in 1841, sheep fell
in price from 40s. to Is. a head, his wages bought him the
sheep-station and stock of his bankrupt employer.
He seemed to be a talkative individual, and rambled on
for some time without waiting for an answer.
“By Goles! he is an innocent,” thought Kelly, with a
grim smile, as he looked down at Don’s broad-brimmed
hat, and listened to his ceaseless flow of talk. “If I bad
a tongue like that, I should have been nabbed long ?go.
It’s a regular misfortune, and if Mr. Don don’t look out,
he’ll get knocked on the head some of these fine days for
letting it run cm too fast.”
“ How on earth did you come to be riding along on
this ’ere boss, without having your wounds attended to
anywhere?” persisted Don, unconscious of the fact that
he was giving offence to the person addressed. “It was
regularly courting death, and so I tell you, mate.”
“ Perhaps so,” said Kelly, feeling strongly tempted to
bring his knife down on the back of his new friend’s
head, and thus put an end to his curiosity, “ but I
had my reasons for acting as I did. It’s a confounded
disagreeable story to tell, but you must know, me and my
brother ain’t cousins, and we had a slight rumpus about a
girl, which ended in a free fight.”
“Well?” asked Don, as Kelly paused.
“Oh, well,” said Kelly, “I got the worst of it, and
clewed out of the building, so that he shouldn’t be
tempted to finish me off to save further trouble. When
people can’t agree it is best to part, say I; and he was
jolly well glad to see my back. He was determined to
get me out, dead or alive. So I thought it best to
slope.”
“lie must have been a strong sort of chap,” said Don,
without sarcasm. “ I'd like to see that brother of
yourn.”
Kelly made no repty.
Perhaps he thought an answer to this remark super-
fluous.
“ I’ve got a wife and one kid,” continued the communi-
cative Don, placidly.
“ They won’t be surprised or put out,” he added quickly,
ae if in reply to some objection his companion might have
Decu about to make. “ I often bring folks home. They
»re used to it by this time, bless your heart.”
Kelly laughed noiselessly, wondering if the stockkeeper’s
Family had ever entertained a visitor of so much import-
ance before.
He felt that he was in luck’s way when chance threw
Mr. Don across his path, for although death troubled him
so little when he was merely a spectator, he placed a most
extraordinary value on Ins own life.
Therefore, thinking: it as well to conciliate Don. and not
knowing how he would be affected by his display m ill.
temper, Kelly made some rough jest, brightening con-
siderably when he found that his rude witticism was re-
ceived with every mark of approval.
He knew that the person who talks little is often
accredited with having something to conceal, and was
deeply anxious not to arouse the suspicions of Uon if he
could possibly help it.
Don had often listened with a shudder to the stories of
Kelly’s atrocious deeds, and he little tho' ight that he was
conversing amicably with that notorious bushranger.
The mere idea would have made him jump out of his
shoes.
The bushranger feigned even more faintness than he
really felt when he reached the station, and artfully
parried all the questions of the stockkeeper’s womankind.
Mrs. Don was a comfortable woman, and her daughter »
remarkably pretty girl.
Kelly admired her from the first.
But he had very little opportunity of improving his
acquaintance with his host’s daughter, who had a fair face,
with a delicate peach-like bloom, large blue eyes, a
pretty rosebud mouth, and a figure which looked almost
too slight for real strength.
The bushranger’s pale face was covered by a sudden
flush as he looked at this vision of loveliness, blooming
in the solitude, with few eyes to admire her delicate
beauty.
He wondered how Don and his wife came by such a
daughter.
His wonderful reserve of strength enabled him to re-
cover from his weakness in an incredibly short space of
time, but he still feigned illness, feeling that it would be
better to keep dark for a little longer, and old Don’s
daughter was a powerful attraction to chain him to th*
spot.
On more than one occasion he had tried to make him-
self agreeable to her, but the girl rejected all his overtures.
For some reason which she could not explain, Lucy Don
did not like the man her father had befriended. There
was something in the expression of his eye which made
her recoil from him with instinctive dislike and distrust,
but she said nothing of this to her parents, fearing that
they would chide her for her folly.
Mr. Don was in the habit of leaving home early in the
morning, while his wife attended to the work at home,
and his daughter made herself useful in a small garden,
which was her especial care.
Kelly, utterly without gratitude to the man who had
prevented him from going to the devil before his time,
resolved to take advantage of this.
He was tired of the society of Bob Don, but he found
it impossible to leave his pretty daughter behind.
“ Morning,” said Bob Don, as he left the station, look-
ing back to nod at Kelly. “ You are getting quite strong
and will soon be thinking of leaving, I suppose ?’’
“Yes, I shall have to leave here soon,” returned the
bushranger, with well-simulated regret, thrusting his
tongue in his check as Don walked away, without the
slightest idea what would occur during his absence.
Kelly waited until he bad been gone some time, and
then, having ascertained that Mrs. Don was busily en-
gaged inside the hut, went in search of Lucy.
The girl was attending to her garden, and singing like*,
bird from very lightness of heart
Kelly looked at her with unbounded admiration as he
stood watching her, himself unseen.
It was very early, but the sky seemed to promise a mag-
nificent day, and the sun shone down on the girl’s fail
young head, making her light-brown hair look like thready
of gold.
All unconscious of the bushranger’s presence, the girl
sang on, happy in her youth and innocence, happy in her
own pure thoughts.
Even if she had known he was so near she would not
have dreamed of danger.


She disliked him, without having any suspicion of the
truth. She would have been frightened out of her wits if
she had known who it was her father had rescued from
death.
She had a sweet, clear voice, and even Kelly, who was
no judge of harmony, listened with pleasure, and waited
in silence until the song was at an end.
“ Brayvo !” he said.
The girl gave a start of surprise and looked about her.
To her idea there was nothing in Kelly’s appearance that
spoke greatly in hi? ; but, above all, she disliked his
voice.
“ Brayvo ! ” he repeated, coming forward with a smile on
his lips. “You thought you were singing for your own
amusement, and didn’t expect to find me a listening behind
a hedge, Why don’t you give us another tune —a more
lively one this time? 1 like your voice, but 1 don't like
your song.”
The girl looked confused, and perhaps a little annoyed,
M she coldly declined to sing again.
“ Do now,” said Kelly coaxingly.
“ The songs I know would not please you,” she answered
with increasing coldness.
“ I am the most easily pleased man in the world,” re-
turned Kelly with an admiring glance at her pretty face.
“ Don't be obstinate.”
“ I do not wish to sing again.”
“It’s always the way with the women,” said Kelly;
“they want a deal of coaxing.”
And he put himself in her path, seeing that she was
beginning to get alarmed, and looked wistfully in the
direction of the station.
“ Let me pass, please,” said Lucy. j
Kelly gave a hoarse chuckle.
“ Don’t try to get away,” he said, looking down at the
girl with a smile which frightened her out of her wits.
“ I’ve got something to say to you, my gal, I telJ yer. I
suppose you guess what it is? You women always pretend
to be innocrnt, and all that, sort of thing; but I am an old
joker, and understand your whims, and ain’t to be taken
in l 'y you. 1 have taken a liking to you, my gal, and want
tg to cut away with me—slope sounds better, perhaps.
\Viil you come of your own accord, or shall I have to bring
you ? ”
1 he girl gave a shrill cry of terror, as he seized her in
his strong grasp.
“ Father!” she shrieked.
“ Come with me ! ” hissed Kelly, dragging her along by
the waist.
“ You beast! ” said the girl. “ Let me go, or it will be
the worse for you ! My father will punish you for
this !”
“ Blow the old cuss !” retorted Kelly. “ I ain’t afraid
of Bob Don, my lass. I could crack him in my thumb
like a flea if 1 had a mind.”
“ lie saved your life,” cried the girl trying to appeal to
his better feeling. “ What would have become of you if
father had not bound up your wounds, and given you a
shelter when you were recovering from the loss of blood
and gaining strength ? Surely you will not act with such
base ingratitude as to steal away bis only daughter?”
“Jaw avva} 7 ,” said Kelly, “I like to hear your pretty
prattle.”
“ Oh !” she cried with emotion, “have you no heart?
Is it useless, quite useless, to appeal to your gratitude and
your generosity ?’’
“ I must put an end to this,” cried Kelly; and clapping
his hand over the girl's mouth, he drew a stout handker-
chief from his pocket and securely gagged her as she was
about to give a piercing scream, a loud and despairing cry
for help. #
lie then mounted his horse, placing her before him, and
as he did so Mrs. Don came out of the shanty shading her
eyes from the sun.
She gave an angry cry on beholding her daughter and
Kelly riding away together.
“Infernal luck!” he ejaculated. “Here’s a pretty fix.
The old woman will kick up a devil of a row, and Don wiil
be after me in less than no lime. I shall be lynched
if he gets hold of me. He will be sure to get plenty of coves
to help to hunt me down. Those quiet good-tempered
men are not pleasant when roused. If ever Ido come to
grief it will be all on account of these confounded women.”
He urged hia horse forward as he heard a faint sound
in the distance, rightly judging that Don had not allowed
the grass to grow under his feet, b it had already started
in pursuit. He did not care in the least for Don himself,
but what if he had companions ?
“ him !” he muttered. “If he comes up with me
I’ll put a bullet through his lungs and let daylight into
him, the fool!”
The pursuer or pursuers, Kelly was not sure which, had
the advantage, for his horse had a double burden.
Kelly found great difficulty in retaining his burden, as
she used all her strength to embarrass her captor. 1 1e
held her like a vice, and at last he was so exasperated th t
he swore he would quiet her effectually if she gave him
any more trouble. Still she struggled, and told him death
was preferable to his brutality.
The bushranger looked back over his shoulder with a
frown that promised nothing very pleasant for Don if he
should be alone.
At first he saw nothing ; but after glancing back over
his shoulder several times he became aware that a large
body of horsemen, headed by a woman, were coming up
in hot haste.
He recognised the woman at once. It was Mrs. Don,
followed by tier husband, and, to Kelly’s consternation, the
mounted police.
Nearer and nearer they came, but still Kelly did not
drop the girl.
Kelly saw that without something extraordinary happened
all was indeed lost.
Suddenly an idea flashed through his brain, and a fiend-
ish smile lit up his evil face.
The girl should purchase his safety. If they refused to
let him go on his way unmolested she should* die.
He saw that his horse was gradually losing ground, and
knew that he stood no chance in the open country. He
therefore turned into a wood, his horse making no sound
on the soft grass.
It was with great difficulty that he avoided being swept
from the saddle by the heavy branches of the trees.
He was well aware that nothing could be gained by
hurry now. He never lost his presence of mind for one
instant. We do not wish to take away the only quality in
Kelly’s character which deserves admiration, iiis courage
and coolness when in danger wore wonderful.
Kelly looked about him in every direction in search of
a hiding-place, but none presented itself.
lie beard his pursuers crushing through the wood be-
hind him, and resolved to turn and face them.
He knew he could not escape. His horse was thoroughly-
blown from carrying double weight. Kelly himself was a
heavy man.
So he resolved, as we have said, to face his foes—but to
make a shield of the fair form lie carried.
Suddenly pulling up and facing round, ho awaited the
approach of his pursuers, who were yelling like a pack ci
hounds at some wild beast.
“Drop, you black-hearted curl” cried the distressed
mother,who saw her daughter still struggling to free herself.
“Not if I know it,” said Kelly. “1 know a trick worth
two of that. Come on another foot, and 111 cut her blessed
throat before the whole lot of you. Stand back, I say,
old woman and all of you, or I'll rip her up, and no mis-
take. Ned Kelly ain’t to be bagged by such as you.”
While so speaking he had drawn his knife, and most
certainly would have sacrificed the girl’s life if his pur-
suers had attempted to “ rush ” him.
By this time the girl had got the gag out of her moatka
and cried to her mother to save her.


The mother, of course, thought of nothing else, and
whether Kelly did or did not escape justice was no con-
sideration when the life of her child was concerned.
Knowing the furious passions of the man, and also
recognising the desperate condition of the bushranger,
and seeing that his threat was his only safeguard, his
opponents paused, and finally agreed to his proposal that
they should retire a couple of hundred yards, give him a
fair start for his freedom, and he would leave the girl
where they should find her safe and sound.
He indicated a small hill about 600 yards distant, on
the other side of which was the forest, almost impene-
trable, and effectually shrouding any intruder from
pursuit.
To this the mother, with natural apprehension, de-
murred.
‘'Don’t trust that villain, don’t lose sight of him,” she
screamed.
“Shut up, you idiot,” he replied. “Ain’t my wizzon
more use to me than your filly ? I tell you, you may
make your choice. If I’m taken, your daughter has my
knife into her. I’ll stick her as I would a sheep ;so don’t
lose time, make up your minds. I haven’t any time to
bother with the lot of you. Yes or no, that’s your game.”
The unfortunate girl who still writhed in Ned's Hercu-
lean grasp, simply uttered the magic appeal
“ Mother, mother, save me!”
Consequently the arrangement was made. The force
retired the prescribed distance, when Kelly, seizing his
horse’s bridle, led the brute off, his hostage accompanying
him, sooth to say, with no very great confidence in her
captor’s keeping his word, but reassured when she
thought of the inability of the outlaw’s horse to carry
double weight with sufficient speed to out-pace the party
still in sight.
His departure was watched with mingled feelings of
apprehension and curiosity by his enemies, but as they
knew his only chance of safety lay in the fulfilment of his
promise, they became reassured as to the safety of the
girl, and began to look upon the episode as an amusing
one.
“ Plowed if he ain’t a rare un,” ejaculated a trooper.
“He deserves to get off, in my mind, for he’s a rare
pluck’d un,” said another.
And admiration for successful villainy was the predomi-
nant feeling amongst the unreflecting men who were on
his track.
He fulfilled his contract, arrived at the mount and left
the girl on the top of it, in view of her friends, but
warned her if she turned her head to watch the path he
took, he would return.
In a few seconds, Kelly, who knew the ground better
than his alphabet, doubled under the slope instead of
entering the forest, and was absolutely in the rear of his
pursuer’s, and off in an opposite direction to his supposed
path, when they rode up, restored the girl to her mother,
iud then rushed after the bushranger in the wrong direc-
tion.
He arrived at Barber’s Creek without further adventure,
ind found his companions already waiting for him.
Next morning they broke up into small parties agreeing
to meet in a month.
Kelly kept with him Zeph, Joss, and Salmon Roe.
CHAPTER LXXXIX.
BLUE RIDGE STATION.
A.S we have already stated, the stations of evrn very wealthy
nen, were rough-and-ready places, with every rude com-
ort and some luxuries, to which, however, now they have
generally attained.
Blue Ridge Station belonged to a man named Clarence.
He had a number of men scattered over the run in his
diuploy, while his family consisted of bis wife and sister,
i girl of eighteen.
She was handsome, showy, and attractive. Several of
the young men around admired her very much, but above
all James Powers, a very smart young fellow of seven or
eight and twenty.
The Blue Ridge was on the road to Sydney from
Ballarat.
Ned Kelly now assumed, with his companions, a very
plain dress, suitable to honest miners. But they could not
conceal their countenances which war l * to say the least,
not of the most amiable character.
The four had travelled hard and fast two days, without
visiting any houses save a store near Barber's Creek,
when they had changed the appearance of the outward
man.
They carried no open weapons save pistols, but not one
of them ever went without a long clasp-knife.
As James Powers was jogging along the road in the
direction of Blue Ridge Station, he was overtaken by
our four estimable worthies.
lie started as he turned, for they were rough, and
strangers were looked upon with distrust in that quarter
when so many terrible tragedies were being enacted by
the desperadoes spread over the country.
“ Good evening, sir,” said Kelly, civilly enough, “ we've
had a hard ride and would like to know if there’s any
‘ grub ’ to be got near here.”
“ Well,” answered James Powers in a half-hesitating
kind of way, “ I have got a friend round here, ten miles
off, who’ll give you what you want.”
And he rode on.
“ Come from the diggins?” he asked.
“Yes—pretty well tired of it,” answered Kelly; “ain’t
done much—mean to work our way—to England.”
After a hard ride they came to Blue Ridge Station and
hero James Powers was welcomed by Clarence, while the
others were handed to the overseer, with orders to supply
them with everything they required.
Food is plentiful and the hospitality of the inhabitants
boundless.
Their horses were attended to, and then their wants
were seen to very profusely.
Mutton, tea, and damper were the principal ingredients
of a meal, though in such houses as this there was sure to
be a drop of something stronger than whey.
The bushrangers were on sue a occasions very cautious
in their conversation, and though they were careful to steer
clear of dangci’ous subjects, they told many a rare story of
the diggings.
After supper, an out-hut was pointed out to them
where they could sleep if they liked, and the hospitable
offer was accepted.
“Must be rich people, plenty of tin,” observed Joss ;
“ should like to try a haul.”
“ Don’t keep much pewter in the house in the Colony,”
answered Kelly; “folks mostly take it to the bank—besides
its too risky.”
At this moment one of the men returned. He was a
short, ill-looking fellow, who squinted and looked to the
right and loft.
“ What is it? ” asked Kelly.
“Don’t you know Fiery Dick?” asked the man, with a
leer.
“ The devil it is! ” said Kelly, and he drily added, “And
you know me ? ”
“ The moment I seed you,” continued the other.
“ What are you doing here? ” asked Kelly.
“Working, worse luck !” retorted Dick with supreme
contempt.
“ Do you want to join ? ” asked the bushranger.
“Yes—but I can put yer up to a job first,” wa i the
other’s reply.
“What’s that? ” asked Kelly, curiously.
“ Master’s made a big swap, bought a run from Master
Morgan—close by,” continued the other, “some of the
ochre is in the house.”
“ Ah ! ” said Kelly, with greedy eyes, “ where does he-
keep it ? ”


“In his bedroom,” answered the other. “I was a listen-
ing—and he did not see me—when he locked it up in the
black box.
“ Rather risky work,” said Kelly, musing. “ Who sleeps
in the house ? ”
“The master and the missus, at the back,” he con-
tinued, “nnd the sister in a small room hard by.”
“And this cove who brought us?” asked Kelly,
“lie stays here the night,’"answered the other.
Kelly now took the man out to show him the means of
entering the house by the window.
'1 here was no shutter, and the window was only shaded
from moon or sun light by a muslin curtain. It could be
easily opened., r\nd was big enough to admit a man’s body.
The great chance was that these people, leading a healthy
\nd open-air life, would be very tired and sleep soundly.
Kelly determined to risk it.
The man told him they always slept with a lamp in the
voom.
On the occasion of the visit of Miss Ann’s sweetheart,
they would take something extra.
A long consultation was held, and Fiery Dick promised
to have the horses outside the station.
Timv would be ready on the main road, which was a
quarter of a mile distant from the station.
Then Fiery Dick left them and returned to his duties.
In the colony the class of people to whom we are
alluding retire early and rise early.
Most are in their saddles the greater part of the day.
Kelly always carried his tools in his wallet, so as never
to throw a chance away.
His companions were quite prepared to second him.
They all waited until midnight.
Kelly had examined the scene of action.
The hut was low and rude.
Kelly approached and keenly examined the window.
The hinges were held in their places by rusty screws.
These Kelly attacked with his usual extreme caution, and
in a moment or two the window was open.
Kelly peered in.
Two people were lying on the bed, evidently in a heavy
sleep.
Still Kelly’s heart beat wildly.
The position was a desperate one, as the persons em-
ployed at the station were numerous.
The window opened inward on hinges, with nothing but
a latch to keep it in place.
Still Kelly heard no one move.
He crept in with all the caution of a snake and the
cunning of a fox.
He was in the room.
On one small table was a black box, on another,
between the window and the bed, a large oil lamp, lowered
to a very low focus.
Kelly clutched the box. As he did so he heard some-
one move.
He accidentally gave the table with the lamp on it a
kick, and at the same time a pistol shot was heard.
Then he was through the window.
The oil caught fire, and a loud cry was heard from the
master of the house.
“ Step thief ! FireJ” he roared.
Kelly darted away in the direction indicated by Fiery
Dick, and soon joined his companions.
Those at the station were in too great confusion to
follow.
The Home Station hut was on fire.
Reaching the rendezvous, Kelly, mounting, rode off.
Fiery Dick had by this time joined the party.
We may as well say that, except the destruction of the
house and the loss of the money, no harm was done. The
money loss was not great, as it was only ten per cent, of
the whole amount of the purchase.
Mr. Clarence was a rich man, but the xmpudence of the
outrage and the recklessness it displayed left little doubt
that it was Kelly’s deed.
Another was added to the list of his infamies, and the
public wondered at the impunity with which this atrocious
criminal was able to carry out his nefarious plans.
It caused much discontent, and the colouial press was
very severe in its comments.
Meanwhile the gang were determined to put a long dis-
tance between themselves and the scone of their mis-
deeds.
There was one thing which caused them more trouble
than anything, and that was the continual necessity of as-
suming disguises.
On the present occasion they determined to camp in a
dense bush, at no great distance from an inn.
There were numerous huts of stock-keepers about, but
their own spot was rough, wild, and almost undiscovcrable.
Here they agreed to remain until the hue and cry was
further away from them.
Food was easy to get. A sheep or two would not be
missed, and the roadside inn would supply them with
everything else.
Rude as they were, they were well provided, having to
supply a population which, since the gold discoveries were
made, was always on the move.
An open space was found under some lofty trees, where
a very little fire could be made without exciting suspicion,
as the smoke was lost in the upper boughs of trees.
Fiery Dick, who could easily give himself out as a
shearer, would go down and obtain provisions.
Knowing the character of the people in the neighbour-
hood, the owner of the shanty inn would not be likely to
ask any inconvenient questions.
Money was the one idea of this class of men in the colony.
The inn was three miles from the camp, and Fiery Dick
had to come by devious ways.
Not that he was suspected or watched.
Still, he might be, and they were entitled to take every
precaution.
As a rule one of them accompanied him to the skirts of
the wood and watched for his return at a safe and cautious
distance.
Now it happened that on the morning of the fifth day
Kelly accompanied him and watched for him in the scrub.
Kelly had good eyes, and as Fiery Dick went on he saw a
tall, handsome young man, in trooper’s uniform, with a
frank, brave, fearless face, spring from his horse.
It was Tom Conquest, and behind came eight mounted
troopers.
Kelly at once determined to be even with him.
He watched carefully, and soon saw him come out in
company with Fiery Dick, who placed himself at the head
of the troopers.
He had betrayed them.
Kelly took to his heels at once. He had never run faster
in his life.
“ Mount for your lives, men !” he said, “ Tom Con-
quest is after us. Dick has split.”
No one required twice telling, though the volley of
oaths and other strong language which ensued was fearful
to listen to.
They, however, lost not a moment, and soon the summer
stillness of the bush was abruptly broken by the clatter of
horses’ hoofs.
They were all in a furious rage against Fiery Dick,
though in reality he was probably not to blame.
Tom, who knew Mr. Clarence, had recognised him and
compelled confession.
Still, it was lucky they had commissioned one to watch
Fiery Dick on his daily excursions.
Passing through the dense forest and bush they pro-
ceeded to cross some more open country, lead’Ug to what
were known as the ranges.
Here they could hide in defiance of all the colonial
police until it was safe to move once more.
And such proved to be the case.
When the police and Fiery Dick reached the scone of
action they found the camp empty.


But they did not blame Fiery Dick, who was. however,
sent to prison to be tried for having assisted Ned Kelly
in robbery and attempted murder.
After a halt of several days, Kelly and his party deter-
mined to make their entry into Sydney without beat of
drum in the night.
They intended to appear as sailors for awhile, so as to
have time for reflection.
For this purpose they would get rid of their horses as
having no further use for them.
Then they could adjourn to a crimp, a sailors’ boarding-
house, and mature some scheme for their future guidance.
Kelly was dreaming of some great and extraordinary
coup that should be talked of.
As the horses were good and sold cheap no questions
were asked, and that trouble was over.
Then with their wallets and small bags they started for
a sailors’ boarding-house, where they easily obtained one
large room for the four.
Early next morning the coarse miners’ suits were ex-
changed for sailors’ clothes.
The money stolon from Mr. Clarence was soon got
through in the low gambling shops of the town, besides
which the reckless extravagance of the scoundrels and their
frantic liberality to vicious companions aided the depletion
of their purses.
CHAPTER XC.
SYDNEY.
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, is a wonderful
town. Those who have not seen it can scarcely believe in
its wonderfpl development since its first foundation in
1798.
It is built upon the most beautiful site in the world, aud
much more beautiful in every respect than the vaunted
3enoa the superb. It lies on the edge of a bay unsur-
passed by beauty and convenience in the world. The
water is sixty feet deep at the natural wharves
At the lime of which we speak the city was infinitely
busy, while pleasure was rife everywhere.
There was no amusement that could be thought of that
could not be found in that place.
In the daytime the four sailors kept indoors, amusing
themselves as best they might.
At night time they furbished themselves up to look like
captains and mates, and went about.
In those days, except in first-class hotels and clubs,
everybody was admitted everywhere who had plenty of
money.
The four selected a house where billiards were allowed
and cards not objected to.
It was also a place where money could be spent without
stint, as the menu was expensive.
Kelly and Zoph were very good hands at billiards, and
therefore played continually.
The other two preferred cards, or drinking and smoking.
After the quartette had been in the iiabit of going to the
place -the Eastern Casino it was called—lor two or three
nights, they found themselves observed by a young man,
who, though neatly dressed, looked otherwise seedy and
miserable.
His spirits scorned low, and he seldom played or even
took a drink at his own expense.
Kelly made inquiries about him.
He was a elerk in the Union Bank, where he had a good
ntuation, but, spending money and time too freely, was
always without cash.
Ned Kelly had an idea.
It was prodigious the amount of ideas that struck him.
Gold was pouring in very freely to this bank, awaiting
transmission to England.
The sum total must be very large.
'■ You seem interested in billiards my '-hud,’ said
Kelly, suavely, on the third night, putting ou his best
quality airs. “Why don’t you play?”
The young man flushed and looked round slyly ere h<
made any answer.
“ The fact is, I pretty well lost my last quarter’s salary
on the board of green cloth,” explained the other. “ I
cannot afford it.”
“ Will you liquor ?’’ said Kelly. “ I’m not going to play
any more. Come I'll stand a supper.”
The man, whose name was TempU>, and wno belonged
to a very good family, was only one of those too easily
led away,
“ Very happy,” was the jaunty answer of the seedy one.
So they drank, and then John Temple went off to a
private supper-room with the four respectable sailors, cap-
tain and mates.
John Temple had not had such a feed for a longtime.
It was with particular relish aud enjoyment he ate his
meal.
After supper there was the flowing bowl and the weed,
which all delighted in.
The punch flowed round freely. There was no stint of
that commodity.
“ Let’s have a game,” said Kelly.
“ I have no money,” was the answer.
“ I'll lend you five quid,” said Kelly. “ Anything for
amusement’s sake.”
And he thrust the gold into the other’s hands, whose
face became at once flushed and excited.
It was to him such an exceedingly novel sensation.
lie was a poor fool, and not much of a player.
But they let him win.
And then, as he had too much to drink, they made him
up a shakedown.
Next day was Sunday, and during that day Kelly had
made up his mind to propose a big scheme to the bank
clerk.
He could see at once that he was weak and easily led by
evil counsel
John Temple was rather surprised to find himself in a
sailors’ boarding-house the next day, with money in hi*
pocket, and a luxurious breakfast awaiting him.
It was hard to understand what had passed, but with
him the present was everything.
After breakfast his new friends proposed a drive to one
of the places frequented on high days and holidays by the
people of the town.
John Temple was delighted, and was equally glad not
to have had to go home and dress.
He would have had to face his mother and sister at
home, where they were nearly starving.
He was glad to avoid this.
Suddenly, however, a better feeling prevailed, and, re-
membering he had money, he seat them a sovereign by a
messenger, telling them he had mot some fnorh* with
whom he was going to spend the day.
This duty performed he started to enjoy himself, and
this can be done in the colony if it can be done any-
where.
It was the dark of the evening when they returned to
dine at the boarding-house.
They had a private room, in which after dinner they
locked themselves.
Kelly had provided f/°,uty of drink, but he was careful
not to let Jpm I'smple ) beyond a certain amount.
He had mv. ■' t>o sio ri to say to him before they parted
that night.
You do a lot ot work at that bankV he began when
he thought the young man primed.
“ Yes—for very bad pay,” cried Temple,
It s a tarnation shame,” observed Kelly ‘u a commiser-
ating tone of voice.
“ Yes ; but what’s to be done?” sulkily ensured Temple,
“ the big-pots get all the money.”
“ it’s the way of this here cussed world,” growled the
bushranger ; “ aud sometimes you have big piles V”
“Pretty good size now,” said Temple with a grin
“ something likelv ”


* That's your ticket,” urged Kelly in a low,persuasive
voice; “now why don’t you help yourself, make for
England, and live like a fighting-cock ?”
John Temple turned very pale, and looked both excited
and astonished.
“ It would suit mo to a T,” he answered, speaking in
rather a tremulous tone.
“ Can I trust you, my young chicken?” asked Kelly. *
“You can; I’m sick cf this life—poor, In debt, deeply
involved,” he said. “I will do anything to get out of it.”
“ Do you ever sleep at the bank ?” the other continued,
who had got all this out of him before.
“Twice a week,” replied the weak-minded youth, “the
manager makes us take it in turns.”
“Can you get the keys?” Kelly went on.
“ Yes,” faltered the other.
“ Well, to-morrow 1 11 lock up some friends,” continued
Kelly, “ and we’ll do the job. I’ll have a craft ready to
put out to sea in—and then away for such a spree as you
never seed.”
John Temple nodded idiotically and was soon put to
bed, as they wanted him to go sober to business the next
day.”
But he agreed to meet them every evening at the Eastern
Casino, when they would report progress.
“ Found a flat!” said Joss, “ a rare good un. Hope he
won’t get light and peach.”
“ 1 don’t think so,” responded Kelly, “ he’s all there
when the rhino is concerned. Bit like anything.”
So next day, freshened up, with clean shirt and every-
thing correct, the bank cler c went to his duty.
He was quite exhilarated with hope. He wanted to
give up the life of honest drudgery he had been leading,
and by which he might have become an honourable man,
for the sake of making money suddenly by nefarious
means.
Except with exceptionally wicked natures, bold and
audacious, crime carries its own punishment. Kelly was
aot of those.
Le jen i.e vaut pas la chnndeUe.
It brings sorrow, sleepless nights, and sometimes that
madness which incites to suicide.
But now the unfortunate John Temple saw all through
roseate spectacles, little dreaming what the dread future
would bring forth.
CHAPTER XCI
THE BANK CLEBK.
Next day Kelly made inquiries as to chartering a coasting
vessel, a smart craft, in which he could trade in “ notions ”
and other things.
Salmon Roe had gone off to the rendezvous to collect
together the whole of the band.
They had come in twos and threes.
Kelly meant them to go on board secretly, and when
once on the high seas they could decide what rvas to be
done.
Every man could secure arms and ammunition.
As so many of them were seamen they got anywhere
they pleased.
There are plenty of places in Sydney, as elsewhere,
where everyone is welcome who brings money, and no
questions asked.
But, of course, they must avoid places where English
cruisers are very much in the habit of calling. They are
apt to be rather inquisitive.
When Kelly called, under an assumed name, at a shipping
agent's, and offered to charter a vessel to trade down
the coast in general goods, he found no great difficulty in
obtaining what he wanted, the more that he also intimated
his desire to purchase a good many of the goods required.
He secured the White Eagle, a good-sized schooner, in
the course of the day, paid his deposit, and began to treat
for goods.
lie said he should find his own crew.
As this was only reasonable, no objection was made.
Next day, the charter money being paid, the vessel
was formally handed over to Kelly, who began his pre-
parations.
Salmon Roe returned in a day or two, and then some of
the quietest of the men were told off for loading.
They were busy all day, and in such a port as that no
one took any particular notice.
T hey easily carried on board their arms and ammunition,
with tobacco and such liquids as they required.
At last the day came to carry out the most nefarious part
of their plans.
John Temple was to be on duty on Friday Ills office
was to remain after banking hours in a small counting-
house adjoining the apartments of the head manager.
This gentleman generally went out of an evening, but
always returned before midnight, and shortly afterwards
retired to rest.
The junior clerk then paraded about, saw to the fasten-
ing of the doors, after which he returned to his chair.
All the keys were kept in the head manager’s room, but
John Temple knew how to get at them but too well.
On more than one occasion during his nocturnal vigil
he had availed himself of this knowledge to help himself
to certain small sums.
He had been very cautious, being a very petty and
nerveless thief, and had contrived hitherto to escape
detection.
The key of the outer doors of the bank he had managed
to secure while pretending to put them in their proper
place.
He sat now waiting the half-dreaded signal, with his
heart in his mouth.
Did no thought of his mother and sister and one dearer
still check him in his headlong course? No, indeed.
Conscience was silent and dumb.
The manager, who had two rooms en suite, retired to
sleep the sleep of the just.
A neighbouring clock sounded one.
Then there was a discreet tapping on the oistshlc in a
peculiar way, and John Temple went and with beating
heart removed bolts and bars.
The thing was done and he w r as at the mercy of the
robbers, four in number.
Closing the door they put on rude masks, so as to bo
unrecognisable.
“ Secure the manager first,” whispered John Temple,
leading the way. “ lie might be dangerous.”
Kelly had no wish to pash things to extremites if he
could help it, so came provided with the means of securing
the man effectually.
• They went in, John Temple leading, and found the
manager, Mr. Benson, fast asleep.
Three of them caught hold of him, and, before he coiJd
make the least resistance, gagged and had him effec-
tually.
His struggles were terrible, but at last finding that they
were useless he lay quiet and still.
John Temple now secured all the keys which were in
his possession, and then he led the way to the vaults.
As it happened the actual quantity of bullion in the
bank was not very large, a heavy sum having been scut to
England that very day ; still there was a good haul enough
for these rascals.
But one bitter disappointment was reserved For them.
The safe containing the notes was one of those only to be
opened by one who understood a secret combination
which John Temple did not.
Kelly was savage in his expressions of rage, but it was
clearly not John Temple's fauit, so that they had to put
up with what they had already obtained.
They therefore ascended to the upper regions to make
off as quickly possible. John Temple nad, of course,
to accompany them.
The manager would too surely recognise and denounce
him to his employers.


Such was Kelly’s second successful bank robbery, _ ,ie
of many ho was yet to commit.
They had carpet-bags with them, and it now became a
serious question as to how to reach their inn without
being suspected by the police, who, if they saw them about
at that hour, would certainly make (inquiries.
Hut John Temple knew of a place close at hand, of not
very reputable character, where they could pass the time
until daylight, when they could hurry on board ship and
bo off.
They were fully v leared and everything was ready for a
start at a moment’s notice.
The uilliculty was to think of a place where they could
go and spend their ill-acquired earnings.
John Temple found them the shelter they required, and
at daybreak they immediately went on board their ship,
which lay in deep water alongside the wharf, and worked
down and out of the beautiful harbour. They had a good
stait.
A more villainous crew never perhaps was collected on
one ship.
The great thing was to get away from Sydney as fast
as possible, and so far that no cruiser would have any
idea in which direction the White Eagle had sailed
All sail was cracked on ; long before business hours in
Sydney the schooner was out of sight of land.
Everything depended on their putting the authorities
at fault.
Meanwhile, in the capital of the colony the excitement
was indeed intense, while indignation was profound.
When the hour came for the bank to open, the door
remained closed despite all the knocking.
The principal was immcd&teTy sent for. He came in
hot haste to give authority to open.
He had a key to a side door, so that he could obtain
admission when he liked.
He entered rapidly, and soon became aware of the mis-
fortune which had happened to the manager, and the
treachery of the clerk.
The first thing was to release the unfortunate prisoner,
then rushing off to the police-station, information was
given.
The house of the wretched family of John Temple,
his mother, sister, and cousin, was first searched, but no
trace of him had been seen.
As the news spread, it reached the ears of the police
that be had been lately seen a good deal in the company
of sailors, and the boarding-house inhabited by Kelly and
his associates was visited.
They were at once on the track. A man resembling the
one the police described had that morning gone on boai’d
the White Eagle schooner, which had sailed soon after
daybreak.
Minutely interrogated as to the character and description
of the men, the police came to the startling conclusion
that Kelly and his gang had been in their midst.
The news was astounding, but the chief question that
arose was what was to be done.
The authorities were applied to, and at once granted a
small but well-armed and swift cruiser to go in pursuit.
It was a wild-goose chase, but they were safe to bo
heard of somewhere.
Such unmitigated villains could not possibly remain idle
wherever they located themselves.
But where would they go at first ?
They had plenty of money, and would be sure to seek
some place where they could spend it.
It was a tangled web to unravY but Captain Redknap,
of the Snake Revenue cutter, determined to persevere.
It would be a slow process.. He had an excellent
description of the White Eagle, and must question every
ship he sighted.
He was to hear of her sooner than he expected.
That night, after dark, fire wag seen at a considerable
distance, for which they made at once.
it was a nesting brig that had been boarded by the
White Eagle, which took from them water and biscuit.
They then scuttled the boats, and wantonly fired the
vessel, hoping thus to prevent information of their where-
abouts being given.
Making off in a great hurry they fails*! to do ft effect-
ually, but the crew were already driven into the bows,
and must have perished but for the welcome succour they
had received from the man-of-war.
CHAPTER XCII.
ON BOARD THE WHITE EAGLE,
Where Ned Kelly was there was very little question as to
who should be leader.
The stupendous energy and self-assertion of the man
always carried everything before him.
The ex-captain Zeph was, as a matter of course, ap-
pointed second in command.
lie was a clever and experienced navigator, and on him
they had chiefly to depend for their safety.
As soon as they were fairly out at sea, Kelly asked
Zeph to produce a map and decide on some place where
they might go to spend their ill-gained earnings in, ®f
course, riot and debauchery.
In company with Zeph was one Jennings, a very shrewd
and clever seaman.
Zeph spread the chart out, and at once clapped his
finger on a certain spot.
“ That’s the crib !” he said.
“ Spit out the name,” cried Kelly.
“ Singapore, in Torres Straits,” was the quiet answer of
the man : “ fine place.”
“ Never heard of the shop,” said Kelly.
“ Time you did,” continued Zeph. “ Rare jumping off
place—niggers and Chinee ; plenty of fun, from arrack to
tiger-hunting,”
“ Go for Sing’pore,” answered Kelly.
The vessel was well-built and a good sailor, well
appointed with provisions and even luxuries.
So they started for the desired haven, with every pros-
pect of success.
Kelly was very strict in his discipline on these occasions,
as it w'as their only hope of safety.
Of course there were certain laxities that would not
have been tolerated either on board of a merchantman or
a man-of-war.
That is, more drink was served out than was wise.
But a restriction the men would not have submitted to.
All went well until the next day.
The breeze had been fair until then. It now began to
freshen into a gale from the eastward, and blew with some
violence, but after a while it died away iuto a perfect
calm, leaving a heavy swell in which the vessel rolled in-
cessantly.
About midday the sky began to blacken, and before an
hour more had assumed an appearance of the most dismal
and foreboding darkness.
“Dirty,” said Kelly, with a grim smile.
“ Very,” answered Zeph ; “ we shall have a buster, and
no flies about it.”
There could be no doubt that something like a hurri
cane was coming upon them.
The warning, however, was not lost upon them.
of their sails were taken in, and then even experienced
sailors thought they could defy the storm that was fast
approaching.
An hour later it came on them with sudden and terrific
violence.
The noise the wind made was horrible.
The wind was from the eastward, and the water as it ran
on deck was warm as milk ; the murkiness and closeness
of the air was in a short time dispelled, but soon the ship
heeled over dangerously.
Every article that could move danced to leeward, but
worst of all the topmasts went by the board.


The men looked at one another aghast, waiting ths end
with frantic fright.
Curses flew round like carrion crows, or rather white
sea-gulls.
No voice of command could be heard, and no orders
were given.
All discipline was suspended, and every man was equal
to his neighbour.
Luckily these hurricanes are of short duration, and just
after nightfall the fearful gale ceased.
But the vessel was doomed. A tremendous sea smashed
her rudder. She lay like a log, wiolly unmanagable. She
shipped tom. of water, and was npidly becoming water-
logged.
There were no skilled carpenters on board, and they
could not stop the leaks.
All looked round desperate and moody.
For these men there was only one resource, and that
was the boats.
Fortunately they were stout, and able to accommodate
the crew.
“ We’ll have to get back to the colony,” growled Kffily,
“worse luck, I say.”
“ Mate, it might be wuss,” said Zcph.
Orders were now given to lower the boats, and to put
water and food within.
Each man was to take a limited kit, in which, of course,
would be contained his share of the plunder.
All took care to see that their weapons were cleaned and
loaded.
As they pushed off from the nearly-sinking schooner
the wind almost ceased, and a thick damp and misty haze
settled on the waters.
It was impossible to see a hundred yards before them.
Still they pulled steadily, aided by a small compass
which Zeph could just make out.
Suddenly they heard a bell sound upon the waters, and
the men by one assent ceased rowing.
They then heard eight bells sound clearly on the night
air.
Kelly and Zcph exchanged a wolfish glance.
“If we could only swop vessels,” said Kelly, in an
undertone to his companions.
“Should like to see what’s her size, mate,” replied Zcph,
41 before we do anything.”
And be guided the leading boat until they came in sight
nf the strange vessel.
Then Zsph lifted his head.
“ It’s the cutter Snake,” he said, “ She’s on our heels,
and means to nab us.”
Kelly swore rather hard and fast about his luck.
“She’s a biter,” he observed. “Got too many teeth
for us to draw.”
“No,” whispered Zeph. “She’s like a ship at anchor
watch, or a nigger sloop where the boss, in a storm, takes
in sail and goes below.”
“Is it likely,” continued Kelly, “ we could get along-
side and try it on ?”
“ All serene. We can hardly make her out there.
She can’t see us at all down here,” answered Zeph, and
his whispered order went round.
As Zeph said, from the the cutter Snake, a fine
vessel of about a hundred tons, could easily be seen, while
from the deck of the small man-of-war the boats, in
that haze, would not nave been easily visible.”
After the severe storm, from which cutter had
come out intact, all were tired on board the Snake, and a
poor watch was kept.
Besides, they were n a time of intense peace, and a
night surprise was the last thing to be thought of in Aus-
tralian latitudes. .
Zeph soon showea the men how to fix their oars in tue
rowlocks so us to row without making a noise.
In this way they reached the side of the cutter un-
noticed, , , „ ,
The man at the wheel was half asleep fron fatigue,
while the rest of the watch were nestled in the waist talk-
ing or sleeping.
The officer who should have been on the look-out, had
just gone down into the cabin for a cigar and glass of
spirits.
Nothing suspicious was anywhere iu sight, while the
weather was all that could be desired.
None suspected what a foul and treacherous foe was
lurking near them, nor thought they were close at hand.
Just at this moment a breeze sprung up, and the Snake
began to feel its force.
She yielded gracefully to the pressure, her canvas
belly’d, and away she crept from the boats to the tune of
an eight-knot breeze.
Curses, not loud, but deep, followed her course.
However, in a few moments the wind lulled again ; but
it had served to wake up the attention of the officer of the
watch, and stirred up the crew, who were soon moving
about on deck.
Kelly’s boat followed close.
It could easily do so, as the Snake was only forging
ahead about four knots an hour.
She made for a small port north 01.o l . Sydney, and evi-
dently would snug up there for the night, as the weathei
was intensely hot, and semi-cyclones not improbable.
Besides, daylight was necessary, as coral reefs abounded
here.
Standing off at a safe distance, Kelly watched the vcsrel
into port, saw her made snug for the night, and a boat
carrying the captain and twelve hands pull for the shore.
Waiting until all was quiet on board, Kelly's gang
worked up silently to the side of the schooner, and founj
the companion-ladder had not been hauled up, so that ar
easy means of ascent was offered.
The ruffians crept up the side of the schooner as silently
as flies into a sugar-basin.
They soon secured the watch (one man being considered
sufficient in harbour), and then proceeded to batten dowr
the hatches.
On board men-o’-war the crew are not as a rule armed
until the beat to quarters is heard.
Kelly and his gang were in possession of one of the
finest cutters in her Majesty’s service.
What was to be done now became the next important
question.
Even Kelly revolted at the idea of putting a whole crew
like this to death.
“As a general rule,” he said, “quarts of blood don’t
matter, but this ere job is a big one ; what’s to be done ?’
“ Don’t know,” answered Zeph, “ except set ’em afloat,
How to get up the anchor was the difficulty.
Working the windlass would possibly be heard ashore,
and up it must be hove before the schooner could be
moved a foot.
Accordingly, the windlass was worked very slowly and
gradually, and, as the anchorage was light, and the anchor
did not bite in this calm land-locked berth, it was just
hoisted off the sandy bottom, and half of the manned
the boat, attached a tow-line to the schooner a-rd with a
long pull, and a strong pull, and a pun altogether, soon
got her outside the harbour.
In the meantime the battened-down crew were making
furious efforts to get on deck, and Kelly swore the first
man that showed would have his skull split.
Still the noise continued, and, resolving to stifle it and
show the utter uselessness of opposition, he determined
to let them know who was aboard.
“ Look here,” Kelly growled down tne hatchway,
“ stow your row, or it will be worse for you. Don t make
any mistake about it. Ned Kelly’s aboard! and you
know what that means. Any more of your —— bellow*
ing, and I’ll send the lot of you for crabs’ meat.”
Consternation went to the heart of his hearers.
They knew what an unscrupulous villain the man was,
and that shedding blood was rather a pastime than other-
wise to hiss, particularly if it furthered his ends.


They could uot guess what their fate would be, and
almost feared it would be walking the plank with most of
them.
The first lieutenant, who was in charge of the schooner,
thought it was some practical joke of the middies, and
that the whole thing was pantomime, but he could
scarcely reconcile wdh this thought the movement of the
vessel.
Zeph walked to the quarter-deck and stood over the
skylight of the cabin, beneath which was a framework of
iron bars.
“ Ililloa! what’s up?” he cried, hoarsely.
“Who is playing this foolish trick?” said a stern and
commanding voice. “ Open at once, unless you would be
punished for mutiny.”
“ It ain’t no mutiny, governor,” answered Zeph, in a
sneering tone ; “ only your crew is prisoners, and we want
your ship.”
“ I don’t believe it,” was the resolute answer ; “ it’s a
deuced bad practical joke.”
“ Come on deck and see, my lads,” answered Zeph,
“ but if anybody fires a shot don’t blame me if you all
walks the plank.”
By this time the cabin hatchway was removed, and the
officers, four in number, came out. The men were still
kept below.
They found themselves confronted by between thirty and
forty desperadoes.
“ What is the meaning of this ?” asked the lieutenant,
in an indignant tone.
“ Its no use doing the big boss here,” said Kelly.
Now the lieutenant at once knew the class of men he
had to do with.
If he had had a crew behind him he would have tried
the dignified and commanding, but he was utterly help-
less.
Such a gang as that he saw before him would have no
mercy whatever on him or on his followers.
“ So that my men are fairly treated,” he said, “I care
non. Share their fate I will.”
“ All serene, my jolly swell,” responded Kelly. “ Get
into our boats,” lie added.
Presently the officer and deck-watch were allowed to
enter the boats. Biscuit and a little water wa given them.
One of the men was now ordered to summon the crew,
and inform them cl the change of ownership in the
vessel.
As a matter of course these were unarmed, and could
therefore make no resistance
They were ordered at once to go over the side and join
their ill-fated companions.
Besistance was madness, and they therefore obeyed ic
silence.
Soon (hoy disappeared in the haze and mist,
here was a change in life for these consummate ras-
cals, a change scarcely to be credited.
A splendid English cruiser with every comfort and
luxury that money could procure for the officers, and ex-
ur quarters for the men..
It was indeed a change to be on board a well-appointed
vessel, armed and well provisioned.
But it now became a matter of consideration what pre-
cautions must be taken before they ventured into an
English port.
The names of officers and men would of course ce found
on the ship’s books, but they might meet with a con-
sort.
Zeph, who before commencing his nefarious career
had been in the Naw knew everything about signiis and
all that.
Still, as a British man-of-war, they would not enter any
English seaport.
They would change the name and rig and call themselves
American; but what about the uniiorm? 'lhat was un-
answerable.
She must profess to be a yacht.
Fortunately Zeph, in his portmanteau, had the ship’s
papers of the White Eagle, which, by judicious mani-
pulation, might be made to serve as those of tbs
armed yacht bound for the Solomon and other Cauuibij
glands.
Young Temple was good at any kind of writing, and,
besides, the papers of yachts are not closely over-
hauled.
So it was decided that this should be their plan.
After a hearty supper the watches were set, and all
those off duty went below.
Sleep was very much needed, and even few of those on
deck could not resist its temptations.
But the night was fine, and there was a good man at
the wheel, so it did not matter.
Next day paint brashes and pots were procured, a plat-
form slung, and every vestige of the Snake effaced.
There were several men able to carve a figure-head o.u
board, so that before night every trace of the vessel’s
indentity had disappeared.
Plenty of good plain clothes were found, and aa
Captain Higgins (Kelly) intended to play the part
of a nouveau riche there was not much fear of detec-
tion.
He had no pretence to pass as a native-born American,
That would have been beyond even his powers of mimicry
and disguise.
So all appeared plain sailing, and the vessel with a fair
wind.
(To be continued.)
THE CELEBRATED MOYELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Talc of the American Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
T,P i J i UYf i ; ~ ~n a -. .. , _ . . and Adventure. Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
The Star of tne South.— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of a Scapegrace.
“ The Black Angel.” Adventure. The Cloud King.
T.ie Fiery Cross.— A Talc of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Ha’f-a- Mildred’s Cross, or the High Eoad to
American War. Million. R u in.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search One in a Thousand.
of tne i ‘ Black Angel.” of a 33ig Diamond. Andrew Lopriincr.
Dove’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. j Lord Scatcerbrain, or the Rough Robert the Rover.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Talc of the Deep Sea. 1 Diamond Polished. The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




CHAPTER XCIH.
CATCHING A TARTAR.
Next day was equally fine, and the rascally crew were
looking forward with delight to an easy and rapid journey.
The cutter was under all canvas, with a fine breeze and
smooth water, when there was a cry of “ Sail oh!” on the
larboard quarter.
“What do you think of her, Zeph?” said Captain
Kelly, examining the stranger through a glass.
“ Some stray merchantman, chucked out of her course
by the storm. AYe’d best, if you mean to speak her,” lie
added, with a wink, “put ycr head towards her under easy
sail, so as to near her about sunset.”
“ Look out!” said the man at the wheel, a ’cute youth
of some two-and-twenty summers, “ if e’er I saw wood
and sails, that there is one of John Bull’s calves of the
ocean, and a forty-four gunner at that!”
Zeph made no reply. He ran up the maintop, and
remained for ten minutes in absorbed attention of the cut
of the stranger’s sails.
“ AYe’re done,” cried Zeph, as he came down. “if we
don’t mind. We must show our heels.”
“ All right,” said Kelly, “ give your orders.’
The vessel was well manned certainly, and all sail was
set upon her like lightning.
“ Heave the log!” cried Zeph.
He was obeyed, and she was found by thav- measurement
to be going about nine and six.
“ AVhat is the other feller doing ?” ashf J h “My.
“Ten.” whispered Zeph, in an alarms 1 'Sme. “She’s
about nine miles off. She’ll be up betoi t dark. She
draws up. I can see her bowsprit when she lifts, and
half-an-hour ago I only saw her toreyard.”
Kelly was appalled at this ill-timed news.
The word foreyard made him think of the yard-arm.
Still he determined to run as long as he could, and then
to die fighting.
Surrender on his part was folly. It was simply suicidal
madness.
So everything was done that could be done —that art
and cunning could devise.
An hour passed, and then those who ku«w the real
danger could see the water-line of the frigate.
Dull dismay took possession of all; and there was poor
discipline on board the pirate.
As to the bank clerk, he was sick of the whole business.
He saw he would be robbed of his share of the bank
robbery, and be cast in the world a penniless vagabond,
unless he could continue in a course of crime and blood,
for which he had neither taste nor nerve.
He trembled at all that was going on.
He resolved to abandon his companions on the first
opportunity, and even had thoughts of turning Queen’s
evidence if he could secure his own neck.
He almost longed for the opportunity.
Some suggested the boats, but Zeph stood out. He
still had hope of ultimate escape.
The sun had sunk some time below the horizon, the
c’oud of small sail coming up astern of them began to be
indistinct, and at last disappeared altogether in a black
squall.
Zeph was perfectly p ■;> ired for this emergency, which
he had expected.
He shortened sail, kept on as much as he dared,
and reversed the course of the ship. At the end
of four hours the squall was over, and it became lighter.
Though they scanned the sea in all directions, the fri-
gate was nowhere to be seen.
They, however, were in dangerous proximity to a
coral-bank, to which Zeph proceeded to give a wide berth.
But they did not venture to start until daylight came
and made them aware that none but a few coasters were
in sight.
They at once cracked <?n all sail, and resumed their
voyage.
A strict look-out was kept, as none had any wish to
catch such a Tartar again.
There was always someone at the mast-head, with keen
eyes and a glass.
Two days passed without any further adventure, the
White Eagle going on her way rejoicing, with her villainous
crew. ,
But on the third day two things occurred. The look-
out sighted a sail, which Zeph declared to be the same
they had just avoided.
He also sighted another black squall to the southward.
“ What in the name of is to be done now? ” said
Kelly.
“ Shorten sail, and haul dead on a wind right into that
dark squall yonder,” replied Zeph.
“I suppose it’s all serene,” growled Kelly; “and so
I leave it to you, mate.”
“ Shorten sail there! ” shouted Zeph, in a stern, firm
voice.
All this was done with surprising speed.
A good many of the fellows had been deserters from
men-of-war, and fled to the diggings; but all worked
with a ready will.
“ Haul in the larboard braow, Wh?e sharp up, put the
helm and bring her to the wind,” wied Zeph, continuing
his orders.
“ Port it is,” said the man at the wheel, and the vessel
was close hauled upon the starboard tack.
She had on her a square mainsail, boom mavisail, and
a jib.
The distant vessel was clearly visible, as she was so
much taller than the cutter, while her top canvas was
kept on much longer.
The AVhite Eagle moved with graceful ease, running
right at the squall, which soon burst on them with thun-
dering force.
But all was snug below and aloft, so that when the
wind struck her, everybody was ready.
It was a heavy tussle, and necessitated the taking in of
more sail, but the cutter lived through it.
Once more she had been fortunate enough to escape,
for when the heavy storm was over, the frigate was no-
where to be seen.
But now came the question, what were they to do ?
Their pursuers might be bound for Singapore, as well as
themselves.
A consultation was held, and Zeph, p-oposed that they
should run to within some ten or twelve miles of the
fcettlement, and cast anenor in some unfrequented place.
It would be easy to find a native boat, and Zeph who
spoke most of the lingoes of those seas, could go in and
learn the news. So it was agreed.
All the time they were proceeding on their way keep-
ing a strict lookout.
A third meeting with the cruiser might prove more fatal
than the two others.
Singapore is a British settlement on the Malay coast.
Its surface is generally undulating, with round jungle-
covered hills.
In some parts it is exceedingly swampy and unhealthy.
The town of Singapore is situated on the south side of
the island.
By rivulets it is separated into three distinct divisions,
the west inhabited by Chinese, the central and best part
by Europeans, and the east by Malays.
The central part of the town is laid out in regular streets
with a parade and carriage drive.
The western division comprises the warehouses of Dutch
merchants, as well as the dwellings and shops of the
Chinese, who have a splendid pagoda in this quarter
The Kampovf] Glam, a Malay quarter, is indescribably
filthy and squalid.
Many of the dwellings are erected on posts. Bridges,
chiefly of wood, unite the three divisions together.
The retail trade of the town is chiefly carried on in the
open streets, even to the money-chanp-erg.


Finding that the cruiser was not in the harbour, Zeph
ordered the men to return to the vessel-, which then
came in with flying colours.
Captain Higgins and his mate reported themselves to
the American consul, who was very gracious, and not at
all particular about papers. He asked them to dinner and
the captain said he would give a grand banquet to all the
Americans.
He would accept the hospitality of the consul on that
day, but he would like a quiet day or two to repose and
look about.
The supposed Americans took rooms in a private hotel,
where they brought some luggage.
They dined with the consul, who thought Captain Josiah
Higgins a curious customer, rather reticent and sparing of
speech, while his sailing master was both pleasant and
agreeable.
After dinner the consul returned to his business, and
they to their hotel.
Here they expressed a wish in the evening to see some
of the sights of the town, and asked if there was any sing-
ing and dancing going on.
“ I should like to see where the jolly tars go.”
“ Rather rough, sir,” said the attendant waiter, smiling
and gracious.
“AVe’li put on rough togs,” laughed the owner of
the yacht, and so retired to smoke and drink in a room
overlooking a garden full of marvellous fruit trees.
When night came the guide presented himself. He was
a Malay, and was going to take them to a kind of drinking
shop with a garden, where the sailors danced with such
girls, native and others, whom they found there. _
It was a low quarter of the town, and rarely visited by
the English. . ~ ,
It was a Malay Cremorne, with bowers and tables, and
was lit up by Chinese lamps.
Presently, shaded by some creepers and evergreens, they
saw some of their own men come in and begin to foot it
in the usual way.
They did not make themselves known to them, there
being no motive. ,
Presently a waiter came up carrying a tray, which he
placed in the adjoining arbour. He was followed by two
sailors.
They had not observed that the next arbour was occu-
pied by Kelly and his companion.
“ You’ll never guess why I brought you out here, Bill
never,” said the other.
“ Ain’t good at guessing, Jack,” was the answer.
“ Well do you see, if I’m right, and I m sure I am, we 11
arn a lot of dollars,” continued Jack, “ blowed if we
don’t.” , , i
“How so, my hearty? I know were two pals, and
allays divides, so spit out.” .
“ What do you think I see outside the pagoda, just now,
Bill ? ” whispered the other. “ Why a wessel they calls the
White Eagle; well, there’s some big swindle about, tor
she’s the Snake. I know her like my own father. I served
aboard of her for five years.”
“ No, Jack !” cried the other.
“But 1 say yes, Bill!” persisted the first; “and as
eoon as this drink is over, out I goes and I peaches.
“No you won’t! collect some men ! whispered Kelly;
“ follow—secure them and bring them aboard, i 1
wach him to put a finger in my pie.”
The other went round, spoke to the men, warned ther
there was danger in the wind, and that they must follow
They obeyed. .. , , -
Presently the two men came out and made at once for
the English quarter, where all the Government offices
were situated.
As they entered a dark passage they were set upon,
gagged, and hurried down to a boat, as if they had been
drunken sailors.
The supposed yacht lay well out.
An hour later, when it was quite dark, they sailed, and
were far away at sea before morning.
Kelly gave the two men a severe rope’s-ending, and the*
cast them adrift in a small open boat without oars, food,
or water.
“ Sink or swim, and be d to you! ” was his brutal
cry: “that’ll teach you to make and meddle with Ned
Kelly.”
And so he left them.
CHAPTER XCIV.
STOWED AWAY.
The great object now was to keep dark for a while and do
nothing to excite suspicion.
If they could only find some place where for a little
time they could be quiet and enjoy themselves out of the
way of English cruisers it would be wise and prudent.
A consultation was held in the cabin.
Zeph declared that Batavia in Java was about as jolly a
place as he knew of in the world.
It was a Dutch port, but was very much frequented by
sailors of all kinds.
Ned Kelly on the sea, from pure ignorance, was not like
Ned Kelly on land, and he had to submit to the advice of
Captain Zeph. .
The man since he had been disgraced in the Royal
Navy had served in various capacities in ships of all
nations. , , , ,
He knew these particular seas better than he did almost
any others. , , ,
So it was resolved to make for the Dutch colony and
spend some time there.
Zeph keenly examined the map, and at once fixed on
their course. , , ...
was better than remaining in those immediate
seas and running the risk of meeting the dreaded cruiser.
Of course a good and careful look-out was kept both
night and day.
The men all knew that they sailed with ropes round
their necks, and didn’t wish to give anyone the chance of
hauling the other end of it just yet.
For several days nothing whatever occurred and they
were within twenty-four hours of Java and in sight of a
small island, when a sail was again announced as m sight.
Zeph went up and after ten minutes came down with a
l/lcink facG. . . • 7?
“It’s that infernal cruiser again; she sails like lightning,
he said, “we must hide. 1 know there is land close
J °Tho island is not on many maps, but is well known to
sailors in those parts. <- frt
It is not inviting to ordinary seamen, but it has often
been seized as a refuge, a place of concealment for
P ‘on the side on which they viewed it it presented to the
view a precipitous and rugged-bound coast with hi 0 h
and pointed rocks groaning defiance over the unappease-
able and furious waves which broke incessantly at their
feet and recoiled to repeat the blow.
For them to land was impossible on that side, but Zeph
told them he knew of a cove where they could take
Sh lt was to leeward of the island, and was soon found.
Its entrance were indicated to the memory of the sailor
by a rock here and there covered by verdure but swarm-
in" with sea birds, of which there were myriads.
The sea beat quietly against its base ; the feathered
tribe, in endless variety, had been for ages the almost un-
disturbed tenants of this natural monument .
It stood out by itself in the wide ocean like a pyramid
in the desert. It was not, and never had been inhabited,
but wild fowl of every description made it their home.
All its jutting points and little projections were covered
with white guano.


The water was very deep, and they easily ran into the
bottom of a land-locked cave.
Here they agreed to remain until they could decide on
their future movements.
On landing they found the remains of a very old wreck
and two or three huts that had been built out of the
fragments.
They contained a few benches and tables composed of
boards roughly hewn out and nailed together.
Around were bones of goats and wild hogs, which was a
pleasant discovery, as they were always anxious tor fresh
meat.
As soon as they were safely moored a look-out was
sent to the summit of a rock to watch for the suspicious
vessel.
Zeph went up with a powerful glass and saw her
approach presently within two miles of the island, when
she steered, strangely enough, a course which would take
her straight to Batavia.
“ Hang rue, if she ain’t picked up those two fellows,”
said Zeph; “that’s the Spitfire. Could any fool have said
anything about Java?”
“I wanted to scrag ’em,” said Kelly, in a sullen tone;
‘ ‘ who was right now ?”
“Well, it can’t be helped,” replied Zeph, coolly. “I
tell you what we’ll do—we’ll leave the White Eagle here,
and start you and I and six men for Batavia in the cap-
tain’s cutter. I know a place close to Batavia, a little
fishing villiage of natives, where we can leave our men,
and in the evening walk into Batavia.”
“ Bather dangerous, mate,” mused Kelly, who when
not the leader exhibited less recklessness than usual.
“And a ten mile pull ain’t much in my way.”
“ My friend, in Batavia there is a Jew, Joel by name,
who has been agent for us lads of these seas for years,”
said Zeph, “he buys and sells under the very nose of the
authorities. He will find you manifesto, ship papers,
passports, anything. We will go to him.”
“Useful lot of acquaintances you’ve got mate,” said
Kelly in rather a dolorous than laughing tone.
“ Want friends in this part of the world,” replied cap-
tain Zeph, with a laugh.
“ Seems so,” replied the bushranger.
They now descended from the height, and on
approaching the huts found a very fragrant smell of
cookery.
The goats and hogs were very tame, as this island, a
rock in the sea, is rarely visited, and they had plenty of
fresh food, including eggs, of which there were innumer-
able quantities about.
It was only one mile long by half-a mile wide, and
exhibited curious phenomena.
There was a valley close to the land-locked bay, with
thousands and thousands of trees, each of them about
thirty feet high.
But every tree was dead, extending in leafless boughs
to another—a forest of desolation, as if nature had at
some particular moment ceased to vegetate.
On the lowest of the dead boughs the gannetsand other
sea birds had built their nests in numbers unaccountable.
So unaccustomed did they seem to man that the
mothers brooding over their young only opened their
beaks in a menacing attitude at them as they passed.
As night approached the men returned to their quarters.
Zeph and Kelly had a long conversation.
The former having by far the better education of the
two, could easily play the part of a planter from the
interior, Sourabaya, or elsewhere, while Kelly could do
the overseer.
So it was settled.
At midnight the weather was set fair, and the wind in
the proper direction.
The boat was provided with everything necessary to the
short voyage.
Salmon Boe was to command while the two principals
went on shore and into the town.
Plenty of provisions were stowed in the longboat, and
all were armed to the teeth.
At midnight they started, and Zeph, with a small com-
pass, began to steer.
They had a short voyage before them.
The ship’s boat had been painted out of all recogni-
tion by anybody, besides having been slightly otherwise
altered.
So time went on until they were within four miles of
Batavia, at one of those marshy points so common on that
shore.
The entry into Batavia is up a wide river like a canal,
the waters of which are level with the land.
It was formerly styled the European’s Graveyard, and
was, and is so unhealthy, that a new township has been
formed twenty miles higher up where the land rises, and a
very handsome city has supplanted the old one.
The summer retreat from the intolerable heat is at
Beitenzorg, a city built upon a mountain about 2,000 feet
above the level of the fen. It may be called the Sanitarian
of the Island.
A fishing village lay at the bottom of the little bay, and
into this place Zeph ran.
At certain seasons of the year the rich merchants and
residents in Batavia would come out to this place to in-
dulge in fish dinners, and Mein Herr Hermann therefore
kept a Lust-haus, where people could be seasonably en-
tertained.
This Zeph knew, and leaving the boat in the marshy
entrance to the river, where fever and ague always reign
supreme, started with Kelly for the capital.
Here they tried to hunt up Hermann, but learned he
was at the village aforesaid, and immediately returned
thither for an interview.
However astonished Herr Hermann might have been to
see his old friend Zeph, he showed nothing of it.
No more mistaken notion can be conceived than that
piracy is done away with in that part of the world.
It is not so terrible in its results as of old, and yet many
a missing ship, supposed to have been lost in a cyclone or
a typhoon might have its loss traced to human agency.
Having satisfied their appetites, Zeph and the Dutch-
man were closeted.
After a very few explanations the owner of the house
agreed to look after the boat and its crew, while the others
went to Batavia in a native vehicle provided by him.
This was just what was wanted.
A little after sundown the vehicle was ready and the
two men started, and were driven direct to the house of
Herr v. Joel.
He was a merchant of what might be called all-sorts.
He dealt in anything, from a sack or coffee to a ship.
During the time of the celebrated pirate Van Arden,
whose atrocities and audacity are still remembered in those
seas, he often entertained him openly at table, and intro-
duced him to his friends.
He was never even suspected.
Batavia is a strange place. Its characteristics are ex-
ceedingly peculiar.
It is composed of two portions, the old called Jaccatra
by the natives, situated in a marshy flat near the sea, and
intersected by the great river and sundry canals.
The new suburban portion, extending over the higher
grounds to a distance of several miles inland, contains the
houses of the Europeans who have left the old town,
as we have already said, because of its great insalubrity.
Fever is often caught in it by sleeping in it one night.
But Kelly was hard.
Still it is the business part of the town, though in con-
sequence of the desertion of the Europeans it presents a
very dilapidated appearance. Still it is the business town.
The suburbs inhabited by the Europeans present more
the appearance of a garden than a town, with cocoa-nut
trees, bananas, &c.
The streets of Batavia have footpaths on either side for
the use of the Javanese and Chinese.


Slaves must either walk on the unpaved centre, or if on
he footpath, they must get out of the way of every free-
man they meet.
The Dutch are notoriously the most cruel taskmasters
and slave-holders in the world.
Europeans, as a rule, never walk.
In the olden time if they did, etiquette demanded that
a carriage should follow.
Batavia is the great depot for all the Dutch possessions,
and is very rich.
Such was the place the pirates had reached.
The residence of Herr Joel was of the usual serai-
native, semi-European style.
A long verandah ran in front, with creeping plants, and
it was low, of one story.
He was at home. He was not one of those who, because
he was rich, assumed a right to a country and a town
house.
He lived at his office. But it was provided with every
luxury money could provide.
Herr Joel was a man who denied himself nothing. Ho
had no objection to work, but he also was very fond of
play.
He was very polite and condescending to Zeph. Ho
had made money by him before and was prepared to make
money by him again.
Introducing Kelly as Jacob, the overseer of his friend,
Mr. Lionel Wells, an intending purchaser of a coffee estate,
he explained that they had come to Batavia on very
important business.
The fact was a large coffee plantation was in the market
nrpivately, and probably, if sold before it was put up to
luction, might be privately purchased at a very much
tower rate,
His friend, Mr. Lionel Wells, had plenty of money;
but still he wanted to get the property as cheap as
possible
They had, therefore, come to Herr Joel to ask him to
help them. All they wanted was a handsome suit of
clothes, a diamond ring or two, and an introduction to one
of the best hotels in Batavia frequented by the English.
Now the Dutch Jew, receiver, merchant, and what not,
could believe just what he thought proper about the
statement.
All he cared was about making money.
He found them clothes, jewellery, luggage, and what
was of much more importance, names—Mr. Lionel Wells,
of Salpha Farm, Sourabaya, ’ ad his overseer, Jacob
Jones, of the same place.
He then sent them off to a good hotel of the place,
where they were, as a matter of course, received.
But not without a little hesitation.
A Hindoo waiter, speaking in a mixed lingo of Dutch,
English, and native dialect, explained that they must put
up with inferior rooms for a day or two.
“ Him English Majesty officers, Spitfire, have taken
rooms, sah !” he cried, in a patois only understood by
Zeph; “want to find, sah—a pirate—tink him come
yah !”
The idea was so comical to the Hindoo, and waiter at a
respectable hotel, that he chuckled immoderately.
“ Beg pardon, sah—sahib ”-*■ he went on, “ bat de
ideah too comic ”
The very respectable Mr. Lionel Wells, of Sourabaya,
condescended on the part of himself and overseer to accept
inferior apartments.
They indulged in mild refreshment, and then, habited
in white linen suits, with straw hats to match, sauntered
into the billiard-room. The light was kept out by
Venetian blinds, which, however, helped to keep the place
cool.
As this hotel was very select, and only persons of ac-
knowledged repute were admitted there, no one made
enquiries.
There are rough English in Java, as elsewhere ; but the
planters, as a rule, are rather superior characters.
Some may be a little uncultivated, but vulgarity is the
exception.
There was little fear, therefore, for Zeph and his com-
panions being noticed.
Zeph, whose real name would have astonished some of
those present, could be the gentleman whenever he liked.
It may take three generations to make a gentleman, but
it takes more to unmake one.
The appearance in the billiard-room of Mr. Lionel
Wells and his overseer excited no particular attention.
The commander of the Spitfire, Captain Charles Mon-
tressor by name, was a rather pompous individual, but a
very keen and clever officer.
He was playing a game when Mr. Lionel Wells and
Jacob Jones entered the room.
“ I believe,” he said, sipping a cup of very genuine,
good coffee, “ that the rascals who stole the Snake must
be a set of flying Dutchmen, with a Cape fly-away ready
for them at every turn. It's a most remarkable fact.”
“ Yes, sir,” replied Lieut. Dallen, “ the rascals are cun-
ning, But take my word, for it—we’ll have them yet.
Such a set of unhanged rascals cannot last long.”
“ It would be flying in the face of Providence to believe
it,” replied the captain.
Lionel Wells and his overseer, who looked as humble as
Uriah Heep, stood listening attentively.
"I am from up country, Sourabaya, sir,” said Lionel
Wells, deferentially. “May I ask, sir, what you mean?”
“ You may, sir,” said Captain Charles Montrcssor,
politely. “I’ve been sent in chase of a gang of as vile
cut-throats as ever lived—men only fit to be lynched at
sight.”
“Indeed!” cried Zeph.
“ Yes, sir—murderers, robbers, bushrangers, and now
pirates,” exclaimed the captain, indignantly. “ Yes, sir ;
they have had the temerity to lay their hands on one of
her Majesty’s vessels —to steal a sloop of war. Only let
me catch them.”
“I hope you may, sir,” replied Zeph, calmly. “Such
insolence should not go unpunished.”
“No fear,” said the captain, hotly. “I’ve got two
fellows here who know them by sight, and if I chase them
round the world I will have them.”
Kelly gave a peculiar glance at his comrade.
“ Knows them by sight?” remarked Zeph.
“ Yes, the unhanged rascals who have run away with
the Snake,” cried the captain, irately, “ had the impu-
dence to take her into Singapore as an American yacht.
But I am losing my game. Just have a broiled bone
presently, and I’ll tell you all about it. I’m losing my
game, I say.”
And so Ned Kelly and Criss Zeph were invited to sup
by a post captain in the British Navy.
"it was really too astounding, and tickled the rascals’
fancy excessively.
The game continued with varied success, and then the
officers throw down their cues and gave orders for supper.
“ Residents, I presume ?” remarked the captain.
“Yes, sir,” replied Lionel Wells, bluffly. “1 have a
plantation at Sourabaya, and have come down with my
overseer to make purchases. It is my habit once a year.’
“Grand country,” said Captain Montressor. “ Pity out
people ever gave it up to the Dutch.”
“Yes,” answered Lionel Wells—who was certainly
amazed that England having once owned such a prize
should have given it up—“ quite so.”
A planter, though he may be rather rough, sometimes
belongs to the aristocratic class in these commercial com-
munities.
They are usually the hosts, with the merchants, who en-
tertain our roving guardians.
The supper was jovial, and Lionel Wells, in the exuber-
ance of hip. enjoyment, actually invited the captain to visit
him in his place up country.
Captain Montressor graciously accepted; a day was
fixed, and entered in the captain’s notebook.


Then the conversation continued.
“You were speaking just now of pirates,” remarked
Wells. “ I thought, except among the Malays and the
Arabs, they were things of the past ?”
“ No, sir,” cried the English captain, warmly ; “ we have
them in our very ports —the biggest unhanged scoundrel
in all creation, one Kelly the bushranger.”
“ Up here we get little news,” said Wells.
The captain gave a brief but eloquent outline of the
outlaw’s career, to which Kelly listened with a perfectly
stolid countenance, but keen, merry eyes.
“Well, sir, this villain, this cut-throat and his despera-
does, actually, during a haze and a dark night, boarded
H.M. cutter Snake and surprised the confounded sleepy
crew,” continued Montressor, angrily, “ turned them adrift
and took possession.”
“ You astonish me,” cried Wells.
“Yes, sir,” the irate officer continued, “they did, and
then they painted, altered her rig and name, and went into
Singapore as yatchsmen, Americans going round the world,
they had the impudence to say. But at Singapore, two of
the old crew of the Snake recognised her, and decided to
give information to the authorities. Unfortunately, they
were overheard by some of the gang.”
“ Unfortunate, indeed, sir,” said Zeph, stolidly.
“ Yes, because they were overpowered, kidnapped, and
taken on board,” the captain went on. “ The pirate then
sailed, and, once at sea, put the two men afloat without
any oars. Fortunately, we sighted them and took them
on board.
“ While in the cutter, they had heard enough to become
aware of the character of the crew,” the captain added;
“ they took particular note of Ned Kelly and his lieutenant.
Besides, they learned that the yacht was bound for Batavia,
Here we are ready for them, and may I never be an admiral
if I don’t string the rascally lot at the yard arm, if I get
within sight of them.”
“ I hope you will succeed, sir,” said Lionel Wells ear-
nestly. “ The impudence of the scoundrels is something
beyond conception,”
“It is; but the two lads we picked up owe them a
grudge, and swear they would know them in any dis-
guise,” added the captain. “So no more tricks upon
travellers.”
*• We are deeply indebted to you for your hospitality,”
said Lionel rising, “ and for your extraordinai-y and in-
teresting narrative, I think we will return now. We have
business in the cool of the morning.”
The quartette parted after shaking hands, and the planter
and his overseer retired to their double-bedded room,
where they for a quarter of an hour indulged in unre-
strained laughter.
“I thought I should ha’busted,” said Kelly. “It was
too scrumptious, shaking hands with a post-captain.”
And again he roared in a low, underhand way.
The other did the same, and then proceeded to discuss
some punch, and cigirs, which they had ordered into
their bedroom.
At a very early hour in the morning they paid their bill
and went out.
They had stated at the hotel that they were staying at a
friend’s in the upper town, but, for convenience of busi-
ness, would pass the night there.
As they descended the steps from the front verandah
two sailors presented themselves.
They were ex-mo a-of-war's men of the Snake, turned
afloat on the ocean, and picked up by Captain Montressor.
The two desperadoes moved not a muscle of their faces,
but the Jack Tars ran up the steps in a curiously eager
manner.
“This way,” aaid Mr. Lionel Wells, darting down a
■small alley. “ The sooner we’re out of this the better.”
And he took to his heels until they were in some wind-
ing alleys, which soon brought them to the house of Herr
v. Joel, the merchant.
Without arousing him tL_.y procured the car which had
brought them, and the driver, and drove off as fast as they
could to the little village where they had left the long-
boat.
Meanwhile the men rushed up to a waiter, a negro, who
spoke English.
“ Who are those fellows ?”
“ Don’t know, sah; never see ’em afore. Gemmen
sleep yah last night, sah, sup with the officers in the
ebeniu’.”
“ Show me to the captain’s room.”
The Hindoo obeyed. The room commanded a view of
the shipping.
Going along the nigger told him the names of the
strangers.
In answer to a second knock the captain, in a sleepy
voice, bade the waiter come in.
On shore he liked his ease, but was always ready in case
of business.
“Sailor man, sah, want see you, sahib.”
“ Show him in,” cried the captain. “ Well, what is it,
Jack?”
“Please sir,” said Jack, touching In "lock, “Ned
Kelly and Bill Zeph have just left the uouse. I’m told
you supped with them last night.”
Swearing is not the ordinary fault of officers in the
British Navy, now-a-days, but Captain Montressor gave
vent to a round oath.
“ Go rouse the first lieutenant,” he said, “ and bid him
come to me as soon as dressed.”
He then leaped out of bed, and dressed rather quicker
than he had ever done in his life. It was too marvellous
to believe.
Then the lieutenant came to him.
“ What’s the matter, sir? ”he asked. “ War declared
with France and America ? ”
He was a near relative of the captain, or he would not
have dared to speak to him in such a jocular tone.
“Worse, sir!” cried Montressor. “We supped last
night with Ned Kelly and Bill Zeph. Yes, sir, and they
asked us to their plantation, and shook hands with us.”
“ Surely, sir ,” began Lieutenant
“ I am neither mad nor drunk,” said the captain.
What I tell you is a positive fact. Away to the British
Consul, ask him to communicate with the authorities, and
have the town searched.
The captain then descended to the lower regions and
communicated with the manager, who explained that on
arriving and giving their names, they mentioned Herr
Joel, a very respectable merchant, as their introducer.
“Send for him, with my compliments,” said the captain,
in a dry and irritated tone.
The lieutenant soon returned, having roused the consul,
who promised his personal attendance to the matter.
But nothing came of it, while Herr Joel almost told
the exact truth as to his transaction.
How the rascals had found him out was a profound
mystery. One of them spoke excellent local Dutch.
There was nothing left for it but to put to sea and
pursue them.
Meanwhile, the two outlaws had reached the fishing
village, and at once put to sea.
The mast and sail were taken down, and then the long-
boat was rowed swiftly down the stream, until they came
to a cove distant from any habitation.
The vegetation was luxuriant, and the trees grew to the
edge of the water.
Here they intended to remain a while. A look-out was
arranged on a tree whence the open sea could be clearly
seen.
They had not long to wait.
The cruiser was soon visible sailing along at a moderate
rate, a mile from land.
They had concealed the long-boat in a creek over-arched
by trees, but was much more effectually hidden when
worked into the tall reeds, which, like the tea-tree scrub
in the rivers’ mouths in Australia, are so close and so


<f!exible that they bend like standing corn, and once in
amongst them all trace is lost of the fugitive. Just such
cover the pirates availed themselves of, and there they
remained until their pursuers, like the Levite in Holy
Writ, “ passed by on the other side.”
The look-out came down next moment in great tre-
pidation.
The ship’s launch with a strong crew was coming along
close on them.
The pirates withdrew on board and lay still. All were
heavily armed and prepared for the worst. If the launch
came in they must light hard, and run up country.
It was a desperate matter, as lose their boat they must,
while, even if they got another, there would bo a stout
blockade kept up.
The launch was near the mouth of the little cove, when
the order was given to back water.
“ Couldn’t hide a dingy in there, sir,” said a young and
pert voice, that of a midshipman.
“ I expect you are right, Walters,’’replied the lieutenant,
“ and we know their boat was a large one ” (they had
called at the village and made enquiries). “Go ahead.”
The pirates once more breathed freely, but remained
■still until the sound of voices was no longer heard.
Even then it was decided to keep close until night.
This they did, and, when darkness had covered the deep,
pulled out—still having no mast —to where their ship
awaited them.
Between Kelly and Zeph it had been determined to
put oceans between them and the British cruiser before
they again made a halt.
CHAPTER XCV.
ANOTHER AND A BETTER WORLD.
After long consideration the next scene which they se-
lected for their labours was California, where they could
not be known.
They would put in at the Cape for water and provisions,
and then make boldly round the Horn.
Their vessel was stout, had a broad beam, and could
«tand any amount of rough weather with any other Queen’s
ship in the service.
The men grumbled, but Kelly explained that they were
in serious danger while the baulked and enraged captain
of the cruiser was near them. He would make short
work if he caught them.
He promised them a day ashore each at the Cape if they
would be cautious, and then at San Francisco unlimited
leave of absence.
They set sail, and duly reached the Cape, where, aided
by the politeness of the American Consul, they were able
to get ample supplies.
The men had their run on shore, but were careful to do
nothing to excite suspicion.
They drank, fiddled, and danced to their hearts’ content,
spending money lavishly.
Then they began their arduous journey.
Luckily the weather was fine, and with the exception
of an inevitable storm or two, they found themselves in
the Pacific.
The voyage to San Francisco was very smooth and
fortunate.
The locality has been described as nauseous. Kelly
and his crew found it the very place to their taste.
But the chiefs sought adventure, and after two days,
leaving the vessel in charge of some of the safest men,
started up country, promising to return with a good swing
for the party left behind.
The travellers for up-country were Kelly, Joss, Zeph,
and Salmon Roc, with a fellow named Stewart whom Kelly
had recognised.
lie had fled Australia, being looked after for more than
one atrocious murder.
He was one of the criminals amongst the thousands the
“ paternal ” Government of England fcas secretly freighted
to Victoria from V. D. Land to get rid of the expense of
their keep.
He was a man after Kelly’s own heart, a miscreant of
the deepest dye.
These banded together to plunder up country, and pro-
curing horses, miners’ clothes, with tools, started for
Scotch diggings.
Of course this was only a blind, as we are well aware
they had other views.
Having reached the desired spot they looked about
them, found a digger who was about to leave, bought his
house and claim, and thus obtained a footing.
Then they determined to look around, and see what the
country was made of.
They entered the scattered town—it being evening—
found plenty of saloons, one of which they entered.
A motley scene presented itself. The visitors to these
“ saloons” were as many-coloured in feature and garment
as Joseph's coat. Every nation had its representative
there, and some in their national costumes. All were
gambling and drinking.
Everything was enormously dear, but none of the im-
bibers seemed to think the price asked by the Hebe be-
hind the bar was too much for the winning smile that
accompanied the demand.
The place was brilliantly lighted and the noise something
bewildering.
But the most reckless gambling was carried on in the
Chinese quarters; and as more fun and most plunder
would be found in the house of “ the childlike and bland,”
and less resistance offered to violence, our party resolved
to resort thither in search of prey.
CHAPTER XCVI.
r JIIE JOSS-HOUSE.
The house which Kelly and his party had selected was
kept by a very worthy Chinaman named Sing-Wang.
He supplied the best of coffee, fiery liquors, and pro-
vided numerous other ways of passing the time.
The house was nothing more than a shed with a bar,
and behind the landlord’s private room, where he kept his
stores, and probably his money.
Sing-Wang was a stupid-looking, inoffensive Chinaman
whose one only ambition was to make money enough
to return to his native land, and live in comfort.
Kelly and his friends felt quite at home in the joss-
house. They were fond of drink, no matter what its
quality, and bad company.
The bushranger swaggered up to to the bar, followed
by his friends. Kelly was for a wonder not sober.
“Now, then, look sharp, you sneaking-looking cuss!”
he cried, looking at the Chinaman. “ Don’t stand skulk-
ing about; but serve round your poison.”
“That’s right, old smutty, look alive!” said Captain
Zeph.
“ What is it to be?” asked the immovable Chinaman
in broken English, which we cannot pretend to imitate.
. “Whisky, you pig tailed monstrosity!” howled Joss;
“ bale it out quick, you infernal heathen ! if you are not
as sharp as greased lightning I'll make a hole through
your head! ”
The Chinaman seemed accustomed to these polite and
affable remarks, for he grinned from ear to ear as if he had
been complimented on his personal appearance.
“Don’t grin at us ! ” shouted Stewart; “shut up that
gash, or I’ll cut out your tongue by the roots! ”
The man was used to this sort of thing, and was well
aware he would bo paid.
In less time than it takes to tell, the liquor was placed
on the counter, and the Chinaman demanded two dollars.
“Two dollars!” cried Kelly, “grin and be blowed to
you, do! Can’t you trust me for a moment ? Do you
want to jump down my tlu’oat? Do you think I am
going to sling my hook without paying you for your
cursed poison? ”


“ Money down—no slate kept at the bar, said Sing-
Wang, pointing to a placard behind his back.
“Go and be smothered!” roared Kelly. “If you are
not more civil I’ll turn you into a dead Chinaman, and
send you home in a plank suit. You are fretting to find
yourself between four deal boards. That’s what the matter
with you! ” . ,
The patient Sing-Wang still held out his hand. It was
the rule of the house, he said,
“ Two dollars ! ” he repeated.
“Take that!” cried the enraged bushranger, throwing
the hot whisky in the Chinaman’s face. “ I Irate the sight
of you pig-tailed gentry, and should like to drive you out
of the country ! ”
Si no-, Wang wiped the tears from Ins eyes, while those
in the joss-house jeered at him, for Chinamen are not
popular in California, however much they may be
tolerated.
“Me poor Chinaman, and want my money, he cried.
“ Can’t give whisky for nothing.' 1
Kelly was in an obstinate humour, and still declined
to pay, and furthermore stated that he would drink as
much as he liked without spending a penny.
“ Dat not fair,” cried the horror-stricken Sing-Wang,
who beo-an to see what his customer was like.
“Fair or not, I shall do what I like,” replied Kelly,
ferociously, and as he spoke he pulled out a pistol. “ Fill
up the glasses again, or I’ll make short work of you., you
U crly, yellow-faced, old dried- up parchment-skinned thief! ’
Me give no more drink tor nothing,” said the China-
man in a dreamy voice.
“Look sharp!” cried Kelly. “Will you trust me or
have a bullet through your nut?”
Sing-Wang hesitated a moment, and then reluctantly
brought the drink.
“ I’ll trust to the honour of Englee genl man, he said,
trying to look easy in his mind, for he felt sure that the
whisky would never be paid for.
But Captain Zcph, who did not want a row, called him
on one side and paid him, and Sing-Wang was made
The joss-house w'as almost empty when Kelly entered
it, but it gradually filled up and soon became crowded.
They were a rough lot, and seemed very thirsty, for they
drank like fishes, and seemed to enjoy the fiery spirit.
Some smoked, some swore and talked, some sang, and
some gambled.
Sing-Wang was evidently doing well, for most of the
miners spent their money as soon as they earned it. In
fact, they would work hard for a couple of weeks and then
never leave the joss-house until all their money was in the
Chinaman’s till.
When drunk they would not be very particular in see-
ing after their change, and Sing-Wang was not the sort
of s raan to insist upon their accepting it.
The subject of conversation that evening was a man,
Peleg Oswald by name, who had struck a good lead, and
was declared by everyone to be the luckiest fellow in crea-
tion.
He was a tall, gaunt-lookiug fellow, spare and hollow-
eyed, with lean checks and a large mouth, on which there
was always a disagreeable grin.
He spent his money freely, swore and chewed, and was
very fond of fighting.
“ Is any critter ready to take a hand with me, or are
you all afeared?” cried Peleg Oswald, throwing down
some money on the rough table. “ Are you all cleared out,
or ain’t you got enough grit on yer to run your chance ?
There’s the money, boys.”
To the surprise of Kelly and his friends no one came
forward; they did not know that Peleg Oswald had hardly
ever been known to lose as yet, and almost always suc-
ceeded in clearing out his men.
“ I’ll take anyone,” continued Peleg. “ Don’t stand
back. I’ll put down double the amount any other chap
nkes to put down if he’ll only stand forward.”
“No,” replied a seedy-looking man. “ None cares to
play with you, you make it too lively for ’em. You
always win, I guess.”
“ Always win,” cried Peleg ; “ you mean, I guess, to
insinuate suthin’ wrong. What are you a-crowding up
to me and a-hinting, and a-throwing out agm my credit?
I’m straight, I am. Don’t try to sneak out of it, you
blatherskite. You insinuated afore strangers that \
cheated. You’re a nice old figger-head to come here a
roaring and howling for a fight. Why don’t you say
suthin’ ? Speak your mind if you dare, A cussin’ and
yelling at a man because he happens to have the luck.
You’re mean, downright mean, you aint got pluck enough
to have it out between man and man.”
“ I didn’t mean no harm,” the other said.
“Didn’t mean no harm,” yelled Peleg Oswald,
“ s’posing I pulls this yar pistol out of my belt,” suiting
the action to the word. S’posing I pints it at you and it
goes off of its own accord, would it make any difference
to you, you sucker, if I didn’t mean no harm ? I think I
must do for you, I don’t see why a sneakin’ cuss like you
should be allowed to live. If I does it’s all on account of
good nature.”
“ I knew you was a-joking,” said the man who had
given offence, with a sickly smile, making for the door
with more speed than dignity.
“ Joking be blowed!” cried Peleg, and the next moment
he fired, but to his annoyance missed the man.
“ Missed!” he muttered, and made a rush after the un-
fortunate individual, “ I’ll make dead sure of him this
time.”
“ Don’t be in such a hurry,” said Charles Stewart, getting
in front of him. “ You challenged anyone in this here
company to a game, and I am ready to accept.'’
• “ I’ll be back in no time,” said Peleg, with a savage
grin, “ Let me clear out the vermin and play Euchre
ftft6i’Wcirds«^
“Now or not at all,” said Stewart doggedly ; “ are you
my man or not ?”
“ It wouldn’t take long to settle his hash,” remarked
Peleg, “I’d be sharper than Jersey lightning, that I
would.”
“ You can settle your dispute with that coward another
day,” said Stewart, “ but if you want to shuffle cards with
me, you must do it at once.”
“ I ain’t a quarrelsome man,” observed Peleg Oswald.
“ I’m a man as likes peace and quietness ; but when a man
puts my back up, I’m a demou—a regular ring-tailed coon.
The American eagle don’t fly over a chap who is more full
of grit than the cuss who stands afore you, stranger,
you may bet your pile on that.”
“You have proved your manhood, and that poor
frightened, trembling cuss is about a mile away by this
time,” returned Charles Stewart.
“ And I guess is running still,” said Peleg, spitting out
a large plug of tobacco on to the grimy floor.
“ He may run to a warm place for all I care, ” cried
Charles Stewart. “ Are you going to play or not ?”
“I’m on,” replied the gambler.
“ Order liquors before we begin.”
This was done, and then the piay commenced.
The Chinaman looked on at his customers with as much
expression in his face as a barber's block.
He only thought of the money that came to his mill.
It w r as nothing to him if his customers killed each
other as loug as they did not interfere with him.
There was one man in the company who was known by
the name of Swearing Joe.
The Americans were the first to institute the spelling
bee, and it was in California that the swearing bee was
first invented.
The man who was modest in his language had to stand
drinks all round.
The game had been very popular until Swearing Joe
had presented himself.
But that hero was so strong and fluent in his language


that the others owned that he was the best at the busi-
ness, and it was given up.
“By Jerusalem!” cried Swearing Joe, “if old Os-
wald hasn’t gone and found a man soft enough to
play with him. I bet a square dollar that lie’ll go away
from the table with his pockets turned inside out.”
“You’ll bo turned inside out, I guess, my friend,” said
Oswald. “1 can’t bear to bear bad language. I shall get
old Shiny Face to put up a notice, ‘No swearing allowed.
All those who want to use strong language are requested
to go outside.’ ”
Everybody laughed heartily at this sally.
“Who’s a using strong language?” said Joe, in an
irritated tone of voice,
“ Don’t interrupt the game,” cried Stewart, speaking in
Ixis usual snap-dragon tone.
“To ensure fair play,” observed Oswald, “ I’ll put my
pistol on the table. You are a stranger, and I warn you
before I begin that if I see anything that ain’t square I
shall let fly.”
Stewart gave a hideous scowl, and produced a knife and
a p'stol as well.
The two men soon became interested in the game.
Their flushed faces were unpleasant to look at, and they
poured down the brain-destroying drink with avidity.
The Yankee played a good game, and played fair,
lie had never cheated at cards, but Stewart tried all
sorts of tricks, and Oswald, who was a rare old stager,
jgaw through him in no time.
But he kept his temper, grinning to himself.
“He thinks I am only one year old,” he thought, “but
I’ll bet that he’ll soon find out his mistake. 1 calcxilate
that this child is not to be done by no Britisher on airth.
Ther’ll be a muss afore the evening’s done. I can’t stand
such goings on much longer, I calculate.”
The luck has changed.
This was the verdict of the crowd that gathered round
the players.
They had not been so observant as Oswald, and did
not see that Charles Stewart was undoubtedly chiselling.
At last the Yankee could stand it no longer.
His blood boiled over with rage and indignation at the
foul conduct of the other. _
“ No you don’t,” he cried, clutching hold of Stewart s
arm as he was about to sweep the gold off the table.
u Just stop a minute, my friend.”
“ What do you mean?” cried Stewart angrily, with, how-
ever, a startled look.
“I’ve had my eye on you all along, and know what sort
of a cuss you are,” cried Peleg, looking for his pistols,
which Kelly had quietly removed from the table. “ lou
bad your hands too full when you tried to take me in.
It ain't easy to get on the blind side of old Oswald cute
old Oswald. He’s got his eye skinned, he have.”
“Take my advice, and hold your ■ tongue, re-
torted Stewart. “Look here, if you don t snut up there 11
be the devil to pay. Take my advice, and step out-
side to cool off. You're carrying matters a little too
far, so be advised.”
But Peleg declined to budge an inch. _
lie knew nothing of his man, and was in one of his
most aggravating fits of.obstinacy, and began to yell and
blaspheme, while Stewart listened quietly, but with rather
an ominous glitter in his eyes.
“ Will you quit?” lie demanded at last, as Peleg paused
to take breath. “ Will you take a friendly warning and
walk your chalks while you have got the chance . I clou
want to be disagre \' v e, but if this goes on much .ongcr
I shall cut up rough.” . , J OL .
answer was a. oath, and an instant later Stewart
sprang forward, plunging his knife in the man s heart. e
deliberately pulled a handkerchief out of the
pocket, and wiping the knife calir'y, returned the weapon
to his own belt. , . ~ „ , „
These little episodes occurred so often m these quarto s
that it excited little comment.
The victim was dragged out of the room by the heels
and thrown outside.
“ Let’s liquor,” he said, and not one of those present
declined the invitation, the general impression being
that “ the darned fool had brought it on himself,”
Stewart did not again allude to the trifling episode, but
spoke of other things, and his companions followed his
example.
He resumed a conversation he had been carrying on
with Kelly, as if nothing out of the way had happened.
“I tell you what it is,” interrupted Swearing Joe, “if
you don’t d well cut your lucky you’ll be sorry for it.
There arc some people in this place wjio are so infernally
particular, that they d think nothing of lynching you right
off for that little bit of fun. I know ’em, and my advice
is, clear out. There have been a good many rumpusses in
this ’ere place, and a body of men have been and organised
themselves to put a stop to it altogether.”
Stewart perhaps thought it would be prudent to take
advantage of this friendly warning, for he soon after dis-
appeared.
Kelly and his companions looked for him in vain. Ho
was nowhere to be found.
CHAPTER XCYII.
SHORT SHRIFT.
That a man should blow a hole through another or stab
him in the vitals was no very uncommon occurrence in that
part of California
The Chinamen who had carried the dead body of Pclcg
out of the joss-house had taken the precaution to empty
his pockets, but having performed th 13 kindly office, they
speedily forget that such a man had ever existed.
The man who had hurled another into eternity so reck-
lessly had not gone far, but after passing the scattered
Chinese huts near the joss-house concealed himself behind
the friendly shelter of some bushes to watch and wait.
It had occurred to him that Sing-Wang, the placid
Chinaman, was saving money, and, being of an envious
and avaricious nature, he came to the determination of
possessing himself of the gold so carefully hoarded by the
unhappy Celestial.
He had not taken his friends into his confidence, for the
simple reason that he desired to reap the whole profit
himself.
He never cared to go halves with any man if he could
possibly help it, preferring to act on his own hook, as he
eloquently expressed it.
So he waited until the guilty night was far advanced
before he ventured out from his retreat.
The wind moaned through the darK tree tops as he ciept
along as a thing of evil.
All was very quiet and still as he passed on, pausing
every now and then to listen, with his hand on the pistol
in his belt. .
He scarcely knew what he feared, but something in the
deep silence of the whole place made him feel strangely
U! off this unusual feeling, however, and became
himself again in another moment.
“ Just the sort of night for a job like the one I have m
hand,” he muttered. “ That old Chinaman s money-bags
shallsoon be in my possession. I know 1 am running a
greet risk, but it’s worth it. I hope that Sing-Wang lives
by himself.”
He soon arrived at the joss-honse and tried the door,
which he found was firmly fastened. _
“ How the deuce am I to get mto the confounded
piace ?” he thought. “ I could easily break the door in, but
it would make a confounded row and wake up everyone
within half-a-mile. Eh? The window. I must get through
that way.” , . . .
The ni"ht was a warm one, and the unsuspicious China-
man had°left it open, never dreaming for a moment that
anyone would try to break into his place.


lie had been there some time, and no one ever tried to
rob him of a farthing.
Thus he was lulled into false security.
After much difficulty—for the window was a small one
—he succeeded in squeezing himself through the narrow
opening and landing on the floor.
The interior of the joss-house was as dark as pitch, and
the man groped his way cautiously, making as little noise
as possible.
lie softly struck a match and looked about him. It
was a risky thing tc do ; this he knew, but ho could not
help himself.
He was in the drinking-saloon, and partitioned oil was
a small room where the Chinaman slept, doubtless with
his money.
A lamp was standing on the counter, and he lit this,
turning it very low, and, taking down a bottle of whisky,
fortified himself with a stiff draught to steady his nerves.
The silence was oppressive, and Stewart tried to hold
his breath, fearing that the sound of his heavy breathing
would awake the Chinaman.
For a moment he stopped before the door of the inner
room, and then softly turned the handle, making no sound.
A flood of light poured through the half-open door, and
Stewart, to his surprise, saw that the Chinaman was wide
awake.
His back was turned, and he was evidently in ignor-
ance that he was watched. He was gloating over a pile
of money before him, and chuckling to himself.
Stewart pulled out a long knife and crept close up to
the unfortunate Chinaman.
At that moment Sing-Wang became conscious of his
presence, and, looking over his shoulder, saw the man with
ids bright uplifted knife, and the look of murder in his
deep-set, blood-shot eyes.
He gave an awful piercing shriek
At the very moment he was about to make short work
of the Chinee, a sound like rushing wateis smote upon
his ear. The noise gathered force every moment, and the
roar of many voices awoke the echo of the night. Onward
t came, like the roar of the rapids, and the angry bellow-
ings of a multitude struck terror for the moment into his
heart.
“ Lynch him! lynch him !” he heard springing from
the excited throats of the mob.
He rushed from the house, while the Chinaman con-
tinued to scream his loudest. Stewart was not quick
enough; the crowd was upon him, and there stood the
Chinee, who gasped out the particulars of the attack.
Twenty strong arms seized the fellow and carried him,
yelling and shouting to the jail.
The authorities resolved to try him, and there was small
chance upon two grounds of his escaping the gallows.
Firstly, he was a “ darned Britisher,” and, secondly, he
was caught red-handed. The crowd did not disperse;
they sunounded the prison, and distrusting the authorities,
resolved to anticipate the duties of a jury. “ Lynch him !”
was again the shibboleth that resounded through the
tumult. “ Lynch him !” was the universal chorus.
Stewart heard it and trembled. The warders even
looked pale and troubled.
Presently a mighty rush was made by the surging crowd
outside—the door of the prison was forced, and Captain
Freeman, the chairman of the Vigilance Committee,
followed by the mob, rushed into the room where Stewart
stood, pale, firm, but dauntless.
It was the work of a moment to seize him, which was
done with needkss violence. He was dragged outside,
a rope put round his neck, and, with a momentary return
of mercy, Freeman cried—
“ Out with a prayer, you darned human panther, if you
ever knew one, for your time’s up.”
";Firm as a rock, and as dauntless as ever, Stcwait
scowled at his assailants. His hands were still free.
“ Look here,” shouted Stewart, “ I’ve got something to
say. li’a only a few words. Let any three of you ——
Yankees stand out, and I’ll tackle the whole three. If I
lose I will consent to be hanged, but if I win you arer
to let me off. Ain’t that a fair bargain ? Three Yankees
to one Englishman, and I’ll undertake to come out the
winner.”
Everyone in the settlement thought that a not was
taking place, and turned out under the impression that
the Chinese were being massacred; but when the state of
the case was explained, there was a shout of universal in-
dignation as all eyes were turned upon the murderer, who
was white as a tombstone of marble.
He was removed to the jail, and every'jody retired to
rest after cursing him heartily for having disturbed their
Next morning the affair was the talk of the whole place.
Nobody could think of anything else.
“ Curs and cowards,” he yelled at them, “ I wish I had
a chance at any of your yelping lot single-handed; Id
show you an Englishiaan is a match for any of you—yes,
any half-dozen of such a tallow-faced, lank-jawcd ”
But his words were stopped by the rush of half-a dozen of
his tormentors, who struck him in the face.
Here his indomitable pluck sprung out. With a few
well-directed blows from his brawny and muscular arm
down they went like ninepins, which so enraged the
Yankees that they proceeded at once to wreak their
vengeance and Britisher hate upon their helpless victim.
Fifty hands caught hold of the rope which had been
thrown over the branch of a tree, and up went Stewart
with a rush that crashed his head against the branch,
literally smashing in his skull, so that he was dead before
hanging could end his guilty career.
His executioners then quietly dispersed. The laws for
public security were so supinely, and, in many instances,
corruptly administered, that the public were compelled to
take the matter into their own hands.
The country was the rendezvous of the greatest ruffians
convicts and others, from all countries, so strong measures
were absolutely necessary for the security of the lives and
property of the inhabitants.
Kelly and his friends did not much like the prospect
held out by these summary proceedings, and thought they
had had enough of that locality for the present. Fine as
the climate was generally believed to be, they thought the
atmosphere getting rather too warm for their personal
comfort.
They had contemplated an attempt to rescue their com-
rade, but soon saw that it was utterly impossible.
CHAPTER XCViri.
KELLY SKEDADDLES.
Kelly and the rest were stunned at the scene that had
taken place, and determined to make the best of their way
to San Francisco, whence they would pay their promised
visit to Tahiti.
They determined to make tracks for San Sacramento,
whence they could go by steamer.
That night very little was done but drink and gamble,
while one man, half drunk, with bowie-knife and revolver
in belt, kept singing—
O ! O ! high and low of all degree,
A tale I will unfold.
And tell you where, across the sea,
You may get lots of gold,
In the land of Yankee Doodle.
Make no delay, but haste away.
To California, O 1
So we’re told there’s lots of gold
For all who choose to go
On board a ship, and take a trip
To California, O !
Next day they reached San Francisco.
It was a lovely day. Winter is by far the best of the
year, though when they begin the rains are heavy, but ten
days or a fortnight after follow with a delightful sun-
shine, and temperature never under forty degrees during
the day.


The evenings and mornings may require a little fire in
the grab* but no one attends to it through the day, so it
goes out.
The worst of the winter is the mud; knee-deep is a
trifle in the vicinity of the town.
Those of the streets not planked were impassable. All
is changed now.
The drinking and gambling saloons were something
srrible in those days; the drinking has not decreased;
perhaps the saloons have.
The hotels wen then extremely bad—the bed-rooms
nearly all two beds. In many, hardly any furniture
at all.
Kelly and his companions secured two rooms, and then
agreed to hold a council of war.
At last they came to the decision to stay awhile, to
make for some other diggings, and try their luck.
They communicated with the ship, found all was right,
and determined to start up the country once more.
They determined to make for Maryville by steamer and
then start for a place called Volcano Diggings, of which
they had heard a very good account. ILn were making
large fortunes, in which the bushranger determined to have
a share.
Cards were a very good medium, but, after the fate of
Stewart, they felt very dubious of trying their fortune by
any but fair means.
Maryville is on the junction of the rivers Feather and
Yaba, both large streams merging their united waters into
the Sacramento, about forty miles below, as it is the head
of the navigation for steamers in this direction, and is the
depbt from which the more northern mining districts are
supplied with all the necessaries of life, which are conveyed
on mules into the mountain region which commences
about fifteen miles from the city
From the lowness of the place and the contiguity of
rivers, the vicinity is rendered unhealthy during the ex-
treme heat of the dry season when the temperature often
reaches one hundred and ten degrees in the shade.
There are stages—as covered waggons are called—tra-
versing the country for more than a hundred miles into
the mountains, but they are most comfortless conveyances.
Kelly and his companions procured horses and mules so
as to travel independently.
Two days later, they halted at one of those little caravan-
serais which sprinkle the road to the mines.
Slumberers lay all around them. On the bar and behind
the bar, across the doorway and behind the barrels, they
lie thickly stowed away, while from the rafters above them
a sick man swings in his bamboo hammock and dolefully
groans at each puff of air which stirs his pendent couch.
Outside there are others who cannot find room inside,
and whose inclination prompts them to sleep in the open
air.
Near one of the trees which surround the tent, a pair of
rough-bearded Germans have built a large fire and have
stretched themselves on their blankets with their feet to
the flames, in true bivouac style.
Their guns are stacked close at hand, and one or two
who have mules have tethered them in close proximity.
A little further off some Mexicans have chosen their
resting-place. The fire burns brighter than that of any
other party, for two of them are yet sitting playing raente
by the flickering light.
The others are curled up in their penchoes like so many
dogs, and, probably, with about just as much thought of
to-morrow.
A merry life the vagabonds seem to lead, for though
often hungry and always dirty, yet m their worst afflictions
a greasy pack of cards will cause them to forget all their
trials, and they will be as happy as though rolling in every
luxury.
Though almost everyone was asleep, silence was not
wholly prevalent.
Occasionally there was the breaking out of a discordant
laugh from the gambling Mexicans, or the tread of the
tethered mules as they now and then rose to crop the
scanty grass, the mingled cries of wild cals and other
animals.
There was not much sleep to be obtained under theso
circumstances, and the whole party were not sorry to
rouse at an early hour and start.
They took a square meal, provided themselves with
provisions for the day, and then they started, leaving their
companions behind them.
They always travelled as much as possible by themselves,
being by no means fond of creating new acquaintances.
The journey to Volcano Diggings did not take them a
long time to accomplish.
On the third day they reached it.
It was a wild place, and very much scattered.
Kelly and his party while looking around made a pre-
tence of building a small cabin on the side of a crevice,
roofed it with canvas, leaving a corner open to serve as a
chimney.
Then they of course adjourned to the tavern.
The usual crowd was there of idlers and hard-working
men. Several had been very successful, as the mines were
rich, and hard work was rewarded by the usual result.
Among those whom it was said had been specially lucky
was John Rutherford. Kelly and his gang noted him
keenly.
The man was plump and short. Unlike the other
natives of the locality he was close-cropped and shaven,
as if to keep down the strong blue blackness of Tiis head
and hair, which nevertheless asserted itself over his round
cheeks and upper lip like a tattooing of Indian ink.
He drank his glass, smoked, and did not object to a
game of cards, but he was reserved and taciturn—if not
sulky.
lie was a man of iron frame—a mnltum in parvo of thews
and sinews —a small edition of the Farnese Hercules—one
of those prodigies in which nature seems ai times to
rejoice.
There are “ men and men.” As the French say, there
are “ Fagots ct Fagots
The writer of this history once saw Mr. Dalraahoy
Campbell, of Melbourne, Victoria, carry his horse sixty
yards; and what the horse must have been may be judged
from his owner’s weight, which was seventeen stone.
Kelly, who listened carefully to the talk going oa
around, soon became aware that this man was believed to
be rich, though he never bragged or flashed his money.
He lived in a gulch by himself near his claim., which he
worked steadily.
Volcano Diggings had a good name, though it was full
of people; there were no rumours of murders or robberies
of late.
Judge Lynch had been considerably busy at one time,
and had rather terrified men into good behaviour.
It was now for Kelly’s gang to find out where Golcondah
Gulch was.
As it happened it was about half-a-mile beyond their
own location.
At a sign from Kelly they “ humped ” a bottle of Bour-
bon whisky along with them, and returned to their hut.
It was to a remote corner. As soon as they had squatted
around the arch fiend Kelly, he advised them to “ light up”
and listen. There he sat’ like Milton’s Satan in council.
He proceeded to unravel his plan.
“Now, pals, this cove smells of money, the most beau-
tiful scent 1 know of in the world. Well, he don’t use it,
and he won’t use it, so we must set him a good example
and use it for him.”
“ Three cheers for Ned,” was the response to tins
homily.
“Stow all that just now, at all events,” said Ned.
“ Wait till we can cheer without bother. These diggings
were made for men of pluck like us ; besides if wo don t
have the tin these muffs dig up, somebody else will. So I
propose to go home to supper with our new friend with*
out waiting for an invitation, and then ”


58 NED KELLY.
“ Yes,” replied Zeph, “ I’m on the track ; go ahead, Ned,
and then—yes—and then ”
“ Why, assist him to ‘ turn in ’ where he won’t 4 turn up
in a hurry,”
A congratulatory guffaw greeted this refined specimen
of wit, and Ned seemed highly gratified by the tribute to
his comic powers.
They had just finished speaking when they heard the
miner gaily singing one of the sprightly and jocund ditties
of his native laud, as he merrily trudged along, evidently
well satisfied with his day's or night’s work.
He was following a beaten track that would soon take
him out of sight round a knot of trees.
They waited until they could see him no more, and then
prepared to stalk him.
They crept on. Still the man sang merrily and vigor-
ously as he trudged along, his mind full of happy thoughts.
He entered a narrow guily, and soon after a hut built
against the rock.
Then there was a light in the window.
The four ruffians stole cautiously up and peered in
through some crannies.
He was lying down on his side reading and smoking.
He had a large open book before him. There was a smile
on liia face.
The door of the hut was latched.
41 Good evening mate,” said Kelly, in as hearty a voice as
he could assume, while the others kept in the background ;
44 got e’er a drop to lay the dust in my throat ? ”
“There’s plenty down at Maloay’s, unless you mean
water,” said John Rutherford
“ Water ! good enough for a man whose throat’s like a
hot fryiug-pan with no grease in it,’ replied Kelly, as he
lifted up the latch and entered.
The man. who had a gun hanging up, and a pistol in his
belt, pointed to a pitcher.
41 Well, 1 can’t say as you’d give your liver away to a
hungry mate, anyhow,” was the sullen answer. 41 A puli
at your water-can ain’t much.”
The miner felt the rebuke, and that his reception of the
stranger was not first-class.
So he jumped up, on hospitable thoughts intent, and
went to a cupboard.
Just as he turned bis back to Kelly he received a bullet
from the bushranger’s shooter, which passed through his
neck.
He fell, and remained conscious long enough to see the
clan rush in on hearing the shot and begin to ransack the
place
“ Finish the job.” shouted Zeph. 44 While he’s above
ground we have the noose round our necks ; and when
that’s the state of the case the white night-cap and the
fellow as puts it over your neck ain’t far off.”
The victim had meanwhile fainted from loss of blood,
“It won’t do him no harm,” continued Zeph, 44 lodging
another ball in the poor man’s body. 44 He don’t know
nothing about it, he don’t; and we’ve saved him a good
deal of trouble and hard work in this sorrowful world,”
he drawled out in a nasal, conventional drawl, winking one
eye knowingly for the amusement of his friends.
The murderous cad chuckled and looked round for
the approval his charitable sentiments excited.
44 Don’t let us do nothing by halves,” said Kelly. 41 We 11
burn the whole building. We won’t let a stick stand.
The flames will make short work of that little lot,” point-
ing with a grin to the still and immovable body.
They now continued their search, and found some rough
gold concealed in a small box, but not until they had
rummaged the whole place.
Before starting they set fire to the hut, and then made
tracks for pastures new.
But, as Burns tells us, 44 the best-laid schemes of mice
and men oft gang agee,” and so it was in this case.
John Rutherford, though dreadfully wounded, had not
been done to death.
He returned to consciousness just in time to crawl out
from the blazing remnants of his hut, and, though dread-
fully w eak from loss of blood, felt that he was not mor-
tally wounded.
When Ruthei’ford was found by friends it was late nex»
day, and he was not for some time able to explain.
By this time the robbers were far away.
CHAPTER XCIX.
MINBREY.
The next diggings to which Ned Kelly and his gang deter-
mined to remove was Minbrey. Moving about was con-
venient in the position in which they were placed. Their
conduct wherever they went was so marked that it was
likely to arouse suspicion.
Minbrey was not very far from Volcano Diggings, and
the four men determined to take it easy.
They were after the first day’s journey very tired, very
dusty, and very much disgusted.
To men of Kelly’s calibre there was comfort and excite-
ment in the leathern bottle slung over the mantillas of
their saddles.
But they burst into a tempest of fury when they found
that the bottles did not contain aguardiente as they ex-
pected, but had been filled in by a rascally Irishman with
bad American whisky.
Still they drank it. It was better than nothing.
All around was a sterile waste, bordered here and there
by arable fringes and valdas of meadow land. but. in the
main, dry, dusty and forbidding.
On they went continuing the scent.
(To be p
THE “ANONY
PICTURE
MA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS
BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2-
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Formosa, the Life oi a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Woman.
Adventure.
The Beautiful Demon.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Skittles in Haris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Annie.
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
Passion.




At times the half-worn, half-visible trail became utterly
lost in the bare black out-cup of the ridge, but the saga-
cious mules they had hired soon found it again.
When they had ridden a mile along the ridge they
began to descend. Vegetation now sparingly burdened
the trai'l, clumps of chemisnl , an occasional Manzauila
bush, and one or two dwarf buckeyes, rooted their .way
between the interstices of the black-grey rock.
Now and then crossing some dry gully, worn by the
overflow of winter torrents from above, the greyish-rock
gloom was relieved by dark red and brown masses of
colour, and almost every overhanging rock bore the mark
of a miner’s pick.
The fog had already closed in on Minbrey, and it was
now rolling a white, billow sea above, that soon shut off
the blue breakers below.
It was high noon at Minbrey. The pines which abound,
in the dusty road and hot air, seemed to smoke from their
balsamic spires.
There was a glare from the road, a glare from the sky,
a glare from the rocks, a glare from the white canvas
roofs of the few shanties and cabins which make up the
village.
No Britisher can form an idea of the crushing heat of
these latitudes. It is as if one were living in a cauldron
out of which the water has evaporated, but the heating-
fire still kept burning. The heat positively strikes you
from on high and from below and from all around. Only
lizards and snakes can live in it. Sometimes the very
birds fall exhausted from the trees, and the fruit (as in
parts of Australia) are parched and half burnt up while on
the trees.
There was even a glare from the unpainted red wood
of Jones’s grocery and tavern, and a tendency on the
warping floor of the verandah to (furl up beneath the feet
of the intruder.
A few mules near the watering trough had shrunk within
the scant shadow of the corral.
The grocery business of Mr. Jones, though adequate
and sufficient for the village, was not exhausting or over-
taxing to the proprietor.
The refilling of the pork and flour barrel of the average
miner was the work of a half-hour on Saturday nights, but
the daily replenishment of the average miner with whisky
was arduous and incessant.
Jones spent more time behind his bar than behind his
grocer’s counter.
The hotel was chiefly under the surveillance of his wife,
Mrs. Jones, strong, truculent, and good-hearted.
Mr. Jones had early adopted the theory that most of
his customers were insane, and were to be alternately
oullied or placated, as the case might be.
Nothing that occurred, no extravagance of speech, or
act ever ruffle-1 his equilibrium, which was as dogged and
stubborn as it was outwardly calm.
When not serving liquor, and in the interval while it
was being drunk, ho was always wiping his counter with an
exceedingly dirty towel, or indeed anything that came
handy.
Miners noticing this perfunctory habit occasionally sup-
plied him slyly with articles inconsistent with their ser-
vice, fragments of their shirfis and under-clothing, flour-
sacking, tow, and once with a flannel petticoat of his wife’s,
stolen from the line in the back yard.
tins was the place at which the four men put up pre-
para >ery to commencing operations,
Iney had no very clear idea of what they would do, but
they had vague ideas cf plunder and robbery.
The miners were scattered in all directions, but every
now and then a small party was made up to return to Sac-
ramento or San Francisco, and it would bo easy to join one
of these parties.
Of course they made a pretence at working, or at all
events of prospecting, so that they found out who were the
ueky diggers and miners.
At night they returned to Jones’s restaurant and amused
themselves after their usual fashion, gambling an 1
drinking.
They lived an easy, idle, but purposeless life, waiting
for prey, or rather hunting for it.
Kelly was somewhat anxious to remain abroad for some
time, to allow his doings elsewhere to be. if possible, for-
gotten.
The whole clan were often on the ramble.
It happened that in one of these excursions they came
upon a wild and desolate valley, very small, with a few
trees.
As they had rounded the curving flank of a mountain,
from the rocky beach below them a thin ghost-like stream
cf smoke seemed to be steadily drawn by invisible hands
into the thin ether.
Towards this, being tired, they made, with the hope of
getting a hearty meal.
As they neared the camp and stood behind some thick
bushes they heard voices.
“ It's almost time we got out of this here country, my
lads,” said one. “ We’ve made a good haul, enough for
all four, and the sooner we get away the better.”
“I think so, too,” said another ; “ we’ve been careful
we’ve got good stout horses and mules, and I say make-
tracks while we’re safe.”
“ Should our luck be even suspected, it would go hard
with us,” responded another.
And the subject dropped as Kelly and his party made a
motion and coughed.
“ Come in. What’s up?” asked one of the men, a fine
stalwart-looking Englishman.
“ We’re out prospecting,” said Kelly, “and are a little
tired, so we thought as perhaps you’d give us a rest and a
bit of grub.”
Everywhere in the wilds hospitality was general, and;
the miners asked their less fortunate neighbours to come
in.
There was a meal of tortillias , frijoles (beans), salt pork,
and chocolate, and a fresh supply was speedily obtained
for them.
Then they being at no great distance from the diggings,
thanked their entertainers and went away.
The miners were four in number, like themselves, and
stout fellows.
I hey had four horses, and a small waggon with »
oouple of mules ; this contained their traps and doubtless
their gold.
The villains exchanged glances as they moved away.
Doubtless ftiese men would make a good fight, but if
they could only surprise them and carry off the plunder, it
would be doubly useful.
They could secure the waggon.
Kelly proposed that they should follow them ai a dis-
tance, keeping clear out of sight, and waiting until am
opportunity occurred for a sudden rush upon their vic-
tims.
So they spent the night at the restaurant as usual,
rising early in the morning to watch what might happen.
The head of the party of four men who had made such,
a successful haul was a young man of great energy.
He and his party, all English, worked steadily for two
years, and had all along been tolerably successful.
His name was William Maxwell.
He and his companions had been sober and steady, and
had forwarded large sums to England to their account.
They now felt an irresistible inclination to return to
England themselves.
At first they had been, like many others, unlucky, and
had given up claim after claim in succession.
On one occasion they found themselves, when at the
Digger goldfields, after several vicissitudes of fortune,,
what they call out there “ dead broke.”
Their credit was very nearly exhausted at the neigh-
bouring store, and they were almost in want of bread. °
“ Let us have another try,” cried William Maxwell;.
“never give in, is my motter,”


And, advised by him, in their desperation they began
Egging for gold in a very unpromisin ; locality.
It seemed a very hopeless bisk, but they worked on
steadily, standing close to one another.
Maxwell plied his pick on some hard brick like clay,
around the roots of an old tree breaking up fresh earth,
and tearing away the grass from the surface of the
ground.
ife aimed a blow at the clear between the roots,
and the pick instead of sinking into the ground rebounded
•is if it had struck upon quartz or granite.
‘ k Confound it!” he exclaimed, “ I’ve nearly broken my
pick. I shouldn’t have minded if it had only been a
nugget.”
A minute later he called to his companions and asked
them to tell him what this was, pointing to a mass of gold
cropping several inches out of the ground, like a boulder
on a hill.
As each successive portion of the nugget was disclosed
to view, the men were lost in amazement at its size.
It was about a foot long, and apparently nearly the
same in breadth.
Its weight was very great, but they carried it to their
hut and proceeded to examine it. It was completely
covered with black earth and so tarnished in colour that
an inexperienced person might have supposed it to be
merely a mass of auriferous earth.
But the weight dispelled all doubt on that point, for it
was more than twice as heavy as a piece of iron of the
same size.
A fire hiving been made the nugget was placed on it,
and for hours they sat watching it burning the quartz
which adhered to the nugget.
The gold was weighed next day, when quite clean, and
turned the scale at a heavy figure, no less than two hun-
dred cwt. It was worth ten thousand pounds.
Fiom that hour the four young men stuck together with
almost uniform success.
“ I don’t like the look of those roughs,” said William
Maxwell, when the others had taken their departure.
“ I’ve a strong notion that they were skulking around a
good while before they spoke to us.”
“ Well, we’re good enough for them,” replied his chum
Peterson ; “ still, if the chief did come too near me, I’d be
apt to use my six-shooter.”
Meanwhile Kelly and his party had returned to the
restaurant, as we have said, where they spent their eve-
ning as usual.
It was almost time they left, as men who go on pros-
pecting about and do not work, and yet have an ample
supply of money, usually excite suspicion at the diggings.
But though they were continually watched and even
sounded by the police and others, there was nothing
against them.
By what stretch cf imagination could anyone have con-
ceived anything like the truth ?
Still Kelly judged that the wiser part of valour was dis-
cretion, and next day, mounting horse, started on the
lower journey. About midday they reached a two-storey
ant on a small knoll near a sickly river.
It was not a very eligible place, swearing, drinking, and
card-playing being the ordinary programme, with a free
fight thrown in occasionally.
It was a halting place for teamsters, and the amount of
dirt and vermin was simply utterly unconceivable.
The morale of the old and new comers was about on a
par, so after receiving a hearty welcome and the necessary
supplies for their commissariat they started off again.
They had been very minute in their enquiries as to the
road, and obtained every information, though that was not
very necessary. The marks were very clear and distinct.
Towards evening they tethered their horses and camped
in a wood of moderate sized trees and safe bushes.
They made no fire and kept rff the regular track, where
there was a grove of trees evidently often used for a
oamping ground.
Kelly was only too glad to be satisfied with cold Best
when his avarice was concerned.
they were simply banditti on the look-out for victfeia.
Miners were of course the game they wanted to big.
All took their turn at watching, but that night their
patience was not reward© 1, ana they had at considerable
inconvenience to pass all the next day in the place.
Joss, however, went out prowling, and got some proven-
der from the many rude shanties on the road, and thus
the day passed.
Just before evening came on the four young men came
in sight.
Their little waggon was driven by a negro, while there
were several other men in their company. They wore
bitterly disappointed.
Kelly, with a loud oath, declared that nothing could be
done that night and that it would be wise to retire to a»
greater distance from their intended victims.
CHAPTER C
EXCHANGE NO ROBBERY.
The bushrangers had taken up a concealed position wuere
they could observe the others without being seen.
It was useless keeping watch that night, as the travellers
were of course too numerous for them to manage.
Kelly was not in the best of humours, but ho solaced
himself with whisky and tobacco, after which he slept.
At early morn he was up, and saw the small caravan
proceeding on its way.
He followed at a safe distance, beginning to be rather
fearful that they would escape him after all.
If they kept together with the others—and this indeed
would be very probable—they would escape, and Kelly’s
worst ferocity and avarice were both aroused.
He swore at himself heavily for not bringing up more
of the gang from San Francisco.
But it was too late to repine. Nothing whatever could
be done but trust to the chapter of accidents.
It was absolutely necessary to keep at a considerable
distance as the roa Is were hilly and the air so airified that
people could be distinguished a very long way off.
A halt was made by the caravan of the travellers at a
refreshment house, and then again they went on, prefer-
ring like most people to camp in the open at night.
The spot selected by the English on this occasion, was
a small plain shaded by some tall trees, and beneath them
they made a fire.
Their casual companions had left them in the course of
the day, and there remained only the four men and the
negro driver.
Kelly determined under these circumstances to make
his way at once.
He first placed the hirscs at a safe distance from the
camp where they could find them when the affair was
over.
He had no compunction whatever. Bather than miss
the plunder he expected, he was quite determined to kill
the lot.
There was no hesitation in his soul.
As soon as the horses were safe ho and his gang crept
forward with snake-like caution.
It was a very fine night, but rather dark, and the villains
were able to approach pretty near to their intended
victims.
The small waggon was placed near the ffre, the horses
were hobbled securely.
Hound the fire si& the four men smoking and talking,,
and occasionally sipping the favouiite beverage of the
wilds.
The negro was nowhere to be seen. He was probably
eating his sapper under one of the trees alone in deference
to the white men’s prejudices.
On crept the murderous villains, their bowie knives an<3
pistols ready for action, their eyes glaring with greed v
expectation.


Each man as he advanced picked out his victim.
At this moment there was a great and sudden cry.
“ Oh golly, massa ” roared the negro, ‘-boss tief—turn
shoot —golly ”
The negro at the same time fired into their midst, and
the four stalwart fellows leaped to their feet with their
short rilies in their hands.
“ Scoundrels, come on,” roared William Maxwell, “ we
are ready for you—-black, red, or white.”
Kelly had selected his retreat with judgment. It was
down a narrow guliy, that turned short to the right.
Several shots were fired but they were of no avail,
as the bushrangers were far too wary to be caught nap-
ping.
But Kelly's ferocious rage was something fearful and
■wonderful to hear when they were out of reach of the
foe.
Even his fierce and reckless companions were awed into
silence.
He was more like a wild beast than anything else. He
raved and swore.
But the first thing they had to do was to think of their
precious safety.
Kelly had concealed the horses cleverly and had soon
regained the spot and started off in the direction of the
hilly country, where there were hundreds of places to
conceal themselves for a time.
To have attempted another open attack on these four
young men and their watchful negro, would have been
simply utter folly and madness.
But Ned Kelly was not without hope, that by some
means or other, he would still be able to compass the
possession of the successful gold digger’s “ pile.”
As soon as they were out of reach of pursuit, they de-
termined to put their horses to the push, and reach some
out-of-the-way ranche where f/iey could pass the night.
They are to be found in abundance on the route, and
though the accommodation they offer is rough, it is always
welcome.
As soon as one was discovered, the bushrangers easily
selected a room in which to pass the night. It was
crowded and dirty, but it was a roof over their heads.
They were, however, careful to start off early in the
morning. They wished to reach Sacramento city before the
others.
There was no knowing what might happen, if they could
disguise themselves and make another attempt on the
gold
They reached the city, swapped their horses, resumed
their respectable clothes and went to an hotel.
There was no boat ready to go that day. A great many
passengers were expected from the diggings, and it was the
custom of the boat to wait for them until the latest
moment.
Kelly did not much relish the idea of travelling to San
Francisco vvir.h the four stalwart young Englishmen.
He trusted, however, to his disguise, his impudence, and
his unvarying good luck, in case he should go down in the
same boat «s those he had sought to rob.
As it happened, the miners did come on bc»rd the
same vessel as themselves, but the boat was crowded, and
while Kelly new William MaxweU and his the
case was different with the others.
The cabins, saloons and decks were crowded, and the
asual amusements we have already alluded to were in-
dulged in,
Kelly and his pane wore careful to keep as far apart
from that of William Maxwell as possible. The latter had
evidently a keen and far-seeing eye.
But there was another individual on board, on whom
Kelly kept a very strict- watch, and that was Sambo Jones
the servant to the four .Englishmen.
He was a shrewd, clew nigger, and one of those men
who never throw a chance away.
Still it was very unlikely that during that hurried scrim-
mage in the wild country, the black fellow could have re-
cognised any one of those who had attacked them in such a
stealthy way.
But Kelly determined to be on the safe side, and do
nothing to excite any suspicions.
He preferred to examine carefully the tftnall and incon-
venient state room and cabin which the four .English-
men passed the night.
There probably would be tL3 box which contained their
treasure.
But how was it to be got at, was the question the hither-
to baffled ruffian asked himself.
Of course it was locked all day, and at night guarded by
four pair of stalwart arms, besides the Argus-eyed negro.
It did not seem likely that they could do anything under
these adverse circumstances.
They must give it all up until they got to San Fran-
cisco, when an infernal idea came into Kelly’s head.
He would wait and have patience.
To carry out his new scheme he must try and scrape
some sort of acquaintance with William Maxwell and his
three companions, and then go to the same hotel.
In those days of the gold fever, classes were very much
mixed, and few people asked who was who as long as they
behaved themselves.
William Maxwell and his party were not hardened or
professed gamblers, but they had no objection to join in ?
game of cards.
He therefore at night entered the saloon where moS
persons present indulged in fluttering the flimsy paste
board.
Whist was not much of a game in these places. They
preferred games of chance to those of nerve, skill and
cunning.
But an old-fashioned rubber was to be had for the ask-
ing, if anyone really wished it.
Poker, euchre, and such like games were, however, the
favourites, with brag and even sometimes solitaire.
The four friends generally played with their own set,
but sometimes joined a more general table.
At this Kelly contrived on one occasion to be seated
next to William Maxwell.
“ You play a good game, sir,” observed Kelly, in as soft
a tone as he could possibly assume.
“ Pretty fair,” answered Maxwell, looking at a rough
customer who was playing beside him, “ but it does not
require much art. it’s purely luck, and nothing else.”
“Perhaps so,” continued Kelly, “most things goes
pretty well by luck, but I've done pretty well. I didn’t
have much, and now I have a fair pile.”
“ Some are fortunate, others are not,” was the dry re-
mark of William Maxwell, who did not like the style of
the speaker.
But Kelly was careful not to be offensive ; he thought
he knew his man. A little respectful familiarity would
not be resented, but too much would be.
So the game went on and Kelly was content to win and
say no more.
But he watched Maxwell and his friends with the keen
eye of a hawk.
There seemed to be r.o suspicion lurking hi lbs eye,
though Kelly every now raid then thought die other
looked at him keenly.
But still there was at all events no suspicion shown, and
rs’ed Kelly determined to go on to San Francisco and try
his grand coup there.
lie meant to have that treasure if it were in any way
possible.
it was enclosed in a square box tied round with ropes,
and scaled with large seals.
Now Kelly’s idea was to have one made exactly like it,
but lull of rubbish, heavily weighted, which he would ou
some pretence introduce into the keded, and then by a
bold and dashing stroke seek to change them.
It took Ned Kelly a good many hears to figure out this
scheme, but he thought it a gaoi oae, and detarmmod to
carry it out.


He spoke of it to Zeph and that worthy agreed to join
in it with all his heart and soul.
He believed it to be a very probable thing to be done.
« At all events it was worth trying,” he said.
“As well be huug for a sheep as a lamb,” growled
Zeph.
“ Perhaps belter,” grinned Kelly.
Never say die was the reckless motto of these desperate
men.
Next evening they would reach San Francisco, and com-
mence operations.
Kelly kept up the habit of occasionally playing cards
with William Maxwell, but never tried for too much in-
timacy. .
He was rather humble than otherwise, and VV ilham
Maxwell began to think he bad very much misjudged his
character.
He was simply an honest, rough customer after all, with
no particular harm in him, he thought.
“Where have I seen him before, though?” observed
one of Maxwell's friends. “ His confounded face seems
familiar to me, somehow.”
“ I thought so at first, myself,” remarked William Max-
well, “ but I can't place it. These rough sort of fellows
are often very much alike.”
“ I suppose so,” answered the other, rather thoughtfully,
and the conversation dropped for the time.
When the steamer stopped at the quay or wharf, Kelly
was careful to hear for what hotel Maxwell and his friends
wore destined. , „ „ . ~ , ,
It was the President Jackson, and Kelly immediately
ordered his luggage to be taken to the same rather aristo-
cratic locality.
It was somewhat of a dear place, hut the bushrai gers
had still plenty of command of money without showing
® Kelly Always carried a considerable number of notes
a,hout him in the belt with his gold.
Of course, in those days all were welcome, so that they
had plenty of coin.
That was about the only question thought of.
Money was what made the mare to go then, as at most
periods of the world’s history.
All were able to secure rooms, as a good many people
had recently started for Europe.
It was before the overland been invented.
There was of course a table d"u>te, and this they all sat
down to as soon as they were comfortable and settled.
Kelly and his companions were no fools. They were
careful to examine other people and do as they did. ihus
their solecisms were not very great
Still no one could mistake them for anything approach-
ing to gentlemen.
Thev were looked upon as lucky nouvea'ix riches.
After dinner they dispersed to the billiard-room and
smoking-rooms, to divert themselves as best tney niignt.
Kelly and Zeph, however, went out to look about them,
and their first visit was to a cabinet-makers.
They wanted to know about the gold boxes.
To Kelly’s surprise he found that except in difference
of size the gold boxes were all made of about the same
material. ,
They could, therefore, easily have a box made the same
size exactly as that of the Englishman.
Then it could be sent him, strapped and sealed, with
heavy weights of lead inside.
The only difficulty, and it was no easy one, was to ring
the changes. ~ , . ,
It was no easy task, but Kelly fully believed taafc e
GOuld B\iCw?d. „ , ,
The v€-3£tei for England would not start for several days,
no that they had time to arrange everything.
During the hurry and bustle of the day, a box wrappe
round with black glazed doth was easily introduced into
the hotel. Nobody it but one of the darkey
waiters, aid it was taken to Kelly’s room.
There they proceeded to fix it up to look exactly like
that of the successful gold-diggers.
Now remained the opportunity of making the exchange
which was not easy.
In times like those, everybody was particularly careful
of his own belongings.
Every bed-room had two keys, emo earned by the oc-
cupier, the other kept by the owner of t&2 house, and
only trusted to the servants for a short period of the day.
it was rather hard work to get one of these keys out
of the custody of the faithful domestics.
To try that would have been folly; there remained
nothing for it but to try the efficacy of Joss s keys.
He never travelled without them, and they had often
stood him in good stead.
Well, he would try if he could be as successful here as
elsewhere.
Of course it could not be done at night, as then the
owners would be in their rooms.
How was it to be managed.
The suit of apartments occupied by the four young
Englishmen-was next to that occupied by the bushranger.
Now, between them they had managed to make their
own box look so exactly like the other, that once in dif-
ferent rooms, it would have been almost impossible to
see the difference.
OUV/
One or the other could have been openly conveyed on
a truck to the vessel without exciting the slightest sus-
picion. .
After lunch most of the gentlemen, as everyone is called
in the gold regions, adjourned to the billiard-rooms or
else where.
Joss and Zeph retired together to the garden attached
to the hotel, to quietly mature their plans. After hav ng
done so they went to their own rooms, and entering,
closed the doors carefully behind them.
Now came the difficulty, the arduous tug of war. i hey
onoe or twice opened their door a little, and listened for
every sound in the hotel.
Presently all seemed perfectly calm and quiet. Not
a soul appeared about.
Zeph lighted up a big cigar and approached a window
overlooking the port.
Then, tools in band, he came out and began to
apply himself to the door.
In ordinary cases the thing would have been easy, huv
in a large hotel they were so liable to interruptions.
“Golly!” suddenly cried a well-known voice, “What
am de genl’m’n up to! ” .. . ,
Zeph and his pal looked thoroughly scared as they heard
the voice of the nigger. They looked round for the Inac*,
but saw nothing. They heard the chuckle—the yah, yan,
yah' of their black detective, but the sound appeared
to come out of the floor. They could see nothing, but
understood at once that the game was up, and that in five
minutes the'attempt to enter the Englishman s room would
be divulged. , , .... , ,
They hurried downstairs to the billiard-room, wuere
Kelly and Salmon Roe were awaiting them.
At one sign from Captain Zeph they understood, threw
down their cues and went out. ,
Their luggage was the least part of their valuables, and
not one stopped to take anything hut hi-i hat and coat.
They were only too glad to he off before the negro suc-
ceeded in giving the alarm.
Instinctively this class of men know how to leave suen
quarters. ... , ~ . ,
On leaving the hotel they dived into a where
from third to fifth-rate inns were to ho found in aSun-
After plunging down some lanes ana alleys they found
not only what they wanted, but some boxes anu domes
suited to their wishes. .. , , , .
Humility was now their game, and it behoved tnem to
be as little ostentations as possible.
Having procured what they required, they soon fount.


lodgings at a qniet hotel ybere, of course, they told what
■story they like’i, and then, by their profuse expenditures
of money, satisfied all parties.
In rude and vulgar places non A course, the only
consideration.
At the Blue Nugget this was thoroughly the case. Gold
was the landlords idol.
Of course whole party were well aware that the
attempt to rob the Englishmen would put the police on
their track.
It behoved tnem, therefore, to be very careful, and do
nothing to attract especial attention to their movements.
With tins view the four men secured a private room to
themselves where they could eat, drink, and smoke with-
out fear of interruption.
The landlord was a quiet man of unassuming manners,
•particularly regardful of the comfort of his customers
when they paid liberally.
P.e found Kelly and his party to his taste, as they often
asked him up to sup and join them in their whisky guzz-
ling, old sludge, an 1 other amusements.
On the second evening of their arrival a man—a meek
apparently well-meaning sort of fellow—came up and
closed the door.
They stared at him.
“ Now, mat*'*.” he said in a low tone, “ fair is fair yon
know. I’m English like yourselves, and 1 like to serve a
-countryman.”
“ Well,” askud Kelly rather uneasily, “ and what is the
matter now V”
“ Have you any reason —1 only ask from curiosity,” he
wen n “ t<3 tnluk you are being asked for—wanted, you
know ?”
“ What makes you ask such a question ?” replied Kelly,
while the others crowded round.
“ Well, you see, Mr. Jacob Pegrc n, a officer of the city
police, has beeu peering around,” .i utinued Smith, “ and
he’s been asking questions. Lucid.j I was there, aud wheu
he axed about you, I just didn’t know.”
“ Did he particularly mention us? ’ asked Kelly.
“ lie asked if I’d seed anything of four chaps as had
been staying at the hotel,” continued Smith. “Now as
you’ve beeu fair and squ re with mo I thought I'd up and
■tell you.”
“ We four gents certainly wish to be private just now,
ito keep dark just a bit,’* said Kelly ; “ so if you can help
•us, we don’t mind doing the liberal.”
“ AVell, I’ve got,” in a whisper, “n little place of mine,
where chaps can be in private just as long as it suits, and
if you like I’ll take you there.”
They agreed to shift their quarters for a day or so, and,
terms being agreed to, about; an hour later they were
going out at a back entrance to the inn, carrying their
own boxes, as if geing to join their ship.
Smith guided them with apparently n perfect knowledge
■of the ins and outs of the town, already very large and
•straggling.
He brought them at last to a region tenanted by sailors,
boarding-houses, Chinese huts—a mixture of all sorts.
Among these he stopped at a small two-storied house,
which he entered as if he were its master.
A woman sat on a stool in the front room, which was
«ot very clean or well furnished, but that mattered not to
these outcasts of civilisation.
“ Brought you some lodgers, Bridget,” said the man ;
“ want to be quiet, you know.”
“ Quiet enough for me,” th» woman answered, “so as
ihoy pays and don’t fight.”
“All right, old gal; we’re sort. Everyone knows
weVe just lambs,” laughed Kelly.
The man took them up a narrow staircase to two rooms,
which would just accommodate them on a pinch.
“ I’ll bring you bub and grub," said the man, “ and let
you know the news, Jacob Pegrcm won’t look for you
here.”
“AP »quare,. my friend.” said Kelly meaningly.
“I never peaches on friends,” was the dry reply.
“ Send round all you want presently.”
And he went away, leaving the men, whatever they
might say, anything but easy in their minds.
The police of San Francisco were particularly sharp.
Besides, vigilance committees were very active, and
crime was not allowed to go very long unpuni died.
Still, in such a seething mass of beings, all intent on
money-making, all influenced by the demon of avarice,
many crimes did remain undiscovered, the perpetrators
getting off with impunity.
In their case there really had been nothing perpetrated,
and they had every hope that the matter would blow over
with the departure of the four travellers for England.
All they had to do then was to eat, drink and be merry,
and hide their time.
Smith kept them well provided with “ceded,
not forgetting to charge accordingly.
The names of the four Englishmen were known to
Kelly, and with cautious inquiry Smith found that they
had "taken passage in a vessel, and were about to start
immediately for England.
They had, therefore, nothing to fear from them, though
still the police might prove officious and dangerous.
So they w r ere careful.
Through Smith he made inquiries about the yacht, and
found that she was all right, though many of her men had
got tired and dy. 'erted.
This was a baa look-out.
CHAPTER CL
JOSS MEETS A NEAR RELATIVE,
For several days they accordingly remained in the small
out-of-the-way hiding-place where they had concealed
themselves.
They were all afraid of William Maxwell while he re-
mained in town; he was moving heaven and earth to
bring them to justice.
But his time was up.
Kelly was anxious to see after bis craft. It would have
to be provisioned before they started on another journey.
The men had been advised to frequent as quiet drinking
shops as they could, but of course it would be too much
to expect they would keep away from drink altogether.
On the third day they determined to go down to the
Red Plain Hotel, where many of the sailors congregate,
and there look up some of their men.
As soon as they could get on board Kelly was deter-
mined to take his leave of California.
It had not proved a very paying game. They had rather
spent money than earned any.
Still, stowed away, Kelly and his immediate companions
had a good supply of money.
Kelly knew that, if he could not collect his own crew,
it would be difficult to get hands at such a time, when
everyone was suffering from the strange disease called
“ gold fever,” but he must try at all events, and do the
best he could.
The bushranger was fond, to a certain extent, of being
on the sea, fo* there he felt himself the monarch of all he
surveyed.
He was the king of his ship, and no one dared there to
gainsay his authority.
He was the scourge of the land and also the scourge of
the ocean, and many people had no doubt obtained the
credit of committing crimes for which he was wholly
responsible.
This man, whose evil actions naa oast a disastrous lustiv
on his name, had often chuckled on hearing that some inno-
cent person had suffered for his sin, being the victim of
circumstantial evidence, and his lips had often curled when
he read that they had to be carried to the scaffold more
dead than alive.
He might be called everything that was bad, he told
himself, but nobody could accuse him of being a coward


always makes the road easy for his follow-
ght, with a grim smile,
mss bold ruffian, a little peril, a little diffi-
arding off suspicion, might have inspired salu-
,r, but Kelly went on recklessly, undaunted by any
,cle.
Never once did he cast back a look of regret on his past
life. He was equally indifferent to the future, and only
lived for the present hour.
Kelly had never known fear; but, as he grew older, he
grew fiercer and more bloodthirsty, and many brave men
had been known to stand in awe of him—men who have
fought with wild beasts and savages, and charged uphill
to the cannon’s mouth. True he was not wholly dead to
some feelings or rather family instincts, for a good deal of
his determination to visit California, and subsequently New
York, was his desire to hear something of a brother, who
had been acquiring some notoriety as half-smuggler and
whole pirate. His name was Christopher, abbreviated by
his friends to “ Kit,” and as “ Kit, the Cruiser,” we may
yet hear more of him.
He subsequently took the most active part in the “re
surrection ” of Stewart’s body from the grave, in expecta-
tion of extracting a heavy reward from the very wealthy
family as the price of its restitution. The enormous wealth
of the family fostered this expectation.
Whether “Ned” fell in with his brother’s plots, the
sequel will show.
Men declared that they could face anything but that
fiend in human shape, and the words were repeated in
Kelly’s hearing, much to his openly-expressed delight.
He knew that there were some people who regarded him
as a hero in consequence of such rumours, and was tempted
into blacker guilt in order to obtain a more world-wide
notoriety.
The poet has said, “Virtues are dead to no man; that
even in the assassin’s heart there can be found some pity—
some soft spot.”
Hut, as the reader knows, the bushranger had no re-
deeming point in his soul like that.
It is a curious study to contemplate this man’s life, and
reflect what he might have been had he not been born of
convicts, and nurtured in crime.
With the exception of the mild exhortations of a sleepy,
weak-minded pah-son, he was accustomed to Imar nothing
but blasphemy and beastiality. His mind and morals were
warped by the force of his associat ons.
Such men as he always pretend to believe in fate ; an
easy way 10 dispose of the matter, and a good excuse for
any career of crime.
Kelly was a restless nature, and never remained long in
one spot, although this was, perhaps, not always his own
fau% for, as a rule, the places he visited speedily became
too hot to hold him.
He had determined, in order to procure the requisite
men to man his ship, that he would offer double wages
and a double allowance of grog.
Even then it was doubtful whether this temptation
would have any effect, but at all events it would do no
harm to try, even if he did not succeed.
“We must take care that we do not ship aboard lot
of muffs,” said Salmon Roe, as they entered a low drink-
ing shop to while away the time until it was time to go to
the Red Plain Hotel, “ who won’t be any use to us. We
want chaps like ourselves, that don’t care a tinker's curse
for anything, and wouldn’t be squeamish about a drop o’
blood.”
“Trust me,” cried Kelly. “I know the sort of cus-
tomers to pick out; but if we should happen to get
hold of a rotten Jack Tar, who might round on us,
why all we have got to do is to chuck him overboard to
be eaten by sharks, if any of those cursed ugly fish happen
to be about.”
“ That’s your sort,” cried Captain Zeph. “ Send the lot
to blazes if they ain’t the right lot; don’t make no bones
about it, but chuck them overboard, bag and baggage.”
“ I’d give ’em four dozen on their bare hides with the
cat-o’-uine-tails, just to give them time to think over their
latter end,” observed Joss, who was in rather a sulky
humour, having been considerably brow-beaten by Kelly
of late.”
“ Since you have put it into my nut,” cried Kelly, with
a grin. “ You shall be tied up to the grating first, just
to show the others a good example. It would be a treat
to hear you howl, old man.”
This remark, although probably intended for a mere
jest, did not appear to meet with Jess’s approval in any way.
“Perhaps I shan’t sail witn you” muttered Joss to
himself, as ho looked askance at Kel'y with a rather vicious
expression in his bloodshot eyes. “ You ain’t a-going to
ride roughshod over me, mate, so I tell yer.”
This was a mistake on Joss’s part, as he had never told
Kelly anything of the kind, and was very careful not to
let him overhear what he said to others.
“What are you a-growling and a-muttering about?”
demanded Kelly, seeing the man’s lips move. “If you
have got any complaint to make, spit it out.”
“ 1 should like to smash you up,” thought the person
addressed, but he said aloud—■“ Whose a-complaining,
who is a-growling and a-grumbling, I should like to know?
You seem to have made a dead set agin me, and I can’t
please you nohow. Directly I open my mouth you jump
down my throat.”
“You are a peg too low,” said Kelly, sneenugly. “Go
and drink, man, go and drink.”
“I’ll drink starvation to you,” muttered Joss, with ano-
ther furtive glance at Kelly’s dark face.
The bushranger was making a mistake in his treatment
of Joss, who grew more sullen every moment, brooding
over his real or imaginary wrongs.
Even when Kelly stood treats all round, the man’s face
did not clear, and he contrived to spill his liquor instead
ot onrifung it, ordering another glass at his own expense
in M'lucb he mentally drank “ hell and confusion ” to his
enemy
Kelly was not blind to this little bit of by-play.
He wheeled round suddenly, and fixed his glittering and
bloodshot eyes upon Joss’s face.
" Why did you throw away my drink?” he asked. “ I
like to know the meaning of that ’ere trick.”
Joss made no answer, but took another sip out of his
own glass and looked sullenly down at the ground.
“Do you hear?” howled Kelly, going up close to him
with a threatening gesture.
“ A deaf man ’ud hear you through the roar of Niagara
Falls,” —of which he had heard enough in America —returned
Joss, trying to look at his ease, but the onlookers noticed
that he was unusually pale, and trembled so violently that
he could hardly hold the glass.
“ Why do you throw good liquor on the sawdust?” cried
Kelly, in a louder key. “ You’d best answer up if you
don’t want to rouse the devil in me. Curse you! Why
can’t you open your mouth, you confounded fool? Did
you do it to insult me, 1 say?”
-‘No.”
“Then what was your object? I say again, what was
your object, you whisky-loaded idiot?”
And Kelly stamped his foot, clenching his huge brawny
fist.
“ The glass was dirty.”
“ That is a lie. Did you think 1 put poison in the glass?
Do you think I’m such a d n coward as to want to
destroy you in that mean way ? Why, I could crush you
like au insect, and have a good mind to.”
“ Very likely you could,” was Joss’s answer; “but 1
ain’t afraid of you, Kelly,” he added, looking very
white indeed and trembling from head to foot, •• but
I should like to be friends just for the sake of all we have
gone through together. Owe us your hand, old pal, let’s
have a feel of that good old paw what never was raised
agin a friend. me another drink and I’ll toss it down
la two twos. <l. st give mo another chance, that’s aIL”


“Youhl drmk with me this time,” said Kelly.
“ Only too happy, ’ returned Joss, cheerfully. “There
wouldn’t have been no row if that infernal landlord hadn’t
given a difry glass. Why don’t you give him a piece of
your mind ? It ’up do him good, and make him look alive
another time.”
Kelly made no reply to this, but said something in an
undertone to Salmon Roe, who grinned all over his face,
and disappeared for a few moments, while Kelly contrived
to keep Joss in close conversation.
“Ah! here’s your liquor,” lie said, suddenly looking
round. “Toss it off, man; drink.it to the dregs, just to
show you’ve no malice.”
Joss hastened to comply with this request, but the ex-
pression of his face changed after he had taken a good
gulp.
“ Ugh ! ” he yelled, dashing the glass against the wall,
and shivering it into a thousand fragments.
This done, he commenced to dance about like a bed-
lamite. blaspheming horribly as he did so, much to the
amusement of the few spectators present, who roared
with laughter, shouting and jeering at the unlucky victim
of Kelly’s practical joke.
“Show me the man as tampered with that there liquor!”
cried Joss. “ Only let me see him, that’s all; he won’t
have a minute to live. He had better say his prayers, for
I mean to lay him out. Who did it, I want to know ? ”
“ I did,” said the bushranger, calmty, standing before
him with folded arms. “Why don’t you carry out your
threat, mate eh?”
“Oh, it was you, was it?” said the crestfallen Joss,
mildly. “ What a tellow you are to be sure. It is a good
job it was you, and not somebody else. I allows my
friends to take liberties with me, but don’t stand no non-
Bence from nobody else. Landlord, let’s have another
drop to take the taste of the persecution out of my mouth.
The stuff did taste uncommon nasty, but I ain’t a man to
bear malice; there rin't a bit of ill-feeling or ill-will in
me, only, another tune when you wants to play off any of
your larks, Kelly, just give some other cove a chauce ;
turn and turn about. 1 don’t see why I should be let in
for everything, it ain't fair. I feel racked with pain, and
for all the world as if my blessed inside was being stirred
up with a copper stick.”
“ You look uncommon green about the gills,” said
Kelly, consolingly. “ But don’t go and sit down on that
bench, we have got to be moving; so come on all of you.”
Joss rose with a dismal groan, and followed his com-
panions out of the place.
“ 1 shan’t forget that little joke as long as I live,”
h ? muttered, shaking his fist at Kelly’s broad back.
He kept behind the others with his hands deep down in
his trousers’ p' -ket, and occasionally a deep groan would
escape his lips, and on all such occasions Kelly turned
round to smile at his discomfiture.
Rendered desperate by pain, Josa at last flung himself
down on the ground.
Even a mild dose of antimony, which Zeph had procured
at a small chemist’s next door, not enough to kill, onuses
intense suffering, and any man but Kelly might have hesi-
tated ere lie inflicted such torture on a comrade.
But Kelly, who mace every human duty, tie or belief,
»theme for ridicule, was not to bo debarred from carry-
ing out anything that suited his fancy, even at the
expense of his friend.
Joss howled and writhed on the ground, and his fan-
tastic contortions sent Kelly and his companions, who
were haJf-seas over, into paroxysms of mirth.
“ I’m a’most dead,” whined Joss.
“ I’ll ‘dead ’ you if you don’t get np at once,” cried.
Kelly, who began to feel tired of the entertainment,
and wanted an excuse to indulge in his propensity for
brutality.
“Get up,** said the terror-stricken man, “ You’vo
poisoned me, that’s what you’ve done. I shall never
rise again. I’m as good as a dead man.”
“Lie there and rot then!” retorted Kelly; but the
more merciful Salmon Roe kindly kicked the prostrate
man up oehifid with his heavy boot.
“ That’s it,” cried Kelly approvingly; “ kick in hia
lights if he doesn’t move hia dirty carcase when he’s
told.”
“I never desert a friend in need,” observed Salmon, as ha
again kicked Joss in the small of the back. “ Get up, if
you don’t want the too of my boot to go through your
bod}^.”
I want to be let alone,” moaned the suffering Joss;
but they lifted him up by the arms and dragged him along
in spite of his protestations.
It was the best thing they could have done under the
circumstances, and he soon felt the beneficial effect of the
exorcise.
His gratitude, however, was not very great, for he knew
that they had not been actuated by motives of humanity.
He was simply brought along because they did not dare
to leave him behind.
By the time they reached the Red Plain Hotel he was
almost hknself again, and appeared to have completely
recovered his good humour.
His only anxiety seemed to be to conciliate Kelly, who
did not utterly reject his overtures of friendship.
The bushranger flattered himself that ho had brought
Joss to his senses, and convinced him that he was the
better man of the two.
“ I shall be ad right after a drop of brandy,” Joss de-
clared. “ I never had such a turn out in all my life, and
wouldn’t go through it again for love or money; but its
over now. Let bygones be bygones ”
“ I am quite agreeable,” responded Kelly, who was not
the injured party, and they shook hands amicably enough
to all outward appearance, and the bushranger dismissed
the matter from hit mind as unworthy of a second thought,
“The lark was a good one,” remarked Joss; “but 1
should have enjoyed it better if you had played it on
somebody else.”
Kelly made no reply, but entered the Red Plain Hotel,
followed by the others.
The place scarcely deserved the name of hotel, but the
proprietor found that a big name went down with his
customers.
It was crowded to excess, and the company appeared
to be of rather a boisterous nature, judging from the
sounds which saluted the bushranger's ears.
He looked around at the motley groups, and formed
his own estimation of those present, and saw with satis-
faction that he could pick out just the men he wanted.
The four friends sat down at a table and ordered
drink.
Kelly saw thata good many of his own hands werp present,
joining in the no sy merriment; and he soon, seeing bin)
there, beckoned Morgan, the boatswain, across to where
he was sitting.
He came at once, being one of the few sober men ic
the room—a man always to be trusted.
“ What is it? ” he asked in an undertone.
“There are a few likely chaps here,” said Kelly, “ can’t
you contrive to get them k) join our crew ? Make any
promise you like, so as you get them to join. I want
everything on board early, and all ready for a start.”
“ Ay, ay ! ” returned the boatswain.
And then Kelly suggested that he had better return to
his mates and secure as many as possible of suitable men.
“Stand chinks all round,” he cried; “give them any-
thing they like to call for, at my expense.”
“Let them have a little money in advance,” suggested
Morgan. “It kind of opens their hearts, and makes" them
feel friendly. But I believe I can find most of our own
men.”
“Do as you like,” returned Kelly; “as long as yov
get the men together I ain’t particular. Don’t enlist any
men who yon think will be likely to stick at a t
be soft-hearted.”


“ I know what I’m about,” said Morgan, confidently
“ leave it all to me.”
“ All right,” answered Kelly.
“I run all the risk,” replied Morgan, cheerfully, as he
turned to rejoin his friends, who wondered, some of them,
what he was up to.
There was not much amusement to be derived from
watching the drunken sailors, who were swearing, laugh-
ing and talking, playing cards, and enjoying themselves
generally in a tipsy fashion ; so Kelly and his comrades
left the place, after having had two or three drinks.
They were dressed like swells of the vulgar order, and,
after drolling about for some time, entered an oyster-shop.
It was rather a showy place, and behind the counter sat
a stout woman with a pleasant-kmking face, dressed very
smartly. She had smiles for everyone.
There were several barmen and Chinese waiters, and
they served, while, her sole occupation seemed to consist
in taking the money. The place was crowded, and she
evidently did a roaring trade, taking care to keep a sharp
look-out to see that her assistants were not wasting their
time.
“ Snug and comfortable place this,” observed Captain
Zeph, as he swallowed his oysters. “I say, Joss, you’re
in luck’s way,” he aJt’od, “ that rather prepossessing foma’e
seems to have taken a fancy to you.”
“ 1 don’t want any of your say,” growled Joss , “ Can’t
a man oat a dozen of oysters without being bothered.'
“ She’s a-stanng at you with all her eyes,” observed
Salmon Roe.
This was the truth, Mrs. Flynn was looking at Joss
keenly, with a puzzled look on her face.
“ What the devil is she a-staring at?” said the
Aggrieved Joss. “ I hope she'll know me again; blest if
everybody in the world ain’t in league to make me uncom-
fortable.”
At this moment the lady beckoned to the astonished
Joss, and asked him if he and his friends would not come
to a private room.
Joss would have refused, but Kelly, his curiosity having
been aroused, advised Joss to acquiesce.
Hardly had the door been shut, when she threw her fat
arms round Joss's neck and kissed him repeatedly.
“ Let go,” cried that injured individual. ‘-Do you want
to choke me. What arc thinking of, woman. Just
let me alone, I tell you.”
“ Hold ou to him,” cried Salmon Roe. “ Don’t let him
go. Keep him tight while you’ve got him.”
“ Joss,” cried Mrs. Flynn, “ dear Joss, I am so glad to
see you once again. I never expected to see you again
in this world.”
“How did you come to &now my name?” said the
puzzled Joss.
“ Don’t you remember me?*
“ Never set eyes on you before, as far as I know,” re-
plied Joss. “ Who the devil are you, and why do you go
on in this way. 1 don't like it. so just leave go.”
“You are cruel,” said Mrs- Flynn.
“Don’t take any notice of him,” said Salmon Roe.
-• Stick to him like wax.”
“ He is the most unnatural husband I have ever heard
of.” cried Mrs. Flynn. “Do you mean to say that you
.anve forgott n me?”
“ Completely,” said Joss.
“Forgotten your wife, Nancy!”
“ Nancy i You cau’t mean that.”
“Yes, Jdo It’s many years since last we met, bat I
Tecoguis» , 'i you at once,” raid the forgiving wife.
“La have got so precious stout since last we met,
that I did not rememb-jr you a bit at first; but now I
come to look at your toaturcs they do seem familiar.”
“Then you do recognise me at last? ” cried the woman,
etill clinging to her new-found treasure.
Joss nodded, and as his eyes roved over the comfortable
little spot, the thought occurred to him that the meeting
*might be a lucky one for him after all. **
“ You seem prosperous here ? ” he observed-
" I am doing well,” said Mrs. Flynn.
“Then I’ll never leave you again ! ” he cried; ba-
coming most affectionate as his glance took in the com-
fortable and substantial arrangements that met his gaze.
“ Never leave you again, so help me !” ho cried, “ How I
ever came to do it puzzles me. You, who was so good!
Thank you, my girl. Just a taste mere of the stuff to spoil
the water (as he tendered (he glass she had filled for
him). Yes, it fairly puzzles me, now I think on it, how
I ever could ! I'm biowed if I can make it out; but here
I am, old woman, and here I’ll stick, and we’ll be just a«
’appy as rats in a eornbin.”
lie threw his arms round his wife’s ample figure as he
spoke, and they embraced each other, while Kelly and his
companions looked on, amazed at the unexpected and
dramatic scene.
“ You mean what you say?” she asked rather doubtfully ;
“ you won’t leave me again ? ”
“ Never ! ” he returned, well pleased to have found such
comfortable quarters.
“ I hope you wdl keep your word,” she said with a faint
sigh, as she hastened to place the best the house .afforded
before he unexpected guests.
After d.inking to the h-alth of the re-united couple,
Kelly anti his companions left Joss with his wife to talk
over old times, and went to their hiding-place.
CHAPTER CII.
HOW KELLY AVENGED TREACHERY
The bushrangers had a good laugh over Joss’s matrimo
nial adventure.
They never, however, for one moment believed ho woub*
give up his roving life to sit quietly down with a wife, and
help her to keep a shop.
They believed it to be a mere frolic more than anything
else, of which he would soon weary.
After breakfast, Kelly, thinking tiiat one person would
be less noticed than three, arranged to go down to the
“ public," and meet Morga.fi, his boatswain.
He was flashily dressed, while he had assumed a n°Av
pair of w hiskers, that completely changed the expression
of his face.
He knew his way about, and soon found himself once
more within the walls of the low-roofed saloon so dear to
the sailors’ mind.
Morgan, the boatswain, was there, and several other
members of the crew.
Morgan had gone round to all the drinking places in tho
locality, and by telling them that Kelly was about once more
to take to the seas in search of plunder and adventure,
easily persuaded nearly every man of tho old band to jofti.
It was unwise to trust new hands.
The moment Kelly was at their head they were ready
for anything.
Of course it was easy in such places to talk over
business without being noticed or suspected. There is an
urg'd almost peculiar to Australia.
Kelly stood drinks, and then bade the man be on board
in the evening.
To Morgan he left the charge of getting on board all
that was necessary in the way of provisions.
Morgan was an astute fellow, and an excellent sailor.
Dissipation and one sudden unpremeditated crime had
driven him from respectable life, and no more daring
robber of the land or sea existed than William Henry
Morgan.
Anywhere but with Kelly he would l*s.ve been the no •
doubted leader ; but the iron will and brutality of Kelly
overmastered everything.
Kelly told them that he might wish to start at uisn
moment, so begged them to be all ready and on board aoo«»
after nightfall.
He then, secure in his di-guise. wandered ab ut l>he
cioy a: d made some pun haste, which were carried up to


the hotel kept by Smith, whence they could be sent on
board.
After finishing his business, he strolled along, and pre-
sently came near a police-station, lie had no fear there.
Too many crimes were committed in California for them
to bother about those committed in Australia.
He nearly betrayed himself, however. Coming down
the steps of the station was Joss, In oohversation with an
officer.
“This night, at eight, master,” said Joss to the man,
“ and you shall make a fine haul.”
“ I’ll get the men together,” replied the officer, “ so don’t
fail to be here in time.”
“ Never fear,” answered Joss, with a savage scowl on
his countenance. “ I’ll teach him to play his dirty prac-
tical jokes on me. But before I place the lot in your not,
I must know something about my part in it. I must have
an agreement that 1 am not to be quodded with the lot,
a bit o’ paper making me safe, if I give evidence against
Kelly and his gang. You want ’em, and shall have ’em
tight enough. Only you must make me safe.”
“ All right,” replied the policeman, “ come with me t j
the chief, and he’ll give you a clean bill of health for the
future. Come along; you won’t bust yer boiler at that
pace.”
In a few minutes they were in the presence of the chief
police boss, who did all Joss wanted.
And so they parted company.
Kelly’s passion was something terrible to witness. lie
could scarcely restrain himself, but he knew that he must
do so if he would have vengeance.
All was clear to him. In return for the brutal practical
joke played upon him on the previous day Joss was about
to win immunity for himself by betraying his comrades.
Doubtless he was going to give up tbo ship and all to
the local police.
For this purpose a large force would bo required, and
the officer would probably collect them quietly for an
evening surprise. i
What was to be done? 11 " 1 -
Kelly knew where to find Morgan. lie would hasten
to him first, and bid him hurry up the preparations for
their final departure.
This ho did, with a strong hint to get everything ready
as quickly and quietly as possible. Morgan promised strict
obedience.
Kelly then went buck to the den where they had been
concealed by Mr. Smith.
He watched the place keenly and saw nothing suspicious.
No, Joss wanted to have the luxurious enjoyment of wit-
nessing their capture.
He went in, and found his two companions playing a
friendly hand of cards,
“ What’s up ?” asked Zeph, who saw that the bushranger
looked black as night.
“ That villain, Joss, the cowardly sot, is going to betray
us,” he replied, with a fierce and terrible oath ; “ he’s been
to the trap already.”
The two men rose hastily, looking haggard and pale at
the astounding news.
“ We must run for it,” said Zeph.
“We must leave here at once,” replied Kelly; “some.
There’s lots of dolly shops about here, where we can
talk.”
And they hurriedly left the house with their more valu-
able articles in wallets.
Everywhere in San Francisco there are drinking shops
of all shapes and sizes.
They selected one to which a garden was attached with
several arbours.
In one of these they seated themselves and ordered
dinner.
It was necessary to ueep cool.
Believing Kelly and his friends to be wholly ignorant
cf the treacherous conduct of Joss, the police were of
course preparing a not in which to catch the whole gang.
What a triumph for the Frisco police would be this
extensive capture!
To do what had been the hopo of all the colony forces
for years!
The English government would of cou”se ask his extra-
dition, and the reward would bo claimed in California and
not in Australia.
“ I’d sooner run my neck into a noose,” said
Kelly, when they were alone, “ than let that white-
livered cur crow over us.”
“ But what's to bo done?’'' asked Zsph. “The trap*,
are on the lay.”
“I tell you that they mean to make a big haul, and
won’t be ready until eight,” said Kelly, “ when the
hound is to meet the police. Meet the cuss—never. Fit
brain him in his own don first. Listen to my notion,”
They did, and with perfect awe.
The plan proposed by Kelly was a daring one indeed,
but the most dangerous part he took upon himself.
It required great command of face and temper, and the
utmost cool courage.
His comrades admired and agreed.
1 awards six o’clock then Kelly went to the oyster-
sal you kept by Joss’s wife.
He found it busy as usual.
Mrs. Flynn sat behind the bar, presiding over all as
usual.
Joss was fussing about generally, smoking big c'gars-
and making acquaintances.
His sallow complexion flushed a little at sight of Kelly,
but he invited him to have a drink with almost exuberant
hospitality.
Kelly did not refuse.
“Forgotten all about our lark yesterday, ch, old man?”
he said, grinning.
“ Of course,” replied Joss, grimly.
“ Going to tie yourself to your wife's apron-strings
after all ?” laughed Kelly.
“ It’s safe,” responded Joss; “ and then, d’ye see,
there’s no work to do. I’m the perfect gent; all I has
to do is to eat, drink, and do the swell.”
“ Ah I” said Kelly, with a grin, “ that life ’ll suit you to
a hair, my friend.”
“ Yes,” said Joss, who did not like the way in which
Kelly spoke.
But Kelly was careful not to excite his suspicions too
greatly.
lie conversed in a bantering way with him, called for
drinks, and smoked another cigar.
Mrs. Flynn seemingly took no notice. She appeared
absorbed in the multitudinous ramifications of her
business
Presently the clock marked seven.
“Well, Joss, darlint, about that whisky?” she said,,
with an odd glint of the eye, which Kelly carefully ob-
served.
“You rarapagious she cat!” he thought to himself,.
“ if I only had you safe ! ”
But he simply watched Joss.
Kelly’s object was to induce Joss to walk a few yards*
with him—to accompany him to a rendezvous, but how to
do this had puzzled him sorely.
Morgan, however, suggested the means.
He wrote a letter from the “ trap ” with whom Joss had
been in communication, and whose name he managed easily
to learn, requesting Joss to meet him at the police-station
upon important business.
Kelly managed so that the missive was delivered while
he was at the bar, and chuckled with devilish glee as he
saw him leave the house in answer to the letter, and walk
blindfolded into the pit prepared for him.
“ I shan t be long, Kelly,” said Jo,ss; “will you wait
until I come back ? ”
“ I don’t care,” answered Kelly, and reseated himself for
a moment.
As soon, however, as the other’s back was turned he


hastily rose and followed him ; he took his way down a
narrow street whch led to the station.
Kelly followed him closely, but cautiously, until he
came to a doorway at- no great distance from an oyster-
shop. J
Kelly whistled, arid out darted a party of seamen, who
•threw a horse-cloth over Joss’s head.
Before he could shriek he was secured, and hurried
along by his comrades.
It was quite dark, and by exercising great caution they
managed to reas h the boat that awaited them, into which
•“V* was bundled. Ur mure dead than alive.
Meanwhile, at the pol .•« station, several olticers and
B®me forty policemen had been selected for the expedi-
tion.
Ah first the officials refused to believe in the possibility
01 swell audacity,
xaat a common bandit an I bushranger should have the
audacity ho seize a vessel and sail round the world with
ins gang appeared in tWise m dern times incredible.
(Let our readers who doubt this wait until they see
what Kelly’s brother did in this line, and correspond-
onc-o between Victoria and the British Government upon
me suoject. vide Times July, 1831.)
G-eat was the joy, therefore, of the officers and men, at
tne prospect of such a wonderful capture.
Eight o’clock came, but no Joss, and the officers became
very uneasy.
One of them determined to go down to the oyster-
saloon and make enquiries.
Mrs. Flynn was very much alarmed. Her husband had
gone out soon after seven.
The chief of the “robbers and thieves” was in the
saloon, and he had gone after him.
“ The scoundrel has had some hint! ” cried the officer,
and dashed back to the police-station.
Then ail rushed to the shore, to see tLo Buppoaed yacht
in the act of sailing out of the bay.
The officers were frantic with humiliation and rage.
There was not a single steamer available for the chase
ready.
All the men-of-war on the station were absent, cruising
at sea.
It was determined, however, to send out a sharp
revenue cutter to give warning.
But all felt bitterly disappointed at the failure of their
well-laid scheme.
Meanwhile, Kelly and the whole of his band had got
on board.
Joss was cast into the hold very tightly secured.
Kelly was determined to exercise a bitter vengeance
upon the traitor.
It should paralyse even his own crew.
Now his principal object was to escape from his ene-
mies.
That he would be hotly pursued he could well imagine,
and safety was the first law.
A sharp look-out was kept, and then he and his men
held a consultation.
Kelly determined to try him by court-martial, condemn
and hang him.
His associates were enraptured with tke idea.
It was an idea suited to their ferocious natures. But
for the timely action of Kelly they would all be lying in
San Francisco jail.
Had the police hut had the sense to keep Joss a
prisoner all would have been over with them.
Death, or prison for life, would have been their po' Jon
without a doubt.
Bub they would soon have their revenge on the cowardly
traitor who had turned upon his pals.
As soon as hr -hfast was over Kelly called those who
acted as officers ioffether, and bade some of the men bring
Joss in.
A court martial on board a regular ship is a very solemn
tiling.
If the wi a her be fine the ship is
greatest nicety.
The great cabin is prepared with a
with a green cloth.
Pens, ink, and paper, prayer-books, an
war, are placed round to each member.
“ Open the court,” says the president.
In this case Kelly, Zeph and Salmon Roe
the court, while pipes, tobacco and spirits a-’e
tore them.
The prisoner was brought in. He was dca
and his legs shook under him with fright
l< j-’O* ou cur, you blooming son of a aoa-
wolf, cried Kelly, in a hoarse voice, “you sold us to the
traps, did you ?”
“ I did uot,” retorted the trembling caitiff. “I never
peached on a pal.”
“ You lie > yo« skulking hound,” cried Kelly, as he
drank off a glass of brandy. “ I saw you come down the
steps of the station ; I heard you tell the trap you’d meet
him at eight; I saw your look at your wife, you snivelling
cur, going to see about the whisky:”
“I tell you, Ned, its false,” falterjd Joss. “My wife
told me to be civil to the pol ce, and tell’em to look
round ; being civil to them don't do no harm.”
“1 on spawn of fire, j r ou hell-fire cat, you skunk,”
answered Kelly, and for the benefit of the men who we.-e
listening he told the whole story.
Groans and oaths emanated from all sides , execrations
of the most fearful character.
•‘Now, boys, its no use having no more palaver,” he
continued. “ Guilty or not guilty?” he asked.
“ Guilty !” was roared on .all sides.
“And the penalty for peaching is -”
“Death !” replied all who were near.
Joss tried to speak, but he was dragged off to the deck,
where during the brief trial all the needful preparations
for the fearful execution had been made, but they fell far
short of what Ned thought the merits of the case de-
manded.
Kelly, with a brutal laugh, went down into the cabin,
and tossed off a glass to his swift passage to a warm place.
Of course, according to these men and their villainous
code, the deed was a just and retributive one.
He had been a traitor to his pals.
Kelly had for some days pondered over the form of
death he would inflict upon
“Yon trembling coward who forsook
His master,”
as “ My name is Nerval ” has it.
The yardwirm was too common, shooting was too
sudden.
He must be done to death in a way to
“ Make the world grow pale,
To point a moral and adorn a tale.”
To make him an auto defe , to burn him on a pile like an
Hindoo widow, to impale him and hang him “ alive and
kicking,” up on the end of the yard-arm like a skewered
kidney, there to linger out his days and nights in hopeless
agony.
Each of these plans recommended themselves to the
bushranger’s idea of venyeanco and justice.
But each had their objectionable points, and as the
trembling catiff stood before Ned he gave him his choice of
the fate he would like best.
“Look here, you miserable, skulking sneaking viper,
I’m Lind to yon, I am, so wo all arc. You’d have handed
us over to the traps. They wouldnr have been as kind
to us as we are to you They wouldn’t have given us the
choice of how we’d be scragged. No, not they. Now
make your choice. Which will you have—blazes, wood,
or water? Look sharp, your time is short. We can’t he
nice about a hound that would have bitten us all and
lapped up the blood-mon y. Speak. Joss, or Til give
tongue for you, and you’d bett - not leave that W Ned
tongue for you, r
Kelly, I tell you ”


“R a the Waiter who would have murdered us all—
fvhosojd his mates! Roast him! Roast him! ” rattled
and roared out all the enraged men, who encircled the
pallid, m embling,half-paralysed wretch, whosefnghi ened
eyes and quivering frame clearly photographed the
that convulsed him.
jrle knew the men he stood before.
Tueir eyes weregieaming with vengeance—their hands
eager to wreck it on the body of their would-be assassin.
They s’ood glaring ferociously like wolves upon the
ehrinking wretch, while Kelly, like a presiding Satan,
looked calmly and maliciously on, enjoying the torture
that racked the frame of the victim.
Truly it was a seen & where
“ Hope withering fled,
And mercy sighed farewell."
** Now, then, Joss, speak up ; tell the truth now if you
never did before. Which shall it be—fire, wood, or
water ?”
“ Meroy—mercy, Ned!” gasped the horrified man.
“ Mercy for oVI times, Ned Kelly !”
“ Yes. the mercy you’d have shown to Ned Kelly, when
you thought to shunt him into the hands of Jack Ketch.
M*rcy—yes, the mercy you showed to your mates. What
did they ever do to you, Joss—eh ? Did they deserve to
bejnuwlered by their pal—eh ? Answer me that.”
The only answer was a groan.
“ Finish the brute!” screamed the excited voices of the
more excited listeners. “Lynch him! roast him! scrag
him 1” were the cries that raged like a tempest round the
doomed man.
“Holdl” roared Kelly. “Listen to me,” and all were
silent as the grave “ He's not good enough for any of
those forms of death. True men have been hung, brave
men have been burnt, but dogs like Joss don’t deserve
the cost of a rope or a fire. No, my lads, he shall have
a death only fit for such as him. We will lower him over
the side and tow him after ua as bait for the sharks,
whose snouts are now, with true scent, following in our
wake, knowing their dinner is preparing, and that death’s
aboard. We ll just dip him a bit, so that he shan’t be
gobbled up in a mouthful, but let him lose a leg first,
then an arm, just to give him time to enjoy it.”
This pleasantry was answered by a terrified shriek, and
the poor devil fainted.
In the meantime everything was prepared.
A stout rope was tied round the upper part of his body,
his arras and legs being left free.
When he came to, Kelly lifted the man in his powerful
arms and carried him screaming to the side of the vessel.
The victim struggled all he knew now, with instinct of
self-preservation, and without any hope of release. He felt
his last terrible hour had come •, and, what was more, he
felt he deserved it.
His whole previous life passed in review before him;
he suffered the pangs of death fifty times over. Verily,
“ The paiua of hell gat hold upon him.”
“ Ain’t I gentle, my baby ? ” mocked Kelly, as he
quietly lowered the shrinking, quivering, trembling body,
over the side, by which the white-bellied sharks were
(To he continued.)
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly-
THE “ ANONYMA ” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
coursing along, their noses rising every minute above the
water, as if anticipating the repast that was to fill their
open jaws.
Shriek upon shriek issued from the unfortunate victim,
as he turned his horrified gaz-upon the formidable jaws
of the huge beasts, who almost sprung from the waves to
snatch the roan from the arms that were lowering him to
such a fearful and certain death.
Kelly held him with mock tenderness close to himself,
laughing wildly and maliciously, a* he almost cuddled
Joss in his Herculean arms.
Those looking on, almost felt compunjtion, until the
thought of the fate he had prepared for tht m re-awakened
their vengeance, and stifled all huiv A n feeling.
Suddenly they were startled by a loud and furious
curse, and Kelly was seen to grasp the man’s throat.
Joss, in his despair and agony, had tried his powerful
teeth in the flesh part of Kelly’s arm, and held on like a
tiger.
It was only w' en almost choked, tlfat his bite relaxed.
Maddened by the pain, Kelly resolved the wretch’s fate
should not be postponed any longer, and crying out to
those holding the tow-rope to “ slack off,” Joss was
flopped into the water, which was soon reddened with
blood, whil half-a-dozcn sharks soon obliterated all
earthly sign of the once stalwart Joss.
All felt relieved when this interlude was over; Kelly
intended it to be a lesson to those around him.
And r.o doubt it was so, but it was not the last or the
least that Kelly practised upon those who, in his parlance
“ rounded ” on him.
The deed of blood done, there was a general carouse ;
and Joss’s name was dismissed from the minds of all.
Zeph told capital stories of Tahiti and its beauties, both
local and human.
Zeph made it out to be a kind of terrestrial paradise.
He had been there several times, and only regretted having
ever left it.
So, keeping a good look-out, avoiding anything that
appeared suspicious, they wended their way towards the
happy islands of the South.
Zeph, and one or two real salts, made considerable
alterations in the rig—shortened the masts, painted her
sides of a different colour, did everything they could to
avert suspicion.
And so the days passed, until one evening just before
sundown, they sighted the hills of the ancient Otahitc,
modernised into Tahiti.
Agnes Willoughby. | Woman.
The Soiled Dove. i D ... , _
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of The Beaut| ful Demon.
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The Lad with the Ca melias.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and J
Passion. Paris Life at Twenty.




Discovered b} Captain Cook, they should have certainly
been annexed and keot by England as a truly valuable
possession.
But wisdom does not always attend our councils, and
the island belongs, de. facto, to France.
It is almost impossible to exaggerate tue beauty of these
Pacific islands.
CHAPTER CUT.
KED KELLY IN TAHITI.
Nsw Caledonia is an island in the Australasian seas, in
the South Pacific ocean. It is surrounded on all sides by
<soral reefs, connecting numerous islets and banks of sand,
rendering the navigation so intricate and dangerous, that
island can be approached by two openings only.
In physical aspect the island greatly resembles New
South Wales, consisting in the interior of barren, rocky
mountains, mterspersed with fertile valleys.
The sugar-cane and banana, cocoa-nut palm, bread-
fruit tree, tare and mangoes are cultivated, and sandal-
wood is found to some extent. Tho inhabitants live mostly
t>n yams and fish. Trcpang is fished on the coast.
The natives are of a deep black, with curly hair, robust,
active, and well made. Some tribes of them arc known to
be courteous and friendly to strangers, while others are
treacherous, merciless and cruel man-eaters.
In 1849, the station at Balase was attacked, and some of
the Europeans killed, and the same year the captain and
cook of the ship Mary wer* murdered, cooked, and eaten.
They speak a language distinct from that of the neigh-
bouring islands. New Caledonia was discovered by Cook
in 1774. and . ailed Balase by tho natives.
Ihe French, in 1851, sent an expedition to survey the
island. Several of the officers and men were massacred.
The Government at once determined to annex the
bland, and make it a convict settlement. No sooner said
than done.
A. barrack and all necessary buildings, were at once
elected, though the natives were very troublesome at first.
Even the rascals on board the White Eagle, when roused
at daybreak and told that they were entering the port of
Papiete, were astounded.
Great mountains of every shade of blue, pink, grey, and
purple, torn and broken in every conceivable fantastic
shape, with deep, dark, mysterious gorges, showing almost
black by contrast with the surrounding brightness, pre-
cipitous peaks and pinnacles rising one above another like
giant sentinels, until they were lost in the heavy mass of
clouds they had impaled, while below, spreading from the
base of the mountains to the shore, a forest of tropical
trees, with the huts and houses of the town peeping out
between them.
It was a glorious scene.
The men stood as if enthralled.
The descriptions of Zeph had fired their imaginations,
but they little expected to see anything like this,
Kelly was careful that before landing all the men should
be steady and sober.
As wo have before said, Zeph had a smattering of all
tongues, and had a pretty fair ability as to French, the
official language of the islands, which had recently as-
sumed the protectorate of Franco.
When the officials came on board he coolly told them
his story, and, as a matter of course, was believed.
Then the supposed officers, and such of the crew as
could be spared without exciting suspicion went ashoic.
It was a revelation to these men.
Everything was so unexampledly free and easy.
The town itself was nothing wonderful, though it was
extensive and well built
But the natives were simply, in the eyes of these sensual
and coarse individuals, a revelation.
Tho women!
Perhaps nowhere on earth arc to be seer more lovely
creatures than hero are found.
Their forms arc simply perfection.
No whalebone or steel disfigures their forms, while their
dress is nothing but a long white or red chemise, according
to the taste of the wearer. In fact the old English saeque.
The men were little men, and were chiefly remarkable
for their habit of nodding to strangers and crying, “ Ya
ra nn /”
Zcph and Kelly were walking side by aide smoking
cigars in that languid kind of way which men adopt in
hot climates.
Suddenly two girls, with almond-shaped eyes full of tire,
stopped before tnem.
Kelly looked at Z* ph, who simply grinned.
Then the girls deliberately took their cigars out of their
mouths, took a good pull, and then, with a laugh, smoked
about five minutes, returned the weeds, and ran a-way.
“ Kangaroos and butterflies 1” exclaimed Kelly the
bushranger, utterly astonished out of his usual assump-
tion of equanimity, “ what does it mean?”
“Custom of the country,” drily remarked Zoph. “But
you mustn’t presume too much. Most of the female per-
suasions are easy enough, but not all. Be careful.”
And he led "the way to a noted hotel, known to all
English, American, and French visitors as Le Grand
Camel.
Here they secured lodgings, dined, and remained in
consultation for some time.
It was decided to be very cautious while at Papicte.
Under French laws the government was rather severe,
and any open or violent encroachment against the regula-
tions would be resented.
As a matter of course, except under peculiar circum-
stances, any idea of committing any startling robbery was
out of the question.
The port would very soon be too hot to hold them.
But these men were always alive to the fact that some-
thing might turn up.
When evening came round they sailed forth in “ long-
shore togs,” and went to one of tho innumerable grog-
shops.
It, like all its compeers, was crowded with French and
other sailors, and a very large mass of the other sex.
“Well I’m darned!” cried Kelly.
“ What’s up?” asked Zeph.
“ Look at them two spoonies,” responed the bushranger,
laughing. “ Ain’t it fine?”
Well, it was a lesson perhaps in the art cf courtship
no', usually visible to the naked eye.
Presumably, they were sweethearts—at all events, they
ought to have been.
The male, a stalwart young Frenchman, was in company
with a Tahitian girl.
As Lord Pembroke says, in “ The Earl and the Doctor,”
he had his arms round the girl’s neck, while she had hers
round his waist, and hung upon his breast in a simply
affectionate manner.
Zeph laughed.
He had seen that sort of thing before, and it did not
even amuse him.
Kelly seated himself and looked around
The scene was utterly new to him.
No barmaids.
No, nothing but French barmen, with the sleeves of
their dirty white shirts rolled up—brawny, bull-necked,
black-haired, and shaven.
'lhcre were also Yankee skippers to be seen among tue
mob, and English Jacks.
Presently there was a fight, in which neither Kelly nor
any of his comrades was concerned.
The owner of tho place interfered between an English-
man and a Frenchman.
“No fightee in my house,” he cried “ Call dc police
out.’ 1
fhe two drunken sailors made some very strong objui
gations, and then proceeded again to blows.
Then some native police were called m.


Their attire was of the simplest.
But they were not even respected. Th:y begged,
prayed, entreated, commanded the crowd to disperse.
Someone twitched the sticks out or their hands, which
caused a rear of laughter and a fresh torrent of elo-
quence from the brown boobies, which lasted till the mob
good-humouredly lid as they told.
Having duly arrested the criminals, their next duty was
to carry them off.
Strangely enough, one of the most common articles be-
longing to modern civilisation was utterly unknown—the
handcuff
Rope made from cocoa-nut fibre was substituted, and
after a terrible fight the unfortunates were borne away.
“Kura country,” growled Kelly; “but what’s all this
here banting about?”
“Fete Napoleon,” answered Zeph.
“ What in the name of pepper does that mean? ’
asked Ihe truculent bushranger.
“ Well, mate, the country belongs to the Emperor of
the French,” replied Zeph, “ and this is his birthday.
That bill mentions a big thing in the shapo of ajete, as
they call it, at Government House.”
And he pointed to a large poster.
It mentioned that this, the sixteenth of August, being
the anniversary of the fete day of Napoleon the Third, a
grand garden-party would be given.
The Queen Foniare would be present, it said, and tickets
of admission to strangers could only be obtained by refer-
ence to their local consuls.
“ Let us go,” said Kelly.
“ Can’t get in,” replied Zeph.
“ Bounce! ” coolly responded the bushranger.
And so they wend'ed their way towards Government
House, the gardens of which are simply fairy-like.
We have already alluded to the loveliness of the Halls of
Eblis, but even the author Vathek could scarcely have con-
ceived anything to equal this place under such an atmos-
phere.
“ Can’t get in,” said Zeph.
Kelly had been watching. .
The man who took the vouchers was a grinning little ape
of a half-caste.
The bushranger watched him keenly.
He noticed that he was extremely deferential to some
and haughty to others, and his quick wit made him soon
aware that the difference consisted in palm oil.
“ My good fellow,” said Kelly, walking up with an awful
imitation of an aristocratic strut, “ I’ve left my voucher at
home—too much trouble to go back.
And he handed him a sovereign.
The man hesitated, and then, of course, yielded.
The Government House is a very handsome structure of
while free-stone, in the Elizabethan style, and find}'
situated among well-wooded grounds on a height over-
hanging a cove. ,
Once inside the grounds the two men swaggered about
without hindrance or stint. , ,
The elite of Tahitian society was present, out tha» aid
not prevent many odd things from occurring
- the Fete Napoleon, and, as a matter of course,
there were rob ions ceremonials. .
The religious ceremonials were accompanied by music
and dancing. „ , ; , ~
The hymns were sun to to the tune of notea music-icu,.
gongs, and the dance nothing else but tne notorious
cun-can. , , . ,
“ Look out! ” suddenly whispered Zeph, that is
queen—ain’t she a wonder ! ”
« That there a queer/! ’ cried Keby. “Why I ve seen
a better-looking one in the bush.”
She was not a beauty and was very fat.
Still sire was a very quiet, dignified, and gooa- latnrc
old lady. , ,
But she seemed much amused at the scene, id was very
friendly and gracious to all
It was indeed what is commonly called a swell bale.
Nothing so wonderful had ever been seen by such a me*
as Kelly.
It was simply like a view out of the Arabian Nigbtr.,
and reminded him of Hoxnburg, of irenie et quai-an*
celebrity, on fire-work nights.
lie crept up as near tc the shief swell party as he could.
The local governor, whose name was General Viscount
Dubois, offered his arm to the queen, by whose side was,
perhaps, one of the most lovely girls any man ever gazed
at.
Ke’ly was one of those men incapable of love ir. the
real sense of the word, as poets and authors say, out
strongly capable of the passion in Montaigne’s sense of the
word.
He was an animal and nothing else—a coarse, and par-
ticularly vulgar animal.
The reader must recollect that we have to describe the
man as he was, this being no romance, but the history of
an actual (then) living individual.
“ Who's that?” he asked Zeph, pointing out the brown
beauty to his comrade.
“No idea,” responded Zeph. “ I’ll ask.”
Which he did, and found that the lovely creature was
the left-sided daughter of the queen.
Kelly, wild, wicked and passionate, at once took a mad
fancy for the lovely damsel.
There was not much chance of an introduction, and he
knew it well.
At this moment a young man, in semi-naval costume,
an undoubted Englishman, stepped forward and joined
the group.
He was “ only a sailor,” but he was unmistakably a
gentleman.
He was introduced to the queen by the British consul,,
and by the queen to the girl.
Then Kelly saw this young man take the arm of hi*
inamorata and lead her out.
He at once joined in a waltz, in which dance the volup-
tuous natives excel.
They appear rather to float in space tha to dance, so
aerial are their movements.
Kelly followed the pair with greedy eyes.
On inquiry, he found that her name was Leaee Bona,
and, though known to be the queen’s daughter, was spoken
of as a distant relation.
After this dance was over, there was a great rush to a
kind of enclosed meadow, where stood eight girls in very
light and airy costumes—more airy than light. _
At a given signal, and on the playing of a sprightly tune.,
the whole eight girls cast themselves on the sward, throw-
ing themselves on their left elbows, and began wriggling
about in the semblance of a dance, scratching their right
legs.
Having continued this fashion for a considerable period
of time, they reversed positions, leaning on their right
elbows and scratching their left legs.
It was more energetic than docent, but it made Kelly
scream with laughter.
The natives roared, but Zeph explained that their
laughter was caused by the outrageous coarseness of the
soiig with which they accompanied the dance.
With rare exceptions, decency and morality are things
unknown to the female sex.
As Lord Pembrok says, the girls are not moral.
“ It would be thought strange io Europe if a young
lady wl jni you had seen scarcely ten minutes, and had not
spoken ton words to, were coolly to propose deserting her
kindred and friends, and accompanying you, bag and bag-
gage, to the other end of the world; but in the South Seas,
fats but an ordinary occurrence, scarcely deserving of
notice.
I remember at Samoa, two ladies of high degree, fat,
brown and forty, paying their court with such irresistible
ardour, that after telling most shameless lies about a fero-
ciously jealous wife in jfingland, by way of making a polite


excuse for not taking them, I was fain to bolt ignomini-
ously, for fear they should win their end by sheer
persistency, like the widow and the unjust judge in the
parable.”
After a time it became clear, even to the dull
intellect of Kelly, that to attempt to scrape acquain-
tance with Lenee Bana was out of the question, though
win her he would.
The tailor-chap who had been introduced was the
second lieutenant of an English man-of-war, Lord West-
port, and be contrived very cleverly to work into the
good graces of the maid of honour.
This so exasperated .Ned Kelly, that he determined to
relieve him of his companion.
His was a fierce and dogged nature, not easily made to
swerve from its purpose.
When he made up his mind to anything, he seldom failed
to carry it out.
But this affair, another rape of the Sabines it would
have to be, would require care and attention.
Having left the gardens of Government House, they
wended their -way to a grog-shop also liberally supplied
with gardens.
Here they found all the men who had leave dancing
away with native girls.
In another department gambling was going on at a
furious rate.
They take life easy in these parts. A man earns perhaps
five or six dollars, and loses it at cards.
He simply walks off to wherever he is in the habit of
sleeping, and at day-break goes up into the mountains,
gathers fruit, sells it, and begins again.
But easy and indolent as is the habit of life caused by
the climate it is not conducive to morality or even decency.
It is nothing uncommon to come upon a group of dam-
sels in puris naturalibus, swimming and diving in a marvel-
lous manner.
There is not the slightest affectation of offended modesty
at the sight of a male looker on.
They are taught to swim when mere infants, by the sim-
ple expedient of throwing them into the water, and then
calling them to the bank, by tendering them their natural
nourishment.
Kelly found his men thoroughly enjoying themselves.
The bushranger oi seating himself at a table, found him-
self near an Englishman. There were signs of good origin
about him, b*t he had, though not badly dressed, the
unmistakable “vagabond, dry rot,” about him.
Kelly noticed that he had no glass before him and at
once accosted him.
“ Take a drink stranger if it ain’t an impertinent ques-
tion? ” he said.
“ Thanks—hard up—can’t cash cheque,” responded the
individual in a voluble tone.
Kelly summoned a waiter and ordered a bowl of rather
strong sangaree and some of the best cigars.
“ Know this crib ? ” asked Kelly.
“ It ain’t any account,” said the stranger, “ been all over
(he shop—but nothing to be done here. I’m an unlucky
mortal.”
And he told his story, which was a strange one.
“Seems a change would do you my buffer,”said
Kelly; “a few notes wouldn’t be unacceptable.”
“Try me man,” was the response.
“ Well, can you do the big boss? ” asked Kelly of the
stranger.
“ I was bred and born a gentleman,” the man answered
with a deep sigh; “ what is it you want? ”
“ With plenty of tin and togs,” continued Kelly, “ you
could rub noses with the upper crust.”
“Sol’’ said the other.
“ Scrape acquaintance with a nob like Lord Westport? ”
asked Kelly.
“ Yes,” was the dry response.
Kelly now explained that he was owner of a splendid
yacht, but a stranger to the island and its inhabitants.
He wished to give a grand lunch oc board to a few of
the better sort.
He particularly -wished to invite Lord Westport, and
some other gentlemen of position, but they must all bring
a lady with them.
He had an idea that a dance would be acceptable, and
had music.
The man, whose name was Evelyn Hastings, said it could
be easily managed, as he had plenty of good introductions,
which he had failed to deliver from want of money.
Kelly at once asked him to join him at the hotel the
next day, giving him money with which to procure a rig
out.
Loose fish as the man was, he looked as if he could be
trusted.
CHAPTER CIV..
ON BOARD THE YACHT.
Next day, very sprucely dressed, and looking a jaunty,
dcvil-me-care sort of gentleman, Mr. Evelyn Hastings
called on Captain Higgins, at the Queen’s Hotel.
The bushrangers had waited breakfast for their new
guest, who sat down to the meal with a self-satisfied smile.
After breakfast he went out to purchase further neces-
saries, including some luggage, and to release others
detained for rent.
He then returned to the hotel, where for the present ho
had taken rooms.
Then, when the heat of the day was over, he went out to
make calls.
He was away for some time, and then when he reported
progress found that he had been very well received.
A day or two passed, and then Mr. Hastings sent out
certain invitations to his numerous acquaintances, to lunch
on board his friend Captain Higgins's yacht.
There would be music and dancing, and every gentle-
man was expected to bring a lady.
After sending out the invitations, Mr. Hastings ca'led
on a good many of the invited guests, especially on young
Lord Westport.
He graciously accepted, and promised to bring Lenee
Bana, who was reported the best dancer in the country,
Kelly chuckled. Thirty couples and more had accepted
the invitations.
What was the villain’s intention ? To get rid of all the
men and keep the women.
But how was it to be done ?
As to that he had not made up his mind.
To murder thirty odd gentlemen in cold blood would
be unexampled folly.
Such a fearful crime would rouse a natural confedera-
tion against the arch-fiend.
He had quite enemies enough already, without making
a host of unnecessary ones.
He determined, therefore, to be wholly guided by cir-
cumstances.
It would be impossible for him to abduct Lenee Bana
unless he allowed the same latitude to his crew.
What to do with the women before they entered an:thcr
harbour was another consideration.
They could easily set them on shore on some unin-
habited part of one of the many islands, and thence
escape.
Captain Higgins, as he called himself, now began t*
make great preparations to entertain his guests.
Every kind of Parisian shop was to be found at Papiete.
The upper-class ladies dressed in true Parisian stylo
though this was, to say the least, a trifle gaudy.
He gave unlimited orders for the lunch and refresh-
ments, with a select band of music, and everything that
could conduce to the enjoyment of his guests.
At twelve o'clock next day the yacht fired a gun, and
then was covered from deck to truck with bunting.
Soon after, barges and other boats put out in th#
direction of the yacht.


There was only one English man-of-war in port, a
sloop, while there were several Frenchmen.
Mr. Hostings, who spoke French fluently, had invited
one or two of these.
Captain Higgius had deputed Hastings to do the
honours, himself standing on one side, trying to look
bluff but honest.
As the ladies and gentlemen came on deck, and were
introduced by Hastings to their host, they thought that if
he were bluff but honest, he was confoundedly ill-looking.
Still he was very humble, said little, and was most pro-
fuse in his hospitality.
As soon as all were on board, the guests and supposed
ollicers seated themselves.
The ladies were all young, beautiful and natives.
Hastings had particular instructions on this point, which
he had faithfully fulfilled.
The whole deck was covered by an awning, and the
tables laid beneath.
Beside were a number of boats, belonging to the guests,
the caterer, and the band.
The lunch was thoroughly enjoyed, and then the decks
were cleared for dancing.
As Kelly danced only in a very rude way, he had no
care for this part of the entertainment.
The band struck up. All who cared for dancing selected
partners, and the fun began.
Kelly went below and gave instructions.
None of the guests, naval or military, were armed
while the crews of the boats took their refreshments in the
different craft.
As the dance ceased, every male guest was suddenly
seized from behind, and his arms piniouedi.
Then the terrified women found themse ves confronted
by a band of armed sailors, looking more like satyrs than
men.
A Babel of voices arose.
“Bundle the fellers into their boats,” cried Kelly;
“ overboard with them if they ain’t quick.”
At this moment, Lord Westport, who had noticed the
auspicious look of the men coming up from below, and
who had the presence of mind to evade capture, rushed at
the supposed captain of the \V lute Eagle, and clutched
him by the throat.
“Villain, what means this outrage?” he cried “speak
ere I brain you.” .
At that moment Zeph felled him to the ground with
a blow from his powerful fist.
“ Chuck all the rest into the boats,” shrieked Kelly, in
a towering passion. “ I’ll deal with this mighty swell.
“What’s the meaning of all this?” gasped Hastings,
pale and lorror-strickcn,
“ Mind your eye,” said Kelly, furiously, “or it may go
bad with you.”
Officers, cooks, waiters, musicians, were bundled into
the boats. _ .
The scene was simply indesciibable. » hat with the
oaths and oV'urgations of the men. the shrieks and cries
of the women, the hideous blasphemy of the crew, the
scene was awful. #
The women stood still in blank dismay. They guessed
the truth. . ,
Not in any way fastidious, yet not one but looked with
horror to the prospect of falling into the hands of these
w'retches. , ,
Zeph, with a body of men armed with rifles pointed at
the boats, stood near the bulwarks.
“Steer off pretty sharp,” he cried, “or my men v>ill
fire into you.” ... • i
What could they do but go ashore and institute a rapid
“Now then for this insolent cub, said Kelly, as the
young lord arose.
He was firmly held by two men. #
“ So. my cheeky young nob,” exclaimed Kelly, 1 you
tried to strike mo, did you?'’
“ I wish I had killed you,” responded young Lord
Westport, to whom Lenee Bana clung, lovely in her
abject terror.
“ Overboard with him,” cried Kelly ; “ let him walk the
plank. Drag the girl away.”
He was obeyed, and Lord Westport was taken to the
sally-port.
Lenee liana stood still, dazed and shivering with horror
Then she leaned over the side.
Lord Westport, despite his clothes, light and suita
to the climate, was swimming in the direction of
shore.
He was a very powerful athlete in every way.
But Kelly knew the waters to be infested by sharks,
who swarmed in that spot.
The yacht was outside the eastern point of the bay.
It was half-a-mile to the shore.
No man, unguarded by a boat, could swim that distance
without falling a victim to the voracious robbers of the
deep.
Suddenly Lenee Bana gave a wild shriek as a shark
slowly lifted himself and made for the swimmer.
He was close at hand, in the act of turning on his back
to aim at its prey.
Lenee Bana snatched a knife from one of the sailors,
darted into the waist, and leaped clean overboard.
A shout of applause burst from the lips of the
astonished and applauding ruffians.
“ Man a boat!” shrieked Kelly.
Everybody knows what swimmers the natives of these
islands are.
Lenee Bana went down out of sight, and then, rising,
swam hand over hand towards the marine monster.
it was close on to Lord Westport, but the brave girl
caught one of the beast's fins and plunged her long knife
into the stomach in the direction of its heart.
There was an intense wriggle, a spurt of blood, and the
shark turned over.
Lenee Bana simply dived, and again attacked the
animal.
By this time the boat was out and approaching the
girl, while Lord Westport was making frantic efforts to
join her.
The was first.
The girl, who swam easily with one hand, pressed the
knife to her bosom.
“Take him in first,” she said in very fair and intelli-
gible English.
The men obeyed, and the two were dragged in just as
the shark, furious and savage, turned to renew the
attack.
Soon they were on deck.
“ Now,” said Kelly, as he ordered Lord Westport to be
secured, “ now boys, the girls are all your own.”
And he clutched Lenee Bana by the arm with a fero-
cious grin. , ,
“ Stop !” thundered Hastings, who was wild with excite-
ment and horror. “ Look !” . ,
And he pointed to the old Semaphore telegraph, vihic.i
was exchanging rapid signals with the Semaphore lower in
Government gardens.
“ Do you understand what that means ?’’ he asked in a
loud tone.
“ No,” sullenly responded Kelly.
“Those on yonder tower have seen all, and are tele-
graphing the news. In a quarter of an hour two men o*
war will be after you.”
All were startled at this intimation.
Escape was certainly the one thing needful for these
unhanged villains.
If caught, any fresh outrage would tell against them in
case of capture. „ . ,
“Take the prisoners below, and crack on all sail, cried
Kelly. “ Zeph, see it is done smart.”
Their necks were virtually in a halter, and the men
worked indeed with a will


The cutter, as we already know, was a quick sailer;
but Zeph had heard that both the Royal George and
Reme Pomare were very sharp vessels.
As soon as they were loose from their anchors, a look-
out was sent aloft.
He reported at once two vessels in chase; they were
both men-of-war.
Of course they would pick up their officers as they
passed, but this would only cause a very brief delay
indeed.
Every stitch of canvas that the vessel could carry was
clapped, on, and every act resorted to that clever seaman-
ship could devise.
Tne vesseis, However, that pursued tliem, were well-
manned and admirably appointed.
Zeph and Kelly sat in the cabin alone.
“ Curse Eve, and all her daughters! ” said the bush-
ranger. “ I wish I’d never spotted one.”
“ We can swear it’s only a lark,” observed Zeph.
“ What about that Hastings fellow ? ” responded Kelly.
“ He’s a cursed muff.”
“ Can’t we talk him over?’’asked Zeph. “ lie’s poor
as a church-mouse.”
“Ah! he don’t mind a trifle, but he’s not up to snuff,”
cried Kelly. “ He’d do a man with a bill, or swindle a
tradesman or anybody else, but he’d get nasty nice about
a job like this.”
Zeph made no reply, but, after drinking off a stiff glass
and lighting a cigar, went on deck.
Kelly, after thinking over the matter for some time,
followed him.
“ Well, mate, what’s the ticket? ” he said to the other.
“ Looks like a dark and dirty night,” was the answer.
“ I tell you that’s oxir only chance, give ’em the go-by.”
“Leave that to you, Zeph,” surlily replied Kelly.
“Well, we’ll wait until it’s quite dark, then take in all
sail, furl up everything,” continued the sailor, “and lie
to. If they can’t see us, it will be spiffing.”
This was agreed to, and when darkness fell upon the
face of the deep, they suddenly changed their course, put
out all lights, and then took in all sail.
The two men-of-war, one French and one English,
kept on their course.
All they knew was, that the so-called yacht was in reality
an audacious skimmer of the seas, a blot on the escutcheon
of humanity.
As for any inkling of the truth, no one could, by any
gtre’ch of imagination, believe in the monstrous idea that
Ned Kelly was in Tahiti.
On board the English sloop that evening, just before
eight bells, the captain and first lieutenant were talking,
before the former turned on for his watch below.
“ Captain Crowder,” suddenly said the subordinate
officer, “ I see it all! ”
“ In what way? ” asked the superior.
“ Don’t you remember my reading you that amazing
story about the Snake being stolen by bushrangers, and
turning up at Singapore and Batavia as a yacht! ” ex-
claimed Lieut. Crofton.
“Yes, but ”
“That yacht is the Snake, and the rassally cur who
entertained us was Ned Kelly,” was the startled and amazed
answer.
“ By Jove ! ” said the captain.
Then putting things together, this and that, they came to
the conclusion that they were right.
Only the more eager were they to capture the suspicious
vessel which had carried off the girls.
“ That Hastings must have been a confederate,” mused
Captain Crowder,
'' I don’t think go, sir,” remarked Crofton, “ he’s not
very particular, but he's not in that swim, I think.”
“ Come down and have a glass of wine,” said the captain,
“and then keep a sharp look out. This darkness is un-
fortunate.”
And so it proved for them.
Early the next morning, on board the White Eagle, a
good look-out was kept.
“ Sail on the weather-bow,” was shouteL
Zeph went aloft and saw that it was a large vessel
under all sail.
“ ’Bout ship,” said he, as he descended to the deck.
As soon as the White Eagle tacked, the other took in
her topmast studding-sail and hauled her wind.
The pirates had no stomach for fighting. Their only
hope was flight.
“ But I mean not to be taken alive,” sa d Kellv, who
however, little thought his identity was suspected.
At the first trial of strength between the vessels there
was perceptible difference.
On board the Frenchman—for it was that vessel, when
the first lieutenant examined her sextant, he could not
perceive that he had gained a single cable length.
“ We will keep away half a point,” said the captain to
his lieutenant, “we can afford that, and still hold the
weather-guage.”
The Reine Pomare was kept away, and at once increased
her speed. She neared the pirate a quarter-of-a-mile.
“ They are gaining on us,” said Zeph, “ we must keep
away a point.”
Away went the White Eagle, and would have recovered
her distance, but the Frenchman was ?,gain steered more
off the wind.
“ They’ll come up to us, and be cursed,” said Zeph, “ it’s
only a question of time.”
Kelly swore blasphemous oaths, bvt prepared for the
w r orst.
The vessel was well armed, and at a distance would make
a good fight.
They still cracked on, for so slowly did the foe gain on
them, but it might be night before they come up, when by
some stroke of cunning they might escnpe.
But every preparation was made for a fight. The
men were well supplied with arras and ammunition.
Towards night, the Reine Pomare /seemed to gain on
them considerably, and they knew that the end was near.
The Reico Pomare fired a gun, but of this no notice
was taken.
Still, after a consultation, it was determined to trust to
a long gun they had on board.
Their only chance was to disable the other’s masts, and
then again seek safety in flight.
Zeph had it hauled out and carefully /oaded. He and
one or two old raen-of-wa.rsmen undertook to work it.
He put a good man at the wheel, and stood by to give
his directions to him and to the sail-trimmers.
He took steady aim, and then at an opportune moment
fired.
All watched the result, but it was null, »*:cept that it
set a few ribbons of canvas flying.
“ Better run,” gr- wled Kelly.
But it was too late. The Reine Pomare was splendidly
handled, and soon came near enough for a broadside,
which tore several of their sails to pieces, Mid rteut the
main topmast by the board.
They must now surrender or die fighting They fired
a broadside as well, and kept up a constant discharge of
the long gun.
They certainly did considerable damage, b it that did
not prevent the other vessel from coming up hard-over-
hand.
The pirates were ready, well-armed, and desperate.
They fought with halters round their necks.
Soon, amid a cloud of smoke and the roar of artillery
the vessels collided, grappling irons were thrown, and
then a mass of men darted on the pir te’s deck
The defence was of a formidible cha-acer.
Kelly fought with desperation Firing off bis revolvers
he drew his cutlass and fought against odds manfully.
Several times the Frenchmen were driven baek, and
many hurled into the sea.
The deck was slippery with blood.


Suddenly from below rushed Lord Westport, and with
a drawn sabre rushed at Kelly, whom he cut down,
wounding him severely.
The rest surrendered, and a few minutes later, the
delighted ladies being set free, the two vessels were
being refitted. ,
Next day they entered Tahiti harbour in triumph, and
the audacious pirates were lodged in the local prison.
Such a sensation had never been known in that
generally peaceful island.
CHAPTER CY.
THE PRISON.
Kelly was not seriously wounded, but still he required
oare and nursing
As chief and ring leader he Avas more w r atched than
anyone else.
Still on all hands it was determined to make a signal
Example of him.
Such a daring action as the abduction of the girls and the
defence against a man-of-war was unheard of.
Then an examination of the vessel proved hear to be the
Snake.
The whole mystery then came out.
The English representatives demanded that the vessel
and the pirates should be given up to them.
The French authorities demurred, and finally the
decision of the knotty question was referred to the home
government.
This gave the pirates a long respite, which Kelly deter-
mined to make use of.
He resolved to feign great weakness.
He was not chained, but fastened in a strong room with
a bed, a small table, and a chan.
All the money that remained to the villains had been
secured as pri/.e money, but the persons of the prisoners
had been only hastily searched.
Kelly had round his Avaist a girdle full of valuable
diamonds, widen. he had ahvays ready to put on Avhen in
danger or likely to be compelled to “ make tracks. 1 ’
This knoAvledge gave him courage.
He was visited twice a day by the doctor, and once by a
sister of charitj, while his meals Avere brought to him
by an odd chara -ter enough.
His name was T ean Gordon, a marine, avlio in the course
■ r his voyages had picked up a small smattering of
English. •
As the jail *as confined to French, English, and
Americans, as a rule, this sufficed.
Jean Goujon Avas a thin, \yary fellow, with a cunning,
greedy face, and Kelly thought he might venture an ex-
periment Avith him.
“Hoav do you like this beastly hole?” asked Kelly one
day, as the other gave him his breakfast.
“ Cochon hole,” said the man, Avith an expression of
deep disgust.
“ Why you stop?” continued Ktlly.
“ I have to excest. you know,” with an inimitable shrug
of the shoulders, “ and veu I pay of z y poot me here.
“ I suppose you miss your France ?’’ observed Kelly.
“Ah ! la belle France. -'e beautiful country dat I lofe,
said the man. clasping his hands; “and my famille, and
ze beautiful Jeannette.” _ _
“You could go back to the old crib, if you lik d, ’ said
Kellv, in a low. meaning tone.
“ How you mean?” cried the jailer, anxiously.
11 You’ll never peach ? ” observed Kelly.
“ No, nevare,” said the man.
Kelly now told him in a £cav slow, p’ain words that ii
had with him a valuable lot of diamonds.
If he would help him to escape he would divide them
Avith him. ,
If he refused, be should tell the doctor of them, ancl
he would lose all.
The jailer’s face was a picture, his hands
convulsively.
“ Show me ze diarnand,” he said, in a thick',
voice.
Kelly withdrew the belt from under his clothes.
It Avas admirably made and padded, the trousers being
made in a particular way to hide it.
He opened one end and took out a fine stone, which he
handed to the Frenchman,.
He caught at it Avith delirious agitation of manner, and
devoured it with his eyes.
“ Is die mine ?”
“ Yes; you just take it to some diamond bloke, and
he'll tell you its worth. Mind, it’s a tip-topper.” he
added,
“ I knows Samuels Levy—he ask no question,” replied
the jailer, taking his leave to try and gee an hour or two
out.
Kelly’s eyes sparkled with hope. The man was evidently
greedy and covetous.
He sat Avrapped in deep thought for a long time.
Should he escape alone, or should he let loose all his
fellows ?
A grand idea flashed across his mind.
He Avould liberate all, and once again seize the cutter
and put to sea.
In the evening the jailer returned and announced that
he had received thirty-three pounds for it—a little over
eight hundred francs.
The man had questioned him much about it, but he was
careful to give no information.
He wanted to know if there were any more,''and his
answer had been, he believed, yes.
As the man had brought him his supper, with a small
bottle of whisky which he li 1 muggled in, he offered to
stay aAvhile and discuss matters.
Kelly, who saw the man was bound to him body anu
soul, now unveiled his plan.
He proposed that at midnight next day he should let the
whole party out.
Of course he must go Avith them.
He fully explained his plan of seizing the ship and being
far aAvay before they were pursued.
The man listened to him Avith amazed horror, the impji-
deuce of the thing was so intense.
“ Bigre ! ” he cried, “ but dat is vou fine stroke of vat
you say—pisness. Where you go? ’
“ To a laud where gold peeps out of the ground like
’tatoes,” said Kelly.
And he described the gold-diggings, of wmch dean
Goujon had certainly never heard.
The man was enraptured and agreed to everything.
Discipline in that country was rather lax.
There was a guard-house and sentries outside, but
scarcely any watek Avas kept in the interior of the prison
at nigh* . , ~ .
He could with his key unlock the rooms and cells in
which the prisoners Avere confined. Then they could make
their Avay to the garrets and on to the roof.
He would contrive a good stout knotted cord, which
would enable them to reach the exercise-yard.
Jean Goujon declared that to ensure success he must
have a confederate, and the only one Avhom he could trust
was a Avoman . ,
She Avas bound to him body ahd soul, and could he
trusted. . . ...
Ned Kelly did not relish the proposition, but the jailor
declared it must be.
Ned Kelly reluctantly gave big consent.
Jean Goujon further offered to make enquiries about
ihc cutter which lay in the harbour.
Hethealeft his new pal and retired, leaving Ned Kelly
in the seventh heaven of exhilaration and hopefulness.
Ho had, after long research, found on board the cutter
a secret locker, in which he had concealed a considerable
~>art of his plunder.


He had every no(r- this had been spared.
At all events he could but try his fortune.
It was the midday me u which Jean Goujon brought
him, and with it news.
Phe Snake had been refitted, but, pending finding a
crew for her to be taken back to Australia, she had a rew
native sailors put on board her—in fact, what is known to
sailors as an anchor watch.
Kelly grinned as he beam.
She had been cleared, well supplied, and of course there
was plenty of provisions on board.
Kelly was flushed and excited.
He longed for the night to come, and for it to be over,
'ihe warder bade him be Very cautious about the
whisky, and not to drink it until the last visit of the doctor
and nurse.
They would be sure to smell it, and that would spoil
all.
I here was no fear of Kelly disobeying his injunctions.
There was by far too much at stake.
'Then Jean Goujon retired, leaving the bushranger
alone, very much elated, but still filled with suspense and
anxiety.
As the prisoners detained in the Snake case were only
accused, they wore their ordinary dresses.
The night came at last, and of course Ned Kelly neither
went to bed nor undressed.
He was in a feverish state of excitement.
Meanwhile, Jean Goujon had not been idle.
He had been round to all the prisoners, and informed
them that they were to make ready for a start.
“ Ned Kelly ” was enough.
Then lie went up to the loft, and opened a window,
above which was suspended a crane.
To this he fastened the rope.
io use the chain would have been madness.
He was very methodical in his proceedings, and pre-
pared everything with calm decision.
Then lie went to his own room.
ihe patrol passed every two hours, after which all was
safe for that length of time.
He waited until the twelve o’clock patrol had gone, and
then joined Kelly, who awaited him with fierce and fiery
impatience.
He could even now scarcely believe his good fortune.
It seemed really too good to be true.
Then he heard the key cautiously turned, and tiie bolts
quietly withdrawn.
The jailer entered with a lantern in one hand, a brace
of pistols in the other.
Kelly convulsively clutched them, and prepared to
follow.
The jailer impressed the necessity of strict silence, and
then Kelly found that the corridors were full of men
LTp the stairs they went, treading cautiously and care-
fully, until they were in a huge loft.
Kelly peered out, lowered the rope, and was soon in the
yard, followed by the jailer, and presently by the others.
Once in the yard, the jailer gave a low but distinct
whistle, which was answered from the outside.
He then produced a thick, knotted rope, to which a
stone was attached, which he cast over the wall.
After an interval of two minutes there was another
whistle, and trying the rope it was found to be fast.
I hen Kelly led the way in silence.
Soon all were in the street, a narrow lane running at the
back of the prison.
Zeph, to.; astonished to speak, had received his orders
from Kelly.
1 lie jailer explained that the Snake was only about
twenty feet from the shore. The night was intensely
Kelly and Jean moved away to where the diamond
merchant awaited them.
He had sat up by directions of Jean. He stared at the
’•ough figure of Kelly, but went to business at once.
jj., o -lUD x uny a ream puru nof hem, winch he
would pay in told, and French and English notes.
If they would wait for a day or two, he would pur-
chase the rest, as Queen Pomare would like to have
some set for her.
Kelly said he’d think about it and went out. Once in
the street, he made up the jailer’s money to a hundred
pounds as he had promised, lie owed life and liberty to
him.
Meanwhile, Zeph had made for where the Sm,
and found only an anchor watch kept on board.
Not a sound was heard.
She was only warped to piles, and when seizing a boat
they crept on board, they found three men sleeping on the
deck.
These were at once secured.
If there were any sentries about, or custom-house officers,
they slept under the heavy night air. At all events they
were nowhere to be seen
A couple of boats were put out after a most noiseless
fashion, and every preparation made for towing her out
of the harbour.
Once clear of that they could hoist their sails and
have several hours start of their foe.
After this escapade they could surely expect no mercy
from English or French.
Presently Kelly and the Frenchman came hurrying on
board, the vessel was unmoored and slowly and cautiously
she was towed out.
The scene was one that would have singularly impressed
a thoughtful mind The beautiful—though rather dark—
night, lieecy clouds, myriads of stars, and the vessel as it
swept along in dark shadow actually touching the trees as
it passed.
Everything was lazy in that fortunate clime, and no one
rule bothered themselves about other people’s business.
The Snake was a mile from shore before an hour, with
all sail set.
The astonishment of the crew was something stupendous.
Their belief in Kelly when they heard all, became a coarse,
vulgar kind of hero-worship.
There were few of those who expected to escape the
gallows on board, and their relief was naturally very
great. J
The wind was fairly fresh, and at two o’clock they had
made a good stretch.
Five minutes later, a rocket went up, and the boom of
big gun was heard.
“ What’s the row? ” asked Kelly.
“ They find out you have escaped,” cried Jean Goujon,
with a shrug of the shoulders.
u ® must crack on a buster,” said Kelly, addrcssiim
Zeph. “If they see us at daylight we shall be gone
coons.
Zeph gave bis orders, and then the leaders went below
to smoko, and drink, and sleep.
They were to be called at daybreak.
They were, and came on deck at once.
Neither of the dreaded cruisers were to be seen, but
almost in the wind’s eye was a merchant brig
“Might hold something useful,” said KyLy. “All is
fish to our net.”
“Nothing comes unwelcome,” replied Zeph. “ We’ll
steer for her.” *
And, altering their course, they did so.
The vessel took hardly any notice of the supposed war-
ship which was coming up.
Ihe brig was Yankee, owned by a man who was goin ,r
around with notions to sell in the islands. “
He was a straight up-and-down sort of a chap, with an
inordinate opinion of himself and his country, which if
not an uncommon failing with our transatlantic brethren.
As soon as the pirates were close to her they fired a gua
Ihe brig came to, wondering what was the matter.
The cutter put out a boat, and Kelly and Zeph, with a
crew, started for the brig. 1


They meant to play a practical joke of a khul not likely
to prove very pleasant to the sufferer.
When they, in the dress of officers, leaped on the deck,
they found the master sitting on a hen-coop.
lie was a short, thick, paunchy-looking fellow, who
never offered to salute them
“You’re Britishers I guess?” he said
“ I guess we are,” replied Kelly, imitating his twang.
“ Thought it was one of the old country sarpents. No
harm meant,” grinned the master.
“ Oh no ; only we wanted to know if you had seen any-
thing of a rascally pirate just escaped from TalJiti. lie’s
about our build.”
“ Seen ne’er a one,” replied the other in somewhat of
an anxious tone, “ and don’t want to nuthcr.”
“Is your cargo so valuable, old horse?” asked Kelly
of the master, who, used to rough customers in his own
navy, was not surprised at the other's roughness.
“ We’ve sweet oil, raisins, and what we call notions,”
he went on.
“ Don’t notion what you mean,” said Kelly. “ Ain’t
got the rarest idea.”
“ Well, notions is, you see, a little of all sorts, sir-ee,”
he answered. “ So. e like some things, some another.
Some likes sweet almonds, arid some likes silk ; and some
likes opium, and some,” he added with a cunning grin,
“ likes dollars.”
“ Them the kind of notions yo ’re loaded with ? said
Kelly in a bantering tone.
“ Yes, I guess we are.”
“ Got any good whisky ?” asked Kelly.
“Sartin sure,” cried the master.
And a boy was at once sent in search of a bottle and
glasses.
The two drank freely.
By this time the White Eagle was close at liana, ana,
to the surprise of the Yankee skipper, showed her teeth.
“What’s up?” asked the ma ter, whose face became
t.hc colour of one in the jaundi e. .
“ liana over them dollars,” cried Kelly, 4 and wwat spirits
you can spare or, by thunder, I’ll sink your —— craft.
The man fetched a sigh from the waistband of his
trousers as he answered—
“ You’re only piling it on.”
“You’d better be pretty sm rtsaid Kelly, as he
pointed to two boat loads of armed men.
The unfortunate trader went be.ow, opened a locker in
which were thirty thousand dollars- -he had been trading
round the world for a year—and allowed them to be taken,
not without many a sigh and groan.
He gave out a good lot of brandy, whisky, and Hol-
lands, which the pirates secured.
“If you’re overhauled by the British slryink, then re-
marked Kelly, “give my compliments a’ud hops he s
el!” , . . . ,
They then started, leaving the owner of the brig to
inn, rave, and curse.
As Kelly put his foot on deck there came a cry of—
“ Sail oh!” , . ,
Ze h went up, and at once declared it be the English
miser, but hull down.
Zeph at once gave his orders, and soon the W lute
agle stood under press Ox sail to tb° northward.
Zeph knew that nothing n. would save them but a
ght pair of heels. ,
The wind was one just suited to the craft, and soo n ie y
were again out of sight. ,
Meanwnile, the American had taken care to cross ie
track of the cruiser, and to put up signals of distress.
The cruiser at once backed her mainyard and lay to.
The skipper went on board and told his story in exaspe-
rated toner.
“ My in ards is took out,” he began.
He’d been imbibing whisky all day.
“ Hall Columbia, happy land ’
If I ain’t ruined I U be d—d."
The officers heard him with astonishment.
They, however, soon got rid of the drunken Yankee,
and started in | nisuit.
Zeph now txa.mii.cd the map keenly.
There were not only charts, but there were also
“ Memoirs of the So,” which minutely described every
island.
The number of inhabited islands was considerable,
but there were also some that were qurte uninhabited.
Z=ph proposed to make for one of these islands, which
lay under the lea of Tahama, and there remain con-
cealed until the first hue and cry was over.
Kelly at once acquiesced.
lie was, while at sea, completely in the hands of Zeph
in whom, however, he had the greatest confidence.
It was not so many years before that the island to width
Zcphwas about to make his way was the refuge of pi rati al
vessels, the reefs and shoals by which it was surround
affording them protection from their larger pusuers, t «
passages through this dangerous navigation being then
only known to the pirates who frequented there, proved
an additional security.
The largest of the three islands forms a curve like an
open horseshoe to the southward, with safe and protected
anchorage when once in the bay on the southern side.
But previous to reaching the anchorage there are exten-
sive coral reefs through which it is necessary to conduct a
vessel.
This passage was extremely intricate ; but there was
amongst the ship’s charts a very good one of this island,
made by a well known American.
Zcph felt that he could, with the aid of this, conn her
in.
When they were close to the dangerous channel, Zeph
put two of the best men at the wheel, and others as sail
trimmers.
He himself went forward and placed the chart on the
capstan.
The chart was carefully prepared, with every point
marked out clearly.
The islands themselves had been originally composed of
coral rocks, a few cocoa trees raised their heads where
uuC re was sufficient earth for vegetation, while one part
was a tall roc*.
But the chief peculiarity of the islands, rendering them
suitable to those who frequented them, was tire numerous
caves with which the rocks were perforated, some above
high-water mark, but the majority with the sea water
flowing in and out of them, in some cases merely rushing
in, and at high-water falling into deep pools which were
detached from each other when the tide receded; in others
was a sufficient depth of water at all times to allow you
to pull in with a large boat.
It is scarcely necessary to observe how convenient the
higher and drier cave? were as receptacles for articles
which were intended to bo concealed until an opportunity
occurred for disposing of them.
They were soon in the channel, and Zeph quickly showed
of what seamanship ho was capable.
He carefully evadcu „ danger.
He had. however, to be careful, as the breeze had
freshened, and the water was in strong ripples, so that they
could no longer see the danger beneath her bottom.
Half-an-hour later the wind had considerably increased,
and the breakers now turned and broke in wild foam over
the coral reefs in every direction.
The sail was still more reduced on board the White
Eagle, and her difficulties increased fiom the rapidity of
her motion.
A storm-jib was set and the other hauled down, yet,
even under this small sail, she seemed to fly before the
wind.
“ Sail ho ! ” cried the look-out. the young sailor who
had recognised the frigate on the way to Singapore.
Zeph went up with him, and by means of a powerful
glass they made out the Royal George.


But there was little chance of their being seen. They
would have to attend to themselves.
Zeph stood at the bowsprit giving his directions to the
helmsman.
More than onw they grazed the reefs and then were
clear again.
Spars were towed astern, and every means to
to check her way.
They had now no guide but the breaking of the wild
water on each side of them.
“ Starboard a little,” suddenly shouted Zeph. “ Star-
board yet. Steady so,” and he pointed to some smooth
water between the breakers. “ Port a little—steady ! ”
And a few minutes later they were safely at anchor in a
sheltered haven under the lee of the tall rock we have
spoken of.
They were for the present safe.
Then a look-out was sent to the summit of the tall rock,
and he, two houis later, reported the cruiser in sight,
bound for Tahama.
The ruffians knew themselves safe for the present.
They took in all s» ; l, lower ;a tne.r spars, and then went
into one of the' old piratic .1 caves to enjoy themselves,
which, under the circumstances, meant smoking, drink-
ing, and gambling.
There were no nymphs or na'ads to beguile the time in
those diggings, not even me; maids.
CHAPTER CVL
KELLY MAKES A DISCOVERY.
Early next morning Kelly, who liked nothing unless it
was audacious, proposed that next night after dark a select
party in various disguise should visit Tahama, and hear
what was said.
He proposed four sailors in die captain’s gig, himself,
Zeph, and Jean Goujon.
He of course must be carefully Msguiscd. But the
marine was not a Frenchman for nothing.
To him to make up as an English sailor appeared the
easiest thing in the world.
How he was to carry it out was to the vainglorious
Frenchman a mere trifling question.
Of course he must avoid speaking, though for that matter
he might be a Jersey man, even a Frenchman.
Such things had happened.
The island of Tahama was about two hours distant.
It was not their intention to go into the harbour direct,
but to land somewhere up the coast, hide the boat, and
walk into the town.
Kelly had a straw hat, a loose cotton blouse, trousers
ditto, and loose boots, the dress of European cotton
planters.
He further had a pair of spectacles and a riding-whip,
and looked eminently respectable.
Zeph had a similar disguise, while the rest were to
represent sailors, while Salmon Roe was made up as an
overseer.
On reaching the coast they found a small fishing village,
where they could leave the boat and the crew.
It was about a mile from the harbour, and the walk was
a pleasant and shady one.
The three walked along leisurely in conversation, smok-
ing as they went.
They passed several natives, who nodded and laughed,
but luckily did not speak.
Thus they reached Tahama.
They did not care about making a grand entrance, but
worked their way into the town towards the port.
Here were the public buildings, and among others a
grand hotel of two stories high, covering a large space of
ground, and surrounded by gardens.
In these were several tents.
One of these the three took possession of. They were
bell-shaped, and did not reach within three feet of the
ground.
Close at Ivan WnS another one much larger, which was
occupied bv a part,, ot English naval officers.
There was Lieut. '* often, Lord Westport, and the
capt-in they had bamboozled a t Batavia.
Kelly knew them in a moment.
“Yes, sir,” said the latter: “the unhanged rascal
actually supped with us, and invited me to spend a day
or two at bis plantation.”
“The scoundrel!” responded the young lord ; “never
shall I forget his impudence. To invite her Majesty’s
officers to a breakfast! ”
“ The villain must be awfully cunning,” resumed the
other; “while his impudence is something beyond com-
parison.”
“Nothing would astonish me,” said the young noble-
man.
How Kelly chuckled. This was all nuts to him. Hi»
gross vanity was tickled.
Half his crimes were the effect of his inordinate conceit
and vanity.
lie was in rapture ndwhen the waiter came—he spoke
some sort oi Jttngiish—ordered a most gorgeous lunch.
His companions were afraid he would do some rash and
dangerous deed. When exhilarated he was very reckless
arid daring.
They resolved to watch him carefully, lest he should do
anything rash.
But Ned Kelly was too glad in heart to be as mad as h«
sometimes became when under the influence f drink.
He whistled and crowed, but did nothing at all out-
rageous.
Zeph and Salmon Roe kept a constant eye upon him
but he merely cracked a joke or two.
He was even cautious not to raise his voice too high.
He knew it was a peculiar one, and might be recog-
nised.
Presently, the heat increasing, the officers went in, lea>
ing the bushrangers to their devices.
Kelly laughed grimly. He had never enjoyed anything
so much in all his life. It was a splendid joke, and ho
appreciated it.
“ Blow me if I don’t keep it rolling!” ho said with a
hoarse laugh ; “we dine at that there table dot," he added,,
pointing to a bill.
“ Be cautious, Ned,” urged Zeph.
“ I value my neck as much as °nv bloke,” growled
Kelly, “ so don’t you do the blue funk.”
“ All right,” responded Zeph.
They went into caravanserai and secured rooms for the
night.
They reclined on luxurious couches, and drank sangaree
and smoked.
It was unmitigated luxury ; such luxury as is not given
to such villains often to indulge in. This indeed was living
in clover.
Presently they fell asleep, nor woke until the first gong
sounded for dinner.
There was no severe etiquette at that time of year as to
dress. The two supposed planters found no difficulty in-
obtaining seats at table.
They kept at a respectable distance from the officers as
their voices might awaken unpleasant memories.
Kelly revelled vith delight. There was an immense
fund of humour in the man ; of course, rough, vulgar
humour.
He chuckled ovei wliat the officers would say if they
knew their fatal foe, Ned Kelly, was actually in their
midst.
The dinner passed off very well, and then the whole
party adjourned to a large coffee-room and saloon, much
frequented by the elite of the native and European
population.
Kelly and his party sat at a window looking cut
the lively scene.
At eventide all turned oov, and the sound ©f
laughter was voutagi us.


Presently Kelly noticed a familiar voice ; it was that of
Jc-tn Goujon.
“Bigre! mais cola est bicn, vera fine, hootiful,” he
said.
“ Hope the cvacKed idiot won’t be found jut,” growled
Ned.
A'l this moment another voice close at hand startled the
bushranger.
It was that of the Yankee skipper.
“Tarnation snakes!” he said, “but that Ned Kelly’s
a ’cute cuss. Freed me, by gum. Airthquak.es and apple
saurce, but he’s tall!”
“ The vilest vagabond that ever broke the bread of life,”
responded the English captain. “There’s ten thousand
pounds, sovereigns, offered for him.”
“No more!” was all the other said.
“Yes, the daring ruffian has committed more crimes
fhan any other bushranger in the colony,” continued the
irate captain, “ his carcase is worth its weight in gold.”
“ Jehoshaphat!” cried the skipper, “and the mean cuss
cleared me out of thirty thousand dollars ! ’
“ All’s fish to his net, Mr. Caleb,” laughed the Eng-
lish captain ; “ he’s not particular.”
“So I reckon,” answered Caleb, with a growl, “ I wish
I had the varmint by the scruff of his neck.”
“ Pretty stiff chap to deal with, I think,” retorted the
captain, and moved on.
Caleb approached the window and seated himself at a
small vacant table, where he was soon joined by his mate.
“Sawdust and gingerbread!” cried Caleb, “ ain t that
cuss, Kelly, a wonder?”
“What’s up?” asked Sol Jackson.
Caleb told him all he had heard from he Britisher, and
Sol Jackson listened in amazement.
Kelly laughed in his sleeve. This notoriety was almost
too good for him.
He ordered up champagne, nd then, assuming a very
broad Irish accent, spoke—
“ Faith, and you’ll join us?” he said ; “ shure and some-
thing’s upset yer.”
“A blamed vagabond has,” cried Caleb; “but I’m a
ring-tailed roarer, 1 am, and mean to be even with the
alligator.”
“To his confusion, may he never die under a blanket,
but dance upon nothing,” proposed Kelly.
“And me hanging to his heels!” cried Josh Caleb,
«that’s the right grit. I reckon I’d give a few cents to be
Jz'jx fcu see.”
And Josh Caleb told his story, to which the three bush-
rangers listened with deep interest.
Later on the board of green cloth reigned supreme, and
Kelly adjourned to the table.
The play was free, but not very extravagant, yet it was
easy enough to win or lose a good many dollars.
Kelly went in for the highest stakes, and won a goodish
psie.
His luck was something wonderful.
This drew rather more attention to himself than he
liked.
But he had confidence in his disguise, and went on cool
and unabashed. . ,
Presently, however, as the luck changed, he quietly
withdrew, and looked on smoking.
He then sauntered away to where the .English ofiicera
and some of their local friends were playing whist.
He stood gazing at them with a sardonic smile as tney
laughed and joked.
He seemed to stand in a bad pre-eminence over them,
as a fallen angel might have done over the true.
Then he and his comrades moved away once more to
where the American notion-monger, or ocean pedlar, was
holding forth to some of his countrymen as to ins
wrongs.
“He was darned if he war a-goin’ to be streaked by a
beef-catin’ Britisher,” he said, “ and no mistake. He d
bet snakes that he’d be even with him yet.”
And many s’ich a brag and a boast did Be utter, which
were equally r >olish and blatant.
“I suppose,” sa : d Kelly, “you’re not dead on all
Britishers? I m blovved if 1 don’t half think you are a
Britisher yourself.”
“Me!” ejioi lated the Yank with a look in which sur-
prise and indignation struggled for the mastery. The ac-
cusation seemed to almost choke him. “Me a Britisher !”
he rather yelled than asked.
He rose hastily to his feet, and, staring with suppressed
fury at Kelly, cried in livid and angry accent —
“Me a "confounded pumpkin faced Britisher? No,
sirree, I ain’t. I’d sooner go to and pump thunder
—I would—at three cents a clap, than be a confounded
Britisher!”
His patriotism, or rather his mode of proclaiming it,
caused a geneial roar.
“ Well, old horse, you are a screamer, and no mistake.
So come along and have a taste of something better than
salt junk and ration rum.”
“ Slide !” ejaculated the denizen of the stars and stripes.
“ I’m after you as the pinna said to the rabbit.”
Kelly ordered a very recherche supper, and for a couple
of hours feasting was the order of the night.
Then the bushranger® retired, as, indeed, did all in the
house.
I was late.
Kelly was up, however, at a tolerably early hour, and
sat down to a breakfast that would have surprised most
people.
He was a devourer of unconsidercd trifles.
Chops and steaks were nothing to him and his friends.
They determined to keep quiet all day, intending to
stay to dinner once more.
Their object was to try and discover what would bo the
future movements of the English.
This was a matter of life and death to them, as they
could scarely hope to give both of them-the slip.
They were in what truly n ight bo termed a quandary.
It would require all their udacity and luck to get out
of the difficulty.
The day passed in visiting various well-known places
of amusement. . .
As is the case in such latitudes, the night fell suddenly.
The gang hastened back to dinner, and by some
manoeuvring got near enough to the British officers to hear
their conversation.
The English had a separate table, but they were close
to the one occupied by Kelly and others.
Next the captain of the cruiser sat the British con-
sul in plain clothes. , .
“ I think you are right, captain,” he said, “ You had
better start on the backward track, while the brcnchman
cruises about. The fellow is sure to make for Aus-
“ Yes; he’d never be happy out of his old den, re-
marked the English captain, “so to-morrow well start
early, and the lieinc Pomorc can cruise about and search
all the islands. The fellow may lie pt ■da for a few days.
Ned Kelly and the other two exchanged glances. _
As soon as dinner was over they rose ami went to tuoir
rooms.
“ We’d better hook it,” said Kelly.
“ No fear of searching those islands,” said Zoph ; 1 otter
keep quiet. If a stray craft should see us, they rmghfc
dart back.”
“ I trust in you, mate,” urged Kelly-
“ Ho ; let the cruisers get right oil, and then we d make
tracks for New Zealand, stop there a few days, and then
make once more for the colony.”
“ Seed nothing like it,” cried Kelly ; “ a feller feels as
if he can breathe there.”
And so it was decided to take Zeph’s advice, which
Kelly did the more readily that he had a special object in
view, which he did not confide to any of his fellows.
That evening they heard there would ksa kind of hop.


attended by anyone who chose, but not by the higher
classes.
Still it was good enough for Kelly and his accomplices,
ao they went.
It was the usual free-and-easy kind of affair, and the
three men enjoyed themselves.
About an hour after their entrance, they noticed Jean
Goujon and the others of the boat’s crew come in.
They looked very shaky, as if they had made a night of it
They entered an inferior saloon, and Kelly determined
to keep an eye on them.
If Jean Goujon got drunk, he might talk, and in the
exuberance of his good fortune it was a very likely thing
for him to do.
Kelly followed him into the room, and stood closebehind
Jean, who, with the others, was standing at a gin and
whisky bar
“ Safierlote /” cried Jean Goujon, “ve veel drink ze
visky—vat you call a la sanle of ze Engleesh.”
And he threw down two or three dollars.
“I always cypher’d,” said a looker-on; “you Johnny
Grenouilles didn’t cotton to Britishers.”
“ Zat is all change.” cried Jean. “Ze Engleesh and le
Frangais best of friends, since Bong Johnny time, d mm
vieux. Yeel you drinks ?”
“ I reckon that’s Johnny Gudjeon,” whispered a man
close to Kelly. “ Darn my old stockin’s, he’s worth a pot.
Let us off.”
And the two men moved away.
Kelly hurried up to where Jean Goujon stood with his
friends.
They’re spotted him,” hr whispered to an Englisn
sailor of the boat’s crew, “ make your carcases scarce, or
you’ll be copped. Take him with you.”
The man nodded, and two minutes later the party took
their leave.
Kelly and his companions followed their example, and
returned to the hotel.
The English officers had all taken their departure, but
the American colony were all there.
Ouptain Josh Caleb, as he called himself amongst his
own people, had come to Tehama under the escort of the
English sloop of war.
He thought he would thus be safe.
The bushrangers dined as usual at the table d'hote , and
then went to the board of green cloth.
Ned Kelly and Zeph had a long conference, over which
they laughed heartily.
Again they supped with the Yankees, who stood treat
this time, and a crowded affair it was.
They played cards, they drank, they sang, they shouted,
and then the three bushrangers saw Josh Caleb up to
their rooms.
Having nut him in safety on Kelly’s own bed, Zeph
pinned a card to his coat, on which he had written a few
words.
Then the three men went downstairs, paid their bill, and
took their departure.
It was late next morning when Josh Caleb awoke, to
find himself lying full-dressed on a bed in the hotel.
Parched with thirst, his mouth white and hot, he rang
the bell and the waiter came.
“ Water and straight whisky! ” he cried.
The waiter gave him both, and then did a perceptible
grin.
“ What's up, you yaller cuss?” asked Caleb.
The waiter, a Mexican-looking card, pointed to a white
card fastened to a button.
Josh Caleb snatched it and read.
The card was written, or rather printed, by Zeph.
“ You skinny old curse ! don’t brag so much, old nutmeg f
You’ve supped twice with Ned Kelly, and you paid for it.”
Josh Caleb leaped from his bed with a roar, and, hastily
making his toilet, went downstairs, whence he went off to
the American Consul.
That individual was at first incredulous, then appalled.
But what could be done ? There was no man-of-war on
that station, but a swift revenue cutter, which -was at once
despatched.
The fury and indignation of all who heard of the
audacious deed, may be imagined better than it can be
described.
The impudence of this cosmopolitan ruffian was beyond
all bearing.
It thrilled people with astonishment and dread.
CHAPTER CYII.
KELLY PLAYS ANOTHER TOUCH.
ME/*‘"while, the chuckling bushrangers had made off;
they knew that the only two vessels they had to fear
were conspicuous bp their absence.
They, therefore, did not hesitate to hire a conveyance
to the village, where their boat awaited them.
Dismissing the driver at a small inn frequented by
sailors ; they found it- just open.
It was nearly daylight.
Their own crew was there, quiet, and ready for orders.
Not a moment was wasted; a rapid breakfast was con-
sumed, and then they -went to their boat and hoisted sail.
No one had the slightest suspicion that anything was
wrong, and no notice w r as taken of the escape of the
nefarious gang.
As soon as they reached the cave m which the vessel
was concealed, a look-out was sent to the top of the rock
to keep a sharp look-out.
One of these w r as Jennings, the shrewd young man-of-
war’s man, a sharp, clever fellow.
(To he continued.)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“ The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.—A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
Love and Adventure. Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures ol
Run away from Home. —A Life of a Scapegrace.
Adventure. The Cloud King.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Haif a- Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Million. Tiuin.
The Idol’s Eye. —Adventures in Search One in a Thousand.
of a Big Diamond. Andrew Lorrimer.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough Robert the Rover.
Diamond Polished. The Mutiny of the “Thunde.*.”




• ' ' ■ ' 90.
Abost twelve he signalled Zeph, who at once went up,
and saw a sharp-looking schooner dashing through the
channel under heavy press of sail.
“The revenue cutter," remarked Zeph.
“Yes, sir,” replied Jennings.
And the two went below to report to Kelly. His ad-
vice was to haul out at once, and be ready to start as
nighc fell.
“ You’re right, mate,” answered Zeph, “ But not just
yet; wait for tho tide.”
Of course that was a matter of which Kelly understood
nothing, so he acquiesced.
They spent the day in the cool caves.
“Ned Kelly,” suddenly said Zeph, “do you know that
somewhere in these caves are hidden lots of tin ? ”
“ One of our sort was took and offered, if his life was
spared, that he would show them where over a million,
in plate, jewels, diamonds, and money, was concealed.”
“ And the duffers refused ? ”
“Yes.”
“ And what did they do with the bloke ? ” asked Kelly,
with a slight show of interest.
“ Hanged him,” replied Zeph.
“A very stupid thing to do with a cove,” philosophically
remarked Kelly; “ seems to me about the silliest thing
yer can do with a fellow.”
And the bushranger unconsciously said in other words
what a great author had said before him.
“ I tell you what, Zeph, do you think it’s true ?” asked
Kelly, after a pa%se.
“ i do,” was the answer.
“ Now, look you here, my shaver,” said Ned Kelly, in a
low voice, “ tare an’ ouns—what do you think we’ll be
after?”
“ I don’t know,” cried Zeph.
“ Get away slick and straight to the Colony—do a good
stroke of business and then back here,” exclaimed Kelly ;
“is this the spot? ”
“ I believe it is,” continued Zeph; “ all I know is that
not one, but twenty, old salts have told me the treasure is
here or hereabouts.”
“ Then, curse me for donkey’s father if we won’t find it,”
exclaimed Kelly; “we must hook it, keep emse for a time.”
After some farther conversation orders were given to be
ready.
The men were treated with excessive liberality and then
put on careful rations.
“ Safety before everything,” urged Zeph, and the men
were compelled to own that he was right.
The cutter was slowly warped out by boats, and before
daybreak was all-a-taunt-o.
'Pile morning was bright, clear, and hazy. The cutter
got clear therefore without difficulty.
An hour later, with every stitch of sail on, the White
Eagle was steering direct for New Zealand.
Except on rare occasions, the peaceful ocean keeps true
to its name. Storms are of rare occurrence, but when they
do come round they are excessively severe.
The White Eagle soon lost light of laud. Not a sign of
hull and sail.
The pirates felt considerably relieved in their minds, and
were to give themselves up to enjoyment.
Several vessels passed ‘them, but none of them were,
to all appearance, worth going out of their way for.
Ordinary merchant vessels were not of sufficient impor-
tance to take them out of their track.
It happened at this time two of the South American
republics were at war—what about nobody knew and nobody
cared.
The simple fact existed, and the consequence was both
issued letters of marque,
The two same republics are at war at the present
moment.
Zeph had* heard of the circumstance at Tahiti.
He had determined, before making his way direct to New
Zealand, to make a call on the western coast of America.
There are worse places than Callao and Peru, in vrMsh
to spend a sailor’s orgie.
So Zeph determined to make “a slide” for Callao,
steering direct for New Zealand.
There was plenty of time ; plenty of money, and no
hurry.
Three days passed away and then a sail was sighted. She
looked a suspicious looking customer, and Zeph, recollect-
ing what he had heard at Papiete, thought he would be
careful.
The White Eagle was well manned, but her crew was
not quite strong enough for a man-of-war.
As soon as the vessel hove in sight, Zeph examined her
keenly.
As she came nearer he guessed at once that she was a
privateer in the service of one of the republics.
She carried fourteen guns, and seemed through the glass
to have a very large crew.
She seemed to have taken notice of the White Eagle,
for as soon as she perceived her she bore down.
The two vessels then spoke, and the cutter found that
the Pride of Lima was in the service of Peru, manned by
Americans chiefly, but strangely enough her chief officer
was an Englishman.
The supposed yacht made signals and suggested an
interview.
The privateer, the Pride of Lima, at once agreed, and
the White Eagle put out the captain’s cutter.
Kelly, Zeph, and Salmon Roe went in the boat and
boarded the privateer.
On the deck of the vessel, which was wonderfully well
manned, stood a host of officers in deference to the
British flag.
The first man who leaped on deck was Zeph. There
was something of the real naval officer about him, despite
his fall.
“ May I ask what vessel is this?” he asked hotly.
“Pride of Lima,” answered one of the officers, an
Englishman, “ letter of marque under the republic of
Peru.”
“ Happy to have the pleasure ot making your acquain-
tance,” replied Zeph. “ Ours is the yacht White Eagl>»„
this Mr. Higgins our owner”—pointing to Ned. “We
are doubtful about our longitude and latitude.”
‘‘ We will give you every information,” was the polite
answer of the officer. “In the meantime, pray let me
offer you lunch.”
As a matter of course, this was an offer not to be re-
fused, and they politely accepted.
From the moment that Zeph had spoken, a young
officer had fixed his eyes upon him in surprised amaze-
ment.
He looked, and looked, when he disappeared, with &
thoughtful countenance.
Before lunch was put on the table, the young officer
went down, making some excuse to speak to the first
lieutenant.
He fixed his gaze on Zeph all the time.
That worthy noticed it, and began to feel very une*oy
and uncomfortable.
Then the young man went out, and the lunch v;af
ready.
Everything was excellent, and the pirates did justice tf
all.
Presently Zeph looked up, and saw the face of ths
young officer peering through the skylight.
He began to feel very uncomfortable and anxious fci
departure.
But of course they must abide their time.
Presently the captain bade the first lieutenant give
them their reckoning, after which he showed them over
his ship.
Presently Zeph found himself close to the young
officer.
“ Uncle Alfred,” said a pained voice.
The man known as Zeph staggered back.


Silence!—who spoke?—lean wot think what you mean,”
gasped Zeph.
“ Uncle Alfred*.” was the calm response of the other,
“ I knew you at once. Deny me, do with me what you
think proper, but do not attempt to deceive me.”
“ Where are yim bound for ?” asked Zeph, hoarsely.
“ Calloa,” was the answer.
“ It is well ; meet me there in a week,” replied Zeph.
“You sh 11 tell me all.”
“ I am second lieutenant,” said the young man, “ and
its an easy enough berth—but will you really meet me?”
“ Yes,” was the hurried answer.
The letter of marque was a brig of fourteen guns, and
with a goodly crew.
Zeph at once re-entered his boat and rowed back to his
ovm ship.
He was very much upset.
The man had been a very different person from what he
Cas now.
Some folly, some imaginary wrong, had changed him,
and made him a being of crime.
He was deeply moved, but he made no remark to anyone
Who knows what memories of the past had been evoked
by this extraordinary meeting—what strange feelings, long
since, he believed, dead, were aroused within the bosom
of the man of blood and crime ?
He afterwards volunteered some explanation to Kelly,
but entered into no particulars.
He seemed p changed man, his brow being overcast
with thought.
The two vessels parted company, each going its own way,
and then Zeph proposed that they should visit Callao.
Kelly was in his hands.
If he had said go to China, it would have been all the
same.
Several days passed away, during which they kept aloof
from all vessels.
Once more they assumed the characters of Americans,
as more likely to ensure them popularity where they were
going
Lieutenant Charles Warner, of the Warspite privateer,
had given Zeph an address at an hotel named the Lima.
Dressing himself as much like a gentleman as possible,
and looking a rough one at all events, Zeph went to the
place.
He inquired if the young officer was in, and was at
once ushered into a room where he awaited him.
“ So,” said the young man, gravely, “we meet again.
But how?”
“ Charles,” replied the other. “ Though how you could
know me after all those years I cannot tell.”
«Remember, we met in Loudon some years ago, after
your ”
He hesitated.
“Crime,” was the other’s response.
“ Yes, I remember. I was then a mate on board a
vessel bound for Australia,” the ether went on.
“ But why did you leave the navy ?” asked his nephew.
“What could have possessed you to do anything so
polish?”
“My boy, ray captain was a fiend.” re, pi id Zeph, “ with
the exterior of a quiet gentleman. He couid torture anyone.
There was no galling insult that imagination could devise
that he would not indulge in. When under the influence
of drink he taunted me—told me 1 was not worth my salt.
“But would you like to hear my story, boy?” asked
Zeph, huskily. “ Give me wine—and do not interrupt,
above all”
’lhe young officer carried out his uncle’s suggestions,
ana then shut the door and locked it..
CHAPTER CYIIL
CAPTAIN ZEPH’S STOUT,
The e a'-officer’s narrative was rather discursive and inter-
laced with expletives.
We will not, therefore, tell it in his pwn words, but
give a summary of the narrative.
Zeph was the third sou of a country squire, with more
pride than purse.
His estate was worth about two thousand a year, and
was strictly entailed, and ail would go to the eldest Son.
while the second was provided for by his mother’s por-
tion.
Alfred and his sister were dependent on what their
father could save, and that was not likely to be much, with
the father’s habits.
He lived well, kept a good table, and was fond of a-
hundred-and-twenty shilling port.
He was liable to gout, and when under its influence was
hot, fierce, and irascible.
Alfred, as we shall for the present call him, was of a fiery
disposition himself, as was shown by his constant trouble
at school.
He was frank, generous, quick mischievous, and
had a large portion of what sailors call devil, which was
openly displayed, while a much larger portion was deposited
in his brain and bosom.
His ruling passion was pride, accompanied by a great
deal of obstinacy.
He was quick at learning, but up to all sorts of tricks
and mischief.
In the robbery of orchards he was great, and immense
at the stealing of eggs.
He was cunning, and contrived to carry off the new-
laid eggs with practised dexterity.
At home he was the plague of his sister. Without in-
tending it he was cruel.
When fourteen years of age he went home for his noli-
days. His father was ill—suffering from his periodical
accession of gout.
It was very fine weather, and cherries were ripe. The
father strictly prohibited any fruit from being plucked
except by the gardener, a cannie old Scotchman.
But when the cat is away, the mice will play; aud these
orders were not strictly obeyed when the father was ill.
Alfred and his sister went out one afternoon when
luncheon was over in search of an alfresco dessert.
They put a ladder to a cherry-tree, and began their
feast.
Just as they were enjoying themselves to the full, the
cannie Macdermott came in sight.
“Mercy! the world’s coming a to an end,” he cried. “Did
you ever see the like o’ that?”
Lucy, the sister, lost her presence of mind and fell
with a sharp cry.
Alfred rushed to her, tried to lift her up, and found
her ankle sprained.
“You hulking brute!” cried Alfred, and hit the Scotch-
man a smart blow between the ey^s.
He then turned to help his ulster, leaving the Scotchman
furious.
Half an hour later, Alfred was summoned to his irate
father’s presence.
The parent was furious.
Ilis cherries had been consumed, his daughter’s ankle
sprained, and his trusty gardener assaulted.
A violent scene ensued. The father was foolish enough
to strike his son with a crutch, upon which Alfred
declared he would run away to sea.
“All you are fit for, you thievish rascal!” roared the
infuriated father.
Alfred turned to go, but the father rang a boll violently,
and Mac appeared with suspicious alacrity.
“ Look Master Alfred up,” was all he said.
The Scotchman, a wiry and powerful man—he was very
vindictive, and had many tricks played on him by Alfred
—caught the other by the arm.
Alfred was too proud to resist uselessly, so he was taken
to a room from which escape was impossible, and locked in.
Next day he was taken by the gardener to a rather
severe school, were lads were prepared for the navy.


At Christmas he cams home, and nothing was said of
the past, but the father and son were never cordial again.
In due time Aliftd passed his examination and entered
the service.
lie distinguished nunself by bio activity and general
good conduct
At last he was promoted, and went home on a visit.
Though always rough he was ready and courteous,
especially to his sister.
But his parent was not disposed to have him at home
long.
He applied to the Admiralty for employment.
Two days later his father had a big bouncing official
communication, announcing his son's appointment to the
Uigby brig of eighteen guns at Portsmouth.
fie was told to join his ship at once and take up his
commission. .
Alfred started next day, and, on his arrival at Ports-
mouth, put up at Billing’s, as a matter of course.
It was the resort of all the naval aristocracy, and near
the admiral’s office.
Alfred was now above putting up at the midshipmen s
favourite resort, the Blue Posts.
Perhaps this arose from modesty, and a desire to spare
his old comrades the trouble of touching their hats too often.
He then made inquiries for his captain.
He did not put up at the George, nor did he mess at
the Crown ; he was not at the Fountain, nor the Parade
Coffee-house.
After considerable research he found that he patronised
the Star and Garter.
To the Star and Garter he therefore went, and asked for
Captain Ledley Gordon.
It seemed to Alfred a strange place for a captain, as it
■was a notorious resort of warrant officers, mates and mid-
shipmen.
But there he was, and sending up his name he was told
to go upstairs, where he was introduced to the presence
of his aristocratic chief.
Captain Ledley Gordon was seated in a small room,
with the remains of a glass of brandy and water before
him; his feet were on the fender, and several official docu-
ments lying before him.
He rose as the other entered, and let him see a short,
square-built frame with a strong projection of the sphere,
or what the Spaniards call harruja.
The abnormal rotundity of corporation was, however,
supported by a pair of legs that might have honoured a
Bath-chairman.
He was rather good-looking, with a pleasant smile upon
his lips and a deep dimple in his chin.
His eyes were peculiar; they were small but piercing.
“ Happy to see you, sir,” said Captain Sedley Gordon ;
“ proud that you have joined my ship. Sit down lieu-
tenant.”
Alfred was delighted. This was the sort of man to be
comfortable with.
“ I always take care to know something beforehand
ibout my officers,” he went on. “ I look for good officers
And gentlemen, one ‘ scabby sheep ’ can spoil a ship.
Above all no coarse manners, execrations, or abusive
language. I have taken the liberty to make inquires
about you—and everything 1 hear is to your advantage.”
What could the other do but bow and thank the kind
speaker ?
The captain then continued that he sliould sail in a few
days.
“ You had better meet me on board at nine o’clock,
when your commission can be read, and after that I beg
you will consider yourself your own master for a few
days, as I presume you have some little arrangements to
make."
The young man bowed with a flush of pleasure.
“I am aware,” continued the urbane captain, “that
there are many little comforts which officers wish to
attend to, such as fitting their cabins, and looking to their
men, and other nameless things which to pass their
time and break up the monotony of sea life.”
“ You are very good, sir,” replied Alfred.
“Not at all,” replied the captain graciously ; “fort;
years have I trod the planks, man and boy, and not with
any great success, as you may perceive by the rank I
now hold, for I here tit over a humble glass ot grog
instead of joining my brother captains in their claret at
the Crown.
Alfred could only bow.
“ I have sisters to keep ”he went on. “ But never
mind. To-morrow at nine o’clock.” _
Alfred went back to his inn thinking how fortunate he
was in having such an honest, straightforward, bold
British tar of a captain.
He then ordered dinner at the George, and afterwards
strolled out to mike his purchases, and give a few oxders
for a few articles for sea service.
lie then fell in with some old messmates, who con-
gratulated him on his promotion, and insisted he should
wet his commission by giving a dinner.
This he did.
At seven o’clock next morning he went down to break-
fast in a speck and span new uniform, with an immensely
large epaulette stuck on the right shoulder.
Presently he sallied forth, in his own conceit, as hand-
some a chap as ever buckled a sword belt.
He skimmed with a light and joyous foot down High-
street, and on reaching New Sully Port was hailed, but
made no answer until he came to the point.
“Where to, sir?” asked the waterman, as soonaa Alfred
had secured a boat.
“ Brig Digby,” he answered.
The waterman simply heaved a sigh and said not a word,
at which Alfred was rather pleased than not. He preferred
his own thoughts to anything else at that moment.
The brig proved to be a beautiful vessel. She mounted,
as wc know, eighteen guns.
Alfred’s astonishment was great when he found the
pennant was up for punishment.
Of course he took it for granted that some aggravated
offence, such as mutiny, had been committed.
Seeing Alfred was an officer, he was at once admitted
alongside.
So he paid the waterman, who went away.
As Alfred went up the side he saw a poor fellow spread-
eagled up to the gratings, while the captain, officers, and
ship’s company stood round witnessing the athletic dex-
terity of a boatswain’s mate, who, by the even, deep, and
parallel marks of the cat on the white back and shoulders of
the patient seemed to be perfectly master of his business.
All this did not surprise the young lieutenant, but, after
the mild conduct of his captain on the previous day, he
was amazed to hear him using language in direct violation
of the second article of war.
Execrations and curses pour out of his mouth with a
volubility equal to that of the most accomplished Mott on
the Point.
“ Boatswain’s mate,” yelled the captain, “do your duty
better, or by I’ll have you up, give you four dozen,
and then disrate you. One would think—your- you were
flapping flies off a cat’s back instead of flogging a scoundrel
with a hide as thick as a buffalo's.”
While the captain was delivering this elegant speech
the victim had received four severe dozen, which the
master-at-arms had counted out and reported duly to the
captain.
The wretched creature turned his head over his shoulders
with an imploring look, but it was utterly in vain.
Alfred all this time, appalled and horrified, watched the
countenance of the captain, and the peculiar expression
he had not been able to decipher at his first interview he
now read most clearly—it was utterly malignant cruelty,
and supreme delight in torturing his fellow-creatures.
He appeared to take a diabolical delight in the hateful
operation which they were compelled to witness.


Now the second boatswain’s mate* commenced opera-
tions with a fresh cat, and gave a lash across the back of
the prisoner that made Lieut. Alfred start.
“ One,” said the master-at-arms, in a droning voice,
eginniug to count.
“ One !” roared the infuriated captain. “Do you call
that one ? it’s not a quarter of one. Hang you, you are
only fit for a fly-flapper at a pork-shop. I’ll disrate you,
dang yer. Is that the way to handle a cat ?” and then
losing all presence of mind in his blind fury, “ I’d show
you how how to do it—if I dared. Where’s the boat-
swain ?”
“ Present,” said a stout, gigantic, hulking ruffian, a left-
handed fellow, who wore a blue uniform coat and a plain
anchor button, holding his hat in his left hand, and
BtrOkJng his hair down his forehead with his right.
“ Give that fellow a dozen, sir,” said Captain Gordon,
“and if you favour him, I’ll put you in irons and stop
your liquor.”
Tom Best was the boatswain’s name, and singularly
enough the last part of the threat with him was worse
than the first.
He began, as the saying is, to peel. Off came his
spacious coat and other garments followed. Then he
rolled up his shirt sleeves above his elbow and showed an
arm and a back very like the Farnese Hercules, which no
doubt all our readers have seen at the foot of Somerset
House.
The mild and elegant commentator on the articles of
war, seized the cat.
The handle was two feet long, one inch and three quar-
ters thick and covered with red baize.
The lashes of this terrible weapon were three feet long,
nine in number.
Tom Best, whose scientific display in this part of his
art had no doubt procured him his warrant as a boatswain,
handled his cat as one who'knew it well—looked at it from
top to bottom, cleared all the tails combing them out with
his fingers, stretched out his left leg, and measuring his
distance with an accurate eye, raised his cat high in the
air with his left hand, his right still holding the top of the
tails as if to restrain their impatience, when, giving his
arm and body a full swing, embracing three fourths of the
circle, he inflicted a tremendous stroke on the back ol the
unfortunate culprit.
The captain nodded approbation.
The poor fellow lost his breath from the force of the
blow, and the lash of the cat coming from an opposite
direction to the first four dozen cut the flesh diamond-wise,
bringing blood at every blow.
It is not necessary to harrow the reader's feelings by
continuing to describe a scene now happily impossible.
When the sickening spectacle was over Alfred went up
and touched his hat to the captain.
“ Oh ! you’ve come,” he said ; “ pipe belay there —send
everybody aft in the quarter deck.”
Alfred’s commission was then read, after which the
captain ordered Ins gig to be manned and prepared to go
on shore.
Remembering his promise tne day before Alfred went
ip to him.
“ You were kind enough, sir, yesterday to say I might
spend a day or two on p bore,” he said, “ with your per-
mission.”
“ Shore, sir, he cried, “and who is to carry on the duty
if you go on shore. Shore! no, sir, you’ve had enough.
Th i service is uoing to the dogs now. No, sir, stay on
board, or I’ll break you like an egg-shell before you’ve
taken t’ e shine out of your brand-new epaulettes. Stay
on board and do your duty.”
The young officer mildly suggested that he had promised
him leave ; he retorted—
• This is a real occurrence, rather tamed down than exaggerated. We
rive some of the sickening details, because it is true. Many persons will
remember the painful fact. Fortunately there are few of the old school
left in the British navy.
“ Perhaps I did, bat it was only to got you oa board
I’m up to all your tricks—when you get on shore, there’s
no getting you on board again. No—now I’ve got you I’U
keep you.”
And turning his back he went ove the other side with
a malicious scowl on his face.
Alfred now took the opportunity of making acquaintance
with the first lieutenant, who readily told him that the
skipper was the most notorious tyrant and bully in the
service.
“ But keep your weather eye open,” said the other,
“ and he can only annoy you.”
And Alfred determined at once to look cut for squalls.
Three days later they sailed for the West Indies.
Alfred seldom came into contact with his captain except
on duty.
He was cold, distant, and respectful, and avoided all
contact more than he could help.
They reached the Kingston, Jamaica, where they were
to remain some time ; and here, under the eye of the
port admiral, Captain Gordon had to be careful.
The officers got leave in turns, and availed themselves
of it freely.
The first lieutenant, Arnold, introduced Alfred into
several families.
Shortly after their arrival they were invited in common
with most of the officers to a good ball.
Here Alfred danced with a young lady named Celestine,
a Creole, a daughter of French parents, herself bom at
New Orleans.
She was a very beautiful girl. Alfred bad met her once
or twice in society and been very much struck by her.
While dancing they came almost face to face with Cap-
tain Gordon.
Alfred saw a fearful scowl on nis face.
The girl shivered.
“ Are you not well, miss ?” asked the young officer,
“ Will you rest?”
“ Yes, it was only that horrid man,” she answered. “ I
detest him. He persecuted me with his attentions a year
ago, and when I refused him, threatened me awfully. Do
you know him?”
“ He ia my captain,” was the grave reply.
“ 1 am sorry,” she said.
And the subject dropped for the time.
“ He is coming this way,” she whispered presently in an
agitated tone. “ Secure the next dance ; it is vacant, i
can then refuse him.”
Of course Alfred did not hesitate.
•< Miss Laferl,” said Captain Gordon, in his most urbane
manner, “ may I ask for the next dance ?
“ My tablets are full,” she answered putting her arm
in that of Alfred as the music began.
“ But this gentleman has just danced with you," he con-
tinued. “ Surely he will resign you to me.”
“ I must decline the exchange,” she answered, and drew
Alfred away.
Captain Gordon stood petrified, quivering with rage.
But he was helpless.
He was not on his own quarter deck now.
Still he bided his time.
He would be revenged.
He, however, made no more advances to Celestine
Laferl that evening.
This incident naturally made the young couple more
intimate, and before they parted they were a'? meed.
Early next morning Alfred went on board tend returned
to his duty.
The captain took no notice of him-
At length came, in routine, his turn for going oa
shore.
He was refused in language more energetic than
refined.
« You’ve had your answer, sir.”
“ I have, sir,” retorted Alfred ; “ but it is unusual, air,
to alter the routine arrangements),”


“ Mutiny, by heaven !” cried the captain. “ I stop your
leave altogether.”
“ Then, sir, I shall write a letter to the admiral,” said
Alfred respectfully, “which I shall trouble you to for-
ward.”
“ I shall not send it."
“You nave said that publicly. S'r,” Alfred went on
calmly, “in the presence of the officers and ship’s com-
pany. I shall forward it myself, asking why my leave is
stopped.”
The captain, who was an arrant coward, at once toned
down. ....
It was not his wish to have an official inquiry into the
state of his ship.
He knew that officers and men would all testify against
him.
He went below, and presently sending for the first
lieutenant, bade him let the second have his usual leave.
“Be careful,” said the first “I never saw such a
devil’s gleam in a man’s eye !”
Alfred went on shore and called on the parents of Ccles-
tine.
They were plain, simple people, thinking only of the
happiness of their daughter.
Alfred asked for time, that is until he made his next step.
This was agreed to, and they were regularly affianced.
Celestine had a small fortune, which at the death of
her parents would be doubled.
This important step settled, the young lieutenant asked
the girl to show him something of the town.
It was a cool and pleasant day, and Celestine readily
acquiesced,
Presently they passed an hotel, on the steps of which
stood Captain Gordon and other officers of similar rank.
Alfred saluted, and the captain returned his salute with
ironical politeness, at the same time nudging the man next
to him, and saying something which aroused a roar of
laughter.
Alfred’s cheeks burned.
He knew the coward had said something derogatory to
the girl he loved, but he was powerless.
Celestine had simply turned her head with indignant
scorn when she saw the other.
“Has that man much power over you, Alfred?” she
asked patiently.
“ He can do nothing as long as I do my duty strictly,”
he answered.
“There is a snake look in his eye,” she went on,
“ which makes me shudder. If he can do you an injury
he will.”
“ I fear him not,” was the answer.
They spent some happy hours together.
Alfred returned and dined with the parents.
He spent several pleasant hours, and then, fear’ng to
outstay his welcome, left.
Strolling about, he entered an hotel where there was a
large billiard-room, much frequented by the officers of the
fleet.
The first lieutenant was there, and with him Alfred
shook hands.
The captain was playing at a neighbouring table. He
was very excited, evidently from drink.
When he saw Alfred he chuckled, and said loud enough
for everyone to hear—
“ What flats young fellows are to be picked up by a
Creole girl I never knew one worth having by a
respectable man.”
“Liar!” exclaimed Alfred, mad with rage and passion,
drawing his dirk and stabbing him.
He then, m the confusion, fled.
The night aT partially restored his senses.
Recovering his coolness, he obtained a boat, went on
board, secured bit money and plain clothes, and again
went on shore.
Ere daybreak lie wis on board an American vessel
bound for Galveston, in Texas.
“ I was reckless,” he continued. “Iw as reckles
and desperate. I joined a slaver, and so on from bad
to worse.
“ I did lose the girl, and her loss turned my heart to
stone. Then I committed another desperate crime,
and was sent to prison. From there I escaped.
“ I am an outlaw, and I have been a wander®” ever
since.
“ He did not die,” said Charles Warner, “but expect-
ing death he exonerated you in every way. Vou might
have got off with light punishment.”
But, my boy, 11 replied Zeph, whose real name we
need not give, all that is ancient I have
become a wild man 5 everyone’s hand is against me, as
mine is against everybody’s. Forget me ; never say to
any that we have met. I could not if I wished it retun
to society.”
“ You will think better of it, Uncle Alfred,” continues
the warm-hearted young man. *“ Ihere are other careers
open to you besides the navy. In some obscure country
retreat you might outlive all this.”
“ No, my choice is made,” hoarsely cried Zeph. “I am
not sorry we have met, because it shows me there is
some good in this world.”
And he would talk no more of himself, but asked
questions of others, of those he had known in happier days.
The cutter had not entered the port and an hour after
the meeting was over was again upon tne high seas on her
way to New Zealand.
After a prosperous voyage they reached a small and in-
significant port on the Australian coast.
°Here they agreed to remain a few days to take in water
and fresh provisions.
But the great question now arose as to what was best
to be done.
Kelly was tired of the sea. He was eager for snore
once more.
Their plunder fairly divided would give them a good
start.
But what about the vessel ?
Could anything be done to retain it as a last resource
in case of future complications ?
Zeph thought not.
There was no place where it could by a®y possibdity be
secured.
Besides, its discovery would compromise them.
Their return would be known.
“ What’s your game, then ?” asked Kelly.
“ Scuttle her and land in boats,” was the answer, and as
there was no better thing to be done, Kelly sulkily agreed.
After a few days’ rest and recreation, that is of orgies
in sailors’ drinking saloons, it was agreed to start next
day. .
Zeph and Kelly had stayed on shore during the whole
time, and kept aloof from the men.
They occupied rooms in a boarding-house, end b re
lived several clerks and others.
Few had cared to inquire who the two strangers were
who spent their money so lavishly.
They paid their way and were quiet, which was all the
landlady cared about.
At dinner two clerks were in conversation.
“ Russell, up at the custom house, is iu a fidget about
the strange vessel,” said one ; “ he strongly suspects her.”
“‘lu what way?” asked the other in a low tone, but
quite audible to Kelly.
“Thinks she's the missing Snake,* answered the other.
•« He has telegraphed to Hobart Town for a man-of-war.”
“ Good thing for Russell, if he’s right,” responded his
companion; “ lucky dog.”
Kelly and Zeph exchanged glances. There appeared to
be some good fortune on their side.
They went on with their dinner quietly; when it was
concluded, sat as usual for a few moments.
Zeph, however, slipped out and had the luggage sent
down to the boat.


An hour later the two men left.
“ Mr. Bene,” said Mrs. Jones, the landlady, when they
were gone, to one of the speakers, “ you’ve lost me two
good lodgers—they’ve gone away in a huff.”
“ What do you mean ?” asked Bene.
‘ Your talking about the ship in that way sent them
off,” she continued; “paid their bill, saying they were
in a hurry.”
“What do you mean?” cried the puzzled man. “I
do not understand.”
“That was I believe, the captain and first officer of
the vessel yonder,” she answered. “ 1 watched them while
you were speaking, anu they exchanged queer looks.”
“Oh, Lord!” erica ‘he man. “What a fool 1 have
been,” and he rushed oat.
He went at once to the customs, and from there he and
the discomfited Mr. Russell had the satisfaction of seeing
the White Eagle making seaward, with all sail set.
“ Comes of jabbering,” said Kelly, with a laugh,
“might have jugged us up if they’d have held their
tongues.”
“ Just so,” remarked Zeph, who since the meeting with
his nephew had been very much changed in manner. He
was subdued, and appeared to have that strange feeling
which sometimes prevades the human frame—that some-
thing is going to happen.
“ Cheer up, old cockalorum,” said Kelly ; “ a cup too
low; take a stiff one,” and he mixed him a very stiff one.
Zeph took it with a sigh then, and then another, and
before an hour was over all his good resolutions were gone.
After a prosperous voyage they came within sight of
Port Macquarie heads one dark night.
The boats were put out, and every man took his kit,
which was necessarily restricted.
The carpenter and others had been at work. Holes
had been bored in various places. As soon as all but
three were on board the boats, the plugs ware pulled up,
and the water rushed in rapidly through the leaks.
Then away for the joys of shore.
CHAPTER CIX.
AT THE TREMONT.
Tct whole gang landed at Port Macquarie, and here the
boats were subjected to the same treatment as the ship.
‘X hey then separated, making an appointment to meet
at Kelly’s old hut that day month, by which time probably
they would find a city too hot to hold them.
The three inseparables, Kelly, Zeph, and Roe, found
•their way into Sydney, and went first to a rough sailor’s
boarding-house, where they hired rooms.
Here they sent for a hair-dresser, and had their frightful
•wigs and beards trimmed to more civilised dimensions.
They then sent for a ready-made clothier, and selected
good but not too flashy clothes.
There remained some further disguise. To go to a
theatrical costumier, if there had been such a thing in
■Sydney, would have excited suspicion.
But Jews and other fences are always in possession of
such things to oblige their customers.
So the three, having got their boxes packed to be handed
over to a porter, went out.
They easily found the mat, they wanted, who was a
clever manipulator.
When they came out they not only had very fine heads
of hair and beards, but their skins had been bronzed a
little more than Nature had done it.
3ielly had recourse to his false nose only on rare occa-
sions, but he always kept it about him.
Two vessels had come that day into harbour. They
hired a truck, sent for their goods, and then ordering the
man to follow them, wont to the Tremont, where they
intimated that they had not been comfortable at the
Continental, and so had moved.
They were, of course, warmly received.
'XV' Tremont, though, not a first-class hotel, was an
expensive one. It was a good deal frequented by actors
and other class, drawn by the gold fever.
Wherever there is money there will flock adventurers of
both sexes.
The Tremont had several of these now, mea of rank in
their own country, but chevaliers d'imhisfrie all the same.
There were many of th« opposite sex who called them-
selves by big names am# «me were very fascinating.
The three men were Uetermined to be very wary. It
was useless to plaj' the fine gentleman; but they could do
the nouveau riche with ease.
After dinner Kelly induced Zephto come into the read-
ing-room, which at that hour was deserted. He got him
to look over a file of the Melbourne Argus since the day of
their departure.
There was enough and to spare about Kelly and his
gang.
All that was known of their misdeeds in California and
Tahiti was recorded.
Both the cruisers had been some days in Sydney, and
they read the following in the papers :
“It is not believed that the villains will venture back to
the colony, so that we have doubtless seen the last of the
detestable gang.
“ The general idea is that they will run aground in some
quiet cove, disperse, and spend their ill-gotten gains.
“The colony is well rid of the scoundrels, who will
doubtless get hanged elsewhere.”
Kelly laughed, and it was not a pleasant laugh to hear
“ We’ll show them a thing or two, I calk’late, as the
Americans say,” remarked Kelly; “ oh—what’s the matter
—what makes yer so white about the gills V ”
“ Listen. Second edition:—
“ * The Snake has been found in an almost sinking state
She had evidently been imperfectly scuttled. She is being
towed in, a powerful double gang working at the pumps.
“ ‘ Doubtless the nefarious crew is again amongst us,
ready for new acts of villainy.’ ”
“ That’s a boss of another colour,” said Kelly, grimly ;
“we must look out for squalls. The cursed reward will
set every gaping fool looking out for Ned Kelly.”
“ Just so,” said Zeph, “but I ain’t afraid of many, un-
less it be Tom Conquest. That fellow has got an eye to
business.”
“ him !” hissed Kelly, in a ferocious tone. “ He’d
better not meddle too much with this cove. I mean to
tree him yet.”
“Be careful,” continued Zeph. “ Don’t shove your
hand in a wasps’ nest.”
“ I’m no fool,” blurted out Kelly. “ Let’s liquor, my
boy, I’m thirsty.”
Which it appears he always was.
They went now to the grand salon, where music, flirta-
tion and cards appeared to be the great attraction.
There was another room supposed to bo “strictly
private,” in which the game they so well remembered as
having learned at Homburg, baccarat was played.
They strolled in, determined to try their luck.
Imagine their astonishment when, in the head croupier ,
they recognised Count Anatole.
They resolved, however, to keep themselves incognito
for the present.
They played with varying luck, not much either way,
until the croupier was replaced by another.
Then Kelly followed him, and tapping him on the
shoulder, whispered a few words.
“ Count Anatole,” he said, “ have you forgotten our
little job at Homburg ?”
“ Mortbleu!" replied the other, with a frightened look
round the room. “ What does you mean, sure ?”
“ Don’t you remember me, and our meeting at the Little
Rag in London ?” answered Kelly.
“ (Jui. yes—ah! my friend—l lose all again—my moneys
zay go like what you call von o’clock,” he said, with his
old, inimitable shrug; “ and zare is noting for me but to
come out yar.”


“ How d’ye do here ?”
“ Pretty bad. I have noting to begin vith,” he sighed.
“If I had ze moneys 1 start von roulette table, and
make my fortune.”
“ How many chips do ycu want?”
“ Just a few hundreds,” was the answer.
“I’ll find the tin if you’ll go halves,” replied Kelly.
“ I’ve shoved some ochre in the bank.”
“ Vtcioire /” cried Count Anatole.
“Let’s sup by ourselves,” said Kelly.
The Frenchman at once acquiesced, and went to secure
a private room.
The meeting was a jolly onaindeed. The rascals grinned
and roared over the memory of their misdeeds.
They roared, chuckled, and laughed until at last they
were actually tired.
Then over a bowl of pnnch they talked business.
All that was necessary was to have a suite of furnished
rooms, which could be done with ease, as Kelly, as Mr.
Fellowes, had a banker’s account.
The count knew where to get a roulette table.
Then cards of invitation would be printed, as the affair
was to be select and private.
All that much money was wanted for was to provide for
a run against the table.
“Here is no such ting as lose,” said the count confidently.
Another bowl of punch, and then the quartette of con-
spirators separated.
It was rare fun.
Not that Kelly meant to keep it up long.
It might serve to hoodwink the police for some time, but
finally might attract attention.
Occasionally these private hells were treated with scant
ceremony.
But Ned Kelly insisted that all at first should be fair,
square, and above board.
The count promised.
Next day they easily found what they wanted.
A gentleman had left his apartment vacant for three
months while he wen f to the diggings.
All was at once settled, the place was taken, and the
cards printed.
The count wanted it to be “ Mr. and Madame Fellowes
present their compliments,” offering to find a very eligible
Mrs. Fellowes at a moment’s notice.
But Kelly declined.
It was his policy never to trust a woman. His disguise
would be then at the mercy of one of the frail sex.
Count Anatole resigned his position at the hotel—of
course, it was only during the height of the gold-fever that
this anomalous state of things existed—and went round to
several haunts frequented by professional and other
gamblers.
The programme was seductive. A select dinner party,
followed by a game of chance.
The apartments were extensive, and, by the aid of an
hotel, they contrived to dine forty.
They were an odd assembly. There were newly-arrived
miners, wool merchants, roues, foreign and native adven-
turers. There were a few pigeons, but a great many more
rooks.
But the game was fair.
Kelly and his companions played for the excitement of
the thing. It mattered not to them who were winners or
who were losers.
As Kelly sat down he found himself next to a very hand-
some woman.
She was rather masculine, slight, and had a moustache,
such as is commonly the case with Frenchwomen.
But she had fine eyes, full and handsome mouth, and an
expression that was bewitching.
She fixed her eyes on Kelly with a look of bold admi-
ration.
“ iou are English, sir,” she said with the slightest
accent in the world. She had lived nearly all her life in
England.
“ Yes,” responded Kelly, colouring.
Tina style of woman was rather a novelty to him.
“ I may say that, though I was born in the colony. ’
“Wonderful place,” she went on, taking an admiring
glance at the herculean proportions of Kelly.
French women, as a rule, admire brute strength facr
more than regularity and delicacy of features.
“It is,” responded Kelly.
And then the game began, which slightly checked the
conversation.
But the Frenchwoman contrived to keep the ball roll-
ing.
She talked between the events, and leaned towards
Kelly in a most seductive manner.
She wore an evening dress, exposing to view very fine
shoulders.
Kelly began to return her admiring glances. She only
smiled all the more.
And this lasted all the evening.
During the course of conversation he found that her
name was Madame la Comtesse de Paradis, and that she
lived at the Tremont.
“We shall meet again,” he said in a fervent tone that
to anyone else would have been ludicrous.
“You will sup with me this evening?” she said with »
fascinating smile.
“ I had promised one of my p —friends, I mean,” he
answered.
“ Bring your friends. The Count Anatole will com®
too.”
Kelly, of course, could not refuse, and so the evening
ended.
It would not do to keep it up too late.
It would excite the suspicions of the neighbours and of
the police, and Kelly had no desire to have dealings with
the latter.
Madame la Comtesse de Paradis had a small carriage
waiting, and in this she returned to the hotel, Kelly
accompanying her.
He had not been used to this sort of thing—a fashion-
able carriage and a pretty woman.
Kelly felt like a fish out of water.
He was very pleased, but he was conscious of a difficulty
in keeping up conversation.
But the countess, really a governess discharged for mis-
conduct, did the talking.
Since her disgrace she had lived in certain ilemi-monde
circles, where a varnish is acquired, a little too much for
Kelly.
He was bewildered.
On reaching the hotel, they at once adjourned to the
rooms occupied by the countess.
She had sent to her dame de comparjnie to have a luxurious
supper ready.
Madame la Comtesse had only been in the colony four
months, and she had made a victim or two.
She was irresistible, and, like another Daniie, was wooeof
in showers of gold.
Her jewel-box was a wonder.
And yet nothing could be substantiated against her.
She could not help people loving her.
Her secret life, at all events, was well kept. It might be
shady indeed but no one knew anything.
To Kelly the reception in the Frenchw n’s room®
was simply a revelation.
Covers were laid for eight.
Kelly, Salmon Roe, Zeph, and the Count Anatole were
the men ; the Countess de Paradis, her anvic de roin/xiymf,
and two bright-eyed French girls were the females.
The repast was exquisite.
The viands and the wines were simply perfection itself,,
and the champagne lovelj'.
At the Tremont there were no tricks upon travellers, ti
was real and genuine.
Kelly was in the seventh heaven of deiiglß-
Next day, when in the seclusion of bis own chamber, P'


reflected rather grimly on the evening before, or rather,
morning
He had made Madame la Comtesse—she called herself
Hortense —promises of presents.
He smiled grimly. Well, it couldn’t last, and he need
not be too extravagant.
There was a mean corner in Kelly’s soul.
He went out after breakfast and purchased a rather
handsome pair of bracelets.
They particularly attracted Kelly’s attention, and though
they were more expensive than he intended he did not
retract.
He returned to the hotel, and shortly after presented
himself at the entrance of the apartments allotted to
Madame la Comtesse.
Me was at once admitted.
The countess lay in a very studied deshabille on a couch.
Kelly approached, trying to seem at ease, and to do the
grand.
But he was so utterly gauche and awkward that Hortense
very nearly laughed in his face.
But she had a very powerful command of countenance,
and smiled.
After a very few word-i Kelly produced his present.
“I’ve taken the extreme liberty, Countess, to bring this
trifle to offer you,” he began.
“ Magnijique ! ” she cried, as she matched the bracelets—
she knew the value to a penny—“ Oh how kind of you.”
“ Highly pleased,” retorted Kelly. “ Ain’t much judge
of jimcracks, hut thems right.”
“ Lovely,” answered the woman, and beckoned him to
her side.
The ironclad bushranger was completely at her feet. A
vulgar Antony utterly prostrate before an equally vulgar
Cleopatra.
After a stay of some duration he joined his comrades.
The amp of the night before had been a good one, and
Kelly saw his way clear to extending instead of decreasing
his capital.
That night was but a repetition of the night before, only
Kelly paid the expenses of the luxurious supper.
Then there was a run against the bank. A lucky specu-
lator broke it one night.
Ned Kelly was furious.
“This will not do,” he said to the count, “we shah be
ruined.”
“ Cerlainement oui /” cried the Frenchman, with his usual
shrug.
Ned Kelly had been thinking deeply. At last ho pro-
pounded a plan.
His proposal was to extend their operations. __ The count
would remain in charge of the tables, while Kelly, Zeph,
and Salmon Roe would play elsewhere.
But fiist they must carry out a desperate undertaking,
They would buy up ev ry pack cf cards in Sydney.
That very day this was done, and for hours the four arch
fiends were engaged in marking them.
They were then deftly put together.
Meanwhile, there was a rush for cards all over the c : ty.^
Then Zeph made his appearance in one of the stationers’
shops and announced that he had a job lot to sell cheap.
The shopkeeper was too glad to close with his offer and
the transaction was concluded.
Next day, Zeph and Kelly went to a private room where
introductions were regained.
They were taken in by Senor Mendez, the lucky schemer
who had broken their bank.
They seated themselves, and found that the cards were
those which they had cleverly and secretly manipulated.
Mendez was not at first in a humour co play, but pre-
eently he began.
The stakes ware not very high, but you could win a
£ood bit of money.
Kelly began to show a large pile. It increased at every
•troke.
Mendez left off playing - md seated himself behind Kelly.
“ Demonin /” he suddenly cried, “you, ,ire a ©heat
These cards are marked/’
There was awful confusion.
Mendez had seized the cards and pointed out slight
marks invisible to any but a keen eye.
The confusion was awful, but no one thought of examin-
ing the other cards.
“ You are a liar,” said Kelly; “and if they ere marked
I did not know it.”
“ Sci’igre de dios I ” roared Mendez, “I like chat. Re-
fund the money, or ”
Kelly rose and faced his antagonist.
“ You’re an infernal scoundrel," he said, “but it's ton
to one on you and your pals. I'll never cuter your cheat-
ing den again.”
And he went out, leaving his gold on the table. Bui
he had a large portion of his winnings in his pocket.
No one in the room cared about exposure, so no attempt
was made to stay them.
They were not in one of those saloons where bowie
knives and pistols decided quarrels.
“That plot’s stumped,” he said, when they were outside.
“ He’ll blow the gaff!” said Zeph.
“Not he,” answered Kelly. “ He’s up to snuff himself.
But oughtn't I to call him out?”
Zeph laughed.
“Not unless you could get him in the bush,” he con-
tinued. “ Those dons are toppers at shooting,”
“ Ain’t I a shot?” asked Kelly indignantly.
“ Well, if you like a bullet in your carcase,” quiet!? re-
marked Zeph.
“I’ll have my rights, mate,” insisted Kelly with fig-
headed obstinacy.
“ All serene,” laughed Zeph.
And so it was settled that ho should next day call oa
Mendez and demand satisfaction.
Zeph tried next day to alter his determination, but
Kelly was obstinate.
One of his savage fits was on him, and he would not
be advised
“ You’ll be sorry,” said Zeph.
“ me if 1 care,” insisted Kelly. “If he turns tail,
I’ll shoot him in the streets.”
Zeph went to the hotel where Senor Mendez was resid-
ing and sent up a card he had written at a stationer’s.
It had on it his real name and rank.
He was courteously received, though the Spaniard
looked rather cool.
Zeph told his story, which the Spaniard listened to with
nonchalance.
He spoke English perfectly, though with a slight
accent.
“Tell your friend that he is a low blackleg and thief,”
was the cool “lf I hear from him again, / wir
hand him orer to ihc police ! Good morning.”
And he bowed the astonished Zeph out of the room. He
was dumbfounded.
The rage of Kelly was as fierce as it was impotent.
The threat of the police completely humbled him.
“ 111 bo even with the beggar yet,'’ he growled, with
sundry savage oaths.
But Mendez was careful not to throw himself in his way,
and soon after sailed for Havana, in Cuba, there to pursue
his varied fortunes.
Would they ever meet again? That only time could
show.
Kelly, with dogged obstinacy, would have liked to follow
him, but he had other matters to attend to.
“If ever i meet that sneak and coward again,” he said,
“I’ll make cold meat of him.”
“All riSht,” replied Zeph. “Good riddance oi bad
rubbish.”
Kelly muttered something, but he was in no humour to
quarrel with Zeph, so he changed the subject.
Their stay in Sydney was getting protracted, anu might
prove dangerous.


Still Kelly was not prepared to leave at once. The
countuss held him in her thrall.
One morning after hr akfast Kelly was taking an early
walk. The kind of life he was leading was making him
fat.
This would not do at aO, as he might at any time have
to return to the bush.
He was sauntering along when he gave a sudden start.
It was not surprising that his heart gave a great bound.
He had reoguised one whom he cared for more than any
human being.
A mounted policeman was passing, and he rode Marco
Polo.
Marco Polo, a horse which performed exploits quite
equal to anything done by Black Bess.
Lest our readers should think we are romancing, we
refer them to the (Loudon) Telegraph of the 7th July, 1881:
“ It is well known in England that for many yaars the pro-
vince of Victoria was the scene of unparalleled outrages com-
mitted by the most lawless and desperate gang of ruffians that
ever attacked a gold escort on its road from ‘ the diggings ’ to
Melbourne, or * stuck up ’ a bank in some lonely little town on
the edge of the bush. At the head of these desperadoes, the
‘ ironclad bushranger,’ Ned Kelly, had made himself notorious
and formidable by a series of such crimes as appear to be wholly
incompatible with the much-vaunted civilisation of the nine-
teenth century in the last quarter of its existence. In contem-
plating, however, the atrocities with which we have lately been
familiarised in every quarter of the globe, we are tempted to ask
with a melancholy American querist, ‘ Is the Caucasian played
out ? ’ Given such opportunities as the wild and tangled fast-
nesses of the Wombat and Strathbogie ranges in Victoria afford,
it seems but too probable that the ‘ Kelly gang ’ or other similar
associations of fearful marauders will from timo to time cause
their names to be mentioned with terror even at the other end of
the earth. Australia is a land of natural horsemen, and Ned
Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well-known at the
Antipodes as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess is in these islands It
was not unnatural that,, when month after month passed with-
out the arrest of Ned Kelly and his three daring associates, upon
whose heads a reward of two thousand pounds each hac oeen
set, murmurs of complaint should have been heard in Melbourne
aga inst Captain Standish’s management of the force under his
«o mmand. The remonstrants, however, captious from terror,
little knew the character of t he country in which the bushrangers
had established themselves, and where for years they were as
nafe as runaway negroes who in the slavery days had sought
sheltei in the Dismal Swamp of Virginia, or in the cane-brake
of Alabama.”
Kelly then stood still and watched him.
The horse was in magnificent condition.
Kelly stepped up.
The policeman was quite a young man.
“ Fine animal that, my man,” he said, feeling his
■noulder. “ Splendid creature.”
“You may say that,” replied the other, with an
Irish accent. “ It’s a beautiful baste.”
“It is,” replied the bushranger. “ Will you quench ?”
pointing to a drinking-saloon.
It was a quiet neighbourhood, and the trooper had no
objection.
A boy held the horse.
They entered the shop.
“ Seems strange such a beauty should be in the police,”
observed Kelly. “No offence.”
“Shure an’ it’s like this,” continued the mam “The
baste belonged to that thief of the world, Ned Kelly ; and
Captain Tom Conquest, when he grabbed the animal,
swore he’d keep him.”
“ Oh, that’s it ?” replied Kelly. “ Well, all I can say
is, I hope he may keep her.”
“Maybe not,” continued the open-spoken young
policeman, « as it’ssaid that that etarual rapparee, a oily,
is about Again.”
*• The devil he is ?” cried Kelly,
“ Yes, and Captain Tom, he’s after him. Share, and
he’ll get him after all,” the man said, “ and then won’t
we all have a beautiful “ wake ” over hia body ”
“ I hope you may,” said Kelly, with a queer ex-
pression which the young troooer afterwards remem-
bered.
Now, Kelly had a new ambition in his heart, a»id that
was to recover Marco.
“ Do you often ride this here horse ?” asked Kelly, aa
he finished.
“ Every morning, sir, I pass this way,” the man an •
svvered, with a wink at the public-house.
“ All right,” said Kelly, “ I’ll have another squint at
the critter to-morrow.”
And so he went away.
That he would have the horse be was determined ; but
it must be only at the last pinch.
It was nearer than he expected.
The usual evening occurred.
The table was in iuck this time, and Kelly revelled in the
delights of winning.
He was in the seventh heaven of delight.
Madame la Comtesse was kind and gracious in the ex-
treme.
Kelly could go into her room whenever he liked.
No need for knocking at the door.
He seldom went of a morning.
But next day, intending to ask her to go for a drive in
a buggy, he went up to her rooms, and entered un-
announced.
He was in the vestibule.
He heard voices—the voices of Madame la Comtesse
and Tom Conquest.
“ I tell you, sir, that the man who makes me presents,
who is in love with me, is the robber Kelly,” said Madame,
la Comtesse. “I cannot tell you how I know—but Ido
know. How about the reward ?”
“ Half to you, the other half to me,” replied Conquest,
“ but I can hardly think it possible.”
“ You wait; if he is in the house lie shall come here.”
Kelly at once started, and met Zeph as ha went down-
stairs.
“Tom Conquest is in the house; that infernal Delilah
has betrayed us,” he said. “ Your purse—meet me at the
old Oak Ridge.
“ All right,” replied Zoph,
Kelly wasted no time. It was about the hour to meet
the young Irish policeman.
He started off, and after waiting a few minutes saw the
man coming.
He touched his hat.
Kelly patted the horse, which at once neighed in a
peculiar way.
“ Horse seems to know you.”
“ Animals always like me,” was the retort.
And he invited the policeman to drink. Nothing loth,
he not being on duty but only exercising the horse,
accepted.
Kelly paid a boy to take care of the horse.
“ Walk him up and down and keep him cool,” he said;
“ feed of corn—bait him ?” he asked of the policeman.
“ No,” said the Irishman.
And they went in. Kelly now proposed a lunch such
as is taken in the colonies.
A big dinner in England.
There were all sorts of delicacies, and a bottle of
whisky, the whole laid in front of the bar.
Ned Kelly presently filled the polce-officer’s glass again,
and the genial Irishman continued the Conversation. Le
was as communicative as most of his country men.
“ Of course you take care of the beauty "at night?” re-
marked the bushranger.
“ As a mother does of her first baby, my jewel. Sorrow,
one of us has half the dressing, and feedin, an coaxin’ of
that dumb baste. Bedad, he’s almost a Christian already,
only he’s too ’cute to spake—l believe he could if he
chose.”
“ Well, what would he say if he could ‘spake,’ as yon
call it v”


u Why, avoumeen, he’d just say to you, ‘ Pat Logan’s
mighty dry about the throat.’ ”
‘‘Oh, J. see,” said Kelly. “ Come in then and have a
liquor. But where is this wonderful ‘ hair trunk ’ your
talking about?"
“ Snug as Father Murphy’s cat forenenst the fire on a
winter's night Sure, he’s up to his nose in straw in the
stables behind the Station.”
Kelly had heard all he wanted.
After a final drink, he and the garrulous officer parted.
Kelly retired to an obscure part of the town, where he
easily found a hiding place until night came on, when he
procured the costume of a superior class of digger, which
he donned, and sold the other dress.
Then he got another man to write a letter addressed to
Captain Zeph, under an assumed name, with these simple
words inside—
“ Ware hawks. Bold by the Count Wagga-Wagga.
This he posted, satisfied that Tom Conquest would not
betray his knowledge until his presumed return to the
hotel.
It was midnight when he left the place of shelter he had
selected.
He had no luggage. A brace of pistols, a knife, and an
ample supply of money was all he carried.
The police-station was in rather a conspicuous position,
but the compound in which the stables were erected over-
looked a small open space surrounded by outhouses.
All was silent and deserted, but the wall was ten feet
high.
How to get inside, and then with Marco I 010 get out-
side again, was a difficulty not easily overcome.
But the ruffian was fertile of resources, and unscrupu-
lous in his carrying them out.
He resolved to scale the wall, and thus he did it.
Ho had a rope with him, and at the end of it was a
powerful iron hook.
This he threw up and fastened on the top of the wa...
Once fixed on or in the brick-work, he soon pulled him-
self up to a level with the hook, which was easily done, as
the rope, being knotted throughout, afforded foot and
hand hold. , ...
Once on the top, he silently descended, but was awfully
disgusted when, creeping up to the stables where Marco,
the" “friend of his youth,” was “in clover,” he saw a
trooper asleep on the ground at the door of the stable .
What was he to do V
He never could Had Marco out without awaking the
sleeper, . .
And no time was to be lost, as daylight in these lati-
tudes comes, as the song says, “ so early in the morning,
namely, about three o’clock.
Well now or never something must be done.
So, quietly, he first inspected the gateway, which was,
with the carelessness of colonial discipline, unbarred.
Seeing this, he softly entered the stable.
The beast turned his head, and appeared by his move-
ments to recognise his old master, as he gently whinnied.
But as the stable was almost in darkness, he could not
hffirp cppri Kollv
So some other sense must have led him to prick forward
his ears, and, as Kelly subsequently said when recounting
the matter, rubbed his nose and head against Kelly s hand
as gently as a favourite Tom-cat.
Putting a bridle on Marco, and adding thereto a saddle,
lu* loosened the horw* from the stall and turned his hea
towards the door. _ , ,
Kelly then deliberately lit a match, set fire to the straw
in the neighbouring stables, and srw the whole place in
a blaze before five minutes had elapsed.
Immediately the inmates of the station were rushing
about the place, when confusion reigned supreme, and
fright almost paralysed everyone.
The troopers rushed to save the horses.
Kelly made himself very busy as a “help, and in the
utaQultuous confusion led his friend Marco in o ■ * open.
He was quickly ou his back, and us quickly out of
sight.
He had made up his mind that the police should have
no clue whatever to the route he had taken.
He would pass through no inhabited districts, keep-
ing wholly to the Bush, and trusting for food to shep-
herds and stockkeepers, who wer? only too glad to har-
bour the popular freebooter.
He certainly did not want to tire his horse, as there
might be occasions when he would have to depend
upon his pluck and endurance.
Kelly always had his wits about him, as, unlike most oi
his kind, he never drank when on the “road,” or when he
had any little game on hand.
A long night’s ride tired both man and horse, so he re-
solved at the first quiet spot to pull up and give himself a
“ coil ” as he called it, and Marco a feed of grass, of
which there was plenty about.
Just as he mounted the top of a hill and daylight had
fairly broken, he saw a small volume of smoke quietly
ascending.
“ Hullo!” he mentally cried, “ there’s breakfast there,
and Fm going to have some, and chance it ”
He grasped a pistol in his right hand, and rode as bold
as brass up to the spot indicated.
Here he saw four men, Squatters, sitting round a large
fire, frying chops and preparing the morning’s meal.
Seeing the men were gentlemen Squatters, he knew he
would be hospitably received, but he was so cautious that
though he dismounted to partake of the breakfast offered
him, o he kept tight hold of the bridle.
His searching glance also revealed to him that there were
no firearms about. Indeed, travellers very rarely carried
them, as the blacks were harmless, and people seldom
carried on their persons anything worth robbing.
After having refreshed himself Kelly thought of Marco.
So he bid his entertainers a bluff good-bye, and when out
of sight shunted off into the bend of the nearest belt of
timber, where he lay down, but not to sleep.
He hobbled Marco, who was soon filling himself with
the nutritious grass that was half-way up to his fetlock
joints, and watched him feeding.
Here he stopped all day, as he feared an officer m
every bush,”
It was not known he had « cleared out from the police
stables with Marco, who in the great excitement and terror
of the fire was not missed, and, even when so missed, it
was supposed had simply got out of his stable in the
midst of the general confusion and was, no doubt, quietly
grazing within a mile or two of the station.
It was expected that Marco would bo found in the next
Pound, but, as day after day went by, and no news of the
“Government” horse turned up, the matter passed out of
the public mind, excepting that the mention in the adver-
tisement of the missing horse having once belonged to
the notorious Ned Kelly made it certain that the animal
(whose description was given in full) would be recognised
if ever seen, the more especially as he had a white star m
the centre of his forehead.
When thoroughly refreshed Kelly remounted to pursue
his path, which was a long one indeed.
He was making for the colony of Victoria, six nun-
dred miles distant, and prudently avoided the beaten track,
as he felt his own company would be about the safest he
could indulge in at present. .
It was tiresome work, from daylight to sundown, jog,
iocr jog, about five miles an hour, startling an occasional
long black snake basking in the sun, or putting to flight
myriads of white cockatoos, who congregate m thousands,
and, when disturbed, make a screaming, abb-ring tumult,
boisterous enough to wake tue dead bob e their tune.
Ned did not feel his own company on reflection, very
enlivening. .
Reflection was “ not in his line. He panted for action
—but not the action of a six-hundred-mile ride through
bush with houtebted or board.


The latter he got at out-station huts, the former a la
belle dtoile — AngUce , under the sky, the superb climate ren-
dering this sort of “ beading-out ” not disagreeable.
For two d'ys wefther man nor beast had tasted food or
Ned had lost tho track, and in taking a “ short cut ” had
made the usual mistake in such cases.
Towards the third sundown he approached a deep
ravine called the Great Sydney Pass.
Still no sign of water, and he listened in vain for “the
honest watch-dog’s bark.”
The bark of the shepherds’ dogs when the sheep come
homewards is often, in this still-aired climate, heard a
mile or so off.
For the first time Ned began to feel that he was in
a predicament.
The great pass or gully seemed to be “ the Great
Divide ” between him and the living world.
Hungry, thirsty?^id fatigued, he was dispirited. The
ravine was two hundred feet deep, and, in the exhausted
condition of Marco Po'o he was afraid the noble animal
must succumb at last, lae white foam already fell in flakes
from his parched mouth ; nevertheless he carried his burden
stoutly and willingly.
Both had just turned a bend in the path of descent,
when Kelly’s quick sight deleted a form stretched upon
the grass.
Fearing treachery he pulled up. Then, cautiously ap-
proaching, he beheld the dead body of a man, who had
evidently been lost in the bush, and perished for the want
of food or water.
By his side Kelly found a small leathern pocket tilled
with rough gold, which he speedily transferred to his own
pocket.
Ikve he beheld too picture of what his own fate might
be—one by no means uncommon in Australia.
Hurrying out of sight of the corpse he managed to cross
to :he opposite side of the pass. It was all lie could do.
Marco began to show signs of giving in. This perplexed
Ned.
What would he do without the gallant steed ? If he
could have lived on the blood of the animal he would no
doubt have made a repast on it —but after!
Thoroughly beaten by fatigue, hunger, and thirst, as
well as the awful prospect of death by starvation, he
jumped off the back of the poor beast and exclaimed—
The game’s up Ned ! pay your stake like a man, and
don’t flinch. We ll if I must go, that’s no reason Marco
should suffer too. He’s done his best, poor devil! One
of us shall have a chanee for life: so here goes, old fellow,
the best, if not the only friend I ever had.’’
So saying, with a sigh, he took off the saddle and bridle,
aud turned Marco “ 100-e ” for his life.
He lay down himself, and listlessly looked up into a sky
that has not its rival for beauty and splendour.
What his thoughts were God knows, but before he w?,s
long in the clouds he heard a whinny, then a second, am,,
springing to his feet, saw Marco, not twenty yards distant,
with his nose thrust under z lot of reeds.
He knew at once what i& was.
(To he continued.)
PICTURE BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Anonyma, or Fair but Fraif.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Woman.
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
The Beautiful Demon
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Marco had found water , foul and stagnant perhaps*
but nectar to iu;n and tils rna rr.
Both drank a S "only the parched with do drink
To Kelly, whose lips, paiate, and throat were as dry as
hot iron, the liquid seemed delicious.
He recognised in it the breath of life, his resurrection
from the grave, and absolutely embraced Marco, who was
too busily engaged in having his fid to show any recogni
tion of his master’s affection.
No wretch reprieved from the gallows felt more re-
joiced. He had escaped a dreadful late and a lingering
one.
He remembered the body ue had just left, and from
which a carrion crow lazily rose as he came in view, show-
ing clearly the unholy repast he had been making.
“Ned’s himself again,” he soliloquised, attributing his
deliverance to no higher influence than chance.
After resting until daybreak he remounted his resusci-
tated horse and pursued his way towards the township of
Wagga-Wagga, which was in his route, and where he was
totally unknown.
Yes, at grey dawn, he was in the saddle once more,
having by a miracle escaped a fate he shuddered to think
of.
That lone corpse in the forest haunted his imagination.
He was rather faint and exhausted, but his horse was
thoroughly refreshed, aud that was the great point for
him.
On the springy, ever-verdant turf Marco went along
easily and almost gaily.
He soon discovered at some distance a man looking
after a huge flock of sheep, and rode up to him.
“ Well, mate.” said Ned, “ I’m just the cl>ip as has rid
through the Great Sydney Pass, without no grub or water.
Can you help a lame dog over a stile V”
“ All right,” the mao replied, laughing, “ you’re welcome
to what I’ve got, and that ain’t wild duck and champagne,
you know. There’s the hut about half-a mile off. I'll
leave my coßey with the flo k and go along with you.”
Ned Kelly was too tired to talk, so he followed the shop
herd, who had built Ids hut in a sheltered spot, near i
small spring.
He had, as usual, nothing but tea, but the restorative
effect of this beverage is well known. Fc-» this purpose it
beats alcohol “ all to pieces.'
However, there was an inn no great distance off, which
Kelly intended to visit, and to reconnoitre before dc lug
30.
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLI: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
CHAPTER ClX.— Continued.
“"■What sort of a crib is the whisky-shop?” asked Ned
Kelly.
“Roughish sort of den,” replied the man; “but the
liquor ain’t bad. Swells don’t patronise it much.”
“ Well, after our feed can you spare an hour to fetch
some more ‘straight tip’?” asked Ned, pulling out a
sovereign. “ I should like to rest my carcase till it’s cool.”
“All serene, my lad,” said the man, as they sat down to
a meal which though rough was indeed welcome.
Ned soon felt himself again, and. after lighting a pipe,
lay down to sleep, while the shepherd started off to a
general store where he could usually get anything he
wanted.
These storekeepers are not allowed to sell spirits, other-
wise every shepherd and stock-keeper in the vicinity for
twenty miles round would be perpetually drunk, and the
publicans lose the valuable custom of these men, who will
“ knock down ” a year’s wages in a week in drink.
The shepherd returned without anything but tobacco.
Kelly had given the man a sovereign, and refused the
change.
After an hour’s rest he was up and off.
His host regarded him earnestly, and. as he mounted
Marco, said to himself—
“ Ned Kelly, or I’m a duffer! He’s one o’ the right
sort, too. I wonder where’s the swell who would hand out
a Bovereign and not ask for change, I wish there was
bore Ned Kellys, I do.”
And back to hia sheep he slowly walked, the solitude of
his life having been agreeably varied by his strange visitor.
“No business of mine,” he muttered as he walked
along.
CHAPTER CX.
KSLtY’te INTERVIEW WITH THE CLAIMANT.
Kelly roda oa without meeting any adventures of
OMuswet.,
read him like a book.
well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series or crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.” Ned Kelly, illustrated. Nos. Ito 11, already published at 44. Essex-
Btreet, Strand, price One Penny.— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881. . ,
“It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the- assistance of Ned Kelly a
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor lesß than a pirate ship.”— Times, July. ,
“The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollections of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
and his Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.” — Press, July.
He met a few travellers, but none apparently he had any
reason to dread.
Of course, unless Tom Conquest had some inkling of
the course he had taken, he had little or nothing to fear
from him.
He was far from Sydney—hundreds of miles away.
The moment Captain Zeph and Salmon Roe received
his letter they would make themselves scarce.
His absenting himself for a night would excite no sus-
picion until the discovery was made of the loss of the
horse.
So he pressed on, determined to enjoy himself in com-
pensation for the hardships he had gone through.
Early one morning he found himself in a rather wild dis-
trict of scrub.
Nothing was to be heard save the song of birds.
Suddenly there arose on the air a cry which no one can
ever mistake, that of a horse in extreme pain.
Kelly looked in the direction, and his surprise was great
when he came upon a scene which for a moment he was at
a loss to understand.
A horse was tied to a tree, while a stout, heavy, pon-
derous man, with heavy cheeks, and a butcher’s blue apron
on, was standing beside him with a fryingpan, red hot, which
he had just applied to the poor animal’s flank.
The horse reared, plunged, and uttered a strange, shrill
cry.
“ What’s up, mate ?” asked Kelly,
“What’s that to you? Can’t a feller brand Ms boss
without having someone basking himpertinent questions ?”
surlily replied the big man.
“ Dry up, you darned fool. Dye think I don’t know
your game ?” said Kelly, laughing. “I’m up to your dodge.
The frying-pan brand is as old as Adam.”
It was a common one.
In the colony most horses bear the brand of the owner,
and the first thing a thief does is to efface that compro-
mising mark with the frying-pan.
The fat man looked knowingly at Kelly, and to


Well, it ain’t your boss, is it?” he asked, with a broad
grin
“Not likely,” answered Kelly, “and not my business
neither. Am I right for Wagga-Wagga?”
“Wagga-Wagga?” the other went on. “Yes; it’s a
good fifteen mile yet. You seem a right sort; won’t you
wet your blowpipe ?”
And he threw his frying-pan in the direction of a thicket.
“ Right you are,” laughed Kelly, alighting and follow-
ing his new acquaintance to where he found another
powerful horse carefully tethered.
Looking at Kelly suspiciously, Orton (for it was that
unscrupulous villain in propria persona,} said—
“ I think I’ve heard of you before, mate, and of yCur
/lack hair trunk, eh ?”
Kelly’s hand played with the handle of his pistol.
“Don’t be gallied,lad.”replied Orton; “I ain’t
split.”
“ Look here, mate,” said Kelly, «I’m not curious myself,
and don’t like those who are. I don’t ask you whose
horse you’re nobbling, and 10 don’t you ask me what you
needn’t know, but you maj know this, that we may be
able to work together, d’ye understand ?”
“ I’m fly,” returned Orton. “ You’re one of my sort.
Some has money and no brains, some has brains and no
monev. Now I’m one of the last flock, but I mean to
have the money somehow, and I’m on a heavy lay just
now.” , . ,
“ Blow your lay! ” said Kelly, “ I’m as dry as a hot wind.
Is there ne’er a ‘public’ in this tarnation dry-looking
desert ?”
“ Yes, at Wagga-Wagga, about five miles off.
“ Then I’m on for Wagga-Wagga,” said Kelly. “ Not
a big place, eh ? Not too many police about ?”
“ Not one, just now,” said Orton. “If there was I can
square the lot. But, I say, just look here, mate, I’m fixed
in that village, and mind, if I turn up, you ve never seed
me before, mind that.”
“ Mum as a dead man in a worked-out pit, said Ned.
Then receiving minute directions from his new acquain-
tance he rode off. _ „ ,
Such was the first meeting between Ned Kelly and
Arthur Orton, which was to lead to such marvellous
results. , , , , • u n
After leaving his new comrade, the bushranger, wno bad
no motive for haste, rode quietly along.
The day was warm, and with his pipe in his mouth
Kelly rode along as quietly and contentedly as if he were
a second Wilberforce. „
Arrived at Wagga-Wagga, he beheld a small village
with nothing remarkable about, except the extraordinary
silence that reigned everywhere. One might almost hear
the buzz of a bluebottle-fly from one end of the High-
street to the other. . ,
The butcher’s shop was a conspicuous point, ana its
occupant equally so. , , ,
It very much resembled some newly-built English coun-
fT ‘There” were houses of various sizes, chiefly cottages,
with verandahs ; there was an iron church, a brick police-
station, and the usual one-storied wooden siops.
The first inn he came to, the Wagga- Wagga Arms, was
a rather straggling wooden-looking building, making up
in extent for the want of height. _ •
Towards this, by natural attraction, Ned Kelly giavi-
Aflehting, he took Marco himself to the stables and at-
tended to °him. saw him have a heavy feed of oats, and
made snug
He then sauntered into the bar. . «
After having secured a room and taken the dust out ot
his windpipe, he returned to the stable.
Be was not a little astonished on entering to see ns
friend in close confab with the ostler.
were aroused, but the first sentence he
eassured him.
“ Worry fine hanimal. He’d carry a mountain, and rm.
away from Heclipse.”
“ Yes,” said a voice behind him, “ he’s a rare one, ams
as good as he looks. You know something about horses ?”
“ Rather !” the other went on, “ been used to ’osses
halways. New chum, eh?”
They, as agreed upon, did not recognise each other.
“ Yes,” said Kelly, “ green, very, as yet.”
“ You look jolly green, I must say,” laughed Ort/.r-,
until his fat sides shook like a plate of jelly. You’ve just
come from the old country, hain’t you?”
“ Landed a fortnight ago, and don’t yet know nothing.”
“ Hinnocent as a hangel,” said Orton, “ and you look
it. Well, over to my diggins, and I’ll show you the
ropes of this here colony.”
Kelly accepted the invitation, and followed his friend.
They went over to a butcher’s shop, which the fat man
entered with the air of the proprietor.
Over the door Kelly read—
“ Thomas Castro. Butcher.’*
On returning to the Wagga-Wagga Arms, Ned Kelly,
who gave his name as Wilson, engaged a room and
ordered dinner.
An hour later the fat butcher came in and asked for the
guest.
The landlord pointed to a back room.
“ Going for to try his palaver on him,” said mine host
with a grin, as he prepared a drink for the ponderous
butcher.
Castro went across and seated himself in a huge arm-
chair, which appeared to be cut out for him.
He gave a deep sigh as he seated himself.
Prospecting,” he asked, “ like most folks ? It's too
’ard work for me, and I oughtn’t to work at nothing',
as I’m soon going to get back my rights.”
“ Your rights? What’s up?”
“ I mean I’m a Barrownight in my own right, with lots
of tin hanging to it, that I’m kept out of.” ?
“ Whew!” was the exclamation that came from Kelly s
lips. “ Drunk or mad, which, old man?”
“ Neither one or the other, as I mean to prove. Ive
got all the hevidence cut and dry, and a lawyer free gratis
to work the job.”
This was before his fraudulent intentions were known
or his game suspected.
He had lots of audacity, and was profoundly ignorant.
This latter quality was subsequently construed by the
shallow into “ cleverness.” . .
His cleverness was sheer bold lying, and the only
“ cleverness” he exhibited was in simply and calmly stick-
ing to his falsehoods—the consequences were beyond the
reach of his mind.
His whole career showed pigheaded stupidity.
Had he been a clever plotter he would never have
o-iven as the name of the captain of the Osprey that of the
captain of the Jessie Miller, in which he originally went
in 1862 to Tasmania, and years before the Osprey was
heard of
How could Roger Tichborne have learned the name ot
the captain of the Jessie Miller?
However, he was so persistent,_ that Kelly began to
think there might be something in it. .
He had heard that someone in the colony had claimed
to be a long-missing baronet of high degree and large
estates, for whom his family had been looking for years.
He also knew, however, from what he had heard very
lately, that he was generally regarded as an impostor. _
At all events, he had not found as yet the means of going
t 0 will,” said the Claimant. “ Rights is rights,
and they ain’t a-going to do me. I’ve led a rough life,
We 1 choosed to, and I’ve heerd Robinson Crusoe was-
a gent at home.” . .... .
a Why,” said Kelly, “ what a howling swell you *iU oe ,
you won’t then forget an old pal will you ?” .
At this moment the baronet was called to serve a Qonpt*


of pounds of chops, and while the knife and steel were per-
forming a duet, Kelly re-entered the Wagga- Wagga Arms.
*» }t*um un over yonder,” said Kelly addressing mine
host. “ Any truth in his yarn ?”
“ Can’t say ; he's been known as Thomas Castro here a
goodisn Vit; says he’s a married man,” and the man hesita-
ted. ‘ But that’s nothing to you or me. She was a
decent sort of a gal. She was for some time in my service ;
her father was Paddy the Plasterer.”
“ Hah ! hah !” laughed Kelly, “ your slavey’s a right down
lady--well I am ”
“ Many a slavey and wuss has married swells here, I can
tell you ; them as have had the iron bracelets on, have had
diamonds on the same place afterwards. Some coves
hawked advertisements for Sir Roger Tichborne and say
Castro's the man.”
“ It’s a queer yarn,” said Kelly, “ he seems no fool, and
Ot a bad judge of hossflesh.”
The man looked with a sly wink at Ned Kelly; it was a
' jvelation however.
“That’s it,” cried Kelly, and ceased as Thomas Castro
came in again.
“ It ain’t hoften,” said the butcher, “ as we sees strangers
down here. You’ve been in hold England lately? ”
“Some months ago,” replied Kelly.
“ Never mind, you’re a man hafter my own ’art,” con-
tinued Castro. “My missus is cooking some supper.
Will you make one?”
Nothing loth, Kelly followed Orton and was introduced
lo a good looking, swect-faced young woman. She was of
course utterly uneducated and consequently looked up to
her husband with intense admiration.
She considered him one of the cleverest men in the
world.
She was very civil to Kelly and made him as comfortable
as she could.
There was a really good supper so far as plenty was
concerned. With beef "and mutton at twopence a pound
a bountiful feast was always at hand.
More Colonial constitutions are broken down by over
•eating, than drinking or smoking. The digestive organs
are prostrated by “ musters ” of meat.
Mrs. Castro retired leaving pipes and whisky on the
table.
Two of the greatest villains on the globe sat down to
enjoy themselves.
“ And you think you’ll pull through,” asked Ned Kelly,
“ and prove your case?”
“ I ain’t a going to funk it,” said Thomas Castro. “If
that lawyer in Sydney ain’t going to do the right, I’ll get
to Loudon, if I’ve got to swim for it and hold on by the
tail of a shark.”
“ Money!” observed Kelly, with a peculiarly significant
glance.
“ Hem ! well that’s it,” said Thomas Castro ; “ of course
I’ve been a blessed fool to keep dark all this time. But
you see. I’d got used to this rough life, the other never
was my style.”
“ It this here lawyer does not turn up,” continued Kelly,
'* what then V”
“ I’ll get it somehow. Money I must have. If ever I
put my foot in England, I’m all right.”
He was not aware that the guhe-mouches of Sydney
already believed his strange story, and were already sub-
scribing funds.
But the most singular feature was, that men of standing
and education could not see through the swindle and the
impossibility of Orton being Tichborne.
One fact alone was sufficient—how could Tichborne
have acquired the argot of Wapping?
But Johanna Southcott, at 70 years of age, received
from the British public £lOO,OOO to pay for the expense
or her lying-in of the new Messiah. Royalty even sent a
cradle for the use of the expected Godhead, worth
£6,000.
Little wonr'gr then that the sympathy of the masses
- ,■ ■ r. ■HhwW*-'
(or, as Punch haffl iA thera-asses ”) should *>® enlisted
for this Wagga-Wagga “ Bloater,” as “ the long-lost heir
of the House of Tichborne.
“If you want money,” said Kelly, “you know howto
get it. Your little game of the fryingpan ought to nil
your pockets.” ,
“ Look here, mate,” said the Bloater, “ as you know ray
private banker is in the bush” (here he chuckled with glee)
“ and how my checks is paid, I don’t mind trusting you a
bit. Will you lend me a hand? It will be all the belief
for you ; yon shall be in it, and no mistake.
“ Just in my line. Out with it—no secrets ainong-it
pals, or we can’t run in the same harness together. \on ve
told me a secret, now I’ll tell you one. Can you keep it
as well as I can your horse-stealing job ...
This hint was given to prove that Kelly had him ir. Ins
power in case of treachery.
“Keep it? as the ocean keeps a lump of lead dropv.su
into it. Own up ; what is it?”
“ Do you know who you’re talking to i"
“No, I don’t, and don’t care much either, if he’s true
to his pal.”
“ Ned Kelly never sold a pal yet,” exclaimed the bush-
ranger.
“Ned Kelly!” exclaimed the Bloater, in a tone of
almost fright.
“ I’m the bloke ; so now we both toe the line.”
“ Ten thousand pounds for his capture,” rushed across
the Bloater’s mind. The blood rushed into his face when
the thought occurred to him.
Kelly saw the prodigious effect his imprudence produced,
and shrewdly guessed the cause. Orton alias Castro wns
silent for a moment; his eyes positively glared at Kelly,
as the £lO,OOO reward opened up prospects of a capital for
the prosecution of his intended swindle. But he soon re-
covered his calmness.
Kelly read him like a book. The sudden flush and the
eager glance, were not lost upon him ; but that any man
seeking to establish his claim to a baronetcy should turn
informer was a thought that simultaneously struck the two
men, and all apprehension vanished.
By way of interlude Kelly related the little incident
of the manner in which his friend Joss expiated his good
intentions, and dwelt with apparent pleasure upon tho
part the white-bellied sharks played in that little drama.
Castro winced as he mentally placed himself in Joss’s
uncomfortable position.
“ No. ho cried.
“ Fact,’ said the other, “ and what’s more he’s the chap
to find you the money, when the time comes, if these
lawyers don’t.”
“ You?” exclaimed the Wagga-Wagga butcher.
“Yes,” gasped Kelly. “ I’ve a goodish bit of tin
put away—here, there, and everywhere ; show me its iho
correct card, and I’m fly.”
The Wagga-Wagga butcher then told him a story
which, as Kelly never repeated it, we can give no version
of.
Whether he stuck to his claim, or whether he told Hi*
whole truth and elaborated his plot, can never be known
now.
Then they made arrangements for the event of the cexi
day.
As Kelly was not known in these parts, lie was to seW
the horses, though Thomas Castro was to direct the
stealing.
The programme was this. They were to travel to the
station where the horses were that Thomas Castro had his
eye on.
Near this they would halt, and contrive somehow to
steal the cattle.
Thomas Castro knew the station well, and would Jirecfc
the pilfering.
He was to return to Wagga-Wagga in order 'o
divert suspicion, while Kelly would start for Aiixnr.
where a market was held for sheep, horses, and


There Castro would make purchases as a butcher while
Kelly rid himself of the horses.
This was one of the curses of the colony. Where so
many horses were in the possession of such a large number
of owners, it was difficult for anyone to swear to any one
particular animah
And yet horse-stealing was regarded with almost as
much anger as in the outlying districts in America.
Scant chance for one found red-handed. A bullet or a
rope was the response, and in regions frequented by such
people as the colony was, by a paternal Government what
else can be done?
The routine of a trial might end in nothing besides the
expense.
When Ned Kelly returned to the Wagga-Wagga hotel
all the company had cleared out, but the landlord was
waning up.
“ Rather late, mate,” cried mine host, who was far
gone in liquor.
“ Not too late for a drink,” laughed Kelly, throwing
down a coin.
Mine host rose, and at once procured the materials for a
“ corpse-reviver.”
H iving consumed his glass, which wa» a stiff one, he
was shown his bed by the landlord.
• i say,” said Kelly, as he prepared to fasten his door,
“ if anyone calls me before I want to be called, look out
for squalls.”
And he was soon sleeping the .deep as of the just.
CHAPTER CXL
THE BARONET Sli )\VS THE WAV.
Ned Kelly was accordingly not called early, though the
:at butcher had been over once or twice to inquire for him.
Mine host repeated his orders of the previous night and
waited. . , , . x ,
About midday, Ned Kelly opened his door and shouted
for whisky straight.
V\ hen this was brought he asked for water and ordered
breakfast. The pump was the general resource of visitors
io that hostelry, bur few would have liked to disobey
Kelly’s fierce and peremptory summons.
Some men have a knack of being obeyed, and Ned Kelly
tlm bushranger was one of these.
He was attended to, and went down looking particularly
spruce. . . , , .
As soon as he had partaken of a copious breakfast he
lighted his pipe and walked over to where the Wagga-
Wagga butcher was cutting up his joints and serving his
customers. . , .
Thomas Castro nodded, and bade him walk into ins
parlour, where he would join him shortly.
He did so ; and, the business being attended to by Mrs.
Castro and the assistant, Kelly and the coming Claimant
had a long talk.
They were to start that night when dark, and reach the
station by paths well known to Kelly.
After this was all settled Kelly returned to the hotel.
He wanted to see his friends and hear the latest news of
Tom Conquest.
But they did not turn up that day.
After dark, Thomas Castro came over, and there was a
regular merrymaking. Many of the butcher s friends weie
there, several of whom believed in his monstrous assertion.
No human credulity ever went further. It was a blot
on common sense. , ■,
Nothing else was talked of. Ned Kelly listened and
made no remark. He was no fool, and had very s rong
° P Ab°mt ten!NedKelly and his new associates had their
horses brought out and started on their way. ,
Their object was to reach the station about twelve, w
all would be in a tired sleep, and then bide their time.
Thomas Castro was well acquainted with the station,
whero he bad been on business
He knew where four favourite horses were placed and
had studied the station with his keen and ready if vulgar
art.
Reaching the neighbourhood, Thomas Castro left Kelly
in a safe quarter and then crept on to the station.
Good horses were worth money, and would always fetch
a price from colonists.
The station was a scattered one, and belonged to one who
owned immense herds of sheep.
Kelly remained on the edge of the bush, quiet and
watchful.
He was amused by his new associate, but he scarcely
knew what to make of him. He appeared shrewd enough,
and jet the undertaking in which he was engaged was to
all appearance the height of folly.
Still it mattered not to him. He could wait and sef
more of his new acquaintance and judge better as to help
ing him.
Presently he heard sounds that indicated the horse-stealaL
had succeeded and was approaching, with the four horses
driven before him.
No time was wasted. It was mount and away without
loss of time.
Castro knew every inch of the country, and after a hard
ride they were in a secure hiding place where they could
safely rest for a few hours.
Then again they were one the road, and at an early
hour parted, Thomas Castro taking the route to Wagga-
Wagga, while Kelly made for Albany, where a market wa*
held for the sale of horses, cattle, and sheep.
The place consisted only of a few scattered houses, and
an extensive enclosure for the cattle-yards.
It was attended by large numbers of squatters, and
small cattle jobbers.
Immediately on his arrival, Kelly rode up to an ina
which the other had described as frequented by horee
jobbers and others.
Here he found a good many more hagglers than buyers,
but engaging a tout, a man who cares for nothing but his
commission, he put the horses forward, and after some
delay, succeeded in getting rid of the animals at a fair
price.
He had very many offers made for Marco Polo, but these
he curtly declined.
Having disposed of his merchandise, Kelly went into the
saloon and satisfied his thirst.
He had not been at the bar many minutes when he saw
the tout making signs to him.
“My boy,” said the fellow with an ugly leer, “ you’ve
got me into a hot place.”
“ What’s up ?” asked Kelly.
“ Some fellows say as they knows them horses,” con-
tinued the tout, “ and are looking around for the chap as
sold ’em. It ain’t no business of mine. I’m a agent; but
you twig.”
The man’s manner was vulgar and impertinent, but his
meaning was evident.
“ Time for a drink ?” asked Kelly.
“ Oh, yes. I shoved ’em on the wrong track; but you’d
better make tracks pretty soon,” the fellow went on.
In truth, the go-between did not want any trouble, but
to make money both sides.
While the drinks were being made, Kelly felt in his
pockets and brought out some gold, which speedily disap-
peared in some private corner of the other's garments.
This transaction over, Kelly mounted and made a hasty
retreat to the back of the inn, and guided, by the informa-
tion given him, easily got once more into the bush.
The only course now to be adopted was to work back
to Wagga-Wagga and lie perdu for a while, until this
matter blew over.
It was dangerous work, as the colonists were more
furious at horse-stealing than at anything else.
On reaching Wagga-Wagga, Ned Kelly found that Zeph
and Salmon Roe were there awaiting him.
They had cleared out at once, on receipt of his warning,


with their valuables, and had neither seen nor heard any-
thing of Tom Conquest.
A conference was now held. Their return to the colony
was known, and the bush would be scoured in every
direction for them.
It was to be a new precaution to remain very quiet for
a time.
After some conversation Kelly proposed first a visit to
Melbourne, where, after remaining some time, they could
tack back to Sydney,
Kelly hankered to be revenged on the treacherous Count
and his associate, the Frenchwoman, who had betrayed his
/dentity to Conquest.
The other desperadoes had no objection ; anything was
their game.
But their plans were doomed to be upset.
The second evening after the return of Kelly from
Albany, the butcher informed him that his presence in
Wagga-Wagga was being talked about.
His identity was not suspected, but he was thought to
be the stealer of the four horses belonging to Mr. Horsfall.
Kelly at once determined to depart without beat of
drum.
He and his two comrades accordingly started into the
bush, promising to revisit the Claimant at some future
period.
Kelly’s plan was to make for the Murray river and go
down to Adelaide by a flat steamer, whence he could again
take the mail boat for Sydney.
Finding himself on his way thither in the neighbourhood
of his sister's shanty inn, Kelly thought he would pay her
a visit.
To his great surprise, he found her a widow.
Her husband had fallen in a scrimmage with some im-
pecunious customer.
The widow had made money, and was ambitious. She
wished to try her hand at something larger in one of the
trwns, and was delighted to see and consult with her
u,-other.
How, Kelly’s sister was a fine handsome young woman,
one of those peculiarly attractive in a bar; and Kelly,
when he found she had a good purse saved, advised her
at once.
“ Sell your sticks to the first comer,” he said, “ and get
down to Sydney ; you’ll dp fine in a bar, and maybe, lass,
we may both work together,*
Kate Kelly, as we shall now call her, at once caught at
the idea.
Her-ideas of meum and tuum were on a par with those
of her brother, to whom it may be observed she was
sincerely attached.
A customer was easily found, and with a few clothes
and her money she prepared fora start, making an appoint-
ment in Sydney with Ned.
He and his friends then left her, to make their own
way to the river.
After some hard riding they reached a small hamlet
ylience the flat bottomed steamboats started.
Now came the question as to Marco Polo.
The other horses could be sold, but Kelly would not
part with bis favourite.
After some reflection and inquiries be found a man who
took horses in to grass at so much a month.
He had a large paddock for the purpose.
Kelly paid him a month in advance, saw the shoes
knocked off so that he should not be worked, and then re-
joined his comrades.
The steamer was to start in a few hours, and in due
time reached Adelaide, where they heard that Tom Con-
quest had just married, and had been appointed chief con-
stable of Melbourne.
This was important news in two ways.
It made their visit to Sydney tolerably safe, as there
was no one so well acquainted with the person of the bush-
ranger as the persevering trooper, while they would no
ionger have him scampering all over the country after them.
CHAPTER CXIL
WHERE KIT THE CRUISER APPEARS.
Leaving Ned Kelly and his desperadoes for a wbfs'a, we
transfer our readers to pastures new, that we may intro-
duce characters essential to our narrative.
We are in sight of a bay on what may be the shores of
a continent or of an island.
It offers nothing to the view but a shelving beach of
dazzling white sand, backed with a few small hummocks
beat up by occasional gales.
In this place the soil is arid and without the slightest
appearance of vegetable life.
The inland prospect is shrouded over by a dreary mirage.
The water in the bay is calm and smooth as the polished
mirror, not the slightest ripple is heard on the beach to
break the stillness of nature.
At the entrance of the bay, in about three fathoms of
water, floats a schooner.
What is she doing in that remote region? for we are on
the shores of New Caledonia, the convict settlement estab-
lished by France, and to which so many desperadoes, who
had fired Paris and committed other almost unheard-of
atrocities, had been sent.
The schooner is well manned
Its skipper was a young man of stout build, a man with
a countenance soured by misfortune, but remarkably hand-
some, of the brigand type.
He was a man reckless and daring, and if his life had
been laid bare deeds would have been made known at
which humanity might have shuddered.
His crew were men used to hardships and ready for
anything.
In various capacities he had been everywhere, in the
east and the west, the north and the south, having some
track behind.
He was standing now under an awning in conversation
with a Frenchman.
The latter was a short, bullet-headed fellow, with a face
of little expression but that of cunning. He had no
whiskers, and a short, stubbly moustache.
A word here about the French convict settlement of
New Caledonia.
Nothing more atrocious can be conceived than the
treatment of the convicts, male and female, by their
jailors.
Torture, shooting, villainies of all kinds, were of con-
stant occurrence, and connived at by those in high places.
No wonder the most desperate attempts were made to
escape.
Most attempts, however, were frustrated, and repressed
with ruthless cruelty.
Ihe only successful escapes were those which were con-
nived at by venal jailors.
There was a permanent committee sitting in France to
collect money and organise escapes, which were generally
carried out from Sydney.
Sufficient had been collected to tempt some of the
officials, and the schooner Kate had been chartered to aid
in the escape of a party of Communists, Socialists, and
Petroleuses.
“When shall we get the signal?” asked the skipper,
Jack Leary by name.
“ I expect every moment,” replied the Frenchman;
“ but vraiment , I tink it will come at the nuit —ze dark.”
“ Well, the sooner the better,” continued the skipper.
“ I don t want to run into the jaws of one of your snappers
—they bite pretty sharply.”
The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders with an expres-
sion of contempt.
“ Nevere fear. Ve will vaz you call snap xo fingere at
zem,” he said.
And drawing out a cigar, he lighted ii, and, walking up
and down, gave occasional glances at the shore.
1 his man, Jean Ribault, was himself an escaped Com-
munist, and occupied himself in aiding the escape of others.


He had an agent on the island who was completely in
his power.
Besides this, no knew the island well.
Some hours passed, and then night fell on the scene.
The schooner still lay quite motionless.
A boat was put out ready for action.
Then came the flash of three muskets from the she re,
and away went the boat.
It ran upon the beach, where a party of eight awaited
them, besides a jailor.
With this man Jean Ribault went on one side, and they
had a brief conversation.
Money then passed, and they parted.
“ Allans , mes en/'ans cried the agent, as soon as the
business was settled, “ no time to lose.”
The escaped victims gladly obeyed.
Re-capture meant much worse than death.
The boat was ready.
All clambered in, and away they went, the men bending
manfully to their oars.
The schooner was ready to slip her anchor at a moment’s
notice.
She had been selected for her swiftness.
The beautiful model aud elegant tapering spars seemed
to indicate American origin.
Anyone on board that day could have seen in what per-
fect order she was.
Her raking masts were clean scraped; her topmasts,
her crosstrees, caps, and even running-blocks were painted
white.
In every point she wore the appearance of being under
the control of seamanship and strict discipline.
As soon as the order was given the crew were immedi-
ately on the alert.
The awnings were furled. She slipped her cable, for
the noise or weighing the anchor might have been heard
ashore, aud was quietly towed out of the harbour by a
boat lowered for that purpose.
Her canvas was soon shaken out, and in the steady soft
breeze “ she walked the waters like a thing of life.''
The breeze freshened, and the schooner darted through
the smooth water with the impetuosity of a dolphin after
its prey.
The incessant jabbering for which our Gallic neighbours
*re so famous was as loud and discordant as of the
white paroquets of Australia when disturbed in the
bush.
Gladness and excitement lit up every countenance, and
a cargo of the greatest ruffians, men and women, fit only
to people the infernal regions, made night hideous by their
singing, dancing, and tumultuous joy at escaping from
that “ Ocean Hell,” the French penal settlement of New
Caledonia.
Women who had long been dead to every sense of
shame, men who would have murdered the twelve Apostles
for five centimes, and burnt a church with in it
to light a cigar, jumped about and howled with frantic
delight.
They were now free from what they bad so righteously
earned—the whip aud the forced corvee , and the scanty,
wretched food upon which they had to sustain a life
doomed to incessant labour under a broiling sun.
Hardly had they made a good ofhng when they heard
.three guns fired, aud knew the escape of prisoners was
discovered.
All convicts were allowed to move about in the day,
but unless they presented themselves at a fixed hour in
the evening were considered as absent.
4s the punishments were too horrible to be risked for a
trifle, the officials knew that absence meant escape.
At once the alarm was given, and two swift vessels,
always kept ready, were sent in pursuit.
Daylight had wholly disappeared, and the question was,
had the - schooner been seen by any bub those who were
poking tor ner ?
Thia was an important question.
Still she kept on her way, knowing all chance of escape
depended on the swiftness of her heels.
They hud no means cf fighting the well-armed and well-
manned brig in pursuit.
She carried too heavy metal, and was by far Voo well
manned.
They must depend on their racing powers, and at a pinch
on some cunning trick.
The victims who had escaped from Now Caledonia were
eight in number—four men and four women.
The first were of the loud-speaking, blatant sort so com-
mon France, while three of the women wt-re of the
common •'•lass of those who helped to fire fair Paris.
The four was different— -petite, with a soft youthful
face and sweet eyes.
No one could have suspected her of crime, and yet
sometimes there was an expression of her countenance
which betrayed that moitie Hinge, moitie Tigre which is so
often to be found in the French character.
“So, Marie Franconnet,” said Jean Ribault, laughing,
“you have escaped at last?”
“It was time,” she answered, with an ineffable look of
sorrow aud pain. “ But what for?” she asked dreamily.
“ You’ll do anywhere,” ho answered gallantly, “with your
face and talents.”
‘’l cannot re-enter La Belle France,” she continued
plaintively ; “ where else can we live ?”
“ Anywhere, ma fine ,” was the laughing rejoinder, “if
you have money, aud you know la bus they have a small
fund for you.”
“ But, then, I must earn my living,” she continued,
“ Your money will not last for ever.”
“You have accomplishments. You sing, play, and can
teach your language.”
“ I know no English,” she sighed.
“No matter,” said Jean Ribault; “I know in Sydney
a lady who finds situations. Your want of Knowledge of
English will cause you to bo taken into some high family.”
At this moment "dinner, most welcome to the escaped,
was announced, and the conversation became general.
The escaped convicts, by whose friends the schooner
was hired, had all the best accommodation to themselves.
Provisions had been taken on in abundance, and the
ex-prisoners revelled in them.
After dinner they hastened to perform another duty;
that was to get rid of their prison dress and assume other
habiliments provided by the agents, thus getting rid of the
last signs of New Caledonia.
Meanwhile, Jack Leary, the skipper, was on the look-
out, He had a man in the crosstrees, while he himself
examined the chase by means of a night glass.
She could be plainly made out, and, it was clear, sailed
well. , . ..
“It won’t do,” muttered Leary, “to get caught. It
means losing my light little craft.”
Aud calling his first officer they held a long consultation,
which terminated in the keen examination of the ropes and
sails.
At this time the wind increased.
“That’s the ticket,” cried Jack Leary; “well show
her a clean pair of heels after all.”
Again an hour of deep anxiety passed, aud then once
more they examined the chase.
The hull, which an hour before was plainly to be dis-
tinguished, could now no longer be seen.
When daw n came not a trace of her was in view.
The victims 01 their own crimes and the harshness of
others had escaped.
The next thing to be considered was how to land them
in Sydney.
The Kate was chary about showing he»‘celf very openly,
In Sydney sue would decidedly attract too much atten-
tion.
Besides, they wanted to keep the mystery, if possible,
of their organised escape from New Caledonia, i hat soma
English aud American vessels had a hand in it was known,


desirable to keep the individuality of the
secret.
After some consideration it was resolved to waylay a
Sydney-bound vessel, half a day from the port, and
say these eight foreigners had been picked up in aa open
boat without luggage and with very little money.
Of course they would not be refused.
And so matters came about.
A vessel was hailed, the escaped convicts taken on
board, their story believed, and pitied.
Of course they were taken on without the slightest
hesitation. A collection even was made for them.
Thus they lauded in glory and in clover. They were
evidently not aware that they would be free the moment
they landed on .British soil, and would not be surren-
dered.
They went to 4 quiet hotel, and began to purchase
what they required.
There seven of them disappeared from our view ; most
likely they got mixed up in the seething vortex of crime
which at this time swept like a torrent over the colony.
Marie Franconnet, after making her toilette one morn-
ing with more than ordinary care, went to call on Madame
nfbillard, the agent for governesses.
She received Mademoiselle Franconnet great
cordiality. Her friend, M. dean Eibault had spoken of
her, and she would do her best.
After some conversation, Madame Eibillard examined
her books.
“I have a very fine situation,” she said, “but what
about papers and references ?”
Marie assumed a dejected air.
“ All lost upon that unfortunate ship,” said the girl in
a plantive tone.
“Well, the situation I recommend is at Government
House,” she continued. “ Lady Belmont has two daughters
who speak French a little, and who wane someone to
perfect them. I will lay the case before her ladyship,
and you shall hear from me.”
And so Marie Franconnet went away rejoicing. Thus
Marie Franconnet, really Frangoise Benoit, the petroleuse,
was promised a situation in the house of an English
nobleman !
The Earl of Belmont was governor of the colony, a
high and mighty personage.
Next day Madame Llibiiiard wrote to Marie to attend
her to Government House.
Meanwhile, of course, the girl lived in the house of the
governesses’ agent.
The residence of Madame Eibillard was in the old part
of Sydney, which in no wise resembles the magnificent
capital erected on Port Jackson, one of the finest natural
harbours in the world.
The houses are chiefly built of wood.
That of the Frenchwoman was of a f-uperior class, and
had been improved by its more recent owners
It had three storeys, aud Marie Franconneb’s room was
at the summit.
After a long talk about the future, the girl retired.
She had been in bed and asleep some time when she
was awakened by the smell of smoke.
Hastening to the door she opened it, but as hastily
closed it again, for she saw that the stairs were in flames.
Her only hope was the window, but looking out, she
knew at once that to leap out would be to expose herself
to certain death.
The flames were bursting from the lower windows, and
the tenement must soon fall a prey to the raging element.
Marie believed her last hour had come.
But as she appeared at the window, a loud shout irom
below informed her that she had been seen.
This was wue. The fire had soon collected the usual
crowd.
The engines had not yet come, but as soon as it was
known there was someone in the upper room, a ladder
was fetched by a number of men.
Marie, who had dressed herself and secured her small
stock of valuables, looked out with feverish anxiety
Would they be in time ?
The floor of her room was quite red hot, and the names
must come through before many minutes could elapse.
Then she was lost, all her scheming was over.
No prayer came to her lips, but the old teachings of
youth are not to be smothered.
A prayer came to her heart if not to her lips.
Then there was a great shout, and she saw that a ladder
had been placed against the house.
Again she looked out aud saw that flames and smoko
obscured the view below.
She had no courage to clamber to the ladder, which,
moreover, was too far from the window for her to reach.
Then again a roar came, and she saw a man emerge
from the clouds of smoke and flame.
As he did so, he yelled to the crowd below some orders
she did not understand
At the same moment she became dizzy, and fell.
The crowd pushed the ladder nearer the house, as di.
rected by the man, and be was able to enter the cnamber.
Clutching a blanket, he wrapped up the semi-insensible
form in it, and, being of powerful frame, contrived to
reach the ladder with his burden.
Once on the ladder, he kept a firm hold with both hands,
one to his burden, the other to the ladder.
He was half blinded with the smoke, while his hands
and face were much scorched by the flames.
But he kept on, and finally reached the street, with his
still insensible burden, amid loud and ringing cheers.
As these arose the roof of the house fell in, and all
knew what would have been the fate of the gir\ if he bad
not had the courage to save her.
“ This way,” said several voices, and then they took
him though the dense crowd, which made way withoSS
hesitation to where a shop had been opened for the recep-
tion of Madame Eibillard.
The good woman had been terribly alarmed for her
lodger, and it was her cries that had first drawn attention
to her existence.
She received her from the arms of her saviour with
delight.
Under theinfluence of restoratives, Marie soon recovered,
and then tried to thank her brave deliverer.
But Madame Eibillard had to translate.
The rough-and-ready individual who had risked his life
to save Marie Franconnet, was no other than Ned
Kelly.
Though coarse, his was a manly physique which
the petroleuse admired.
As she thanked him with tears in her eyes, the bush-
ranger thought he had never seen anyone so beautiful.
He resolved to renew the acquaintance, but now took
his farewell.
When he went out, greatly to his annoyance he received
an ovation.
A neighbouring drinking saloon had been opened on the
strength of the fire, and was driving a rare trade.
Here Kelly was taken, and forced to imbibe several
drinks before he could get away.
Such was the first meeting between Ned Kelly aud Marie
Franconnet, which was to lead to so many and such not-
able results.
Kelly and his pals had been passing at the time and haC
stayed to witness the scene.
When it became known that a girl had appeared at &
window above, the bushranger was forced by a desire to
distinguish himself.
Zeph and Salmon Eoe would have held him back, but
opposition always roused him.
He would ascend, and ascend he did, to the great advan-
tage of Marie Franconnet.
The house was gutted and several others were injured,
but Madame Eibillard was insured, so it mattered little-
to her.


Kelly returned to his lodgings and when he went to
sleep, found himself dreaming of the beautiful French
girl.
CHAPTER CXIII.
AN EARTHLY PARADISE.
Government House, Sydney, is one of the most beauti-
fully-situated palaces in the world.
It is placed on a height overlooking lovely grounds,
styled Hyde-park, and a bay only equalled for beauty by
that of Rio.
When we say “bay,” we should rather describe a suc-
cession of bays, one opening out of the other, dotted with
fertile islands covered with timber.
Out of these bays start coves of equally deep water—
sixty f eet in depth—penetrating into the forests, and over-
hung by the branches of almost primeval trees—a scene
of sylvan beauty unrivalled in the world.
Government House is built of white stone, and is a
superb residence for any potentate.
It is said that the noble earl, the Governor aforesaid,
was almost dumb with astonishment when he entered the
capital of a colony not a hundred years old. and founded
by successive cargoes of the vilest of England’s crimi-
nals.
It is no longer a penal settlement.
To this place Madame Ribillard took Marie Franconnet
in a vehicle.
The history of the girl was never exactly known, nor
how she came to be mixed up with the ferocious group
of covpr-yuryes and other wretches who did their utmost to
ruin Paris.
Her origin remained a myth. That she was well-
nurtured, well educated, and gentle in manners, was very
clear.
Probably like many others, carried away by a wild and
false enthusiasm, she had made an idol of one of the red
Republican leaders, and had fought by his side.
Lady Belmont had already given orders, so that when
M, Ribillard seutin her name she was at once admitted to a
small reception-room, where Lady Belmont, a fine, aristo-
cratic-looking woman, soon joined them.
She received Madame Ribillard, whom she knew and
esteemed, graciously.
She then turned to Marie Franconnet, who, on being
questioned, stated that, having lost her friends and her
small fortune, she had been advised to try Australia,
where there was a demand for her Qualifications.
tshe had numerous letters of introduction, all of which
had been lost in the unfortunate vessel which had been
wrecked.
She remembered ony two names, Monsieur Jean Ribault
and Madame Ribilla T d.
M. Jean Uibault, bad spoken to madame, and she hoped
she would give her a fair trial.
“I will,” said the countess most graciously, “give you
a fair trial Yo~ will live with us, and be the constant-
companion o f w y girls.”
The salan was exceedingly liberal, and Marie Fran-
connet weiU a-vay delighted, and inwardly thinking how
easily th"°o insu'ar ladies of rank and title were hood-
winked
She went out, bougiit a couple of boxes and some very
simple necessaries, and then, putting on a very plain dress
wearing a veil, took her walks abroad.
She was quite surprised at the sight of a city so well
built, so different from anything she had seen, except
that one she had done her utmost to destroy.
She went down towards the shipping.
She noticed th.it many turned to look after her near
and dainty figure, but no one attempted to speak to her.
Once or twma "he remarked that a man web -dressed
passed her. .....
He was a Nfld, nar.cifVMVc win, with a rather forbidding
countenance
But he was of those who command, and Marie Fran-
connet admired that sort of man.
Still she was not going to give him encouragement.
She knew he. p.a,oe too weh, so that when ran assi-
duities became rather too annoying, she hastily returned
to her hotel.
The good-looking, though rough, stranger followed
close on her heels, took note of the name and situation,
and retired with a self-satisfied and somewhat sardonic
grin on his lips.
It was Ned Kelly, now domiciled in Sydney, carefully
disguised, who was determined, before he ventured again
into Melbourne, to hear what report was true about
Tom Conquest.
He had met his sister, who, partly by his aid and the
influence of her own sharpness and good looks, had
got a position as barmaid in an hotel, the luncheon-bar of
which was frequented by numerous swells, among others,
by the officers of the constabulary, who had been in the
army.
As the pay is good and the service active, many dash-
ing young fellows had volunteered.
Among these was one Captain Lionel Henshaw, who
had already taken some notice of Mary Meadows as Kate
Kelly called herself.
“ Stick to him, my girl,” cried Kelly; “ who knows what
may happen ? Anyway, you can pump him.”
And Mary promised.
Fascinating young women are the o’vis to worm secrets
from susceptible young men.
Kelly chuckled excessively.
Happening to get a glimpse of the taco <j2 Marie Fran-
connet, whom he did not as yet recognise as the girl he
had saved, and believing, like many ignorant Englishmen,
that French girls are ever ready and willing to speak to
anyone, especially if well-dressed and rich, he had tried
to make her acquaintance.
He had failed, but he in no way felt faint hearted.
That one glance had inflamed his rather peppery imagina-
tion, and he determined to follow the matter up. He
would scrape an introduction in some way or other.
He followed her home, and soon found means to ascer-
tain her name.
His plan was to get his sister to call, make up some story
and thus strive for her acquaintance.
But when Miss Mary Meadows called next day, rather
gorgeously arrayed, she found she had flown. She had flitted
to Government House, where Mary could not follow.
The daughters of the Earl of Belmont were two, Blanche
and Violet, sixteen and eighteen.
They had music-masters, drawing-masters, everything
that con’d be thought of to make them accomplished and
lady-like.
Marie Franconnet was only to speak French. She would
accompany them in their walks, and except on public days
take her meals with them.
The earl and countess liked to practise French, and found
no great opportunity in the colony.
There were a great many public dinners and dinners to
large families.
These she did not attend.
Now there was in the family the Honourable
Boyd, privatp secretary, nephew, and heir to the earl.
He was a young fellow of about two-and-twenty. He
was very good-looking, very impressionable, and verj
foppish, and not overburdened with brains.
The first dinner at which he sat, he was opposite
Marie Franconnet, and that ’cute young lady at once saw
that she had made a deep if not a lasting impression.
But she was careful to show no knowledge of the other #
evident admiration.
Mario had to play a waiting game, to ingratiate herself
with the family, and this could only bo done by playing the
part of a modest and retiring girl.
It was almost too ludicrous —she, the petrolcn-.e and the
of the late Louis Jambert. shot on the barricades.


to be looked on as fit to associate with young ladies of
rank. . .
But this Honourable Percy Boyd might be worth winning.
Her first duty to hers°lf, she said, was to learn English.
Site* would never be able to get on without that.
Her employers all spoke French, but she did not wish to
confine herself to associating with them only
Some day English might prove useful. But she had an
idea it was very hard work.
Still she would persevere.
Marie Franconnet had great liberty. Shf had to be
present at ail the meals of the young ladies, to v?alk certain
hours with them, to drive also. The rest of her time was
her own.
She would remain in her room and do as she thought
proper.
It was not difficult to get out.
At the back of the Government House were the grounds,
and at the extremity of these was a double turnstile turn-
ing both ways.
This Marie knew and determined to avail herself of it
Next day, after breakfast, the young ladies went to take
their music and drawing lessons, which would occupy them
until lunch.
Marie Franconnet selected a book from one of her boxes,
a novel of rather a prononce character, which sho took
with her to a shady part of the grounds.
Here she seated herself in a position where she could
see anyone approaching before they could get close to her.
She then opened her book and was soon deep in its
contents.
Presently she started.
She heard footsteps, and saw the Hon. Percy Boyd ap-
proaching
She at once concealed her book in a capacious pocket,
and assumed a half-sleepy, half-languid attitude.
Percy Boyd saw her flushed face with pleasure, and ap-
proached hurriedly.
He was no roue, no profligate—he was deeply respectful
to all women.
He spoke French perfectly, and when Marie looked up
ghe saw him bowing with polished grace.
“ You are indeed a welcome addition to the colony,” he
■aid, after some brief courtesy.
“ You flatter,” she answered. “ I thought you English
never condescended to do so.”
“ We never flatter, we tell the truth,” was the response.
Marie laughed, and said nothing when he seated himself
close to her.
The yoang man had seen a little of the world and that
was all.
He was scarcely more than a hoy, hut he was warm-
hearted, and the sprightly French girl, with her smattering
knowledge of French literature, delighted him.
She was a revelation—a something he had never seen
before.
He was delighted, and Marie Franconnet, who saw
through him aa if he were transparent, was not ill-gratified.
She might win this glorious prize in the matrimonial
lottery perhaps, if she were careful.
Suddenly the young man started and looked at his watch.
He leaped up.
“ My uncle will be wondering what I am doing,” said
the young man ; and shaking hands and bowing, he took
his departure, leaving Marie Franconnet in the seventh
heaven of delight.
Then, when alone, she continued the reading of her
book until the gong sounded for lunch.
After lunch she talked French in the garden for an hour,
and then went for a drive through the best parts of
Sydney, and out to the beautiful suburb of Parramatta.
After dinner there was a small reception, and one of
the girls asked if she would mind stopping and playing.
They had heard her practise and sing.
Marie of course acquiesced with pleasure, and then
Percy Boyd gave a grateful look.
Marie Franconnet went to her room to make sonar little
change in her toilette.
Where was she bom and where was she bred, that sue
looked so much like a princess in mien, though so petiu
in size and make ? ~
The Hon. Percy Boyd was expected to marry eider
cousin, Violet.
It was an old family arrangement.
But nothing had been formally decided.
Violet was too young, her parents thought, while her
cousin was in no hurry. .
Still Percy Boyd knew what was expected of him, ami
could not make love to Marie before his semi-aftiancefi
cousin’s face.
Still he could be polite and attentive.
All were surprised at the playing and voice of the young
Frenchwoman, who, though only looking eighteen, was
twenty-three, _
“ Where were you taught, my child ?” asked the Conn
tess of Belmont kindly.
“In the College of the Sacre Coeur,”* replied Mane
lowering her eyes.
“Indeed,” said the countess, well pleased, as she must,
in that case, have been of good family.
And so the evening went on.
Marie went to her room very vain and triumphant.
Next day she had another hour in the grounds with the
Hon. Percy Boyd, the nephew, who was very tender.
Still he 'did not say anything to alarm the most fasti-
dious mind.
The young man, heir to an earldom and to a high posi-
tion in society, had to think the matter over very seii-
ously.
He had no father or mother, but he had a guardian in
the shape of an uncle.
He felt that such a marriage as he contemplated would
never he allowed by the latter.
Still he was young, and determined to win this peer-
less girl if he could.
What he heard the night before had helped to give him
hope.
She was of good family, if poor.
And that goes a long way, even when the person spoken
of is French,
Marie Franconnet determined to be very cautious.
She would excite no suspicion in the eyes of any of the
family.
She begged the Hon. Percy Boyd not to make a point
of meeting her every day, as that might excite comment.
“ No one comes here of a morning,” he said laughingly,
“ and I am not to be defrauded of my morning’s lesson.”
And he again wished her good morning.
After lunch Lady Belmont intimated her intention of
taking her daughters out for a drive, so that Marie had
her time for a stroll.
Again she put on a simple dress, and a veil that did not
wholly conceal her beauty.
She went out, determined to see as much of Sydney as
possible.
In the course of her walk she noticed that he man she
Lad already remarked was following her again on the arm
of a rather handsome female. She was tolerably good-
looking, but coarse.
They were evidently bent on speaking to her, but Mari®
was determined they should not.
She saw a kind of tea-garden attached to an hotel.
Seeing a female waiter, evidently French, Marie Fran-
connet ordered tea and entered an arbour.
Kelly and his sister-for it was they—followed, and
took up a table close at hand.
The woman tried to speak, but Marie, with a haughty
look, shook her head.
Then the waiter came.
* A pious convent or school for young ladies. A fttrolrvse was aa «»•
member of this society.


‘‘Tell those people I do not speak English, and do not
want to be talked to,” she said, rather sharply.
The two exchanged glances, but bowed politely, and
ordered refreshments.
Marie laughed to herself
Then she stepped out, with a look out of the corner of
her eye that electrified Kelly.
“ She’s a stunner,” cried Kelly as she left. “I should
like to know more of her.”
“Not while she lives at Government House,” replied
Kate Kelly, “you can have no chance ”
“ She’s only a paid governess,” retorted Kelly. “ No-
thing so very wonderful.”
“You’ll marry her, I suppose,” sneered his sister—
“that useless creature?”
“If slic’d have me,” answered the man, hotly. “ But
I’m a bit too rough for her. I want a wife as can work—
like you.”
“More your sort,” replied Kate, laughing.
And shortly after she returned to her hotel, and made
her appearance in the bar, where Ned Kelly was a con-
stant visitor.
He was soon at her stand, and Kelly was there in con-
versation with Captain Lionel Henshaw.
They were mere casual acquaintances, and Kelly was
very chary of what he said to him.
Besides, he needed to disguise his voice, which was
peculiar, and to keep that up constantly was hard work
Still, they drank and smoked together, and spoke of the
news.
They even alluded to Kelly
But Captain Lionel Henshaw was new in the police, and
knew very little of him as yet. 1
“ I’ve been told to communicate with Tom Conquest,
the new Chief Constable of Melbourne,” he said “ I
have written to him, and shall know more about the
fellow soon ”
Kelly and his sister exchanged glances. Such informa-
tion was well worth picking up.
And then, with a nod to the barmaid, he went away,
leaving the field clear to the captain of the mounted police.
“ Hope to catch Kelly, sir? ” she asked presently, in a
careless kind of way.
“ I joined the force for no other purpose, was the
reply. “ I mean to see him hung ; besides, £lO,OOO is a
good stake to run for.”
“Many have tried,” she remarked, “but none have
succeeded.”
“ Yes; but it can’t go on for ever,” he said. “ And
then, besides ridding the colony of an accursed fiend, I
get enough to start me in matrimony.”
And he looked at Kate Kelly with a peculiar glance,
which meant “ chaff,” nothing more—and so she read it.
And he ordered on the strength of his great expecta-
tions an extra drink. _
Meanwhile, Kelly went away, having marked this man
as one to be watched. , , Al
When he heard from Tom Conquest, he would doubtless
have a fair description of him. Still, the police officer
had never had a good view of him, and could not give a
very close description.
He must be very careful.
But as long as he kept quiet in Sydney, public attention
would not be too strictly drawn towards him.
He determined to be very careful, and do nothing to
excite suspicion.
He led a very quiet life, though he frequented saloons,
and amused himself drinking and smoking.
Leaving Kelly, we return to Marie Franconnet and her
other lovers.
CHAPTER CXIV.
THE THREE RIVALS.
She was undoubtedly a very clever actress.
Two or three days after the circumstances related in
our last chapter, she found herself in the evening seated
next to a man who was a type of the superior Australian.
He was a squatter, and owner of some two hundred
thousand sheep, besides having one of thv -argeat stations
on the Murray river.
He was a gentleman, highly educated and polished.
He was, moreover, a good-looking man, and had
travelled in Europe.
His knowledge of the French language, acquired in a
twelve months’ stay in Paris, was not extensive, but he was
just able to converse with Marie.
First he was drawn towards her simply to air his know-
ledge of the language, but soon he found himself inter-
ested.
He was attracted by her singular beauty and her charm-
ing simplicity of manner.
She knew how to fascinate all those who came within
her influence.
Michael Eldred was about thirty-five, rich, and un-
married.
Here was a chance for her. In her heart of hearts,
Marie did not believe that the Hon. Percy Boyd would
dare to face the anger of his friends for her sake.
Still she would do nothing to repel him. Two strings
to her bow might prove useful
She was, however, very careful not to let her intentions
be guessed at.
The young secretary was watching her, and ahe knew
it perfectly well.
Her manner was inimitable. She listened to Michael
Eldred, answered his questions with apparent timidity,
and then when Percy Boyd came to lead her to the piano
she gave him a sweet smile and a curtsey that were
charming.
The Australian squatter was delighted with the music,
and went away charmed and desperately in love.
He knew she was only a governess, but she would not
be received on the terms she was by his Excellency and
his lady had not her character been perfect.
Percy Boyd had not been blind to the admiration of the
squatter, one of the richest and most influential men in
the colony.
He knew him to be impulsive and generous.
Next morning as usual he met Marie iu the grounds.
There were a few lover-like endearments, and then he
wish you were not such a flirt,” he said, half
“I?” she cried, looking up with a glance of the most
innocent and infantine surprise. (
“Yes, mademoiselle I'ingenue,” he went on, “donb pre-
tend to have forgotten that big, handsome colonist.” >
“ Quelle horreur!” lifting up her hands, “ and monsieur
is jealous.” , . . , ,
“ I am only joking,” he went on, “ but he is handsome,
rich, and young.”
“ There is only one man in the world for me, ahe said
sadly, “ and yet he cannot be mine ”
“ Why?” he asked, looking somewhat puzzled.
“ Your friends will never consent,” she went on in a
sweet plaintive voice. “I am noble, but lam poor.
“ I shall have enough for both,” he answered, “so cheer
up, cherie, and all will be well.”
She did cheer up considerably, and they chatted away
pleasantly for the small time, when duty summoned him
away.
Marie remained alone. ...
She was in deep thought. Should the colonist prove to
be in earnest, should she accept him at once ?
There is many a slip between the cap and the lip. ana
once married all would be well.
The colonist was young, handsome, and, Percy Boyd had
assured her, rich, while the nephew of the Governor had
only his pay and a rather liberal allowance. ,
Marie Franconnet, by her quiet and reserved manner,
quite won on the Earl and Countess of Belmont.


This marriage with her would mortally offend his re-
latives and lose hinj his place.
She would temporise and act according to circum-
stances.
While on these thoughts intent, she heato footsteps,
and looking up saw Kelly before her, accompanied by a
curious looking Frenchman.
Marie rose as if to fly to the house.
“ One moment, mademoiselle,” said Jean Goujon re-
spectfully, “ my master only wants to say two words to you,
in all honour.”
Marie stood still. Despite herself there was something
in Kelly’s manner which impressed her.
“ I am listening,” she said coldly.
“ Monsieur has only seen you once, but already he loves
you. He is rich and ready to make you his wife.”
Kelly, who knew the meaning of the word sa femme ,
nodded.
“Tell the gentleman,” she answered in a dignified tone,
“ that I am honoured by his offer—but I cannot converse
with a stranger. Let him obtain a proper introduction,”
she continued, “ and I shall be happy 1 to receive him—l
mean an introduction to his excellency.”
And with the air of a duchess she curtsied and left
them.
“ High and mighty,” growled Kelly, as he repeated the
incident to Zeph ; “ but I’ll tame the she-cat. That young
girl has a history. I’ll find it out.”
Kelly little thought how near he was speaking the truth
of Marie, attas the petroleuse.
Still he must bide his time.
Kelly was careful not to remain too long at the bar kept
by his sister, but he went in oecasionally.
He did not stop long when the handsome captain was
there in conversation with the attendant Hebe.
He continued, however, to have frequent conversations
with the all-admired barmaid.
One morning the Captain spoke to the girl in an
undertone.
“ Any news?” she asked.
“ Yes,” replied the captain. “ I have heard that Kelly
is about. A man professed to have met him not long
ago. He did not spot him at the time, he said, but,
after thinking where he had seen the face before, he
remembered.”
“Ned Kelly in Sydney?” said the girl, with a hoarse
laugh. “ Impossible! ”
“So they say,” remarked the Captain, and walked off,
leaving the brother and sister together.
Nothing is impossible to that man,” remarked a soli-
tary bystander, a man of about five-and-twenty, very
much of Kelly’s build, and not unlike him in face, though
much more refined in manner.
Why so ?” asked Kelly, secretly amused at tbe state-
ment.
“ Because he’s got toe pluck of the old one,” replied the
other, admiringly “You don’t look half a bad one.
Would you believe it,” he whispered, “ that, though not
by the same mother, I’m his brother?”
Kelly looked at him in wild pernlexity.
I ain’t ashamed of it, neither,” the other went on, “ am
would give anything to see him, if only once.”
“ Anybody in the den, Kate ?” said Kelly to his sister.
“ Nobody,” she answered; “it is quite at your ser-
vice ”
“ Send mz in two goes,” he cried. “If you’ve no- objec-
tion I should like a chat.”
The stranger nodded carelessly a«d followed his new
acquaintance.
As soon as they were alono the redoubtable bushranger
seated himself.
“ I never heard as Ned Kelly ever had a brother,” he
remarked.
“He does not know it himself,” was the answer.
“ Soon after my birth my mother had some money left
her and went to England. She never saw my father again.
It was only when dying she told me the truth. With
all his faults and crimes she remained faithful to his
memory.”
“How did you come out here?” the bushranger asked
curiously.
The man blushed slightly.
“ I did not come of my own accord,” said the other,
who was no other than the man known to us as captain of
the Kate, John Leary, but better known by his sobriquet
of “ Kit the Cruiser. 1 ’
“You needn’t be squeamish with me,” replied the bush-
ranger, “ I ain’t easily made such. You said just now you
had a brother, and that you were not ashamed of him.”
“I did,” replied Kit Kelly, alias John Larvry ; “and I
say it again. He’s every inch a man, from sky-scraper to
his lower stun^ils; and 1 like a fellow that’s got the grit
in him.” *
“ Have you ever seen him ?” said Ned.
“No, I haven’t. No such luckl What a pal he’d
make! By the living Jingo !—as the Yankees say—we’d
sweep creation!”
“ Would you like to see him ?”
“ I’d give the best haul I ever made to clap my two
eyes on him !” said Kit, emphatically.
“ Then just look before you, lad. I’m Ned Kelly, and
ain’t ashamed to own it to a man, for I sf,e you are built
of the stuff I like.”
“ You?” gasped the other.
“ Yes,” holding out h'.s hand, “ I’m the very fellow him-
self—your brother, as you say.”
The younger man could scarcely believe the evidence of
his senses.
“ You are not joking?” he faltoi-*.
(To be continued. }
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the Scuth.— A Sequel to
“The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
leave’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log. —A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Demons of the Sea.
Love and Adventure.
Run away from Home.— A Life of
Adventure.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Million.
The Idol’s Bye.— Adventures in Search
of a Big Diamond.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures ot
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Loruraer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thundea,"




NED KELLI; IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
* It is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpins Black Bess in these islands.” Ned Kei/y, illustrated, Nos. Ito 11, already published at 44, Essex-
■treet, Strand, price One Penny.— Telegraph , 7th July, 1881.
“It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly's
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times , July.
“The history of N»d Kkllt and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollections of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘Nbd
'▲nd his Nao ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Tress, July.
CHAPTER CXlV.— Continued.
“Pm no joker,” was the dry response.
And the two shook hands again as the girl brought in
their drinks.
“WeTe as snng here as a flea in a mat,” said Kelly,
“ so spit out your yarn.”
“ I don’t mind if 1 do,” said the other; “ but oh, lad,
who’d a’ thought it ? ”
And he told his story.
CHAPTER CXV.
KIT KELLY’S YARN.
“Of my mother’s relations with our father I know nothing.
I believe he married her, though, whether the marriage
was legal or not, I cannot say.
“My mother lived in the East-end of London, where
she kept a shop for the supply of sailors—a ship-chandler’s
it was called.
“ She sent me to a very good school, and I went on
fairly enough until I was fourteen. I was fond of reading,
and improved myself by the better class of books.
“ My mother was then very good-looking, but that mat-
tered not. She was sure of plenty of sailors even if she
had been ugly.
“ She was very well-to-do; still for a long time she
reflated all attempts to make her renew matrimonial re-
lations. But there came one, Obadiah Helpmate, as he
called Xiituself, the pastor of a Little Bethel which my
mother attended.
“He was a sleek, obsequious individual, with a snuffle,
and all the usual pious jargon. He used to come to tea,
..ad his consumption of food was wonderful.
“He was very kind to me, which helped him much
with my mother. He always brought me presents, but
though his books were rattier too goody-goody for me, I
never objected.
'■‘l had no suspicion of hie object; or, young as I was,
I should have circumvented him, 1 believe.
“ When I knew of it, it was too late. I was told of it
only four days before the wedding.
“It was useless to object. So my mother, who had
been the wife of Tom Kelly the renowned bushranger,
became Mrs. Obadiah Helpmate.
“ I doubt if our father was as bad as the hypocritical
monster of Little Bethel.
“ I and an aunt took care of the shop during the honey
moon.
“It only lasted a week, and then they came home to
the shop in Thames-etreet. I was at the door.
“ A cab drove up, and my mother, looking years older
than a month ago, alighted, followed by the Rev. Obadiah
Helpmate—drunk.
“My mother walked straight into the shop, and kissed
me with a sob.
“ ‘ Let that cub alone, woman,’ said my pious step-
father.
“ ‘ Who are you talking to like that? ’ I asked.
“ ‘To my wife, you whelp.’
“ He had been a sailor, and aimed a blow at me.
“I evaded it, and sent him sprawling. He got nin a
furious passion, and a nose not at all suitable to a pastor.
“ From that hour he threw off the mask.
“ He had gained his end, and Little Bethel might go to a
warm place.
“ His brutality to my mother was excessive, but he
feared me.
“ I was tall and powerful for my age.
“ I knocked him down twice and damaged his optics, so
that he was confined to the house for some days.
“ Then he changed his tactics.
“ He became suave and bland, and persuaded my mother
that 1 was wholly in fault.
“I had better go to sea.
“ He had a friend, a shipping agent, who would got me
a first-class berth as a midshipman bound for li
“My \ and gave him the mom v


“Luckily her money was strictly tied up, and, though
he had the run of the till, lie could not touch anything
else.
“ He took me to an ill-looking place in the city, and there
I signed.
“ Two davs later I bade my mother farewell, and went
with my precious guardian to the docks.
“ ‘ I’ve a call to make,’ said this amiable imitation of
Stiggms. ‘My brother is captain and part owner of a
small vessel running between this and Newcastle.’
“ I went on board innocently enough.
“It was a small, low-class collier, and the captain was a
coarse imitation of his brother, profane and black-
guardly.
“ We went into the cabin, and soon I heard shouts of
laughter.
“ Then my stepfather, a littb* the worse for liquor,
came on deck and prepared to land.
“ I was about to follow.
‘“Stop where you are, you whelp!’ roared Captain
Hetton—Helpmate was a false name—' you’re bound to
me for seven years.’
“ I turned upon him, and plainly told him he was an
infamous liar.
“ Upon which I was floored by a handspike, and rendered
insensible.
“ When I came to, I was out at sea, and in the hands
of as cruel a gang as ever lived.
“ The captain, as they called him, was brutal, the mate
was brutal, and the men, as a matter of course, followed
suit.
“ I was kicked, cuffed, swore at, half-stunned, and made
the slave-of-all-work of the whole ship.
“My ferocious stepfather had kept the premium my
mother had paid, and just given my master five pounds to
take me away.
•• His object was doubtless to drive me to some violent
act.
“ Well, I reached Newcastle, and here this brute was
compelled to redouble his vigilance.
“ He, of course, would not allow me to go on shore, but
when night came, I swam ashore and escaped.
“ It was easy enough to hide, as, unknown to Obadiah, my
mother had given me money.
“ I walked to Shields, and then I wrote to a trusty friend,
who I knew would not fail me. ,
“ I wrote a letter to my mother, enclosed in this, in which
1 told her all. ...
“As her precious husband spent nearly all his time at the
public-house, she could easily receive the letter unknown
to him. , , ,
“ I told the whole story and begged her to send me
go to sea, long voyages, and let her know how
I got on. I would return home when he was dead, and not
before.
“My mother sent me money. .
“ I came back several times, and communicated with my
“ She told me to be wary, as her husband and his
brother were both on the look-out for me, determined on
revenge.
“ 1 laughed at them.
“ Return to that vile slavery, I never would, lhat 1 was
determined. .
“ When I was nineteen, I reached the port of London
from China, and had some days leisure and plenty of
money. , . .
“ I contrived to find that my stepfather was always out,
at drinking-saloons, music-halls, &c.
“ I was a man now, and feared him not, so I went home.
“My mother was very ill, nearly dying. The brute had
ill-used her because she refused to make a will in his
“ She had left everything to me. I was furiously indig-
nant, and spoke in no measured terms of his misconduct.
“ ‘So,’ said a malignant voice, that of the collier captaia,
as he touched my arm.
“ I was eating some cold meat and breao my mother put
before me.
“ 1 had a knife in my hand, and struck at him, mechani-
cally, meaning to knock him down and escape.
“ But as ill-luck would have it, I imow not how, the
knife entered his body, and unintentionally I was a
murderer.
“ I was arrested after a fearful scene with my mother,
and, after some days, committed for trial for wilful murder.
“At the trial, my stepfather swore hard and fast that I
coolly and deliberately stabbed his brother, though ho
knew it was a pure accident.
“ I was condemned to death, but my sentence, on account
of my youth, was commuted to penal servitude for life*
“ill though my mother was, she was allowed to saje ms
before I was sent away.
“ Then it was that, impelled by some impulse she c/mld
not restrain, she told me the secret of my birth.
“ She told me something else.
“ She could not make a will in my favour now, but she
would transfer the money to a lawyer she believed in, sa
trust for John Morgan.
“ If my sentence should be shortened, or if I escaped,
the life of the convict, I believe I could claim the money.
“ And so we parted. Before we left England I heard
she was dead.
“ We were taken to Norfolk Island, as you are aware,
the worst of penal colonies.
“ Why I should have been sent! there is a matter be-
yond my comprehension.
“ r lhe place itself is charming, but man has made of it
a hell upon earth.’’
Norfolk island was discovered by Captain Cook. It was
then 'iniuhabited, and it is believed that the well-known
nuvig.w>* and his people were the first who ever trod upon
its soil.
It was and is a most beautiful region ; but, nearly every-
where iron-bound.
From the top of Mount Pitt every acre of this land can
be seen as on a map.
It seems strange in alluding to a penal settlement to
speak of the magnificent Norfolk queen pine, with its
sombre foliage, the pear tree with its softless green, the
orange and lemon groves, and numerous gum-trees.
“ 1 need not go into long details of my sufferings,”
continued Kit. “ Let me shorten a horrible story. _
“ I was sent, after a time, with a gang some distance
from the prison, to work at a small breakwater, which was
being made in order to make a new port.
“ For the convenience of the officers we slept on board
a bulk moored about a hundred yards from shore.
“ The intervening water was bright and beautiful, out
beneath the waters were concealed some of the most dan-
gerous and ravenous sharks known in those seas.
“ A swim would not have been pleasant.
“The officer in command of this gang was a fellow
named Captain Blood.
“ If ever there was a fiend in human shape it was this
villain. . , ...
“ His power, of course, was despotic, and we poor devils
were made to feel it.
“His cruelties were dreadful, some of them scarcely
creditable.
« Blood was omnipotent.
“ He could do what he liked, and to whom he liked, _
“ He always carried loaded pistols, as he knew how in-
tensely he was hated, and that, given the opportunity,
there wasn’t a prisoner on the island who would not have
murd red him in cold blood.
“ The triangles ran with blood daily.
“ Men were ‘ tied up ’ for a look, and Blood stood by
gloating over the agony inflicted by the cat, which, if not
lai I on with a will, subjected the flogger (a convict) to
the same punishment.


“ Byron rails at ‘ Man’s inhumanity to man,’
“ He would have known what that could amount to if
he had witnessed the 4 bloody assize ’ daily held on an is-
land which, for climate and natural beauty, is unequalled
on the face of the earth.
44 There was no appeal.
44 We worked in gangs, watched by armed men, while
outside of the hulk was an armed revenue cutter with
her guns always run out and ready for action.
44 But we felt that there must be an end to this-
-44 One of our men was a powerful Irishman, Dan
Regan.
4< He came in for more than his full share of punish-
ment.
44 How he cursed and threatened, and tried to induce
his fellows to rebel, but for a long time in vain.
44 We were forty unarmed wretches, while they were
eight active, armed men.
44 One morning Captain Blood, who, though not actually
intoxicated, was always simmering with drink, was un-
usually abusive and scurrilous.
44 He came aboard the hulk with several warders to take
us off to the works.
44 He cursed us all round—swore he’d flog the lot 4 till
cur livers were bare,' and, just to show his brutal nature,
violently kicked a man who was passing him to descend
into the boat, when, with a yell and a bound like a tiger,
Dan Regan roared out —
44 4 Take that!’ and hit him on the head with a marling-
epike.
44 1 saw at once that it was a planned thing, for the men
flew at the warders, who were preparing to descend to
the boats.
4 4 Taken by surprise, they were hustled into the boats,
and some disarmed.
44 Then to work we all went to get rid of our bracelets.
Though we knew the revenue cutter to be shorthanded,
still she was well armed.
41 Dan Regan had planned his rising with great saga-
city.
44 He had been off and on years on board that hulk.
44 As soon as we were free he broke open a chest of
carpenters’ tools, and then attacked an arm chest, in which
there was a supply of muskets for the use of our masters.
44 There was not much ammunition, but still enough to
suit desperate men.
44 When we went on deck, where lay the dead body of
Captain Blood, we found the revenue cutter within hail-
ing distance.
44 4 Surrender!’ shouted the manly voice of a young lieu-
tenant, 4 or I’ll blow you out of the water!’
44 4 Blow away!’ roared Dan Regan. 4 Better go up than
down among the sharks.’
44 And he and the armed men fired a volley.
44 This was answered by a broadside, which was kept
up, while the boats put out with all the force they could
make.
44 They were fewer in number than ourselves, but well
armed.
44 Dan Regan and his intimates held a conference, and
decided on a plan of action.
44 It was communicated to us all.”
It must be confessed the plan was both daring and in-
genious as detailed by Kit, whose recital we must curtail
by taking his story into our own hands.
It appears that a very strong current, running miles an
hour, set in every day, and at the hour this melee took place,
towards the shore, thus a very stout cable and anchor were
necessary to hold even a light craft in that anchorage. Dan
suggested, or rather decided, to cut the strong cable hold-
ing the hulk by four anchors, and let her drift bodily on
to the Government cutter, and being a far heavier craft
would either sink or fearfully damage that vessel, and
give those on board enough to do to look out for their
safety.
These forty desperadoes were determined when they
44 collided,” or, rather came to 44 smash” on the cutter,
to board her at once and master the crew, satisfied the
awful confusion ensuing would divert the attention, if not
paralyse the action of the crew.
Death awaited them under any circumstances, and
Blood's death and the possession of the cutter wjre their
only chances.
They worked with a will.
Axes soon severed the cables, and down before the in-
setting current came the hulk, increasing her speed every
moment, and bearing down upon the devoted Government
craft with the speed of a raft over the rapids.
Those on board soon saw the game that was up, and
were appalled.
The sound of the heaving the anchor was heard, with
the musical 44 heave ho!” which habit made the sailors
indulge in even at this desperate moment.
But it was no use.
Long before the 44 bite ” of the anchor was loosened,
down came the huge hulk like an avalanche, and crash she
came athwart the cutter.
The two guns discharged their contents into the hulk as
she came on, but there was no time to reload, and the
collision was followed by the forty convicts, headed by the
Irishman, swarming over the side.
They w r ere met by a murderous fire, and down went the
leader, Dan Regan.
Kit was close beside him at that moment.
Dan’s leg was broken.
44 Don’t let them take me, Kit,” he said. 44 Shoot me
first, alanna.”
44 Keep up your pluck, my boy, we’ll soon settle this
little business ;be still till I’m back.” And away he went
to assist in mastering the crew of the cutter.
The fight, though against odds, was very desperate;
but the forty desperadoes were too much for their eight
opponents, who, being overpowered, were securely bound.
There was only one thing to do now: send Her
Majesty’s servants ashore, and use the cutter to reach more
friendly shores.
Kit was a good seaman, and two of the captured crew
offered to join him, provided he told the Government
crew he was sending ashore, they went on compulsion.
The cutter was a good deal damaged, but not so as to
render her unseaworthy.
Being in the Pacific Ocean, and no great distance from
the Fiji Islands (then not colonised by Englishmen), they
could easily send the cutter to tbe bottom and laud L; the
long boat, whose name and colour would first be changed.
When they first landed they were in constant danger of
being murdered by these savages, but by keeping together
they were too strong to be molested.
Kit subsequently got off in a whaler.
His companions preferred to 44 chance it ” with the
natives rather than run the risk of the rope that awaited
them elsewhere, if captured.
This accounts for the number of half-caste children
existing in the island when recently annexed by the
British Government,
It is quite possible the character of their progenitors
was suspected, but the Paternal Government that emptied,
on the sly, their jail-birds into the unsuspecting Australian
Colonies, did not wish to be burdened with the cost of the
support of forty criminals whom they would have been com-
pelled to bring back to England, as the convict settlements
in Australia had been abolished.
After relating this adventure, Kit (or Capt. Leary)
continued—
44 1 went to England, and after some hesitation visited
the lawyer. He proved to be an honest man.
44 My mother had imbued him with a belief in my inno-
cence and he paid me the money. I did not squander it,
but still I spent some in travelling.
44 1 wished my personal appearance to change as much
as possible, and so went to hot countries like Spain and
Mexico.


“ When I thought myself unrecognisable, I came over
here and easily got to be captain of the smartest schooner
I know, the Kate.
c ‘ I bought a third of her with my money, and by dint
ol industry and saving am now her master and owner.”
“Got a craft of your own?” exclaimed Kelly, in a
tone of delighted astonishment. “What do you do with
her?”
Kit Kelly hesitated.
“ I am not particular,” he said, “ to a bit of smuggling
perhaps worse; but since the day I shed blood unin-
tentionally, I never lifted my hand against any man in
that way. I’m proud of your pluck, Ned, and would
place my schooner at your orders—bub no bloodshed
where I am.”
“ Who’s a-going to kill anybody?” said Kelly, roughly.
“ Not me. I never made a stiff un, whatever fools say,
except in self-defence.”
« Glad to hear it,” answered Kit, and fresh drinks were
ordered in.
Ned Kelly became thoughtful for a time.
“ Kit,” he suddenly exclaimed.
“ Well, what is it, Ned ? ’ answered the other.
“ Would you, to oblige a pal and a brother, mind a little
bit of kidnapping?” he asked.
« What do you mean ?” said Kit.
“ I’m spooney on a girl. She’s a Frenchee, but she’s a
plucky sort,” continued Ned. “I’d like to tame her.”
“ French?” said Kit, in a musing way. “ I’d like to see
her
“So you shall,” replied Ned. “ Where do you put up ?”
“ Come and grub with me,” remarked Kit; and the two
went out. .
Kit lived at a seaman’s boarding-house in a quiet
quarter, and had comfortable quarters enough.
Ned chuckled over this, as, in case of need, he might
take shelter here, and, presumably, defy the police if it
were necessary. ,
Ned spent the rest of the day with his brother, and
then returned to his own place, after making an appoint-
ment with Kit for the morrow.
Kit was very anxious Ned should clear out of Australia.
He had done enough to nang twenty men, but Kelly
would not listen to any advice from any quarter.
He told Kit of the target he had been for bullets, and
explained how his armour kept him bullet-proof.
Kit nevertheless was determined to get him away.
CHAPTER CXVI.
KELLY MEETS WITH A STRANGE ADVENTURE.
Kate Kelly, or Mary Meadows as she called herself, had
a very good berth of it. ... a
As she was very attractive, brought in customers and
plenty of grist to the mill, she was not only well paid but
had plenty of leisure. , , a A
Like all her class, she was very fond of finery and
Pl AtTer own request she did not lodge at the hotel, but
had a small private lodging.
Here Kelly was able to visit her and hear the news.
Kate Kelly was proud of her figure, and liked, therefore,
to show herself on horseback.
She bought a habit, and horses were easily hired. _
Occasionally Ned, strictly made up for the occasion,
would accompany her. . ,
On these occasions he affected an elderly wig
spectacles, so that with a grey, short-cut beard and
moustache, few would have suspected him
moment.
It was a perfect metamorphosis. , nlll(1
One morning it had been arranged that they
take a ride, and Kelly had ordered the horses.
He then went to his sister’s lodgings. ! »
She was not wanted until after twelve, when active busme
began.
He found her rather agitated. ■ i
‘ ‘ Anything up, wench ?” he asked.
“ Yes,” she replied, “ that lieutenant stared me lasi
night.”
And she told him what had passed. He came in elated
and excited.
“ Miss Meadows,” he said in a whisper—he ma.de a
confidant of no one else—“l have certain news that
Kelly is in Sydney.”
“ Indeed?” cried the girl, incredulously.
“ Yes, he’s been seen by two persons,” was the answer;
“ one who was robbed and ill-used by him swears that
next time he meets him he’ll never leave him, but traclf
him home.”
“ Why doesn’t he catch him himself?” was Kate Kelly*
contemptuous reply.
“ He’s afraid to,” was the laughing answer; “ he’s life
match for him and is afraid.”
“ Oh !” said Kate Kelly.
The gallant police officer then explained that the ma&
meant in some way to worm himself into his confidence
and then betray him.
“ Scoundrel I” cried Kate Kelly, involuntarily.
“Why do you say so?” asked the surprised captain.
“ Kelly is a fearful vagabond.”
“ But I hate treachery,” she replied, and so the subject
dropped. , „
“Now, Ned,” said the girl, “you must make yourself
scarce— or keep close.”
“ I’m blowed if 1 does,” replied Ned “ I’m going to the
races —and go I will.”
“It an awful risk,” urged his sister. . .
“ I never harks back,” cried the ruffian, “ and I am t a-
going to begin.”
“ Remember, I’d be alone in the world,’ she said, mourn-
fully. “Do be careful.”
“I’m worth ten dead uns yet, Kate, darling,’ cried
Kelly, and began to assume his disguise.
But to please Kate he took an unusual and less public
direction for their ride.
They returned without any suspicious event occurring.
Before going to her business Kate begged he*
brother to be very careful, and to leave Sydney for a
while.
He bluntly declined.
“Bub tare an’ ’oun’s, Kate,” he said, laughing, “111
tell you a dodge. “I’ll ride side-saddle to the race*
You'll lend me °your habit—you’re pretty plump.”
“ Get out with you!” she said, laughing; but so it waa
fi Kelly then went to his lodging, and remained in all day,
not showing himself in the streets at all not even in
all to Zeph and Salmon Roe, who blamed
his foolhardiness.
But Kelly was obstinate.
“Only let me spot this bloke and 111 stop his yaw
tackle,” was his savage answer. “If I only could «wig
him, a knife ’ud be too good for him !
He then recorded his determination to visit the races
disguised as a woman.
They roared with laughter. .
“ Impossible !” said Zeph. “ You would be shotted at
011 “ Don’t you make no blooming error,” replied Kelly.
As his friends were rather afraid of him they held their
Pe They would go to the races in any way they could.
They were a recent experiment since the discovery ot gold,
and were doomed to lead to great things.
Next morning Kelly, after securing a horse well up to
his weight and both powerful and swift, went round to
his sister’s, who had not been idle.
She had got him a wig with curls and a hat to su.t hia
head, which was not exceptionally large.


She had procured a veil which would hide the coarse-
ness of his face.
For the purposes of disguise he was always clean shaven.
He was dressed in a light tight-fitting suit, so that if he
ehould have to throw off his female garb he might easily
appear in another disguise.
Kate contrived to alter her habit to suit him, and as
the skirt was very voluminous, there was no fear of detec-
tion.
The veil was ticu under his chin, so that nothing was
feally visible but the mouth.
Kelly was in raptures. He so delighted in startling and
dangerous adventures that ho was in the highest spirits.
“ Be careful, Ned,” said the girl, in sorrowful alarm.
“ I dread that horrid Henshaw.”
“ Your young man,” laughed Kelly.
He then kissed her heartily, and bade her be hospitable
and bring out the whisky.
While she was getting this refreshment ready he secreted
two pistols and a knife very much like a stilleto.
He then seated himself to await the arrival of the
horse.
Kate warned him against any awkwardness in mount-
ing. But Kelly was too good a mimic to fear detection.
Properly brought up, he might have proved a very good
actor.
At half-past eleven the horse came round, and Kelly
mounted.
He was very careful to act with becoming modesty.
Presently he, or she, was seated side saddle, and trotted
off after throwing the man some money.
“He said the V y was a stout one,” muttered the ostler,
4 ‘ faith, and she’s a strapper.”
Which was doubtless very true.
There was no difficulty about finding the way. Kelly
had had it indicated to him, but the stream was guide
enough.
Kelly had ladies brown gloves and a whip, and though
one or two turned to look at the rather stout party, no
one seemed to have the slightest inkling of the truth.
It was too audacious a thing to be suspected.
. The number of persons going to the races were con-
dderable.
All sorts of vehicles to be found in the colony, and they
much the same as in England, were going.
There was the drag with the Government party, driven
by the Hon. Percy Boyd, and among others on the roof
was Marie Franconnet.
I here were humbler vehicles, but not that exhibition of
utter vulgarity and poor horse flesh so often seen at popu-
lar races in England.
The distance from Sydney was not very great, and Kelly
did not hurry.
When nearing the course, he turned to the left to where
he saw the shelter of some trees.
Kelly had no intention of lunching on the ground. The
act might betray him.
Reckless as he was he took every minute precaution not
to be discovered.
As soon as he was alone in a secluded spot he examined
himself keenly in a pocket-glass, and seeing that all was
right, he again mounted and trotted gently to the race-
course
It was crowded, and most people had taken their places.
Kelly had no idea of entering the enclosures, and shook
ins head when offered tickets.
1° a man of Kelly s tastes the scene was very attractive
and delightful.
Oidyhe would have liked to join in the fun of the affair.
Ihis however was denied him.
Several horsemen made pointed advances to him, which
he coldly repulsed.
It was Kelly’s game not to speak at all. He simply
flicked his horse and moved away.
“ Wife of the Great Mogul,” said one.
Queen of the Cannibal Islands,” laughed another.
We have no intention of describing the races with which
we have nothing to do.
One race is very much like another.
Kelly enjoyed it much and only wished ha could have a
refresher.
Just as one of the races was over, he saw Zeph and
Salmon Roe looking anxiously around.
Kelly disengaged himself from the crowd and rode off
to meet them.
“ Off’s the word,” said Salmon Roe. “ Captain Hen-
shaw is looking for you everywhere, I have kept close to
him all day. A man has just rushed to him, and declared
you are in the disguise of a woman.”
“ him! ” cried Kelly, with a fearful curse, and
turned away quietly.
He did not, however, try his horse’s speed at first.
He made for the road that led to Sydney. But he had
not gone far when he heard shouts, and looking behind
saw a confused mass of men, all mounted, following.
At their head, easily distinguished by his height and
stalwart frame, was Captain Henshaw.
They were about a quarter-of-a-mile behind.
The whole question depended on the speed of his horse.
It was bony and powerful, and Kelly had tolerable confi-
dence in it.
Still the troopers, having to cope with such characters as
they did, were well mounted.
On, on, on, sped Kelly, looking warily to the right
and left.
He soon discovered that those in the rear were quite his
equals.
They might prove his superiors. He knew nothing of
the stamina of the horse when urged to a great pace.
Still he persevered. The road turned several times, and
he lost sight of them several times.
But he could hear the unmistakable sound of pursuit,
and again looked around.
After riding three miles, he came to a bridge over a
stream of not very great width.
Instead of crossing the bridge, he swerved to the left
and dashed towards a mass of thicket near which was a
hut.
He had intended to leap the stream and take a cross
cut.
But on reaching the hut, he found there was a plank
over the river to serve the purpose of a tesMge.
He at once dismounted, let his horse go loose, threw
off his feminine habiliments, and dashed across, casting
the plank into the water when he reached the other side.
He then hurried away.
When Captain Henshaw and his party came up, they
found a hat, veil, habit, and a horse, but no sign of their
owner.
Kelly took his whiskers and nose from his pocket, in
which was also a cap.
thus equipped, he followed a rough-beaten path until
he came to an obscure shanty inn, where a few shepherds
and stock-keepers were drinking.
Here he procured refreshments, and taking a supply of
whisky and tobacco, took his way to wards Sydney, which
he entered in the dark.
He found Zeph and Salmon Roe smoking over their
grog, and very anxious.
Captain Kit had been with them some time, but had
gone away.
“ Let us start at once,” cried Zeph.
~ K°» Kelly, “Im hanged if Ido until i’ve seen
that there Frenchwoman.
~I fc. 'Ta s usele 3s reasoning with him; he must submit to
his fate.
CHAPTER CXYIL
kit’s power over marib.
At ten o’clock the two met, and went in the directaoa. of
the Government grounds.


There was a turnstile by means of which the grounds
could be both entered and left, but they were only for the
use of those who lived in Government House.
No one ever ventured to break the rule; Kelly, of
course, was an exception.
Prowling about in his usual cat-like way, he had dis-
covered Marie’s habit of meeting the governor’s nephew of
a morning.
Leading his brother to a thicket, he concealed himself
to await the departure of the young man.
A moment after they were behind the trees, the lovers
came in sight.
Captain Kit was very nearly whistling.
“ Come away, Ned,” he said, “ there will be no kid-
napping.”
And he drew his astonished brother away. Not until
they were in a retired place did the younger man speak.
“That girl’s an escaped convict,” he then said; “no
one can do anything to her, but if her real chamfer was
known she would be ruined
“Stark mad! that high-flyer a convict!” exclaimed
Kelly ; “it ain’t likely.”
“ It is—and when we’re at home, I’ll tell you all about
it,” replied Kit
Ned Kelly’s astonishment when he heard the truth was
something ludicrous to behold.
All the time he was listening, he was plotting Greed and
avarice were more powerful incentives to him than passion.
The girl was in his power, and in Government House
there must be many valuables.
“ Well—that is a start,” he cried, when Kit’s yarn was
over ; “ did you pick up any parley vuo in your travels ?”
“ A fair smattering,” replied Kit.
“ Then write and tell her ladyship she must come here,
if she don’t want the sack,” said Kelly.
“ What do you intend doing ?” asked Kit.
“ I mean to have that there girl under my thumb, to
make her fetch and carry just as I pleases," he continued,
brutally, “ the wench shall be in my power—you’ll see.”
And he unfolded a plan, cunning and daring, by which
she should join in a daring robbery.
“ We’ll take the swag on board your brig,” he continued,
run to Adelaide, sell it, and come back when the kick-
up is over.”
Captain Kit, like a good many others, was easily ruled
oy a master mind and yielded his ready consent.
He had passed the Rubicon, and, though he looked with
abhorrence on bloodshed, would probably in his brother’s
company learn to be less squeamish.
Captain Kit wrote a letter to Mane Franconnet in these
words—
“A friend who knew Mile. Marie Franconnet, but
under another name, must see her on important business
——this evening at eight. A guide will be in waiting out-
aide the Government grounds, near the turnstile.”
The consternation of the girl on receiving thia laconic
out alarming note may be conceived.
Of course she knew what it meant, and that she was in
some man’s power.
What should she do ? Her first impulse was flight. She
had money and jewels, presents from the family, and she
knew that steamers were plying daily to every part of the
colony.
But this meant ruin to all her hopes. She would go to
the reading-room.
The countess was goodness itself. When Marie asked
for her for leave to call on Madame Rabillard, permis-
sion was granted at once.
At eight she was outside the turnstile, plainly dressed
and thickly veiled.
There Captain Kit awaited her. He bowed politely, but
a cold grip went to her heart when she recognised the man
who had aided her in her escape from New Caledonia.
She walked by his side in speechless terror. She could
not have spoken if she had tried
They reached his house, and she was introduced into a
sitting-room, where, to her increased surprise and alarra,
she recognised her strange admirer.
“ This is my brother,” sait Kit, drily.
Marie sat down, more dead than alive, with fear and
embarrassment.
Captain Kit then explained his views, or rather those
of Ned Kelly.
His brother had wished to marry her.
Marie’s eyes flashed eagerly.
“ Don’t be alarmed,” said Kit, in a cynical tone, “ no
harm is meant you.”
“ A woman like you is after my own heart. who
could burn a town down is just the card I want to hold
in my hand.” said Ned; but the girl did not under-
stand him.
“ As she don t ‘ bite’ ” continued Ned, “just tell her if
she won’t marry me, she must help me.’”
Kit then explained that his brother was in want of
money, had had severe losses at play, and must get gold
somehow.
In Government House there must be plate and cash, tho
position of which she must know.
“ You wish me to rob my employers,” gasped the un-
happy victim. “ Never ! ”
“ No—only to admit my brother when all are sleep,”
continued Kit, “ and show him the place where the valu-
ables are kept.”
“ They are under lock and key,” said Marie, sobbing in
utter consternation.
“ Never you mind that,” was the sardonic answer.
And, despite the girl’s resistance, she was compelled
ultimately to yield.
It was agreed that she should meet Kelly in the
grounds.
There was a side door leading to an escaher ae service,
which was generally left open, to facilitate the exit and
entrance of the servants who stopped out late.
Marie went away in a state of mind most truly pitiable.
What should she do? To tell the truth meant social ruin,
and the end of all her hopes.
This, then, was not to be thought of. She must
resign herself to her cruel fate.
It was long past midnight ere she entered the grounds.^
Kelly was there dressed very plainly. He wore hia
favourite disguise of nose and whiskers.
Not a word was spoken. She led the way.
All was still. Presently they reached a retired part of
the building.
She pointed to a door, and there would have moved
away, but Kelly grasped a knife he wore in his belt, and
looked at her with such fierce and menacing eyes that
she trembled.
He then produced a bunch of strange keys, and soon had
the door open.
He drew her in and closed the door.
The plate chest was not even locked, and Kelly easily
filled a bag.
He however, after a long search, found no money.
Marie believed his Excellency kept his money in hhi
study, which was next to his bedroom, dhis she faltered
in broken English. ~ ..
Kelly made no reply, but put his finger on lus lipa
warningly, and went out.
Marie, more dead than alive, retired to her room.
Next morning, before the robbery was discovered, the
Rate, Captain Kit, with Kelly and his pals on board, was
far away.
The robbery was not discovered until late. There was
to be a dinner-party that day, and in the afternoon the
butler and his aide went to the strong-room.
Nothing seemed touched, but when the confidential
servant opened the chest, he was taken with a kind of
trembling fit.
The chest was empty.
“ Great heavens! ” the man cried, “ whatever can L dt> i
It is all gone.”


“ Put in the w<ong chest, perhaps, Butler,” observed his
friend and aide.
“No!” gasped the unfortunate butler. “I must go
and tell bis Excellency.”
The Earl of Belmont heard the news with great anger
and annoyance. The intrinsic value of the plate was great,
but it was also very unpleasant and awkward for it to dis-
appear just as it was wanted.
Not the faintest suspicions occurred as to the means by
which the robbery was effected. Because when Marie
Franconnet appeared at breakfast, her eyes were heavy and
her cheeks pale, no one thought of connecting that fact
with the robbery.
Lady Belmont kindly asked what was the matter, and
headache was given as an excuse.
There was nothing to be done but send for the police
and set 'hem on the track.
Such valuable plate with crests and other marks indicated
its origin. But in all communities there are disreputable
people who will buy anything without asking its origin.
Marks are not difficult to obliterate, and then the melt-
ing-pot does the rest.
Marie Franconnet was humiliated and terrified. That
she should have conceived a passing admiration for a man
of Kelly’s character was humiliating,
But it was still more miserable for her to know herself
to a certain extent in his power.
How could she get out of it? Not by remaining in
Sydney, where he could always find her.
She must make a bold stroke for a husband, and yet even
that would take time.
CHAPTER CXVIII.
MARIE MAKES A BOLD STROKE.
The goverqpr in a ligno and airy way spoke of his loss at
dinner, apologising for the absence of the plate, but as
that did not detract from the goodness of the dinner, every-
body smiled and the dinner went on.
The young secretary and nephew of the governor could
not very well pay marked attention to Marie before people.
On the contrary he had to attend to others, and especially
to his cousin Violet, who certainly looked upon him as
very stiff and cold to what he had been.
Marie on this occasion was seated beside the wealthy
squatter, who appeared to admire her more and more every
time he saw her.
Marie’s tactics were very clever. She was quiet and
timid, doing nothing to draw out her lover and yet not
repelling him.
Percy Boyd looked on with a frowning brow, though
seeking to conceal his jealously and his infatuation.
Violet and her sister began to have a very slight ink-
ling of the truth -at all events, that Percy admired the
adventuress, as they then called her.
Not for on'' —, ment did they suppose it was anything
but a young man’s passing admiration for a pretty girl.
After dinner there was a reception and music, and the
squatter, while Marie played, sat apart.
But there were professional players present on this occa-
«ion, and Marie’s services were seldom required.
Percy Boyd scarcely ventured to speak, so that the
squatter had it pretty well his own way.
The apartments were extensive, and during the time the
orchestra was playing it was easy to find a corner where
one was safe from interruption.
The colonist contrived a promenade with Marie when
the music was rather loud and boisterous, and general at-
tention was drawn off.
The girl instinctively kneAv that a crisis was coming.
The man’s manner was gauche, and timid.
He was silent, too, as if trying to screw up his courage
to the sticking place.
At last they reached a couch near a window, and sat
down.
The squatter spoke about the country, asked her how
she liked it, and carried on generally a commonplace style
of conversation.
Then he paused again, and Marie, practised actress as
she was, knew what was coming.
The state of the girl’s heart, if she had one, was rather
mixed.
Ned Kelly, by the exposure of his criminal tastes, had
turned her utterly against him.
The Hon. Percy Boyd, she feared, was otsfc of the ques-
tion.
He was young handsome, well-born, and would be titled
and rich, but, then, angling for him would take time.
And in the meantime she would remain in the power
of Kelly, and this might lead to disastrous results.
“ I am a very plain-spoken man,” began the squatter.
“ I have travelled a good deal, and now mean finally to
settle. My means are ample, and, should my good fortune
continue, I may be probably able to sell off and buy pro-
perty in England. But this would be useless unless I had
a •rife. Now I believe you are in every way suited to me.
You have education and accomplishments, very welcome
; n the bush. I will strive to make you happy. Wdl you
be my wife?”
“ I am poor and obscure, and am penniless,” she faltered
in a low tone. “ I have not a friend in the world !”
“ More reason you should want one,” was the hearty
reply of the honest squatter. “ Will you try to like me ?”
“ I like you already,” she faltered, “ but still my position
is so beneath you.”
“ That is my lookout,” he answered ; “am Ito consider
you have accepted me?”
“ Yes,” she faintly ejaculated.
Well, we leave the ill-assorted lovers to their raptures
awhile, and then resume the conversation.
“ I shall ask permission of Lady Belmont—you can give
up your situation, and be married at once,” he said. “ I
know the earl well and will call to morrow.”
“ Monsieur,” she began, timidly, really rather frightened,
“ I am a poor dependant—until you get her ladyship’s
consent, you had better not say I have accepted you ”
“ Leave all to me,” said the loyal colonial, “ your feel-
ings shall be held sacred.”
And they returned to the crowd, not without notice
from Percy Boyd, who however was tied hand and foot.
He could not venture to find fault and expostulate.
Next morning, Marie took her usual walk in the grounds
She was rather more flushed than usual. Naturally
she was paler, but had ventured on the use of cosmetics.
Percy Boyd came to the rendezvous in no very good
humour. He was jealous, and he showed it.
“I was very much surprised, Marie,” he said, “tonotice
how you went on with that horrid bush savage.”
“ He is a most agreeable gentleman,” she answered.
“ I dare say he is,” he growled, “but I cannot let him
come between the wind and my nobility.”
“ But you can never marry me,” she went on, in a rather
hard, sad, dry tone.
“ In time,” he replied, a little uneasy.
“ I cannot wait,” she exclaimed. “ I am poor; my meet-
ing you places me in a false position. It is sure to be
found out. Our meetings must cease, our understanding
must come to an end, unless you speak to your uncle and
aunt at once.”
“ 1 cannot,” he said, colouring hignly. “I am expected
to marry my cousin, Lady Violet Boyd—a mere school-
girl. Were Ito decline, I should be started off to Eng-
land at a moment’s notice—especially if I owned-my love
for you ”
“ Then we must part,” was the answer.
“ You will give me time?”he asked, in desnaring tones,
he was really and truly _ infatuated, and would have
married her, if he had been in a position to have done so,
have married her at once.
“ How long?” she asked, rather coldly.
“I cannot say,” ho urged earnestly, “but if you love
me, you will wait.”


“Consider my position—that of a forlorn girl—with-
out any relatives—dependent on a few kind friends," she
said, in tones of deep emotion, “and 1 fear me, 1 am be-
having very ungratefully.'’
“ Give me time,” he begged.
“We will sneak of it to-night again,” she said, “if wo
can.”
And she allowed him to take his departure.
Then she walked beick to Government House and went
to her room, where she made a seemingly simple, but
really very elaborate costume.
As she expected, she received a summons to attend
Lady Belmore in her boudoir.
Here, as she expected, she found the countess in con-
versation with the squatter.
“ Sit down, mademoiselle,” remarked the countess ; “ I
have something very important to say to you.”
Marie bowed low, and seated herself in the chair pointed
out by the countess.
“ This gentleman,” began the countess, “ has rather
surprised me by informing me that, without having
actually proposed, he has given you a hint as to hi* wish
to make you his wife, and that you have referred him
to me.”
“ Madame la Comtesse,” said the girl, in accents which
thrilled the listener’s heart, they were so plaintive and
sad, “ I have no father, no mother; and, madame, I have
dared to hope you would be my friend, to advise me, if I
dared ask you.”
“Certainly, my dear,” was the answer of the kindly
countess. “It is a serious step to take, and I shall be
sorry to lose you. But you are poor and an orphan, and
monsieur, who is a good man, rich, well known to my
husband.”
The squatter, at a sign from the countess, had moved
away.
“And you think you can love him and be happy?”
asked the countess, kindly.
“ I know ne t much of love,” she answered, with well-
acted timidity—this Petroleuse, who had abandoned family
and sociclj for a handsome Communist —“but I think
him a good man, and will make me a good husband.”
The countess laughed a sweet ripple of womanly
laughter, and then turned to the squatter.
“ You’ve won the day,” she said, looking at her watch.
“ I’ll give you five minutes to settle matters, as lunch will
be ready, and then we can settle the particulars, as your
return to the Murray river is to be so soon.”
And she rose.
Marie could make no objection to an early marriage.
She lived in constant dread of the re-appearance of Kelly,
of whom by his real name of course she had never heard.
He might expose her at any time.
When, therefore, the ardent lover spoke of an early
marriage, she resigned herself into the arms of her lover
and—the countess.
The news somehow spread before they met at lunch,
and everyone was pleased except Percy Boyd.
It was with the greatest difficulty he kept down his
indignation
But she was fair, fickle, and faithless. She had accepted
another man, and he must learn to hate her.
That was his wish, but at twenty-two it is hard to feel
that sentiment towards any woman, especially against the
one you love,
Percy did not know much about drinking the waters of
oblivijn.
On!j» that he was—though slightly foolish—a perfect
gentleman, he would have quarrelled with his father s
friend. .
After lunch the party dispersed, and there being no
further fear of Marie proving a rival, Lady Violet and
Lady Blanche were very gracious to Mane.
They hoped she would be happy; it was an excellent
match ; and, in the days to come, as the colony progressed,
she would have a fine house and every luxury.
Besides she could always come for a short seasou to the
capital.
Marie laughed in «v=r sleeve. If they had only
known !
And if she had only known in the time to come what it
would produce to her !
The squatter, who was being pressed by his overseer to
return to the station, proposed that the marriage should
take place within a fortnight.
There was no opposition, as Percy Boyd, on finding
that his sweetheart had finally jilted him and thrown him
up, asked his uncle to send him on a mission to Mel-
bourne.
Money of course was not wanting, and exactly a fort-
night after she was wooed, Mane Franconnet became Mrs.
Eldred.
Here we leave them. We shall find them again before
long.
CHAPTER G XIX.
WHERE TO MELT IT.
Captain Kit knew those seas well, and as he was well
aware that Ned Kelly would be the better for an absence
of some duration from the colomy, he proposed making a
voyage to Hong-Kong.
There they could get rid of the plate.
Chinese and Jews were to be found ready and willing
to buy everything and ask no questions.
At all events, in order to run no risk, it was decided to
take out the crest.
This there was plenty of time to do.
Captain Kit had not a large crew. He was a cautious
man and did not like to excite suspicion, but he had
enough men for his purpose if he fell in with a moderate-
sized ship.
As a rule there was little to be gained by assaulting
small merchant vessels, as their cargo was bulky and of a
kind which would not suit Kit the cruiser; while, as a rule,
they had not much money.
So Kit trusted a little to chance and to something turn-
ing up.
Though he had plenty of arms on board, he had no
cannon.
Captain Kit on board as a skipper was a very different
man from what he was on shore.
When on his vessel he was every inch a sailor.
At Hong-Kong he had been more than once, but only in
a legitimate way.
The voyage was not a very eventful one, for the weather
was fine and nothing came in their way to excite their
cupidity.
Either the vessels were too large to attack, or too small
to be worth capturing.
In this way they arrived at Hong-Kong.
No one on board had any knowledge of Kelly, Zeph, or
Salmon Roe, while Captain Kit had done nothing to bring
down the vengeance of the authorities upon him.
So they performed the needed formalities, and went
on shore to a lodging-house.
Now came getting the plate on shore. Once the ship
was admitted to harbour, very little notice was taken of
what was done.
Men went backwards and forwards without much ques •
tioning, but should any suspicion be excited, there would,
of course, be a rare hue and cry.
The plate had been knocked out of shape and beaten
into small pieces.
They made a great pretence of looking for a cargo, and
so drew off suspicion.
In this way they contrived to taxe their plunder on
shore and store it at their temporary residence.
Then Captain Kit, through an acquaintance of his in
the settlement, found an introduction to a Chinese general
merchant.
The man was a small innkeeper, who depended alto-


gether on sailors, and who assured them that Chi-he
was not only trustworthy, but able to buy anything from
a ship to a ship’s anchor.
Like most of his countrymen he kept up no appear-
ance ; all he cared about was to make money.
The heathen Chinee acted with the most perfect cool-
ness tested the precious metals, and then, weighing them,
paid in notes and gold.
That he made a more than fair profit on them was not
to be doubted.
Men selling under the circumstances seldom ask ques-
tions, being only too glad of the value for their swag.
It now became a question as to what should be done.
Kelly had no wish to return to Sydney at present. He
knew that the suspicions of Lieutenant Henshaw might
have been very seriously aroused.
He had vanity enough to think that the audacious
robbery committed at Government House would be
ascribed to him, and had no wish to run the chance of
being accused of tne crime.
Besides he knew not how far he could trust the French-
woman. She might try and take time by the forelock and
denounce him even at her own peril.
Women, he thought, were very artful, and she could
easily make up some story to clear herself and implicate him.
At all events he did not think Sydney a safe place,
neither was Melbourne, as he knew that Tom Conquest
would never rest until he effected his capture.
He did not see much to be got by re-visiting his new
friend the Wagga-Wagga butcher, as really and truly he
did not believe in his story.
An arrant rogue himself Kelly was no fool, and could
see discrepancies in the other’s story which made him
doubtful.
Kelly and Kit had a long talk as to what might be done,
and could come to no conclusion, when a vessel, with a
valuable cargo, put into port to refit.
She had passed through a severe storm, lost spars, had
heavy leaks opened, and had several of her crew drowned.
She had a valuable cargo of silk, indigo, and tea
Of course she would be of no use to the owner of
Captain Kit’s cruiser, even if they could capture her.
But Zeph hit upon a plan.
“ Crews are scarce; men desert from here as else-
where,” he began ; “let us ship as sailors.”
“ What’s the use of going in for hard work when we’ve
got the tin?” growled Kelly.
“ You ain’t half alive, Ned. I’ll show you how wa can
make a pile. We sh p aboard as able seamen. She starts
for homeward voyage. Kit lies in her wake. She gets
leaky. A few augur holes make her more so. She’s aban-
doned by the crew. She’s well insured, and the captain,
nor, for the matter of that, the owners don’t care if she
sinks. Kit appears on the scene, repairs the damage
—because he knows where the leaks are—saves the barque,
and takes her into port and makes his claim for salvage.
Now do you tumble to it? ”
All this had to be explained to Ned Kelly, who naturally
enough not understanding anything about the matter had
to give way to the others.
The vessel in question would naturally take some time
to repair.
There was the r efore leisure enough to lay their plans.
After some further consideration, however, it was
agreed that Kelly should go on board as a passenger. He
would hear what was said in this way and communicate
with his associates.
The Duncan was a very smart vessel. She had been
driven out of h< r course and had gone through a good deal,
but she had originally been well built.
The captain and chief officer believed sbe could be patched
up to stand a voyage to England, and so orders were given
'to have her dock- d.
It was soon found that many of the sailors had bolted.
An offer from six the diminished crew
was gladly acce>'*
There was a state cabin vacant; although it was expen-
sive Kelly did not care. The results would be, probably,
very profitable.
All was settled, and the Duncan sailed on » fine day,
with every hope of a prosperous voyage.
Kit Kelly’s cruiser" lay quiet in harbour for six hour*
after the Duncan started, and then departed also.
The Duncan, though she had a valuable cargo of indigo,
silk, and tea, was not a large vessel. She had a moderate
crew and only a few passenge s.
There were only two state rooms, one of which had been
secured by Kelly, the other by a rather saturnine indivi-
dual who called himself a planter, and his name was
entered on the ship books as Errol.
The passengers were all business men and numbered
twelve.
Kelly, alias Bernard, made himself very agreeable. He
had travelled, seen a good deal of the world, and could in
his rough and ready way tell good stories.
In those days, when a large number of the travellers of
the world consisted of the bagman class, coarseness went
a long way for humour, and vulgarity for wit.
In such society as that Kelly could pass for a very smart
and clever fellow.
He toned down his oaths to the finest point, he used as
little slang as possible, and thus passed muster.
The individual who occupied the opposite state room to
him, was somewhat of a mystery to him and to everybody
else.
He was rather rough, but he had money. He appeared
to possess a chronic cold and was always warmly wrapped
U P- .
On the first occasion they met at dinner, the two eyed
each other curiously.
There seemed to be something familiar to each in the
expression of the face.
Both discarded the idea, and yet they were convinced
somehow that they had met before.
Neither, however, made any remark, and after dinner
smoked, drank, and played a game of dominoes without
making the slightest allusion to their mutual suspicion.
The strange passenger, who called bimself Rintoul, had
also joined at Hong-Kong, where he had been remaining
some time as an invalid.
It was only when the vessel offered him a rapid passage
that Rintoul determined to start for England.
What was his other motive ?
Certainly he had been for several nights in the company
of Mr. Bernard (Kelly), and had noticed that he had plenty
of money.
Whatever his ultimate motive was, this induced him to
go on board the same ship.
Kelly’s luggage consisted of just what an extempore
traveller required, and a portmanteau for immediate use.
Kelly knew very well that any attempt to save his
general luggage when the climax came would be useless.
lie therefore decided to have merely what he required
ready and no more.
The third evening out, Kit’s cruiser well in sight, Zeph
let him know that all was ready; that the plugs would all
be out at the same time, and the signal be given a little
before daylight.
Kelly went to his state room, but with no idea of finding
much sleep.
He only partially undressed, and was in the act of put-
ting some of his valuables in a small box, when the doov
of his state-room opened, and a stout, burly-lookmg
fellow entered cautiously, as if expecting to find the other
asleep.
Kelly had him by the collar of the coat in an instant.
He was as stout as himself, but a struggle under the cir-
cuins ancea would have been simply folly.
Tim capt.iin’s cabin was close at band.
But Umre was no necessity.
The minute the stranger saw the occupant of the state-
room in his deshabille, he recognised him.


“ Kelly !” he cried.
“ Hush !” said our hero, “who are you, a-blurting out
names like that ?’
“ Why, Will Morgan, your old pal,” the other retorted,
it x’ve been dodging about these two years on my last stake,
and things were getting warm tor me in my last place, so
I fished up another small pile, and took passage as a
nob.”
“ But what did you want a-sneaking in here?” asked
Kelly, who now recognised his old pal.
“ Well,” grinned Morgan, “ I thought I’d just let you
know—just for old acquaintance sake—that I spotted you,
old man.”
“All right,” answered Ned. “You may be wanted,
but not now, my buck. When I’m asleep, none of your
larks here.”
“ We 11 have a jaw to-morrow,” answered Morgan, who
saw that his comrade was sulky-natured.
Kelly was not at all pleased with this meeting.
He did not like his personality to be known to too
many people. .
He finished his task, secured all he cared for in a kind
of wallet, and then retired.
He slept heavily, nor awakened until a sudden uproar
aroused him.
He hurried on deck, bag In hand, and found the captain
and crew in a state of the utmost alarm.
The ship, which had been so sound the day before, had
apparently opened her seams.
The men were working at the pumps, but from the first
the captain and officers saw that it was a mere question
of time. . , . ,
She might float hours, but she must sink in the end.
She might even go down at any moment.
The captain determined to take to the boats.
They were numerous and well-appointed, and with such
weather as they had, they had nothing to fear.
So they started for Hong-Kong, in their hurry not
noticing a vessel hovering at some distance, nor the fact
that Zeph and Salmon Roe were missing.
As soon as the boats were at some distance, Captain Ivit
hurried up and a gang went on board.
A number were put to the pumps, and then, as Zeph
and Salmon Roe knew wheie the holes where, it was easy
enough to plug them up. ,
In four hours after the ship was a derelict, she was clear
of water and sailing back for Hong-Kong with what may
be called a prize crew. . , ~
Meanwhile the officers, men, and passengers had reached
Hong-Kong, and had reported their loss to Lloyd s agent
and the British Consul. . . .
Then all dispersed to await a chance of returning to
E The vessel and its contents were fully insured, so, after
all, only'he underwriters would suffer. _ .
Kelly and Morgan had struck up a certain kind of inti-
macy, though neither had full confidence in the other.
They had not met for some time. . t ,
Morgan after one of his feats, which consisted always of
atrocious murders and robberies, had made a good haul.
To escape from pursuit he had sailed away and led a
wandering life for more than two years.
His track had been marked by other crimes, and finding
himself at Hong-Kong when the Duncan was m port, he
had taken a passage. „
The man never left himself without means. He was
a cautious and calculating villain, as those who knew him
will be well aware.
His object was to reach England and then work his way
back to the colony.
Meanwhile Kelly and Morgan had returned to Hong-
Kong with tne passengers and crew of the Duncan, itseu
supposed to be at f he bottom of the sea. , ,
Morgan, having r* Mea of the nefarious trick that had
been played, could not tell why Kelly kept sue i a suaip
look-out seaward.
He expected every day to nee the vessels appear in
sight.
He was very fond of sitting for hours on the end of the
jetty, talking to some of the old salts who usually hung
about such spots.
Early one afternoon he took up his usual post and soon
what he was looking for came in sight.
lie had a glass, and peered through it with keen anxiety
“ If that ain’t the Duncan,” he suddenly cried, “ then I’m
a Dutchman.”
The man whom he addressed was one of those men who
are always to be seen hanging round such localities, peer-
ing through glasses without any or reasonable object mat
anyone knows of.
“You've good eyes, mate,” he cried, “but it are the
Duncan.”
The news spread like wild-fire through the town
Kelly modestly retired.
The Duncan was in company with the schooner Kate,
which had left the harbour about the same time.
Soon the two came in, and the captain and Lloyd’s agent
went on board.
Captain Kit's story was simple While pursuing hij
voyage, he had come upon the Duncan water-logged.
He had gone on board, and, knowing the vessel to be
valuable, he had determined to save her.
He had put every man who could work at the punspi,
while the carpenter had searched for the leaks.
Fortunately he found them and was able to stop them
up
They were s* range leaks, being some small holes, unde*
bales, which they had to remove to get at them.
They were however successfully stopped, and then th*
vessel brought into harbour.
The delight of the underwriters was great indeed.
Captain Kit, or John Leary as he was called on tlr\
ship’s papers, was decidedly entitled, with his crew, to larg%
salvage. . .
But Captain Leary objected to abide the decision <a
Courts of Law.
He had no time to waste.
The agent for Lloyd’s said that he had a certain licence
in the matter, and could pay him a sum down in draught?
on London, which any banker would cash.
Then after communications with the owners he couk*-
have the balance at a future time.
After some pretended hesitation Leary accepted, tb*
draughts were signed by the captain and agent, cashed b/
the bankers, and the schooner Kate took her departusfs
to be seen no more in llong-Kong.
It was now determined by the captain and the c, *:‘-*Dn
agent to overhaul the Duncan.
A large part of her cargo was damaged. This was aii
sold at a rummage sale, the re t put in bond.
Then the secret came out. The vessel had be,«-
scuttled—but by whom ? , . ,
They remarked that two of their crew nacl been
when they took to their boats, while the two state-room
passengers had also disappeared. _ ,
There could be but one explanation. I.hey bad beet
the victims of a foul conspiracy.
But it was too late to unmask the vile perpetrators ets
the cruel crime.
CHAPTER CXX.
KELLY MEETS AN OLD FRIEND,
Ned Kelly had never been partial to the sea. On board
a vessel, large or small, he was not king of the castie.
Ho therefore informed his brother of his desire to
put on shore at Adelaide, where once more he could tafcf
one of the flat bottomed steamers which go up tne Mmaaj
river, and go in search of his horse. , , .
Captain Kit agreed, but hoped that now they had
they would not entirely separate. ,
Kelly responded that his adventurous bee would


bably bring him to Sydney again, but that he should keep
away from it for some time.
Kelly bade his brother keep up constant communi-
cation when in Sydney with the barmaid known as Mary
Meadows, through whom, if he knew of any pal going to
Sydney, he would send him messages.
This settled, the voyage was continued; and, finally,
Kelly, Zephj and Salmon Roe landed at Adelaide in
jailors’ dresses, and were soon lost in the crowd.
Captain Kit continued on his way.
The three confederates, having discovered the date of
the departure of a flat-bottomed steamer, secured passages,
and then kept quiet, going out for an hour or so in the
evening.
They amused themselves on boai'd in the usual way
with cards, smoking, and drinking; and finally reached
the landing-place.
Thence they made their way to the paddocks where they
had left Marco Polo.
The owner of the paddocks was very much surprised to
see Kelly after so long an absence, but on being paid all
arrears readily gave up the animal.
He supplied the other two with horses ; and the men,
well-mounted, well-armed, and well-provided, started in
search of further adventures.
It had been decided, however, to do nothing to draw
immediate attention to their return. Their plunder had
been chiefly turned into notes.
Spending money freely in the colony was too common a
practice for anyone to notice it.
They would simply amuse themselves in their own way,
until necessity and the prospect of a great coup made
them yield to temptation.
At last they, after a night of gambling, in which
they had been looked upon with suspicion, made up their
minds to remove.
No bushman is ever encumbered with luggage.
They were now costumed as rough, but respectable
diggers.
Their destination was a certain spot on the Murray
river, where, while there were hiding-places enough, there
were also scattered here and there inns, frequented by
shearers, shepherds, and stock-keepers, where they could
obtain all their requirements.
They could thus pass some time while planning some
scheme by which to replenish their slowly, but surely
vanishing purses.
Kelly did not know wnich he longed for most, to be at
the head of his old gang agf : n, or to be once more with
his brother carrying out «ome daring plot.
They travelled slowly, as there was nothing to hurry for.
The country was thickly peopled for the colony, that is,
they could safely depend on seeing a stock-keeper or
shepherd’s but twice a day, where they could procure
solids
Tlr s they travelled until they came to the position they
desire I
A b fge piece of bush, rough and thick with trees and
rcrub bus situated at no great distance from the Murray
i e.
THE “
PICTURE
BOARDS.
Anonyma, or Fair but Fraif.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
The drivers were inside.
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby
The Soiled Dove.
Woman.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
The Beautiful Demon
In that district were some of the largest estates of the
squatters scattered far and wide, and consequently rude
inns existed for the use of their employes.
Kelly had no desire to draw attention, and so he and
his companions found a safe hiding-place in the bush,
where they could camp within a reasonable distance of the
inn.
In these places no explanation was requited, and no
questions were asked
They, therefore, after arranging their camp and securing
their horses, walked down to the inn.
It was a rude one-storied building, with some rough
tables and seats in front.
But rough and ready as it was, the accommodation was
good. There was little that could not be procured there
from rum to champagne, in which in their mad fits, even
stockkeepers would indulge when in funds.
The inn was on a cross road, and was much frequented
by bullock-drivers and others, so that the business was
tolerably flourishing.
It was determined to move further on, as the neigh-
bourhood did not seem to offer any inducements in the!.-
line. .
Accordingly next day they mounted their horses after a
late breakfast and made for the inn.
In front of the verandah were several waggons, har-
nessed with bullocks.
Finding the bar crowded, Kelly and his party seated
themselves at a table outside and called an attendant.
Their horses were attached to one of several posts that
stood in the road.
They were close to an open window, near which several
men were seated.
Presently Ned Kelly heard his own name mentioned.
“ 1 tell you, mate, I ain’t a-going for to say as that is
Kelly, but I says as that is Kelly’s horse ; know’d him
afore he stole him,” the man was saying.
“ What’s your game ?”
“ Police-station ain’t a mile off,” the other answered
“ I’ll step out at the back.”
“ Right you are," replied the other.
Kelly never moved a muscle.
The men spoke in a hoarse stage-whisper, but Kelly's
ears were almost supernaturally keen.
He looked at his comrades, and then slowly turned hit
head just in time to see the men who had been at the win-
dow away.
(To he continued.)
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLI: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
CHAPTER C XX.—Continued.
Not a moment was to be lost.
His comrades understood Kelly’s warning look, and at
once mounted.
At first they rede slowly, but when out of s ght of the
inn they hurried.
Kelly now told them what had induced him to leave so
abruptly'.
He determined to put a long distance between himself
and that spot ere lie halted.
Presently they came to a cross road again, one being
the main road, such as it was, to Geelong ; the other had
a bullock-track.
“They’ll only squint at my beauty” said Kelly;
“ you’ve nothing to fear. I'll play ’possum for a day or two ;
you can spy, so that when we meet you’ll have news.”
They always obeyed Kelly, and so, after appointing a
meeting in the first drinking-shop in the scattered village
they were going to, he rode away.
The road he followed was a bullock-track, with many
marks of wheels ana also of horses.
Kelly knew he was going in the direction of a station.
He had no doubt that he might fiud some temporary
shelter near it.
Ikm traps would look for him the way his friends had
taken, so that a few days might put them off the track.
As he went on he found all the signs of an extensive
sheep-run.
A* last, after a hard and heavy ride, he came in sight of
the home station.
It was an extensive one, with the usual one-storied
principal building, and out-buildings and paddocks for the
horses.
In the verandah in front sat a -udy, reclining in a rock-
ing-chair, with a book in her hand.
She looked up at the sound of a horse stopping, and
gave a faint shriek.
The recognition was mutual.
H« knew hex to be Marie.
After her stormy and terrible career she had found
repose.
She was alone, she had believed her crimes and siua
could never find her.
And now this man by some fearful fatality had come like
a ghost of the past.
Is wel> known that for manv years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilharion of the • ineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known it the Antipodes
as Pick Turpin's Black Bess in these islands.’’ fled Kei/y, illustrated, Nos. Ito 11, already published at 4. Essex-
Street, Strand, price One Penny.— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Stewards corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kellt’j
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July
“ The history of Mm Kelly and hi* celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollections of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and ihe peiformances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘Ned
and ms Nag in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July,
She knew him to be the man who had saved her from
the fire, but who held her secret
What unlucky chance had brought him there V
It was a dreadful affair, but it must be faced.
Kelly alighted and approached her with an awkward
pretence of politeness.
“ Madam, we meet again,” he said.
“Yes,” she answered in good English, “ how is it so,
why do you come here?”
“ Pure accident, ma’am,” he went on. “ I’m travelling-
looking for a spot to settle on. Lost my way,” he con-
tinued, laughing meaningly.
“ My husband is out,” she faltered, and then explained
that he would soon be in to dinner— -would he walk in
and wait?
“ Say I’m related—what you like—l wants a little shelter
for a little time,” said Kelly, thinking he would be as safe
there as anywhere else
“I’ll fell my husband,” she said, “you saved my life
from fire— that will be enough.”
And Kelly entered after Marie had called a boy to take
his horse to the paddock.
Marie desired another boy to show Kelly to a room,
comfortable, though simply furnished.
She then retired to bemoan the cruel fate which had
brought this man to her quiet ami happy home.
Though love for her husband was out of the question, she
was happy and contented to a certain extent.
He was kindness itself, and gave her every comfort
and indulgence.
All that wealth could command was hers, and her room
had been furnished regardless of expense.
She had a bullock load of things brought up, with a piano
and other luxuries.


That he was coarse ami rough would be to
her husband. °
He had saved her life under perilous circumstances.
He knew the whole story, ;;nd his gratitude was very
great towards the man, who had really done a bravo and
gallant act.
Still she feared him.
He had committed to her knowledge one great robbery,
and there was a fearful dread on her soul that he came
there for no good purpose.
She did not believe in his having reached the station by
accident.
Sne believed he had tracked her out to gain some end.
She was to a certain extent in his power, but she could
jnly expose him, and force him to fly.
Did he betray his knowledge of her, it meant utter and
hopeless ruin.
But she hoped that, whatever his object in coming, she
might induce him to go away and leave her in peace.
Here she was told that her husband had come home and
wanted dinner.
She ran down at once, looking bright and happy, and at
once told him of her unexpected visitor.
He was delighted to welcome the man who had saved his
darling.
‘•No matter if he is rough,” he said, in answer to his
wife, “ he did a bold and gallant thing—and I thank him.”
The wife kissed him.
Then she went and fetched Kelly, to whom he was pro-
fuse in his thanks.
He certainly did not Ike the look of him in any way,
but he forced himself to hide his dislike and distrust.
“ I ain’t one of your polite swells,” said Kelly, “ and I
want no thanks—so the least said is the soonest
mended.”
“ Very good,” replied the squatter, and led the way to
the dining-room, which was amply supplied with
luxuries.
Kelly from habit of imitation was able to just hold his
own. Mr, Eldred, who was a gentleman, every inch of
him, knew that the other had no pretensions that way,
but he was polite and courteous all the same.
Kelly talked but very little, leaving the conversation to
the wife and husband.
After dinner, however, Mr. Eldred proposed a smoke
and a drink, hoping in some way to draw the other out.
But he totally failed. Kelly gave a very commonplace
account of himself, al uded to London, briefly to Paris and
Homburg—which did not surprise. The nouceau riche is
found everywhere.
He was now looking about in the hope of settling. He
had ao taste for gold-digging. He had given that up when
he had a legacy left him in England.
He was searching for a station, and when he found
one co please him he believed he would settle.
Mr. Eldred politely hoped he might find one to suit
him, but he devoutly wished that it would bo a good
distance off.
Two things struck the squatter. The man was too
shifty about the eyes to be honest, while he clearly saw
another thing.
Kelly admired his wife.
She, innocently enough, he thought, would not notice
this, but he did.
ile hoped Captain Higgins, as he called himself, would
be a very distant neighbour, only to be seen on high days
and holidays.
CHAPTER CXXI.
A STRANGE WOOING.
.Stretched at lull length in a Mexican hammock, slung
the creeper-shaded verandah running round her
husband s dwelling-house, Maile Fraueonnet, now Marie
Eldred, was musing on the good things of this life, and
the advantages of virtue.
The girl was shrewd and clever, and had begun to
preciate the value of her new position.
As the honoured wife of one of the richest squatters of
the district, to whom her lightest wish was law, there waa
no saying to what social eminence she might not aspire.
Eldred’s wealth was increasing year by year, and it was
his intention shortly to try for a seat in the colonial legis-
lature. ®
Already in fancy she saw herself playing the part of one
of the leaders of fashion in the capital of the colony, a
part for which she felt she was in every way fitted
Nay, in her dreams she even dared to look forward to
the days when Eldred would realise his fortune, and return
to Europe.
How she would queen it in London and Pans!
Paris 1 ah! how her heart th iiled at the word.
The past, with all its horrors, the frightful excesses of
the Commune, the ghastly news of slaughter that had
marked the entry of the Versailles troops into the devoted
city, the agonies of imprisonment, the dreadful voyage to
the Antipodes, the degrading tortures suffered at New
Caledonia were forgotten.
In seven or eight years, under a new name, as the wife
of a rich Englishman, who would recognise her!
She was lost in the contemplation of a rapturous vision
representing herself borne along the leafy avenues of the
Bois de Boulogne, in an open carriage, drawn by a pair of
the finest steppers that ever wore silver-plated harness.
A heavy step on the boarded floor of the verandah, and
a whiff of coarse tobacco-smoke, puffed almost in her face,
aroused her from her delightful reverie.
She looked up.
With his massy shoulders against one of the pillars of
the verandah, his legs crossed, his hands thrust into his
breeehes-pockets, and his pipe sticking out of one corner
of his mouth stood Captain Higgins, alias Ned Kelly.
For a moment their glances crossed in silence.
T//en the bushranger cook his pipe from his mouth, and
brokt into a chuckling laugh
“ tu seem to find yourself pretty comfortable here,”
he remarked.
Since her marriage Marie had had plenty of practice in
speaking English, and could now converse in that lan-
guage fluently enough.
“Yes,” she answered slowly, “I am very comfortable
here.”
“ Yes, it’s a decent crib, a very decent crib.”
There was another interval of silence.
Marie looked up into Kelly’s face to find his eye fixed
on her with an evil, gloating look, the meaning of which
she could read only too plainly.
Gradually she began to realise her position.
Her husband was away, the shepherds and stockmen
were all far afield, and even if the women employed about
the house were within call their presence was not likely
to prove a check upon such a ruffian as she knew Kelly
to be, if once his mind was made up.
“Look here, Marie,” resumed Ned, “this is, as I war
saying, a very decent crib, eh ?”
“Yes,” she replied.
“ And you figure at the head of it very well, -eery well
indeed. There’s no denying,” he continued in a medita-
tive tone, “ that you women d'' get the puli of us chap?
there Lord, now, anyone would think you’d been play
ing this here game ever since you were kid. and didn’i
know the taste of Government rations,” and he laughed
again.
The woman did not want for pmok.
She had handled a revolver on the barricade of the
Chateau d’Eau.
She saw that Kelly had some evil notion working in his
head, and resolved to learn the worst
“ What is it you will ?” she asked calmly, enough all
the while her heart throbbed violently at the thought of
approaching peril.
“ Well, ves,” he said slowly, watching her as a tiger


does au antelope, “ perhaps it will be just as well to have
a bsft of an explanation. Do you recollect how you and 1
first met at Sydney ?”
« Yes.”
“ How I plucked you like a brand from the burning, as
Holy Joe used to say, eh ?”
“ Well, I admit I owe you my life.”
“ Oh, you do v Well that gives us a fair ground to start
on, anyway. Now don’t you feel all a swelling and a
bursting with feelings of gratitude towards me ?”
“ Gratitude ? Yes ; bad as I have been, I thank you from
my heart for saving my life.”
“Very good. Now I want a little practical proof of
that gratitude.”
“What do you mean?”
“ Why, you see, I am thinking of shifting my quarters
ind lying close for a week or two on the upper waters of
the Murray. I know one or two tidy little spots where one
can lie rmg and comfortable. But lam apt to feel lone-
some at times, and I think I should feel all the better for
your company.”
“V hat!” she almost screamed, “you want me to—
to ’
“To pass a pretty little honeymoon with yours truly,
as the tetter-writers put it,” and he chuckled.
The woman was horror-stricken.
Bad as she had been, she was far from being utterly
iepraved.
Had Kelly merely asked her to betray her husband, she
*muld have hesitated, for she had learned to respect
Michael Eldred, if not to love him, and had besides a
dawning consciousness of what was due to herself in her
rehabilitated position to oppose to the powerful levers,
fear and gratitude, by means of which the bushranger
could work qpon her feelings.
But to leave her home, to court shame and disgrace
♦penly, to voluntarily abandon the high position sin*
beginning to realise, and all her dreams of future grandeur!
It was too much.
Self-interest is the strongest motive in the human te-art,
and self-interest told her to say “nay” to Kelly’s vro-
position.
Only she was too wise to say “ nay” openly.
Whilst she paused, seeking for a reply, the bushranger
had kept his bloodshot eyes fixed on her steadily.
Coarse brutal, and ignorant as Kelly was, he had a
knack of reading human nature
It was this that helped him to his supremacy over his
jomrades.
“ Look here, my wench,” he broke in, suddenly changing
his tone from one of coarse banter to that of menace,
“ you know wno I am. lam Ned Kelly, who never let
man, woman, or child thwart him in any mortal thing he
eet his heart on. The day after to-morrow I start for the
upper waters of the Murray, and you set out with me,
either cantering by me on that pretty little grey mare of
yours or strapped hand and foot across the pommel of
Marco Polo s saddle like a sheep. And, by ,if you
don't behave yourself, you’ll run a very fair chance of
having your throat cut like a sheep’s at the end of the
journey.”
7/T.arie looked at him with a glance of horror.
The blood seemed to freeze in her veins as he hissed out
these last woi ds, with his face close to hers and his eyes
riveted on her own.
At that moment the bushranger’s keen ear caught the
thud of approaching hoofs on the stretch of turf extending
in front of the house.
“Look here,” he continued hoarsely, as he thrust one
hand into his pocket in search of his ever-ready knife, and
laid the other on the woman’s arm, “you’ll swear now, by
all you hold sacred, never to breathe a word of what I
hare said to a living soul, or I’ll have that dainty neck
of yours in half before you can count a dozen. Quick, now!”
“ I svwear, I swear by all that I hold sacred !” gasped
Marie.
“ And a precious good thing for you you did, youn.,
woman,” muttered Ned, releasing her. “Ah ! Mr. Eldred,
he continued, addressing the squatter who had just ridden
up and dismoanted, “ I hope you had a pleasant r ide.
Your goo 1 lady and me have been getting on famously ”
Dinner was shortly served, and for the rest of tSie day
Mane took care not to find herself alone with Kelly for a
single instant.
She laughed and chatted and kept up a show of outward
spirits, but all the while her heart was racked with rage
and fear, and her mind scheming some method of releas-
ing herself from her frightful position.
Tell her husband she dared not, for she knew his first
impulse would be to attempt to seize Kelly, and the
probable result of such au attempt was in her eyes not
doubtful.
She was accustomed to reckon up a man’s fighting-
power, and rightly calculated that Ned would be a match
for four like Michael Eldred.
At last she seemed to hit upon a plan that seemed to
promise success.
She resolved to write a note to the nearest police station
to inform the authorities of Kelly’s presence on the station
and meanwhile to feign acquiescence in the latter’s plan.
Letters to or from the station were left to be called for
at a small roadside public-house about five miles from
the house, kept by a man named Gibson.
The difficulty was to get the letters there.
If she asked her husband to take it, he would naturally
on seeing the address ask why she was in correspondence
with the police, and an explanation, which she wished
above all things to avoid, must ensue.
Moreover, she felt she could not trust any one of the
hands to take it.
There was and is a widespread sympathy with what
«re called the dangerous classes in Australia, and the odds
were that an epistle to the police would, if handed to one
of the shepherds for transmission, be lost n transit.
Such things were continually happening.
Suddenly the bright idea crossed her of making use of
a tame black, who used to hover about the station and
pck up a living by tracking a lost sheep or any similar
job
He would be certain to come prowling about the kitchen-
door some time the next morning.
So. before retiring to rest, she hastily scribbled a few
lines to the police, and thrust them into an envelope in
readiness.
Her spirits rose when this was done.
“Ah! Monsieur Kelly,” she said to herself as she sought
her couch, “ you are very big, very brave, very strong, and I
am only a little weak woman, but 1 think that I—t hat 1—
enfta queje oiens dc mettre une punaise dans votre beurre.”.
CHAPTER CXXII
THE LONE INN,
The inn kept by Gibson was one of the class already de-
scribed in this work.
It was rudely but strongly built of timber.
It stood by the roadside, but dep -nded less upon the few
chance customers travelling by that route than upon the
station-hands who used to come flocking in for miles
around after pay-day, in order to get rid of their six
months 1 earnings with the utmost possible speed.
On such occasions a week of Pandemonium is the only
comparison to be made with the scene presented.
But ordinarily the spot was dull and quiet enough, and
it might be wondered how Gibson could pick up a living.
On the morning after his interview with Marie, hied
Kelly rose in a restless, unsettled humour.
Michael Eldred’s station was Liberty Hall, as far as th«
guests were concerned, but the very odour of respecta-
bility had something in it irksome to Ned’s nature.
He loathed it.
In company with Michael Eldred he felt ill at e*


was rouging for a pipe and glass of grog, and a hand at
cards with some more congenial companions,
lie resolved to ride over to Gibson’s and see if his
wishes could not be gratified.
With some notion in his head that Marco Pxjio might be
recognised he left him in the stable, and, selecting a nice-
looking chestnut of ids host's, was soon slinging across
the five miles of open country lying between the station
and the inn
Eld red had had to start at daybreak for one of the out-
lying huts in the opposite direction, and Kelly on leaving
merely told Marie that he was going out for a canter to
get an appetite for dinner.
She was only too thankful to see him off the premises.
No sooner was he gone than she sent for the black, and
-entrusted him with her letter.
He was to hand it to Gibson, with instructions for the
! liter to give it to the mail-cart, which would pass during
I lie afternoon. . .
Meanwhile, Kelly had ridden up to the inn, and given a
friendly hand to a red-faced, red-headed fellow who was
lounging at the doorway.
This was Gibson himself.
Who or what he was, or whether Gibson was his real
name or not, was a question about which none of his cus-
tomers troubled themselves. . , .
All they cared for was finding him at his post, ready
?. ml willing to supply bad liquor for safe cheques or genuine
gold-dust.
Ned dismounted.
“Hi, Sam!” shouted Gibson. A .. ,
A lean wizzened old man, in a dilapidated stable-dress,
■with “ la" ” written on every line of his shrivelled parch-
ment-like face, shambled round the corner of the house in
obedience to this summons. ~ , .
“Take his horse round to the stable, said Gibson, in-
dicating the one Ned had ridden. “ A tidy bit of horse-
He«h that chestnut of Eldred’s?” he continued as the old
ostler led off the animal which he had recognised.
“A tidy bit? Ah, you should just see my Mai—— began
Eel y, but suddenly checking himself from completing t ie
name’of his favourite steed. _
“ Your mars, is she such a ripper then f . . .
“Kipper? Bygoles! 1 believe you, said Ned, rejoicing a
the other’s misapp.ehension. “But come along inside, I
" <l " All right' 1 What’ll you have?” cried Gibson, leading the
"'o Whisky,” was the answer, “and fill one for your-
86 The two men drank and then stood looking at one an-
other for a minute
k -vrot mnoh doin"?” said Kelly. , „ .
>.No* blow It! ’’ was the reply. “Yours is the first
face IVe seen this morning. aud I don't snppo* anyone
Wi °nnldfind «' e 40 Bit d ?™ a . nd
take a quiet fist of cards? ” said Kelly, m an msim.au.,g
‘“’•No only the time, but the cards,” answered Gibson,
Wi A,**al to emptying and re-filling their tumblers, the
ttoft'SS-ke of amusement and
not for stakes .ere kept moderate and both
P 'iV’hSy were thus engaged, a shadow (ell across the
floor from the open doorway.
The 1 black Tiger as be was called, was standing
on tie threshold, a look of enquiry on his lace.
'ihe black advanced 1 and handed him the letter, repeat-
Mie English aud the aborigines ot Australia.
As Gibson took the letter into his hand, and glanced at
the address a look of surprise passed over his face, and
he uttered alow whistle.
“ What’s up?” asked Ned seriously.
The liushranger had recognised the black, whom he had
seen hanging about Eldred’s station.
“ Oh, nothing,” answered Gibson, “ only it seems a rum
start for a lady to be writing to the police.”
“ To the police ?” said Ned.
“Yes,” said the other, holding out the letter so that
the address was presented towards Kelly.
The bushranger could not read writing, but for the mo-
ment he resolved to keep that discovery to liimself.
In daily and hourly peril, accustomed to read danger in
a thousand things that to other men would hav« been so
many unconsidered trifles, he divined at once that the
letter was connected with himself.
Cuarie was the only lady at the station, and if she had
written to the police it could only be to betray him.
It was necessary that, at all costs, he should become ac-
quainted with the contents of the letter.
But how?
That was the question.
“I should just like to know what’s inside that letter,
he said, with the same air of jovial good humour that he
had put on ever since he had entered the inn.
Gibson laughed, thinking he was only joking, and
placed the document on a shelf behind the bar.
Then he resumed his place in front of Kelly, and took
up the cards.
The bushranger was on thorns. .
He was racking his brains for a method of learning what
Marie had written.
It would have been easy enough to have nit upon u
plan of filching the letter and destroying it, so as to pre-
vent it from reaching its destination, but this was nou
enough for him. . ~ .
He wanted to learn what was inside it, and he could
only do this with another s help
Despite his iron will, he could not help stealing a glance
at it now and then from where he sat, and it needed all
his power to keep his attention fixed on the game.
“ Fill up again,” he said, noticing the tumblers were
Gibso n do g 0) he f o n owe d him to the bar.
“Look here, mate,” he said, leaning against the counter,
“ I’m blowed if I shouldn’t like a squint into that bit of
writ ng.”
Gibson looked at him curiously.
“ The deuce you would ? ” he answered, seeing that
Kelly was in earnest.
men looked steadily at one another for half-a-
-m Kelly was a good judge of character, and he read rogue
written plainly on Gibson’s lace. . ■,
“ Look here,” he said bluntly, extending Ins arm and
taking the letter, “ 1 am going to find out what s inside
th “ Curse it! no,” broke in the other ; i can’t allow that.
I am sworn to the Post Office, and should get into no end
of^ m ,e it worth your while if you choose to help
meAaid My with a y tone of firmness that awed the
0t “ G Well I’m not the man to refuse to lend a hand to a
pal,” he said, with a grin, as he noticed Kelly take out a
hi" which he guessed contained gold.
“Now just listen,” said the bushranger, untying: the
mouth of the bag and taking out a respectable-s.zed
mmg’V .hid.he placed on the ouster , “that's yours
if 1 find out what’s inside the litter.
7. Stop u bit,” said Gibson. “You only want to know
what’s inside it, do you?
“ 'oh at wc“l! we can soon fate that, and no harm &>*».=•


“ What do you mean ? ”
“Just you wait and see,” said Gibson, with a chuckle.
As he spoke he went to the fireplace, where there was a
pile of smouldering ashes.
Puffing at them tor a few instants he brought them to
a red gmw, and unhooking a kettle slung above them,
planted it in their midst.
In a few minutes the kettle began to sing, and a cloud
of steam issued from the spout.
“ Give me the letter,” said Gibson.
Kelly obeyed, watching him closely.
He could not as yet divine the other’s intention.
“If he means to bum it. 111 have his liver,” he mut-
tered, for he did not quite trust his companion.
But such an i ea w s very far from Gibson’s mind.
After going to the door and glancing round so as to be
sure that no new comer was likel. to interrupt them, he
closed it and approached the fire.
He placed the envelope in the jet of steam issuing from
the kettle.
In a few minutes the gum that held down the adhesive
flap was moistened.
Then, removing it, he opened the envelope with ease.
This was done with an assurance and dexterity that were
evidently the result of long practice.
It was cbTous that it was net a first attempt at tamper-
ing with the correspondence that passed through his hands,
and the ghost of Sir James Graham must have smiled ap-
proval at his skill
“ Well, I’m blest,” ejaculated Kelly in amazement.
Gibson held out the biilet 10 him.
“There you are, mate,” he said, with a grin.
Kelly took it and unfolded it.
'Then fumbling in his pocket -
“Well, now, would you believe it?” said he, “I’ve
mislaid my spectacles, so I must trouble you just to oast
your eye over it and tell me what is written there,” And
he held out the open page towards Gibson.
So naturally was this said that Gibson, not dreaming
that Kelly could not read writing, glanced down the page
and repeated the contents aloud.
They were brief:—
“ Siu, —A notorious robber hides himself at my husband’s station. Have
the kindness to send men to effect his arrest at once. He goes to-morrow.
“Marie Elured,
“P.S.—He is very dangerous ; send six men.”
Kelly’s face was unmoved, but in his heart he vowed a
bitter vengeance on Marie.
“The cursed French Jezebel!” he muttered to himself.
“ I hope my hands may rot off at the wrists if she gets
loose when once I have a grip of her.”
Meanwhile Gibsuu had been quietly replacing the letter
in the envelope and fastening it up again, but without
losing sight of Kelly.
He was pretty well used to putting two and two
together.
Kelly's eagerness to learn the contents of the letter and
the paragraph about the “ notorious robber,” were two
things that struck him.
Suddenly a thought flashed across him.
He had noticed Kelly’s hand as they sat down to play.
He glanced at it again
Yes, there was the scar across the back.
He divined the truth at once.
It was Kelly who was before him !
Sharp as he was Kelly was sharper.
He noticed the other glance at his hand and guessed the
very thoughts passing iu his mind.
“You are right, m* blooming swell,” he said coolly, “ I
am Ned Kelly.”
“Ned Kelly!” exclaimed Gibson, with feigned amaze-
ment.
“Ay, Ned Kelly, who never forgets an injury or for-
gives a traitor. You know me. Take a good look at me.
I am worth looking at. This head of mine alone is worth
ten thousand pounds at any police station. But,” and as
he spoke he gripped Gibson by the arm and placing his
face close to the innkeeper’s hissed out the words between
his teeth,the man who tries to earn that ten thousand
pounds will never live to spend it. If i were lying in the
condemned cell to-morrow with a hundredweignt of iron
on each wrist, he would not be safe from my vengeance.
If I only lifted a finger he would have a doien knives in
him. And, by Jingo, if I was howling in eternal flames
I’d come back to see it done, though all the devils in hell
stood round to bar my way.”
“ Good Lord ! mate, no need to talk like that,” said Gib-
son, confusedly, “ I ain’t the chap to think of peaching on
a pal. So you are Ned Kelly, are you? Well. I’ve heerd
a good deal about you and am glad to see you. Proud to
have you in my crib. Come, let’s have another nobbier.
Here’s luck to you.”
As he rattled off these sentences, Kelly continued to
watch him narrowly.
The bushrans. er could not get over the sense of mistrust
inspired by his new friend.
They resumed their game however, and now Gibson was
rackhu his mind how to betray Kelly with safety to him-
self.
He felt uncommonly nervous, but a man will do a good
deal for the value of ten thousand pounds in the way of
risk.
At last he hit upon a plan.
He would hocus Kelly.
It was not the first time he had played such a trick
upon his customers, and the materials were at hand in the
cellar.
“ Look here, old pal,” he began with a drunken air of
confidence that was admirably put on, “such a regular
ripper as you are, must have a mug of the best. I’ve got
a bottle or two of the best stuff that ever trickled out of
a still-worm stowed away below. I’m dashed if we w'on’t
have one in honour of this glorious occasion.”
“ What’s the tipple? ” asked Kelly, with assumed care-
lessness.
“ Whisky, man, whisky! ” said Gibson, speaking
thickly and with great verbosity, “real, genuine, hot, still
with the true flavour of the turf clinging to it Devil a
drop could Roe or Jamieson turn out to match it. So
I’ll step down and get it at once.”
As he spoke he advanced to one corner of the room,
and after pulling a bolt, lifted a trap-door, along the top
of a flight of steps.
Lighting a caudle he prepared to descend.
Kelly was all on the alert for signs of treachery.
To him the change in Gibson’s manner was suspicious
and he had come to the resolve not to lose sight of him for
a moment.
The thought occurred to him that there might be some
other way of exit from t*>e cellar by which Gibson meant
to escape and make bis way to the police station.
“ No you don’t, ray tulip,” he muttered to himself,
and he staggered after the innkeeper, growling out—
“ Let’s have a squint into that underground den of
yours, it might be a handy place to stow away a bit of
swag.”
Gibson had no objection, for the drugged liquor he was
in search of was done up in bottles iu a way to disarm all
suspicion.
“ Come along, then,” he said, and descended the ladder,
closely followed by Ned.
At the foot of the ladder was a sort of landing of earth.
From this another short flight of steps led into the crllat
itself.
Gibson raised the light, and Ned, looking down, saw
that the cellar was a spacious place, but almost filled up
with piles of rubbish, barrels, stacks of bottles, and the
like.
Suddenly, as the two men were standing side by side
the trap above their heads closed with a tremendous crash.
Then came the sound of the shooting of the bolt, *ol-
lowed by a chuckling laugh.


CHAPTER CXXIII.
THE CELLAR.
No sooner had the two men disappeared down the steps
than the inner door of the room, in which they had been
sitting, opened
A face peered cautiously round it.
Then a spare, lean figure glided cautiously across the
floor.
It was that of Sam, the ostler.
lie had been listening to their conversation, and had
heard Kelly dec are himself.
He felt the chance was too good a one to let slip.
Gliding across the floor he slammed down the trap and
shot the bolt.
“ 1 swear I’ll go and draw ten thousand quid. They
must settle matters dowu below there as they can,” he
muttered.
And, after locking the outer doors of the house and
putting the keys in his pocket, he mounted Kelly’s chest-
nut which was the only horse in the stable, and ga.loped
off furiouslv towards the nearest police barracks.
As the trap slammed, Kelly turned fiercely on his com-
panion
“You blooming scoundrel! what’s your gameV” he
cried, seizing him by the shoulders.
“ 1 don’' know,” gasped Gibson, who was himself equally
bewildered.
Releasing him Kelly bounded past him up the steps
and tried to raise the trap with the idea it might have
fallen by accident.
But he at oyce discovered that it was fastened.
Mad with rage, he sprang down the ladder again and
seized on Gibson.
“ You cursed skunk, you mean, sneaking hound of a
spy, so you think to trap Ned Kelly, do you? By all the
holies, there won’t be much of you left iu five minutes to
tell how you did it.”
“ Listen Kelly ! hang it! it’s not me, I’m square ; hold
on a bit!” gasped Gibson, striving to explain and at the
same time to release himself.
But Kelly was far too maddened to listen to him.
“ You miserable viper! I'll drink your blood, I’ll rip your
liver out,” lie foamed, grappling with Gibson and striving
to throw him.
The innkeeper was a powerful man, and was, he felt,
fighting for his life.
Like two maddened tigers they gripped one another.
Gibson had let the caudle fall and they were in utter
darkness.
For some moments nothing could be heard save their
hoarse breathing, as they staggered to and fro on the
narrow landing of slippery earth.
“ You devil! I’ll squeeze the life out of you, gasped
Kelly, shi ting his grip and grasping Gibson by the throat
with one hand. . , ,
But t ie innkeeper had also got a hand loose and dashed
it l eivily into the busnranger's face, causing him to
stagger. ... , ,
As he reeled back without loosening his grasp, he felt
the ground crumble away beneath his feet.
The next moment he fell backward the landing
into the cellar, dragging his adversary with him.
The descent was about four feet, and for a moment he
was half stunned. ,
Profiting by this, Gibson tore himself loose and glided
into the recesses of the cellar.
He knew every hrch of it, and installed himself in a
corner. ,
He remained in silence, listening for the movements of
his advei sary.
Ned rose to his feet a moment later.
“ You murderous hound !” he yelled, with unconscious
irony. “ You rotten-hearted, red-headed fox, just wait
till I get hold of you ! You shall never see daylight
again.”
As he spoke he stretched out his arms and began grop-
ing in the darkness.
“ A precious pretty tomb of a hole you’ve dragged me
into. A tomb, yes—it shall be one for you before 1 Lavs
done with you,”
As he spoke he stumbled against a barrel.
The next moment something whizzed by his ear, and
the crash of broken glass against the wall followed.
Gibson, more artful than Ids adversary, had remained
quiet in his corner.
Knowing every inch of the cellar, he could move about
iu the darkness almost as well as with a light.
He had selected a spot close to a pile of empty b titles
There, *ith neck outstretched, holding his very breath
so as not to reveal his presence, he waited, a bottle iu
each hand.
When he heard Kelly stumble against the barrel, he
hurled one of them in that direction.
It missed.
He sent the second.
The next instant Kelly felt something strike him a
terrible blow on the top of the head, as he stooped for-
ward.
The bottle splintered to fragments against his skull.
For a moment he was half-stunned, but the thick
hair thatching his head in a great measure saved him,
though he could feel the blood trickling down his face.
“ You swine ! I’ll make you pay for this ! ” he yeiled.
Crash!—another struck him on the jaw, almost knocking
him backward, and inflicting a frightful gash in hie chin.
This was too much.
Dropping on his knees, ho began to crawl in search of
shelter.
But every sound he made betrayed his presence, and
served to guide Gibson’s aim.
He sought to shelter his head as well as he could with
his arms, but as the botties broke, the splinters from time
to time reached his face, whilst his hands also suifered
severely.
From time to time, too, he would place them on the
broken glass as he crawle > along.
Suddenly his hand encountered a stack of bottles—full
nu.-s.
.Seizing on them, he hurled a couple of score in rapid
succession in the direction from which he had been
attacked.
They crashed against the walls and pillars, covering
the floor of the collar in all directions wuh broken glass,
whilst an almost overpowering odour arose from the spilt
spirit they contained.
Gibson was, however, untouched.
No sooner had Kelly opened fire in his direction, than
he threw himself flat on his sbomidi and crawled off
into another corner, where he crouched down behind a
barrel, , . ,
Having brought his bombardment to an end without
any response, Kelly paused, exhausted, and begau to wipe
the mingled blood and sweat from his face.
There was a momem’s silence.
Kelly listened, and Gibson, not quite sure of his enemy’s
exact whereabouts, remained quiet.
’This puzzled Kelly.
“ By gosh ! I must have bowled the blooming cellar rat
over,” he chuckled.
A little prematurely, however.
No sooner were the words out of his mouth than a
bottle caught him smash on the forehead, and rolled him
over as if lie had been shot.
“ If I do get v >id of you, my friend,” he said almost
calmly. “ Vm blest it I don’t tear your entrails out with
my before I’ve done with vou.”
The sen«» of the deadly peril in which
himself, did more for Kelly than anything else.
It Drought to him his senses.
He saw that passion was of no avail against ua
as cunning and clever as Gibson.


It would have to be a contest of skill, not brute force.
“Steady, Ned, my boy!” he said to himself, “you’re
not going to let this red bearded Judas get the better of
you. Not if you know it.”
Acting on this resolve he lay quite quiet, though a
bottle flew every now and then in his direction.
Gibson was discerned by this.
He knew by the noise of Ned’s fall, that he had bowled
him ovea 1 , and came to the conclusion that he had stunned
him.
He resolved to profit by this, bind him hand and foot
before he recovered, and on the arrival of the police, for
he guessed the line of conduct Sam had taken, to hand
him over to them and claim the reward.
Cautiously and carefully he stole forward in the dark-
ness.
Inch by inch, putting his feet down with the utmost
caution, he advanced.
Suddenly he trod, as he thought, on a toad.
Something firm and elastic.
The next instant there was a mingled cry of pain and
ferocious joy, and something gripped his ankle like a
vice.
Before he could make an effort to free himself, his legs
were jerked from under him, and he was thrown violently
on his back.
He had stepped on to Kelly’s outstretched hand.
A frightful struggle ensued as the two men rolled over
and over amidst the fragments of broken glass, which tore
their clothes and gashed their flesh.
“You may kill me,” gasped Gibson, as Kelly at last
succeeded in getting his antagonist undermost, “ but
you’ll never get out of here alive without me.”
Kelly made no answer.
One hand was occupied, despite the pain inflicted on
his wounded lingers, in clutching Gibson’s throat like a
band of iron.
With the other he felt in his pockets for his knife, his
only weapon.
He found it, and carrying it to his mouth opened it with
his teeth.
Then he raised it.
Gibson could not follow his movements in the darkness,
but he heard the click of the opening blade, and guessed
the fate impending over him.
“Mercy! it was not me, Sam the ostler; I am inno-
cent. Show the way out,” he gurgled.
Thud.
J 'own came the knife.
There was a low groan, a convulsive jerk, the grip with
which Gibson had striven to keep off his adversary
relaxed, hi arms fell to his sides, and he moaned some in-
coherent words,
Kelly staggered to his feet.
llis head and face were terribly cut by the glass, but he
had sustained no material injury.
“ 1 must get out of this,” he muttered.
Searching his pockets he found some matches, and
lighting one of these staggered towards the steps.
Ascending the first flight he picked up the candle that
Gibson had dropped, lit it, and sat down on the bottom
rung of the ladder leading to the trap, to recover his wind
and collect his thoughts.
Gibson, though frightfully wounded, was not dead,
As soon as Kelly left him, he managed to roll up his
handkerchief, and held it with one hand against his
wound, whilst he followed the bushranger with his glaring
eyes.
Having recovered his breath, Kelly ascended the ladder
and made an effort to lift the trap.
He soon recognised the impossibility of this.
He descended into the cave again, to see if there existed
any other issue.
The last remarks of Gibson seemed to imply that there
was, and for a moment he regretted not having listened to
the innkeeper.
Glancing in his direction, he saw that Gibson was still
alive, but presenting a horrible aspect.
His face, cut to pieces by the broken glass during their
struggle, was one immense wound, ami his whole figure
was deluged with blood.
“Look here, mate,” said Kelly, “perhaps I have been
a bit hasty with you, after all. But I don’t think there's
much damage done, and if you’ll tell me the way to get
out of this infernal hole, why, I’ll try and patch you up a
bit, and no doubt you’ll pull round.”
Something like a smile flitted across the hideously-
mangled face of Gibson.
He knew he was mortally wounded, and had not an hour
to live.
“ Come now, are you going to show me the way out ?”
Still no answer.
“ Curse you!” yelled Ned, seeing that persuasion was
no use, “if you don’t speak I’ll treat you in such a way
that, when you’re in blazes, it shall seem a pleasant relief
to you. I’ll make your last moments on earth warm for
you. Blowed if I won’t roast you alive.”
As he spoke the last words Gibson’s glaring eyes seemed
to light up.
“All right,” he gasped, in an almost inaudible whisper.
“Is there a way out?” roared Ned.
“ Yes,” gasped the other.
“ Will you show it me ?”
“ Yes. Lift me up.”
Despite all Kelly’s nerve, it was even to him a horrible
task to raise the mangled form of his victim into a sitting
position.
“ Over there—by that—row of—barrels,’,’ continued the
innkeeper.
Kelly understood him, and half-carried, half-dragged
him to the spot in question.
“ Start—the—bungs—of—those—two ! ” gasped Gibson,
every one of whose words seemed to be forced out at the
cost of a particle of his life.
Wonderingly, Kelly looked round, picked up a mallet,
and drove in the bungs,
A rush of spirits followed, flooding the floor.
“ What the devil is this?” asked the bushranger.
“ All—right—now— carry—me—to—that—corner,” and
he pointed to where Kelly had left the light.
Wonderingly, Kelly obeyed.
“ Now—over there—an iron—lever.”
No sooner had he turned to go than Gibson, stretching
out his hand, seized the light and held it over the pool of
spirits.
“ Kelly! ”he gasped.
“ Yes.” said the bushranger, who had just laid his hand
on the implement of which the other had spoken.
“ Y r ou—said—l’d—burn but—we—both ! ”
As he spoke the last words he sank forward, exhausted,
whilst the spirits, catching light, lit up the whole cellar.
Kelly turned round.
The floor of the cellar was converted into a lake of
liquid flame, in the midst of which Gibson was writhing
convulsively.
Mad with rage at being tricked, Kelly dashed forward,
and, in the excess of his passion, dealt Ids foe a blow with
the lever that put an end to his existence.
The next moment he repented of what was really an act
of mercy.
His own situation was a terrible one.
The heat and the terrible vapour of the burning spirit
would in a few moments be fatal to him.
He to further end of the cellar, but tha
flames pursued him.
Another barrel bursO, and the flood rose higher™
He glanced wildly around.
Suddenly he caught sight of a door in the opposite
wall, now revealed for the first time by the light of the
flames.
The only way to it, kowever, was through the lake of


1 Maddened by the prospect of certain death, he dashed
mto it.
The flames leaped round him, burning his hair and
beard, and singeing his garments, whilst the broken glass,
amidst which he stumbled twice, cut his hands and
knees.
He reached the door.
It was locked.
With all the fury of despair, he attacked it with his
crowbar, and, wrenching off the lock, tore it open.
It merely led into an inner cellar.
Here, however, for a moment or so, was safety.
As he glanced round it, he perceived a kind of shutter
in the upper part of the wall.
He tore this down.
Ob, blessed sight! The light of day streamed in upon
him once more, through an opening about three feet
square.
He staggered back, almost blinded by the light.
But oh, horror!—between him and light and air, and
freedom and safety, there was a range of iifon bars.
And through the open door b hind him a stream of
liquid flame, like a fiery serpent, had begun to steal into
the room, and was spreading slowly and surely over the
floor.
Inch by inch it crept towards him.
The iron bars were immovable, but the wooden frame
in which they were embedded looked old and dilapi-
dated.
Driving the claw end of his crowbar into this, he
wrenched aw,.y splinter after splinter, till the lower ends
of the bars were laid bare.
Then, seizing one of these, he tugged at it with all his
might.
His strength, naturally Herculean, was tripled by the
sense of danger.
The fiery flood had crept to his heels just as, by a super-
human effort, he bent two of the bars aside sufficiently to
allow him to pass.
With his last remaining strength he dragged himself
through the opening, and sank, scorched, blackened, and
insensible, on the turf outside.
Ashe did so, a fresh sound of explosion was heard, and
the cellar he had just lett became one pit of raging
flame.
CHAPTER CXXIY.
SWIFT VENGEANCE.
Meanwhile the day had worn on at the squatter’s sta-
tion. .
Dinner-time came, but, to Maries surprise, neither
Michael Eldred nor Kelly made their appearance.
She was not alarmed about the former, who was fre-
quentlv detained at one of the outlying tents by some busi-
ness connected with the station, but the latter s absence
rendered her uneasy.
She augured that it meant mischief.
A sense of impending evil beset her, and seemed to
increase as the hours went on.
At last she got so restless she felt she could not remain
in the house any longer.
She had her horse saddled, and rode off in the direction
of Gibson’s inn. ,
She had merely intended the ride as a distraction to her
thoughts, and had taken this direction almost uncon-
sciously. „ .
Suddenly she noticed a column of smoke on the
horizon.
She was on the alert at once.
Michael Eldred had frequently spoken to her of the
danger of bush fires, and warned her never to neglect any
indication of them. . ~ ~
She was naturally brave, however, and was, besides, able
to reason.
The air w’as quite calm, and she had learnt that the only
danger to anyone mounted was when a strong wirfd wa»
blowing.
So she resolved to push on a little further, and ascertain
the cause of the conflagration.
After all it might only be an unusually largo camp*
fire.
She had to traverse a belt of scrub in order to reach her
destination.
It grew in patches interspersed with tracks of sandy
soil.
She had got halfway through it, when suddenly she
heard a rustling sound some distance ahead.
She drew rein and listened.
Someone or something was evidently forcing its way in
her direction.
Nearer and nearer came the sound.
Suddenly, through the parted brushwood, there broke
upon her startled gaze a figure that froze her very soul
with horror.
With hair and beard singed to a matted stubble, with
face blackened with smoke and covered, as by a mask,
with caked and clotted gore, with bloodshot eyes and
parched, crackling lips, with garments hanging in scorched
and tattered ribbons from his frame, Ned Kelly stood
before her.
Less like a man at that moment than some fiend newly
vomited from the lowest depths of Pandemonium.
As she gazed at him aghast, the gristly vision darted
forward, and, with a hoarse and choking cry of recognition,
seized her bridle.
For ten seconds or so he stood confronting her.
Then clutching her wrist with his disengaged hand he
ejaculated the command.
“Get down!”
She remained motionless.
“ Get down!” he roared, forcing the words with difiL
culty through his parched and blistered lips, and at the
same time accentuating them with a jerk at her wrist that
almost tore her from the saddle.
There was nothing to do but to comply with the invita-
tion, for the grasp on wrist and bridle was one of iron.
Disengaging her foot from the stirrup and her leg from
the pommel, she slid down and stood facing him
“You Jezebel! You spawn of hell!” he began, but
even as he spoke he tottered and sank forward on his
knees releasing her wrist as he did so.
His frightful struggle in the cellar, and his mad course
on foot towards the station, had exhausted him.
IVlarie sprang back out of his reach.
In swift succession a train of ideas darted with light-
ning-like rapidity through her mind.
He had disovered hert eaoliery, that was certain.
What was to be done to escape the fearful fate that
only too certainly awaited her ?
Flight was impossible, for in falling he had managed
to slip his arms through the reins, and her horse was
therefore in his power.
It was a moment in which it was no use recoiling before
any extremity.
Marie carried a pistol, as she had been instructed by
her husband to do on all occasions.
A woman riding alone in the bush is exposed to certain
contingencies against which it is always w r ell to be pre-
pared. ..
She had had some experience in handling firearms during
the fighting that marked the fall of the Commune, and
since her marriage Michael Eldred had made her practis?
at a mark in the garden almost daily.
For, as he had told her, a woman had need to know
how to defend both her life and her honour.
As Ned knelt before her, incapable for the moment of
rising, she drew her weapon and levelled it full at his
“Villain!” she said, somewhat melodramatically, “ro
lease try horse and let me pass, or I will kill jou.
Ned stared at her as though stupefied.


Then with a groan he sank forward on his hands with
She reins still retained by his arm.
He moaned feebly, foamed at the mouth, and rolled his
eyes wildly, as though about to have a fit.
Wretch as ho was, the woman could not help feeling
some pity for such a ghastly object.
She hesitated, despite his evil intentions towards her-
self, to shoot him down, as he lay, in cold blood.
Better for her and for many another had she done so
there and then.
“ Listen to me,” she said, “if you can. Ah! do not
move,” she continued, as he seemed to be about to make
an effort to rise, “ or I will fire.”
Her pistol cowed him and lie sank down again.
“You had some talk with me the other day,” she went
on ; “you told me I was to do certain things because it
was your will. Now it is my turn. You are in my power.
If I shoot you now everyone will say Ido well. But I
do not want to hurt you. No. Not if you will be wise.
You will get up, you will let go my horse, I will ride
home, and you will go to an (liable , eh ? And fi J om this
time we are strangers. Will that suit you ?”
As she stood over him cutting him with each word like
a whip-lash, he grovelled almost at her feet, his eyes now
cast down as if iu despair, now glancing wildly round as
if in search of a chance of escape, his hands mechanically
clutching and crushing the sandy soil.
“Do you agree?” she continued, with a stamp of her
foot, and with the pistol still levelled straight at his
head.
He looked up hopelessly, with his fingers still clutching
and crumbling the sand, and gathered his legs under him.
“ If—jf you,” he began falteringly, raising his hands,
still full of soil, in a deprecating manner, like the paws of
a dog who begs, “ will only listen to—to reason a bit.
Just look at it in a fair light. Now, how can L pos-
sibly ”
Wish-ish.
His hands shot out straight before him and two hands-
fult of sand went smack into her face.
Brave as ever, blinded but undaunted, she realised her
peril and fired.
But just as she pulled trigger he was flat on the ground
again, and then up like a serpent springing from its coil.
The next moment she was down on her back with one
of his hands clenched round her throat, the other over
her mouth, whilst one knee crushed her bosom, ari l the
other pinned down her pistol arm,
“You serpent!” croaked Kelly in a voice scarcely
batman, as he bent over her; “ you she-devil, you thought
to send Ned Kelly to kingdom-come, did you, when you
found your pretty little plot of selling him to the beaks was
blowed? I know all that was wri ten in that pretty little
note you sent to Gibson’s this morning. It was written
plain enough, but I’ll write my marks on you a sight
plainer before I’ve done with you, you cursed frog-eating,
double-tongued, black-hearted viper.”
Over the scene of horror that followed, a veil had best
be drawn.
Half-an-hour later, Kelly, mounted on Marie’s grey
mare, galloped up dke a madman to the station.
There were only two women about the place, and his
first care was to seize them, and, after binding them hand
and foot, to lock them up in a room.
Th<m, after washing himself, changing his dress, patching
ud his wounds, and feeding, he proceeded quietly and
systematically to go through the entire establishment.
There was not much money, for squatters are not in the
habit of having large sums on the premises, lest these
should tempt a visit from bushrangers; but one or two
watches and the contents of Marie’s jewel-case formed a
very respectable prize.
With this swag carefully concealed about him. Ned
took his pistols and made his way to the stable where
Marco Polo was.
Leading him out he proceeded to saddle him, whilst the
horse recognising his master, whinnied with joy, and thrus*
his velvet muzzle against Ned’s chest.
Carefully the bushranger tightened the girth, and tnen
ran eye and hand over strap and buckle.
He had a long ride before him, and he knew the hnpor.
tance of everything being iu good trim.
Then he lit his pipe and swung himself into the saddle.
Just as he was about to start, a hail reached his ears.
He looked in the direction from which it came, and
saw Michael Eldred advancing towards the station at a
hand gallop.
“ The devil!” said Ned to himself, “ this is awkward.”
“ Hullo, captain," said Michael, as soon as he got within
speaking distance, “ where are you bound for ?”
Jt was now late in the afternoon, and Eldred was
somewhat surprised to see his guest apparently equipped
for a journey.
“By gosh !” said Kelly, bluntly, “ it’s a jolly good thing
you turned up. I’ve got no end of a yarn for you to
listen to, so just range alongside.”
It was important, above all things, to prevent Eldred
from entering the house, where the captive women would
soon have put him alive to the real state of affairs.
The unsuspecting squatter drew near.
For a moment Kelly debated whether to draw a pistol
and shoot him down.
But he was afraid the shot might be heard.
He waited, therefore, till Eldred came right up to him,
and, assuming a confidential air, began in a lo » voice.
“ It’s just the queerest thing you ever heard of, Mr
Eldred, and if ”
“ Great heavens !” said Eldred, as he ranged up along.,
side, and caught sight of the strapping adorning Ned>
face, “what’s the matter?”
No sooner were the words out of his mouth, than a
sudden drive from Ned knocked him out of the saddle,
utterly uuprepared as he was for any such aggression.
Ned seized, the horse’s bridle to lead him off and turn
him loose in the bush, so as to prevent immediate pursuit
by Eldred, but whilst thus engaged the sound of ap-
proaching hoofs fell on his ear.
He looked up.
A group of horsemen were riding furiously towards the
station from the same quarter from which he himself had
last approached it.
Occupied with Eidred, he had failed to notice their
approach, and now they were not more than fifty yards off.
He could plainly distinguish the uniform of the
mounted police, and noticed that the foremost horse bore
a double burden.
Supported in the rider’s arms was a figure whose
flowing garments were an obvious indication of its sex.
He recognised the grey riding- habit of his victim, Marie.
They had evidently found her when tracing him from
the inn.
Such was the case, the new-comers being four troopers
and a sergeant, whom the officer in command at the police
barracks had despatched on learning from Sam the fact of
Ned Kelly's presence at the inn.
On reaching Gibson’s residence they had found it a pile
of ashes, but the traces of Ned’s escape were plainly
visible.
Tracking him across the plain they had traversed the
belt of scrub, and there discovered the senseless form of
Marie, whom Sam had at once recognised as the wife of
Michael Eldred.
They had pushed on to the station, and now arrived just
as Ned was debating within himself whether he should add
a new victim to the list in the person of the hapless
squatter.
He judged, however, that in the present state of affairs
flight was the best policy.
Dropping the senseless form of the squatter lie sprang
upon the back of Mareo Polo.
A yell of execration from the trooners warned him that
he was discovered.


Two of them pulled up and began to get their carbines
ready, whilst the remainder galloped on at full speed.
Ned’s position seemed somewhat critical.
To the right of him were the stables, and to the left the
house.
In front was a kind of paddock of about a couple of
acres, the further side of which was bounded by a stiff post
and rail
The only method was to cross this, as the approaching
troop rs cut off all attempts to escape in the rear.
With a shake of the rein he got Marco Polo into motion,
but, before the matchless steed could settle into his stride,
the foremost trooper had considerably lessened the distance
between them.
Whing, whmg! a couple of carbine bullets whizzed harm-
lessly past his ears, for a sharp gallop was by no means a
thing calculated to steady a man’s aim.
Without looking back Ned headed Marco Polo straight
at the fence, came steadily up to it, lifted his horse, rose
in the air with a yell of defiance, and the next instant vyas
scouring across the stretch of boundless plain extending
towards the upper waters of the Murray.
CHAPTER CXXV.
THE PURSUIT.
The troopers one and all paused at the fence and drew
bridle.
A brief consultation took place amongst them.
“ By all that’s blue, the scoundrel is getting a long start
of us! ” said one of them, lifting his cap and mopping his
forehead, as he watch d the fast-receding form of Ned.
“ All right, Casson,” said the sergeant, a grin, and
grizzled looking fellow of forty whose face bore the rnarl.s
of hard service, and whose wiry figure bespoke a man
equal to any amount of fatigue ; “ he hasn't got away yet.
We're well on his trail, and if it goes right into the deepest
pit of brimstone, I’ll follow it! ”
“The boasts are blown, though,” said a young tellow
named Anderson •, “ and that clipper of his is as fresh as a
Just so; but I reckon there’s no lack of fresh horse-
flesh in the stable yonder, and I don’t think the boss ot
this show is the man to grudge the loan of it.”
The three cantered back to the stable, where their two
comrades who had halted to fire had by this time arrived,
in company with Sam, who held in his arms the senseless
form of Marie.
By the aid of a bucket or two of water and a nip ot
brandy, Michael Eldred was restored to his senses
He gazed wildly around him
“My head—the ruffian !—ah, sergeant! ” he continued,
as he caught sight of the trooper’s uniform ; • you are
just in time. I have been assaulted by a rulnau, a big
bearded lellow calling himself Captain Higgins. ’
“ And whose real name, sir,” said the sergeant, “ is Meet
6 “Ned Kelly, the ironclad bushranger? Great heavens!
to think 1 should not have suspected this ! ”
Even as he spoke his eye fell on the insensible form ot
his wife, which had been reverently laid on a couch im-
provised with straw and fodder, ■,
“What—what is the meaning of th>r.: he gasped,
staggering towards her
“ More of that devil’s work, sir,” said the sergeant, who
with his men had not lost their time during their colloquy,
but bad rapidly unsaddled their panting horses. “ Aow
look here, sir, you can help us in this matter ick us
out tli£jffive best animals you have in the i
undertake to bring back Ned Kelly, dead or alive.
Eldred complied, and, by the help of a couple of Ins
hands who rode up to the station during this colloquy,
the troopers were mounted on five fresh horses.
“ I 'ock here, governor,” said Sam ; “ I put you on ns
lay, and I have a right to halve the swag. Its only fair
and pro iov \ 'hoaid go along with you.
“ Quite so,” said the sergeant, who thought it would be
just as well not to lose sight of such a slippery customer
as Master Sam evidently was; and accordingly a steed was
provided for the ostler.
The two hands having helped Michael Eldred to convey
Marie to the house, the little troop got under wa,
Skirting the paddock in order to avoid the fence that
had already baffled them, they struck out across the plain
after Kelly, whose figure now appeared a mere dot on the
horizon.
Meanwhile Ned, with a grim chuckle of satisfaction at
the fact of the fence putting a temporary stopper on the
pursuit, was sailing along merrily, Marco Polo having
settled down into the long sweeping stride his rider knew
so well.
Ever and anon, however, the fugitive turned his bead
to see whether the first check had sufficed to baffle his
pursuers, or whether they were not yet shaken off.
“ If they do try it, it will not make much difference,” he
muttered, “ their ‘ prads ’ are pretty well blown, and a sharp
burst will crack ’em up like so many tea-cups ”
As he spoke he glanced back again, and his eye caught
the moving gleam of the troopers accoutrements, as they
skirted the paddock.
“So you’ve not given it up, after all, have you? Web,
I’ve a fancy for giving you a prett} r little bit of a devil s
dance 1 1 guess some of you will be a trifle saddle-galled
before I’ve done with you !”
With reckless bravado lie slowed down Marco Polo,
and suffered his pursuers to gain on him.
“It would be a blessed lark to string them, and pick
them off one by one! If I did, it would be a lesson to
them. None of the cursed traps would be in such a hurry
to follow me after that! ”
He continued at the same slackened pace, and every
moment the pursuers gained ground.
“ One, two, three, four, five, not six of them,” thought
Kelly “ who is the chap in plain clothes? Old Eldred, I
suppose. No, he ain’t tall enough. By Gosh though !
i,hat’s liis grey gelding the first of them is on. Curse me
i;r being a fool, but I never thought ot that, the swine
>»ve changed horses at the station. I’ve a rougher job on
hind than I thought for.”
And so it soon proved.
Sergeant Whitewell had wondered at the foolhardiness
o' the bushranger, in thus allowing them to gain on him
when he might have pushed on and ridden clear out ot
sight, but he was shrewd enough to profit by it.
e He ran his eye over the little troop.
An excellent judge of horseflesh, he picked out at the
glance tlie two worst horses of the five he and his men had
appropiiateci rang out . “ Casson and Whitwell,
ride on ahead as hard as ever you can pelt. Keep neck
and neck, or the beggar may try to settle you single-
handed. But what you must do is to rattle alter him til.
his horse is blown or yours are. We’ll come slinging
along steadily, and in the longrun are bound to land
and Whitwell spurred their beasts, and, shooting
ahead of theii companions, came on with carbines ready,
rushing like a pair of eagles about to pounce on their prc;y.
Neck and neck like jockeys at a finish, they swept on,
and Ned had to wake up Marco Polo and keep him mov-
ing Soon these three, the bushranger and his two tore-
most pursuers, were far ahead of the sergeant, Sam, and the
two remaining troopers. . , ~
Ned, however, had divined the trick and was casting
about for a means of defeating it.
“ They don t quite know what Marco 1 010 s made or,
he thought, ‘ and they are not going to put their claws on
me this journey.” ~ .
Put it was evident that even Ma"co Polo couid no
I continue this mad gallop for long.
I it 1S true he was nobly holding las own, and hed wa*
in no immediate danger


Still the steeds of the troopers seemed fleet and
staunch, and if they could only continue to force the pace
a little longer the ultimate success of their comrades would
be assured.
Half-an-hour elapsed and the relative positions of pur-
suers and pursued were unchanged.
Ned kept about a quarter of a mile ah®id of Casson and
Whitwell, and the remainder of his foes were almost eight
times th t distance in the rear.
All around stretched the flat unbroken plain, save right
ahead where the crests of a line of timber were visible.
Towards these the bushranger was making his way.
“We must do the job befor he gains cover,” ejaculate 1
Casson, in jesting tones to his comrade, “ or he will be
able to pick us off like parrots on a bough. Come, aie
you ready for a spurt
“ Yes.”
“Here you are then, ride every ha’p’orth you know.”
Digging in their spurs, the two men urged their almost
exhausted animals on at racing speed.
Ned glanced anxiously astern and ahead.
Pie noted the distance of the timber and the rate of his
pursuers.
“Mr.rcocan live the pace and stay the distance,” he
thought, and in turn touched his horse with the spur.
He nursed ami spared liim as much as possible, bringing
into use every trick by which a good rider helps and eases
his horse.
A shout and a clatter behind warn him that the troopers
are gaining.
“Now for it old man,” and for ten minutes he urges
Marco to the utmost.
The sounds of pursuit grow fainter again.
The wood is nearer and nearer.
It isarangeof blue gums, and Ned guesses that they mark
the course of a stream.
A faint cry far in the rear marks that his followers are
distanced and that some mishap has befallen them.
A carbine-shot rings out as a parting salute, as he
plunges beneath the sheltering timber
But the bullet is wide, and in another instant he is
swallowed up in the timber.
Twenty minutes or so later the sergeant and his com-
panions, who have been riding steadily within themselves,
reme up with their advanced guard.
Casson is lying on the turf with his head bandaged,
and his horse with dropped head and outstretched legs
is standing by him the very embodiment of grogginess.
Whitwell is attending to his animal, whose heaving
sides betray he is in little better plight.
“ What’s up?” asks the sergeant.
“ Casson s horse dropped and threw him just as that
fellow gained the timber,” was the answer ; “ and I don’t
think mine can to any further yet awhile.”
“ Are you hurt, Casson?” was the next question,
“ No, only a bit shaken.”
“ Well, you stay here with the horses till they come
round, and then follow us. Jump down, you fellow,” he
continued, addressing Sam, who obeyed with no very good
grace. “ Get on his horso, Whitwell, and come on with us.”
And the four continued their pursuit, leaving Sam to
keep company with Casson.
The marks o? Marco Polo’s hoofs on the turf served to
guide them even after entering the timber.
The >rees were some distance apart as yet, and the light
soil beneath them retained the impression distinctly.
The blue gums indicat' d water, and sure enough a alior»
ride brought them in view of a rushing stream, a confluent
of the Murr y.
The track 1j 1 down straight towards it.
The s ,ot in which they found themselves was a kind ot
natural mph: theatre of some two hundred yards in dia-
meter.
Across the centre of this the stream flowed.
The slope down towards it was covered with grass.
A similar growth fringed the opposite bank, but the
further slope was covered with patches of bush.
The banks of the stream were low, and several tracks of
hoofs, some old and some recent, proved that this spot was
used as a ford.
To the right and the left the banks rose and were fringed
with overhanging timber.
“ Get your carbiues ready and come on steadily,” said
the sergeant, “he may be waiting to have a pop at us from
the cover yonder.”
They reached the edge of the stream to which Kelly’s
tracks led.
“Halt!” commanded the sergeant, “this is just the.
place where suck a varmint would try to double. Ander-
son, ride across and see if there are any traces of his
getting out at the other side ”
Anderson rode cautiously.
The water, however, did not come much above his horse’s
knees, for the stream broadened consider tbly.
“No,” he reported from the other side, “there are.
several tracks leaving the water, but they are two days
old at least.”
“ Just as I thought; he has doubled up or down stream.
But we were just too cunning for him,” and as he spoke he
chuckled in his own conceit “ I’ll unearth him yet.”
He gave orders, and the party separated.
Entering the stream, two proceeded to follow its course
upwards and two downwards.
With their eyes riveted on the banks and their carbines
in readiness, they stole c lutiously along scrutinising every
twig and shrub, every imh of soil, for the trace of KoUy’is
passage.
(To be continued,}
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“ The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross. —A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Dove’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log. —A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Demons of the Sea.
Love and Adventure.
Run away from Home.— A Life of
Adventure.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Million.
The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search
of a Big Diamond.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunde*,”




NED KELLY; IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
*‘lt is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a senes of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.” Ned Kelly, illustrated, Nos. Ito 11, already published at ->4, Kssox-
street, Strand, price One Penny.— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881. _ „
‘‘lt is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance ot rved Kelly »
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.” Times, July. _
“The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollections of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of
XHD ms Nag in addition to which Ned's history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction. I ress, July.
CHAPTER CXXV.— Continue!.
Two hours later the party that had gone up stream
returned.
They had failed to discover the slightest trace of Kelly’s
progress, and had found farther advance barred by a
cataract falling some ten feet over a shelf of rocks, up
which it was impossible to scramble.
On either side the stream was bordered by walls of per-
pendicular rock, so it was quite impossible for Kelly to
have escaped that way.
Ten minutes later the sergeant and Whit well, who had
ridden down stream, returned.
They had had no better luck.
A few hundred yards the stream broadened into a swamp,
to traverse which was certain destruction.
Indeed, they had themselves had a narrow escape from
Veing engulfed, and it was patent that the bushranger
jould not have gone that way.
But there were his marks plainly enough leading into
the stream, and there was not the slightest trace of his
having left it.
“ I’m blessed !” growled the sergeant, “ but unless he’s
been and dived into the mud like a turtle, or flown up into
the air like a bird, I can’t see where the deuce he can have
vanished to.”
The others were equally amazed.
Whilst they -were debating, Casson and Sam, whose
horses had recovered sufficiently for them to make a start,
came slowly up.
The state of affairs was explained to them.
The ostler, who was an old bushranger, remained for
some time lost in thought.
Then he rede into the stream. He crossed the ford,
scrutinising the ground as ko did so.
Arrived on the opposite bank, he halted for a moment.
Then suddenly he turned to them and yelled out -
“You infernal blind fools! don’t you see how it is?
He’s crossed here and hacked his horse out of the
rive? 3 M
CHAPTER CXXVL
TWO KINDRED SPIRITS.
Sam was right in his surmise.
Kelly had ridden into the stream, and, on nearing the
opposite bank had turned Marco Polo, and backed him oui
of it.
By this device the track he left appeared to be the hoof-
marks of a horse entering the s ! ream from the farther
side, and had been taken for such by Anderson.
The bushranger had continued to back his horse till he
reached the dense patches of scrub dotting the further
slope, in which it would be a work of time and difficulty
to lift his trail.
Once arrived here he had turned Marco Polo round and
galloped off, feeling sure of having gained a good start on
his pursuers.
He had settled his destination in his own mind.
Some twenty miles off was a safe hiding-place.
It was a large ramshackle range of buildings, that had
once been the residence of a squatter named Lomax.
Lomax had at one time been a well-to-do man, but a
couple of dry seasons and the failure of a bank reduced
him to beggary, after which he quietly proceeded to drink
himself to death.
He had almost accomplished this when the thought
probably occurred to him that there was a quicker method
of leaving the world.
At any rate, he cut his throat during a fit of the horrors.
This brought the place into somewhat evil odour.
The run was gradually occupied by neighbouring
squatters, and the house and buildings were falling into
ruins, when they were taken possession of by a man
named Appleby, who converted tk~m into a kind of sly
grog-shop, the general house of gjrfl for all the scoundrels
of the district.
Only as the district happened to be Lather sparsely
populated, and the percentage of sooxiudrels not much
above the average, lie could not boast of a very extended
custom.


Still, Appleby’s was known far and near as one of those
places where accommodation could be had, an I “no
questions asked,” by any gentleman who might find it
awkward to thrust his nose into an ordinary hostelry.
Night had closed as Ned rode up to Appleby’s.
The long range of stanles, woolsheds, shepherds’ huts,
and other outbuildings belonging to a station, presented
a ghastly and desolate aspect in the moonlight.
Part of them had fallen into ruin, and their skeleton
framework stood out gaunt and Lack against the sky-
line
The dwelling house, which had once been a residence of
some pretensions, was a large and strongly-built erection
of timber, surrounded by a broad verandah, to which
access was gained by a flight of steps.
At one time an attempt had evidently been made to
render it a pleasant residence by the laying-out of a
flower garden around it, but the beds had long since been
trodden down, and a few stumps sticking out of the sun-
baked ground were the only traces left of what had once
been a tastefully-arranged cluster of flowering trees and
shrubs.
The house itself, however, was externally in good re-
pair, and it was evident that no slight attention had been
paid to its external defences.
The door was securely fastened, and the windows se-
cured by massively-constructed shutters.
As Ned drew rein in front of the verandah, he thought
for a moment the place was uninhabited.
This was not an unusual occurrence, for Appleby was
in the habit of starting off from time to time on secret
expeditions, the object of which was only known to himself.
Only certain people of tat objectionably prying disposi-
tion, and a disgusting k ..„ok of what is called “putting
two and tw r o together,” were in the habit of maintaining
that Appleby’s disappearances always coincided with the
disappearance of horses from somebody else’s premises at
a greater or less distance from his dwelling.
On looking closely, however, the bushranger marked a
gleam of light stealing through the crack of one of the
shutters.
He shouted loudly.
No notice, however, seemed taken of his hail.
“ tlullo ! house, Appleby ! ” he roared again.
Still there was no response.
Alter glancing round, lest there should be any sign of
danger, he alighted from Marco Polo’s back, and, throwing
the bridle reins over one of the posts always fringing the
front of “ publics ” in town or country, ascended the steps
and rapped loudly at the door.
Again with no result.
“Hi, Appleby, blow you! What’s up, that you keep
an old pa! waiting like this ? By gosh ! if you’re not slippy,
I’ll burn your cursed old dog-kennel about your ears. ’
“ 1 don’t think you will, sir,” said a clear, ringing voice,
close to his ear.
Ned glanced up in amazement,
A narrow slit had noiselessly opened a little to the
right of the doorway, and through it protruded the barrel
of a pistol which covered him completely.
But what still more surprised him, was to mark that
the hand holding the weapon was that of a woman, whose
voice it was that had addressed him.
“Now then,” she continued, in undaunted tones, “per-
il aj s you'll veil me who you are, and what you want.”
This style of address pleased Ned.
With his usual recklessness he faced the speaker and
replied—
“ Well, my name happens to be Ned Kelly, and I want
a roof, food, and fodd *r, not to mention the company
of a pretty girl, if that’s agreeable to you.”
“ Hold out you* left hand ’ was the answer.
Ned complied, showing thj scar.
“ Yes,” said the unknown, “you bear his brand, sure
• iirli. But you ought to have a password, I fancy, to
“True enough. Now, suppose I told you that wo
buried it to the south of the third gum tree on tha lei?
after crossing th* creek V”
‘ That would be enough to get me to open the door to
Old Nick.”
The slit was closed, and next moment Ned heard the
fastenings of the huge outer door being undone.
Then it swung back, revealing on the threshold the
figure of a young girl holding a fight in one hand and a
pistol in the other.
“ Welcome, Mr. Kelly,” she said, in the same confident
tone.
She was a girl about eighteen or twenty, whom nineteen
men out of twenty would have styled handsome, and
ninety-nine women out of a hundred a fright.
Hair of a reddish chestnut, falling in thick masses over
a square forehead, a straight nose, a pale complexion,
brightened now and again by a kindly flush, eyes greyish
green in the light and black in the shade, a full pillar-like
throat, square shoulders, and round and supple limbs, were
the salient points of her personal appearance.
Ned ran his eyes over these points as ho would over
those of a horse, and nodded approval.
“ You’re a clipping wench,” was his remark as he fol-
lowed her into the hall, “but who the devil are you and
what brings you here ?”
The girl laughed.
“Well, I’m daughter Jess, and I’m keeping
house, you see.”
“Ain’t the governor at home ?”
“ No ; he’s off for a day or two on some lay or other.”
“And left you here alone?”
“ Why not ? I reckon I can take care of the place and
myself too,” she said significantly.
Sooth to say Miss Jessie Appleby was in every way
equal to the twofold task.
She had been dragged up, so to say, in the suburbs of
Sydney, under the nominal care of an aunt whose osten-
sible occupation was keeping a “ leaving shop,” but who
derived the chief part of her income from the purchase
of stolen goods, and even less avowable transactions.
At sixteen Miss Jessie had emancipated herself from
her aunt’s care, and started life on her own account.
It is with deep regret we have to mention that in a very
short time her career became of a somewhat prominent
character, and led to her being brought into contact on
several occasions with the Sydney police.
At length a little difficulty arising about a sailor who
was found one morning on the pavement with his pockets
turned out and his head caved in, led to her passing a
twelvemonth in seclusion at the expense of Government.
On her release she judged a change of air advisable,
and had accordingly come to act as housekeeper to her
father at Lomax’s old station.
“ Well, you do seem a good plucked un,” said Kelly
in tones of unfeigned admiration.
“How about your horse?” asked the girl, paying no
attention to the compliment. “There is very go®d shelter
for him in the stable, it is better than it looks. Shall 1
light you to it?”
“No,”answered Kelly with equal cooiuess, and an air as
if the whole place belonged to him. “Marco Polo and 1
don’t care about being separated, and I guess I can find
him quarters here. Besides, I may want him sooner than
you think—though 1 hope not, for he’s done his work to-
day—so I'll just bring him in here for a while. Lord love
you, he’s as quiet as a Christian, and a great deal bettei*
than most of them —gentle as a cat but as strong aa a
tiger.”
Saying this he went out, and led the way up the steps
into 'th£ large room which served as hall ai.d dining and
drawing room, all in one. Marco followed Ned like a pet-
dog, and seemed no way surprised at his new quarters.
‘ Oh, what a beauty !” cried the girl in admiration.
“ Yes, there ain’t two like him under the southern
cross,” said Kelly with equal enthusiasm.


‘’Cst in there and make yourself comfortable,” said
Jess, iud’oating a large room opening off the right of the
hall.
“ No, no ! beast before man in a case like this,” was the
bushranger’s answer. “ Marco's heels may have to save
my neck before daylight, and looking after him is only
taking care of number one. Is there any fodder on the
premises?”
“ Plenty,” answered leading the way to aback room.
. Soon a corner of the hall was comfortably littered down
Tot Marco Polo’s reception, and, tired as he was, Ned pro-
ceeded to give the gallant animal a thorough rubbing
down before leaving him to repose and the enjoyment of a
feed of corn.
The girl aided him with approving eyes.
“ You’re the right sort,” she observed, leading the Avay
to the room she had already indicated.
It was roughly, but not uncomfortably furnished, and
Ned casting his heavy frame into a huge American chair,
and thrusting his feet out in front of him, heaved a grunt
of satisfaction, for the day had been a terribly trying one
to even his strength, and, in his own words, he felt “ pretty
well played out.”
Jessie proceeded to set food and drink on the table and
called on him to fall to.
As he cast aside his broad hat before commencing his
meal, and revea'ed his scared and plaistered face and the
burnt stubble of his hair and beard, the girl gave a start
of su f prise.
Ng.l laughed,
“ I don’t look much of a beauty, do I?” said he.
“ No, you don’t.”
“ Oh ! you see me at my worst. Just wait a week or so,
till my hair grows and I get rid of these scratches, and I’ll
Mtonish you.”
“How? I always heard Ned Kelly was a very handsome
fellow, but you can hardly pass muster as that.”
“ Just wait a bit, and you’ll change your mind. But
come, are you going to have a mouthful along with me?”
The gi 1 sat down at the table, and the conversation
between the pair soon became brisk and lively, rather too
lively, pfi&iaps, for good taste.
Each recognised in the other a congenial spirit, and the
bond of sympathy between them grew stronger every
minute.
Fatigue, a hearty meal, and two or three stiff tumblers
begax. however, after a while, to have their effect on Ned,
and he nodded once or twice in the chair.
“ Pretty well done up, eh?” said the girl.
“ Rather !” was the rejoinder. “ I’ve got through a-fair
job of work since sunrise.”
“Well, you'd better roll yourself up in a rug and take
a coil on the ground.”
“ And you?” he asked with a grin.
“ Never you mind about me,” she answered significantly.
Ned pondered for a minute.
His late experience with the Countess and Marie was of
a nature to give him some right in feeling mistrustful as
regarded the fair sex.
But on reflection ho came to the conclusion that Jessie
Appleby was a girl to be ti usted.
“ She knows me, and I don t think she’d go back on her
father’s pal,” he muttered, and, wrapping himself in the
rug, stretched himself at fail length on the floor, and was
soon fast asleep, with his saddle under his head and his
pistol gripped in his hand.
The girl sat watching him for some time, with a look of
interest on her features.
'To her, with her training, Ned Kelly was not a villain
but a hero.
No young lady of Higa Clmrch proclivities ever gazed
more admiringly at a young curate ; no feminine wor-
shipper of lilies and sunflowers ever watched with greater
interest the slumbers of an apostle of aestheticism.
‘' J Wn she rose, and, passing into the hall, gave another
to the comforts of Marco Tolo.
Returning to the sitting-room, she resumed her silent
vigil.
The hours passed on, the stars faded and the light of a
new day began to steal over the plain, and still the robber
slept and the girl watched over his slumbers.
Suddenly a shot, followed by a thundering noise at the
outer door, made Ned spring to his feet, pistol in band.
CHAPTER C'XXVIL
“FIRST CATCH YOUR HARE.”
Whem Sergeant Whitwell found the trick that had been
played on him by Kelly at the ford, his fury knew no
bounds.
To be done in any way was bad enough, but to be made
to look small in the eyes of those subordinates to whom
he had been laying down the law, was unbearable.
In his heart he cursed Kelly, and vowed if ever he had
the chance of a shot at him he would not hesitate.
After blowing off as much steam as he could in abusing
Anderson, upon whom he laid the whole blame, and whom
he threatened to put under arrest, he proceeded to resume
pursuit.
It was a work of no small difficulty to find Ned’s trail,
and to follow it to the swamp.
“ Is there a chance of getting hold of a black fellow
hereabouts ?” he enquired of Sam.
“ Well, there are one or two hang about Eldred’s sta-
tion,” replied that worthy. “There’s a shepherd’s hut
somewhere about a couple of miles to the northward, ami
I fancy be might be able to help us.”
Sam and one of the troopers were despatched in quest
of this worthy, the rest of the party endeavouring to
follow Ned’s trail, which was by no means an easy job, as
it was lost in the marshy ground.
Finally they had to give it up, and await the return of
their messengers.
At length these made their appearance, accompanied by
the shepherd and a black boy of about sixteen, and pro-
vided, moreover, with a lantern.
Night was indeed fast coming on.
The black, like all his tribe, had a great objection to be
abroad in the dark, but threats, promises, the company of
white men, and the light, helped to overcome his terror.
So soon as the black was made, with some difficulty, to
comprehend the dodge Kelly had practised upon his
pursuers, he directed the party to separate, and skirt the
marshy swamp into which Kelly’s tracks were followed,
and thus find the spot at which he had debouched and
started squarely on his journey. The black’s advice was
immediately followed, the sergeant impreeating his own
stupidity in not having thought of this self-evident pro-
ceeding instead of being indebted to a “ nigger ” for the
suggestion. The police divided their forces, each taking
the half-circle skirt round the edge of the swamp. Keeping
a good look-out (the moon shining as it only does shine
in Australia, and illuminating the ground as clearly as an
English sun) the said “ nigger ” was the first to detect the
marks of Marco’s hoofs, which important fact he heralded
by loud gutteral chuckles, and exclamations of “ Yarrow-
yarrow, quam by here 1” (horse marks here).
“Got him at last, by Jingo!” shouted the sergeant,
exultingly. “ Now, my beauty, if I don’t run you to
earth and get a pile for your brush, why my head’s only
fit for oat*’ meat.”
“ I should say, sergeant,” said Casaon, “ from tha
course he has evidently taken, that he’s making his way to
Lomax’s old station. That chap Appleby, who’s squat-
ting there now, is a bad egg, if ever there was one, and
would be sure to help him at a pinch.”
“That’s about it,” answered Whitwell. Come, we can
push on pretty smartly. There's no doubt but that’s
where he’s making for.”
They stuck to Marco’s tracks, which the black followed
like a beaten road.
Despite their hurry, however, it was broad daylight


before the old station stood revealed to them, in all its
deeolation.
Before they approached it they halted, and a kind of
council of war was held.
The blacK refused to advance any further.
In common with his tribe he firmly believed the spot
haunted by the ghost of Lomax, and neither threats nor
promises could induce him to venture within its clutches.
The shepherd was, he frankly admitted, a non-combat-
ant, and Master Sam showed a decided reluctance to
trusting his ugly carcase within pistol-shot of the man he
had betrayed to the police, and whom he knew was a dead
shot at twenty paces.
The five troopers resolved therefore to surround the
house, after first riding round it in a wide circuit with the
black, in order to verify the fact that there was no trail
leading away from the station.
Dismounting and leaving their horses under the care of
Sam and the shepherd, they stole cautiously forward to the
main building.
Reconnoitring, they ascertained that there were only
two entrances, one in front and one in the rear.
The sergeant stationed two of his men at the back of
the house, with orders to shoot down Kelly if he attempted
to break away in that direction, or if he sought to escape
by the side windows.
Then with the other two he quietly ascended the steps
of the verandah.
“If he’s here,” he observed, “we shall nab him to a
certainty,”
And placing the muzzle of his carbine to the keyhole he
blew the lock to flinders.
After which, he and his comrades commenced a vigorous
assault on the door with the but-ends of their carbines.
It might have been more in accordance with the laws of
warfare to have summoned the garrison to surrender; but
the sergeant, knowing from Marco’s tracks up to the
house that Ned was within, thought any such courtesy
superfluous.
The bars held firm, however; and for some time the
thundering din produced no response.
Suddenly a hoarse voice was heard within, demanding
who the devil it was hammering at the door in that fashion.
“ All right, Master Kelly,” cried Whitwell. ‘ Just open
the door and let us in, or we’ll find a way to smoke you
out of your hole.”
A laugh was the only answer.
“Hammer away, lads,” cried the sergeant. “We’ll
have this door down in a brace of shakes, and then that
joker’ll laugh on the wrong side of his mouth ”
Suddenly the panel in the shutter flew open, a pistol
shot rang out, and with a low moan the sergeant dropped
in his tracks.
Before the other two could Avell realise Avhence the
attack came, a second shot was fired, the ball passing
through Whitwell’s arm, and, ere he and his companions
could turn their carbines against their foe, the panel was
re-closed.
A panic seized them, and, fairly turning tail, they trotted
from the verandah like startled rabbits, and did not halt
till they had gained the shelter of the ruined outbuildings.
Another shot, and a cry from their companions in the
rear of the house warned them that they too were in equal
peril, and next minute they saAV them falling back.
Ere, however, they could gain shelter a fourth shot was
fired from the house, and the bullet lodging in Casson’s
leg brought him to the ground.
Holmes, his companion, seized him in his arms, and,
swinging him on to his succeeded in bearing him
out of range.
Matters were evidently critical.
With two of their number hors de combat, and a third
wounded, their chance of capturing Kelly seemed farther
•ff than ever.
Holmes and his wounded companion having rejoined
them, they took counsel.
“ Look here,” said Whitwell, whose wound on examina-
tion was found not to be so serious as they had at first
imagined. “we must turn this siege into a blockade. We
can’t storm the house, but the fellow inside is in an equally
tight fix, for if he ventures into the open we can knock
him over like a rabbit.”
“ That’s so,” said Holmes.
“ Well, all we’ve got to do is to keep a sharp lookout,
and, meanwhile, send back the shepherd for help.”
‘•Yes, that’s all very well,” growled \nder on, whose
temper had not been improved by the sergeant’s rating
concerning his oversight at the first, ‘ but if the captain
comes up with the rest of the police, he’ll get the reward,
and we sha'l run all the risk in the meantime.”
“ Something in that,” remarked Holmes.
“I don’t like this job over much,” resumed Anderson.
“If five of us couldn’t come to the end of the fellow,
I’m blessed if I sec how two and a half, for that's all wo
are, can. How are we to keep watch on all sides of tho
house ?”
“ Oh, as to that,” said Casson, pluckily, *• I am not
quite done for. My leg hurts awful, but I think I could
manage to shoot straight, in spite of it. Only just let me
have a fair crack at that beggar, and I’ll lay odds he won’t
forget me.”
“ But how about the sergeant?” asked Whitwell. “1
don’t think he’s dead.”
“ Ain’t there a way of luring Kelly out into the open?”
said Holmes. “If we could only manage that, we cou?**
bowl him over easily. He’s got no horse.'’
“ Where the devil has he hid his horse?” asked Ander-
son.
“ Somewhere in these sheds, I expect. Hullo!”
This last remark was called forth by a startling inci-
dent.
About fifty yards intervened between the sued in which
they had ensconced themselves and the dwelling-house.
Suddenly the door of the latter opened.
They sprang to their arms, expecting to see the form of
the bushranger cross the threshold.
Instead of this, however, they merely saw a pole fitted
at the end with a hook, thrust forth by some invisible
hand.
Before they could advance, the hook was fastened in the
garments of their fallen leader, the sergeant; he was jerked
swiftly into the house, and the door was again closed.
Two minutes later, the same pole with a dirty white
apron fastened at the end was thrust through the panel
and Avaved in invitation.
“ It’s a flag of truce,” said Holmes.
“ Who’s going to answer it ? ” asked Anderson,
“Why, 1 don’t mind,” said Whitwell, pluckily. “I am
hit already, and it would be better for me to come tC
grief than one of you fellows. Besides, I believe Kelly
will keep his word.”
Fastening a hankerchief on the end of a stick, Whitwell
advanced towards the door.
“ Stop there ! ” yelled Ned, as soon as he was within ten
yards of the door, “or I’ll fire at you.”
“ What do you want? ” asked the undaunted trooper.
“I want to know lioav long you felloAvs are going to
keep loafing about the premises,” was the jeering answer.
“ Till you come out.”
“ If I do come out I’ll give you a lesson you won’t for-
get in a hurry. But I’m willing to do it.”
“ Oh ! ”
“ Yes, if you’ll give me a chance.”
“ What do you mean ? ”
“ Why just this. In the first place, I’ve got your ser-
geant in here.”
“Well?”
“ Well, he ain’t dead, but 1 toll you he blessed soon will
be, unless you give me a evince of bolting. And I’ll
tell you something more, if you don’t give me tho chance
I ask for, I’m blessed if I won’t burn him alive over a
slow fire before you get in this crib.”


“ Oe on.”
“ It’s just this. I’m not going to wait till you’ve sent
rff and roused the country, which will be your little game
Sext, I guess.”
“ Oh, you’r" as deep as a lawyer, you are!”
“ Bight you are. Now, what I want is this. You and your
mates shall fan back a hundred and fifty yards from the
house. 1 don’t think there’s any chance of your hitting me
at a hundred and fifty yards,” he continued reflectively,
“ but to make matters quite safe we'll say two hundred.”
“One of us is wounded and can’t walk.”
“Well! he can stay.”
“What next? ”
“Your horses must be tethered out of sight, so that
they cannot be brought up to you before I get my start.
Say yes or no. Sharp’s the word. Neither Ned or the
sergeant shall be taken alive.”
“ I will fall back and consult my comrades. I see no-
thing to disagree with, myself; and if they agree, I’ll step
out and wave this flag twice. You may trust me.”
“ I know 1 can. You are a brave fellow to trust your-
self within pistol-shot of me, and 1 know you’re the sort
to keep your word.”
Whitwell rejoined his comrades, and after a brief con-
sultation it was agreed to accept Ned’s terms.
It was evident he wanted to get a start, and trust to
his fleetness of foot to escape into the neighbouring
scrub.
But they felt sure of baffling him.
Holmes proceeded to the men in charge of the horses,
which were grouped on a little knoll some five hundred
yards to the left of the house.
In obedience to his orders Sam, the shepherd, and the
black fellow picketed their chargers, and then fell back a
hundred yards further.
Holmes rejoined his companions, and after Whitwell
had stepped forward and waved his flag as a signal, the
whole, with the exception of Casson, fell back to the dis-
tance indicated.
The position was then as follows:
The troopers were two hundred yards in front but to
the left of the house.
Their horses were five hundred yards behind them.
Consequently, they were about three hundred yards
apart.
Kelly, on the Other hand, was only two hundred from
the advanced guard.
But then the shepherd, Sam, and the black fellow were
only a hundred yirds from the horses, and their orders
were, directly the door opened to run like the wind to
them and gallop off with them to the troopers, who would
surely be able to overtake Kelly who, on foot, could not
keep up racing-pace very long.
Meanwhile, Ned had been completing his preparations.
After despoiling the insensible sergeant of his uniform,
he had locked him in the room in which he had himself
passed the night.
Then saddling Marco Polo he led him quietly up to the
front door.
He softly undid the bars.
Jessie was watching him with the utmost interest.
“Now, lass, it’s your turn,” he said.
She evidently understood him, for she stepped forward
with a couple of silk handkerchiefs in her hand.
One of these he proceeded to tie over her mouth after
bestowing upon her lips a hearty smack which she seemed
by no means reluctant to receive.
With the other he tied her hands at the wrists, leaving,
however, the fingers at full liberty.
Then ho got into Polo’s saddle, cocked his re-
volver, that belonged to the sergeant, and crouched flat
on the horse’s neck.
“ Now !” he said.
The would-be captors of Kelly were in an agony of
expectation ana excitement, expecting to see the redoubt-
able bushranger walk into the net, but they little knew
the resource and ingenuity of the man they thougni ttssi
within their grasp. They remembered tnat the I'tllow
seemed to bear as charmed a life as that cf Macbeth, who
was to be slam by—
“No man of woman born ! ”
He had been shot at, but stood invulnerable, the bullets
rattling off his body as harmless as peas off a crocodile’s
back. His enemies little knew that they wasted their
pellets upon an “ironclad,” for Kelly always were in
these encounters a suit of mail, hammered out of plough-
shares, which rendered him bullet-proof. With open
mouth and strained eyes they stared at the door by
which they expected to see Ned escape. They were not
long kept in suspense. Suddenly the door was rapidly
thrown open, and disclosed Kelly mounted on Marco
Polo, who the next moment was seen to clear the steps at
a bound, with his tail as straight as a fence in a gale of
wind, and his eyes as bright as lightning-flashes, as if he
knew he bore Caesar and his fortunes on his back. Whew!
on he came, as Jonathan would say, like greased lightning,
Kelly’s loud defiant laugh ringing out clearly, while, wav-
ing his hat triumphantly, he chaffed his enemies with cut-
ting sarcasm to “ come and take him,” to “ get up behind,”
and promising to square up with Sam before many months
were over that worthy’s head.
Down and over the steps, as if he were taking a stream
in his stride, the gallant animal answered the heel and
hopes of his daring rider, who. with a pistol in his grasp
cocked and ready for action, galloped to where the police
horses were tethered, and drawing the policeman’s sword,
with which, as with his uniform, he was furnished, pro-
ceeded with a few furious slashes to hough—in other
words, to hamstring—the unfortunate brutes, and thus
render pursuit for the present impossible. The troopers
looked on perfectly stupefied, and, if truth must be told,
not a little dismayed. They knew that if able to come up
with Kelly while engaged in his barbarous, but to him
necessary, onslaught, the foremost arrivals would certainly
be “ dead meat,” and Kelly’s escape (being mounted) not
prevented.
“ Now, you blooming crawlers,” he roared out, awaken-
ing the echoes of the forest, “such carrion as you will
never put the darbies on Ned Kelly. Take my blessing
before I show you a clean pair of heels!” and, with a
devilish howl which he meant for laughter, he discharged
the contents of his pistol amongst bis astonished and, if
the fact must be confessed, admiring opponents. They saw
his retreating figure, and heard the departing soumfs of
Marco’s thud, thud, as he flew over the ground with a
swinging 20-foot stride, and looked at one anot ; er with
something very like silent apprehension.* As to Sam, he
felt uncommonly uncomfortable, for he knew Kelly would
never forget the little game he had played.
Kelly’s onslaught on the troopers’ horses had been wit
nessed, and its full significance understood.
A very crestf dlen crew the troopers looked, and, know-
ing that the victory obtained by Kelly would find its way
into the colonial papers, they feared something worse than
the universal ridicule with which they were sure to be
overwhelmed.
Pursuit was hopeless, for they were miles from any sta-
tion where there wad the slightest chance of obtaining
horses, and the line of country Ned had selected was one
calculated from its conformation to baffle all attempts at
tracing him.
Disheartened and baffled, they returned to the house, in
order to get something to eat.
Locked in one room they found the insenswle form of
Sergeant Whitwell.
In another, the key of which was _ying in the passage,
they found a young damsel bound and gagged, who, on
being released, entertained them with a very voluble and
highly-coloured account of how the preceding night she
had gone to the door on hearing a knocK, and had beeu
seized and made secure in this manner by a black-bearded
ruffian.


It was Miss Jessie Appleby, who, on Ned’s departure,
liad retired to her room, and, on the troopers entering the
house, had quietly turned the key with her bound hands,
and then pushed it under the door into the passage, where
they found it.
CHAPTER CXXYIII.
FATHER AND SON- THE LAST RESOURCE.
Archibald Douglas Keith Rothsay, seventh Earl of
Stromness, in the peerage of Scotland, and a representative
peer of that ancient kingdom in the Upper House of the
British Legislature, was a nobleman better off as regards
pedigree than possessions.
His blood was of the bluest, but his acres, on the other
hand, were of the barest.
Indeed it was a paradox how such a spreading family-
tree, with such an extent of roots, branches, and ramifi
cations, could exist on such a scanty patch of soil, over-
grown, too, as the latter was, with such a flourishing crop
of mortgages.
He was the nominal possessor of two country seats with
imposing titles.
But Dunstaffness Castle was a roofless tower, which had
been uninhabitable for years, and the miles of moorland
around, which annually let in August to southron sports
men, formed no inconsiderable portion of the earl’s revenue,
whilst Kiulavorack Palace, on the shores of one of the
Northern Isles, was merely a huge, rambling, dilapidated
range of one-storey buildings, half of which were unin-
habitable, whilst the other half served as a joint residence
to Mr. John McCombie, the earl’s “ factor,” his household,
his cattle, and his pigs.
The earl himself, when not staying with or, as evil-dis-
posed people who will not remember the golden rule of
not speaking ill of a hereditary legislator used to style
it, sponging upon his frunds, was wont to occupy a first-
floor in Clarges-street.
The Stromness family was one of those which bred with
the rapidity and fecundity of an insect which enabled Ur.
Johnson to direct one of his most pointed comparisons
against Scotchmen, and Archibald Douglas Keith Rothsay
had a number of brothers, sisters, uncles, and aunts, and a
perfect army of cousins in the fifteenth degree.
But, strange to say, he had only had the honour of con-
tributing two direct offshoots to the family tree —a son and
a daughter
The latter, the Lady Sybclla Malvina, was happily
wedded to Leoni Schumacher, Esquire, a worthy million-
aire of Hebrao-Gennanic extraction and paltry preset.ce,
and the possessor, in addition to vast funded wealth, of a
park in Surrey and a mansion at Queen s-gate.
The Earl had already learnt the value of an aristocratic
title on the first page of the prospectus of a joint-stock
company, and for some time he and his son-in-law were of
great use to one another.
He figured as the director of upwards of a score of
enterprises of a more or less speculative character, and
pocketed guineas with praiseworthy regularity.
But after a time the British public, despite their pro-
verbial love for a lord, began to weary of putting their
hard-earned gains into enterprises whose only recom-
mendation was a more or less skilled directorate, and the
millionaire found he had no use for the Earl, and no longer
cared to make th/’se little financial advances at odd times
for whicn, to tell the trutm,the latter had parted with
his daughter. .
This was bad en.imgli, but another sore thorn in the
side of Archibald Douglas Keith Rothsay lay in the con-
duct and career of uis son, who Ltd been endowed with
the names of Kenneth Shfdco lan and the title of the
Master of S’Sromness.
Kenneth had been to Eton, where the high position he
took in the boats was, in the eyes of his father and other
prejudiced persons, a very poor compensation for the
exceedingly low one he occupied in his form.
It was, moreover, a source of wonderment, even to such
of his schoolfellows who were in the hardening
effect of the continual application of birch twigs to the
human anatomy, how he could sit on the thwarts, con •-
sidering the marked persistency with which his name
figured week after week in the flogging-bill.
Till finally a letter which was nothing lea*, than a
politely-regretful, but at the same time unmistakable,
sentence of excommunication, reached the badgered Earl
from the head-master.
It detailed how Kenneth had committed the unheard-
of crime of assaulting and battering his tutor, and had
maintained that he considered his conduct was, under
the circumstances, perfectly justifiable.
It was somewhat difficult to get him into Oxford after
this, but he managed to scrape through a few terms;
during which he distinguished himself by rowing stroke
in his college eight, one tine May evening which saw
the craft in question achieve the position of head of
the river, running up rather more than the average
amount of bills, driving tandem, and committing sundry
other actions which, though venial in the eyes of every-
day life, constitute dire offences to the proctorial vision,
without incurring rustication.
Then he was sent to a cramming establishment, and
thence duly gazetted to a cornetcy in the Princess’s
Own Rangers.
His cornetcy proved a very rapid act of horsemanship,
yet even his comrades marvelled how he managed to live
the pace anything like so long.
The Princess’s Own was a crack regiment, and the
holders of commissions in it managed to get through a
great deal of money over bets, horses, balls, dinners, dress,
cards, the drama, and similar objects of attraction, and in
all these Kenneth took an interest not exceeded by any
of his brother officers.
Till at length even the patience of the most obsequious
of tradesmen and the purses of the most accommodating
of bill-discounters seemed to be exhausted as far as he
was concerned.
Under the old regulations it is probable that he would
have had to sell his commission, but the memorable Royal
Warrant, by means of which Gladstone checkmated the
House of Lords, had put an end to that kind of trans-
action, and all that was left to him to “ sell ” was Ins
creditors.
Things were in this state when a note from his father,
requesting him to call the following morning to go into a
matter of the highest moment, reached him at Hounslow,
where the Princess’s Own were quartered,
“Wonder what the deuce the governor means?” he
mused, but as he had certainly nothing to lose, and it
might be something to gain, by the interview thus sug-
gested, he made up his mind to accept the invitation.
And then, as the warning blast of a trumpet fell on his
ear, he roused himself from his reverie, and proceeded.
As he gazed at the fore-shortened reflection of his six feet
of lithe, lean-flanked, broad-shouldered, hard-set thew
and sinew in the handsome mess attire of the Princess’s
Own, a melancholy thought occurred to him that before
long he would be forced to nut aside that very becoming
uniform for ever.
“ Which will be a pity, tor I think I can jsay, without
vanity, we become each other,” he muttered, as he took
up his cap, blew out his candle, and descended.
The next morning saw him in presence of his father, a
tall, grey-whiskered, hawk-nosed old aristocrat, with a wax-
like* complexion, a high shirt-collar, a starched necktie,
and a pair of the most immaculate-looking hands ever
seen out of a glass case. _
“ Kenneth,” began ihe earl, with that easy, half-jovial
air which some men always assume when talking of
another’s misfortune, ‘-you are in an infernal mess a
most infernal mess. 5 '
“ Quite so. If it was only tc tell me that you sent tor
for me, I am afraid it was a piece of useless trouble on


joat part, for 1 was perfectly aware of it,’’ was the cool
answer.
“ Certainly, certainly. No, what I wanted to speak to you
about was to see if no wav could be found of getting you
out of it without—without—ahem !—scandal.”
“ I am afraid not.”
“ Look here, Kenneth, have you ever thought of matri-
mony ? ”
“ Only when suicide looked more than usually un-
pleasant.”
‘ Come, come! a man with your rank, your position,
your personal appearance, might choose anywhere.”
And certainly there was some truth in the earl’s re-
ma k
With his tall, erect, soldier-like figure, his neatly-set-on
head, with its closely-cropped hair, his bright blue eyes
now sparkling with merriment and anon glittering cold
and keen us a rapier point in the face of peril, his haughty
aquiline features with an expression at once reckless yet
impassible, his firm red lips shaded by a long drooping
moustache, and his mellow, ringing voice, he was fitted in
all ways to catch a woman's eye and win his way to her
heart.
Fitted for sterner work than that, however, as well.
There was a touch of the young eagle in the way in
which he carried his iiead, and when those steel-blue eyes
began at once to brighten and darken, that iron-clamp of
a lower jaw to set, and those red lips to tighten to white-
ness, those who knew him best recognised the w r aking of
a spirit no earthly peril had power to daunt or check.
He was gifted with all the dour obstinacy, stern endur-
ance, and native shrewdness derived from his ancestry on
the father’s side, but it had pleased Providence to temper
these eminently useful but not always agreeable qualifica-
tions with the reckless daring, high spirits, love of fun,
and genial, careless temperament that had formed almost
the only dowery brought into the matrimonial parntership
by his beautiful and graceful Irish mother.
“ I must confess I don’t like to regard myself in the
light of a barber’s doll,” he answered.
“ Lov-k here, Kenneth, you might marry any amount of
money to-morrow, if you wished.”
“ Perhaps so.”
“There is Miss Rhys, the great Welsh heiress, with
half a county of slate-quarries, a dozen coal-mines, and a
couple of seaport towns.”
“She has red hair and she squints.”
“Miss Shortstaple, the Lancashire girl. Her father has
three millions and ”
“ Cannot write his name, and eats peas with his knife.
Besides she’s booked to Lugard of ours.”
“ Lady Emily Randolph. Her influence in a certain
quarter would ”
“ Obtain her second husband anything but the right of
asking how much was due to his own merit and how much
to the complaisance of Ids predecessor ! No, no ; such a
suggest/on I should resent even from you, if I thought it
made in seriousness.”
“ Well, there is the American girl, Daisy Vandipunt.”
“ I can’t endure her ”
“ Come now, I'll tell you a girl you know as well as I
do warts you to propose.”
“Who?”
“ Miss Locatta, the daughter of that chum of Schu-
macher’s. "Won't she do?”
“No more than the others. I won’t marry.”
“ I was afraid not. Now, however, there is one way in
which the Locatta girl can be of use.”
“How?”
“Why, you see, Schumacher wants her for himself.”
“ What! does he mean to commit bigamy, or poison off
Sybella ?”
“ No, no. * I mean, he wants her to marry his brother,
and he looks upon you as a very dangerous rival. In fact,
he has already spoken to me about the matter.”
“Yes; go on.”
“ Well, the long and short of it is, he thinks if you wer®
out of the way his brother would have a chance.”
“ And what does he propose, for I suppose the truth is
that you have already a programme cut and dried ?”
“Schumacher is not, after all, a bad fellow, Kenneth.
He has put certain things in my way, and I am sure Ire
has behaved well to you. Now he offers to pay your debt*
if you will leave the country. You know I have not a
penny, and you must smash if you go on as you are going
at present.”
“ Very true.”
“Well, I think I can get you an excellent appointment
in the Australian police.”
“ In the what ?”
“In the police. Oh, I have learnt all about it, it is
quite a different thing from what you fancy. Liberal pay,
strictly military force, rank of a field officer. Surely you
remember, some men of the best families in England have
served in it.”
“ I’ll think of it,” said Kenneth.
Which he did ; and, seeing the thing was, so to say, in-
evitable, ultimately accepted it.
He resigned his commission, and quietly departed for
few weeks to the Continent.
Schumacher then proceeded to fulfil his promise of pay-
ing his debts by buying up all his bills at about seventy-
five per cent, discount, and offering his despairing trades-
men a composition of half-a-crown in the pound, which,
seeing the seeming impossibility of ever getting their
money, they thankfully accepted.
A week after, they read of the appointment of Kenneth
to the command of the New South Wales police, and
cursed their ready acquiescence.
CHAPTER CXXIX.
THE VOYAGE.
Kenneth Rothsay had elected to go to his future home in
a clipper rounding the Cape, preferring the fresh breezes
of the longer route to that premature acquaintance with
the temperature of the infernal regions experienced by
those whom the swift progress and luxurious accommoda-
tion of the P. and O. steamers lures into a trip through
the Suez Canal and down (he Red Sea.
So one fine morning saw the A 1 clipper Compostella,
bearing him and his fortunes, dropping down the Thames
in the tow of a couple of snorting steam-tugs, on the top
of the ebb.
Kenneth, standing on the poop, was watching the bustle
and apparent confusion that mark the first day out of
dock, and studying the appearance of his fellow-passen-
gers, when the slight figure of a girl attired in deep
mourning caught his attention.
He could not resist strolling with apparent carelessness
in her direction, in order to get a better look at her.
The little journey in question was, in his opinion, fuliy
justified by this closer inspection.
She was a young creature, slender and supple as a hazel-
twig, pliant and graceful as a willow, with wide-open, arch,
brown eyes, a delicate nose slightly aquiline, a sweet,
womanly mouth, crimson and curved, sensitive, and with
flickering dimples at the corners, a face of the true oval,
and a profusion of chestnut hair lying in rings on the
smooth, broad forehead and in soft clustering curls around
the snowy white neck.
In five minutes Kenneth had contrived to render her
one of the thousand little services a man can always find
to do for a lady on shipboard, and in tea more lie was
chatting to her like an old acquaintance.
Before the Compostella reached Gravesend he was fully
acquainted with her history, such as it was.
Muriel Lyndhurst was ilic orphan daughter of a poc?
curate, who had offended his family and lost a prolific;! ve
living by marrying a young lady engaged as governed m
a noble family to the sons of which ho wa« ergagev. a?


He might have, had he chosen, been the rector of Salt-
corabe-cum-Withersby, with an annual stipend of two
thousand a year, and a population of six hundred
parishioners to look after, had he only deigned to respond
to the sheep’s eyes which the Lady Jane Blenchester kept
on casting at him, and to take that pas.see and
mature beauty to his hearth and home.
Instead of which, he rashly persisted in marrying her
younger sister’s governess—pretty little Ada Craston, the
daughter of a deceased naval officer ; and, being from that
time forward disowned by his own aristocratic connectio:.,
and disowned by old Lord Blenchester, who had fondly
imagined that he saw a chance of getting rid of Jane,
and was sorely disappointed, he obtained the post of
curate in a London parish and within eighteen years was
dead of hard work and heartbreak.
His wife had not the sorrow of witnessing this, for the
poor thing had died in the third year of their marriage.
Muriel’s only relation was a brother of her mother’s
a wild scapegrace, who, when a mere boy, had started off
to earn his living in the colonies.
How he had fared she knew not, for he had not written
to England more than twice since her mother's death.
However, she believed that he was living, and in New
South Wales, and had accordingly resolved on setting
out in search of him.
“ I daresay it seems a wildgoose chase, Mr. Rothsay,”
she said to her new acquaintance ; “ but even if 1 do not
find my uncle in a position to help me, or even if he be
dead, 1 think 1 am doing well in going abroad. What could
I do in England but try to get a situation as governess,
and, after wearing out the best years of my life in teach-
ing, have the workhouse before me for my old age? But
I am sure in Australia I shall have a far better chance of
getting on.”
Kenneth could not help admiring the girl’s pluck, and
an intimacy soon sprang up between them.
There was a fair number of passengers on board the
Compostella, and they exhibited a wide divergency of posi-
tion and character.
Amongst them several colonials of both sexes re-
turning to Australia after a flying visit to the Old Coun-
try.
Kenneth had carefully kept back his real rank and the
position awaiting him at Sydney.
He was simply Mr. Rothsay. and, as his manner and ap-
pearance betrayed, almost in spite of himself, his military
training, was charitably set down by most of his fellow-
passengers as a broken-down officer who, having found it
impossible to exist by billiards and betting, varied by an
occasional attempt at the wine trade in England, was about
to try his luck, as so many of the like kidney have done
before, in the colony.
It is true that his genial good nature, winning ways,
perfect breeding, and superb personal appearance soon
secured for him the suffrages of all but the most surly on
board the ship.
Poor Miss Lyndhurst had a harder task
She was dangerously beautiful, and only a governess.
Consequently, some of the ladies regarded her as a rival
to be extinguished as constantly and systematically as pos-
siole, and some of the gentlemen began to pay her com-
pliments that at times became almost equivocal.
Kenneth’s chivalrous nature suffered terribly at the
slights to which the girl was subjected.
For him to have interfered in person would, or course,
only have resulted in their names being coupled together.
But he got Mrs. Millington, the wife of a wealthy Mel-
bourne merchant, and one of the most influential ladies on
board, to take the girl under her wing, and gently hinted
to a young snob named Hoskins, whose father had shipped
him off to Australia with a couple of thousand pounds to
start a station, and who. on the strength, gave himself the
airs of a being able to bay up the entire colony, he
might feel compelled to drop him gently over the ship’s
side if he did not leave Miss Lyndhurst alone.
Muriel was deeply grateful for these services, which sh*
quickly divined.
“ Mr. Rothsay, she said to him one day, struggling be-
tween boldness and timidity as she spoke, “ J know all you
have done 'or me, and from the bottom of my heart I
thank you. Some day it may lie in my power to prove my
gratitude. At present I can only express it.”
Under Mrs. Millington’s wing Muriel was more at ease,
and the good lady, who was a warm admirer of Kenneth,
was by no means averse to allowing a fair amount of that
flirtation without which existence on shipboard could
hardly be carried on, between the handsome ex-dragoon
and her prote/ee.
So Kenneth and Muriel used to stand side by side, look-
ing over the vessel's quarter, during those lonely moon-
light nights that are only encountered in the tropics, and
if at times a strong young arm did steal round a slim young
waist, it was only natural as a precaution against those
sudden dangerous lurches that will occur under such cir-
cumstances.
So the Compostella ploughed her way along day after
day, meeting more than usually fine weather, and the feel-
ings with which Kenneth had began to regard Miss Lynd-
hurst were very like those of a lover.
The Cape of Good Hope was safely doubled, and the
Australian continent sighted.
The Compostella was bound for Sydney, and after
passing through Bass’s Strait she steered to the north-
ward.
The commander looked anxious, for his keen eye de-
tected unmistakable signs of a coming gale, and knew the
dangerous nature of the coast, whilst a thick atmosphere
prevented any observations from being taken.
At midnight the wind moved suddenly round to the east
and lashed the sea to roughness during the whole of the
following day, the sun, as during the preceding day, being
obscured by clouds
At night the passengers were somewhat uneasy, but the
skipper, Captain Parsons, assured them that there was not
the slightest danger, as they had a good offing, and soon
they were all in their bunks and the deck abandoned to
the watch.
Suddenly the cry of “ Breakers ahead!” rang out from
the look-out man.
The captain sprang forward, but before an order could
be given the Compostella struck on a reef with a mighty
crash.
As the affrighted passengers, in hastily-assumed gar-
ments, rushed in terror to the deck, the billows sweeping
over the ship, which lay on her starboard side, carried
several of them overboard shrieking in mad despair.
Muriel had like to have met with a similar fate, when an
arm of iron was cast around her, and, blinded and half-
suffocated by the water, she was borne by Kenneth back
to the companion-way.
“ Have no fear,” he said. “If I reach th§ shore alive,
you shall.”
Suddenly the stricken vessel heeled over to the other
side and beat repeatedly on the rocks, as though writhing
in mortal agony, whilst sea after sea swept over her.
“ Cut away the masts,” was the captain’s order, and
scarcely had the standing rigging been severed than the
spars snapping off close to the deck plunged with a crash
into the sea.
There was a cry for the boats.
Three had been swept away at the beginning of the
wreck, and now a maddened throng flocked to the two
remaining ones.
“ It’s nob worth risking,” said Kenneth to Muriel. “Do
you think,” he continued, “ that you can keep up sufficient
courage to stand here for a moment whilst I go below ?”
The girl's face was very white, but she answered, “'ll es ”
in a firm, if low, voice.
Darting below, Kenneth reappeared with a life-belt,
which he proceeded to strap around Muriel.
“ But yourself ?” she said.


“Miss Lyndhurst,” he answered, gravely, “if mortal
effort can get you out of this peril you are as safe as if you
were on shore ; and if,” he continued in a livelier tone, for
the very danger nerved and excited him, “mortal effort
can’t, why, it won’t be for the want of hard trying.”
Meanwhile the boats, with the frightened throng who
had crowded into them, were, at what seemed a favour-
able moment, lowered into the water.
There was an awful interval of uncertainty.
Their fate was indistinguishable in the pitchy darkness.
Suddenly the appalling death-cry of the drowning rose
out of the gloon to fill all who heard it with startled
horror.
Too well diet they realise the meaning of that sound,
too well did they know that it denoted the foundering of
the boats and the sinking of all who had sought safety in
them.
Rapidly did the destruction of the Compostella follow
A few minutes after the lowering of the boats she parted
asunder, a confused mass of riven timbers, splintered
planks, tangled spars, and writhing human beings.
In indiscriminate commingling the wreck and the
wrecked, dead, half-dead, and desperately clingingto any-
thing that promised support, were driven on to the reef.
Throughout the rest of that night of horrors Kenneth,
who had never released Muriel from the moment the ship
had broken up, and had enabled her to gain a place of
comparative safety, did not quit her for a moment.
They had obtained a foothold on the rocks, which rose
above water, though from time to time a wave larger than
the rest threatened to tear them from the post.
Eagerly they longed for day.
As day approached the wind gradually sank, and their
position became more tolerable.
Daybreak revealed a melancholy sight.
The Compostella had evidently deviated from her
course, and come in much nearer shore than her captain
had supposed.
She had struck on a reef extending parallel to the
coast, which lay about a mile off.
Her fragments were seen extending for about the same
distance along the reef, and bore melancholy witness to
the tremendous shock the vessel had sustained.
Cabin doors, pieces of boats, casks, seats, cabin furni-
ture, planks, beds, seamen’s chests, and passengers’ lug-
gage formed a continuous ridge in places -everal feet high,
whilst numerous drowned corpses added to the horrors of
the sight.
A score of human beings, mostly sailors, clinging to
the rocks, many half-submerged as the waves washed over
them, were all that were left of the eighty souls on board
tire Compostella when she quitted the Thames
Amongst them -was the chief officer, Mr. Sandilands,
whom Kenneth at once hailed.
“What is our best way of reaching the shore?” he
asked, cheerily.
“The sea is going down, and I think there is every
chance that a raft will float us,” was the answer.
The surA A r ors, under Sandilands’ direction, began to set
to Avork to construct a raft, Avhilst Kenneth proceeded to
break open one of the trunks Avashed on to the rock.with a
view of finding some clothing for Muriel.
The remains of one of the boats caught his eye.
“ Do you think this could be patched up to carry us?”
he asked of the chief officer.
Part of the planking had been stove in, and the little
craft Avas quite unseaworthy, but Sandilands expressed an
idea that it might be made to serve.
A copper bolt that might do at a pinch for a hammer
was Avrenched from a piece of timber, and a number of
nails slowly collected from amongst the lumber.
Whilst one party continued to put the raft together,
the remainder proceeded to patch up the boat as well
as they could.
“Which do you think safest?” asked Kenneth of
Saudilan da.
The other stared at the question, coming as it did from
one whom he had seen a moment before risking his life
on the edge of the reef in the search for nails and the
like, and ho half smiled.
“You misunderstand me,” said Kenneth. “I was
thinking that there are women here.”
“ Well, they are patching up the boat pretty well, but
I prefer rope to nails as a fastening.”
And he glanced at the raft.
By noon the boat had been patched up and the raft
completed, and preparations were made to leave the
reef.
There were two ladies saved besides Muriel, and these
took their places in the stern of the boat, and asked her
to come with them.
“No,” said Kenneth to her quickly. “Trust to me
and come on the raft.”
It had been arranged that the boat should tow the raft,
and that the progress of both should be helped by impro-
vise I sails.
They were soon under way.
They found wind and current both serving their turn,
and rapidly impelling them towards the coast, but a
nearer view of this showed plainly that their perils were
not yet over.
The sea swept in, in a succession of huge rollers, which
broke with thundering sound on the strip of be ch.
But between them and that beach were ranges of half-
submerged rocks, amongst Avhich the receding waves hissed
and foamed and snorted in threatening whirlpools.
“ We cannot risk a landing here,” said the chief mate
“ We must pull along the shore till we find a better
spot.”
It was more easily said than done.
They found to their horror that wind and current were
rapidly drawing them shoreward.
The men in the boat, thinking only of their own
safety, cast off the tow-ropes, and began to try to gain an
offing.
The raft, thus abandoned, was unmanageable in the
current, and drifted each moment nearer shore.
Again Kenneth’s arm was placed round Muriel.
“ My darling,” he murmured, “ we will live or die to-
gether.”
Even in that awful moment the girl evoked this indirect
avowal of his love.
The next moment the raft was tosskig madly in the
surging sea of breakers.
There was a succession of desperate wrenches, the
strong cords snapped like twine, and it fell asunder like a
house of cards.
Muriel felt the seas go over her head, but the strong
grip never loosened.
There was a desperate struggle of drowning men, seiz-
ing on one another.
A moment or so later, Kenneth, cut, bruised, and
bleeding, felt himself dashed against the shore, still hold-
ing Muriel.
Digging his feet into the sand, he escaped the danger
of the murderous undertow, and as it swept back, bearing
off to death two hapless wretches who had pushed
on as far as himself, he rose and staggered forward, out of
reach of the waves, with his precious burden still clasped
in his arms.
Then he fell again almost insensible.
“By Jove!” he muttered, rising to his feet and spit-
ting out the salt water, “ I have taken possession of in
new territory like William the Conqueror. I wonde
if my jurisdiction extends over this spot as chief o
police ?”
Muriel Avas insensible, and, before trying to revive her,
he Manced seaward.
A few floating timbers amidst the breakers alone marked
the spot where the raft had been engulfed, and it was
plain that they were the only survivors of its crew who
had reached shore.


The boat was still striving to gain an offing ; but, even
m> he watched it, a succession of heavy rollers swept in
quick succession down upon it, and the next instant it
had disappeared, never to rise again.
Alone on that barren shore, Kenneth and Muriel stood,
the sole survivors ot all who had sailed in the good ship
Couipostclla.
CHAPTER CXX.
AN ARISTOCRATIC SCOUNDREL.
At this period, one of the most prominent, if not the most
popular, characters in Sydney was a gentleman who bore
the time-honoured name of Knatchbull—Captain Knatch-
bull, of the Royal Navy, brother to the esteemed and
wealthy baronet of that name. From his chili hood,
George Knatchbull was like one possessed of the devil;
as Tiberius said of Nero, “ A thing of blood and mud.”
He belonged to one of the oldest and most influential
families in the county of Kent, but from his childhood
upwards behaved as if possessed of an evil spirit.
He was a liar and a thief, and was criminally and
malevolently mischievous.
The old people who dwell about his ancestral hall will
yet tell you how, when a mere lad, if he entered a poor
man’s orchard stealthily to rob an apple or pear tree, and
found no fruit on it, he would take out his knife and
bark the tree all round near the root, and thus kill it, for
the sap could not ascend.
He would worry sheep with dogs, and chase cattle till
they jumped into chalk-pits, and staked themselves in try-
ing to clear fences.
To save him frem the clutches of the law, his brother,
Sir Edward Knatchbull, had annually to pay a large sum of
money to people who would otherwise have prosecuted him.
At thirteen years of age, the only thing to be done for
him was to send him out of the way to sea.
Accordingly, he was sent into the Royal Navy as a mid-
shipman.
At nineteen he gazetted as lieutenant, and was appointed
to a line-of-battle ship.
Interest had a great deal to do, no doubt, in bringing
about his speedy promotion, for his uncle was a Lord of
the Admiralty, but it would be unjust to dispute George
Kuatchbull’s merit as either seaman or officer, fora smarter
and more daring fellow never walked a quarterdeck.
But, at the same time, a crueller brute never wore the
British uniform.
At the age of twenty-three he was appointed to the
command of the Hecuba, one of the prettiest and fastest
eighteen-gun brigs in the service, with orders to proceed
to Staten Island.
The master, Mr. John Treadwell, was a skilful navi-
gator, and an unusually scientific man ; and not only
was he specially required by the Admiralty to furnish a
report on the swinging of the pendulum—a rather im-
portant question in those days—but to his care were
entrusted several chronometers besides those required for
the working of the ship, in order that he might test and
report on their accuracy and value.
The Hecuba never got so far as Staten Island.
When she had been only three weeks at sea, Lieutenant,
by courtesy Captain, Knatchbull discovered there was
mutiny on board, mutiny fostered by bis first lieutenant
whose soul had sickened at the daily sights of horror to
which he was exposed.
For Captain Knatchbull, finding himself for the first time
in his life in absolute command of a vessel under orders
fora foreign station, had thrown aside all restraint, and
yielded to the fiendish ; mpuLes of his nature.
The gratings were constantly rigged, the cat was never
out of the hands of the boalswain and his mates, and every
night Knatchbull might have repeated the words of the
captain who observed on coming ashore “ My ship s crew
are at the present moment the happiest fellows in the
world. I have iust flogged half of them, who are delighted
that it is over, whilst the other half are rejoicing that they
have got off this time at any rate.”
When, however, he found the officers could stand this
no longer and were going to take an active part against
him, he, one morning, suddenly gave the order to put the
ship about, and returned to the Downs.
There was an investigation respecting the alleged mutiny,
but the revelations concerning Knatchbull were so
damaging that the matter was hushed up, and it merely
ended in a recommendation that the Hecuba should be
put out of commission and paid off, which was done
accordingly.
In all there were seven chronometers on board her, in
Mr. Treadwell’s custody, but on the day on which he had
to deliver them up only six could be found.
One had been abstracted from his cabin.
The old man, who had only his scanty pay to live on and
a wife and three daughters to support, was unable to inake
the loss good, and inasmuch as Captain Knatchbull, when
written to on the subject, falsely represented the old mas'er
as “ a drunken fellow on whom no dependence could bo
placed,” Mr. Treadwell was ordered to be dismissed from
the service.
Numberless were the petitions addressed to the Lords
of the Admiralty by the old man, setting forth the hard-
ness of his case, and voluminous were the accompanying
certificates signed by the various captains with whom he
had sailed during the past thirty years, and bearing testi-
mony to the honesty, sobriety, zeal, and skill of Mr. John
Treadwell, late Master R.N.
They were of no avail, and at last the receipt of a
petition from John Treadwell was not acknowledged by
the officials, who looked upon the poor fellow as that
greatest of all horrors in their eyes, namely, a man with a
grievance.
As to Captain Knatchbull, six months after the Hecuba
was paid off he was appointed to the command of a sloop
of war, on the Mediterranean station.
Here he remained for two years, and then came home
on sick leave in the hope of getting a larger vessel, a hope
on the very eve of being realised, when an accident,
ordained it otherwise.
Poor old John Treadwell, in almost soleless shoes and
rusty threadbare coat, was one morning walking down
Holborn-hill, thinking of his grievance, when he stopped
opposite the window of a pawnbroker’s, and began abstrac-
tedly to look at all the various articles exposed to view.
Suddenly his eyes lighted on a chronometer, which he
fancied he recognised as the one that had brougnt him
into so much trouble—which, in fact, had ruined him.
To make sure he entered the shop.
“ Is that chronometer for sale?” he asked.
“It is, sir,” was the pawnbroker’s reply.
“ An unredeemed pledge ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“Its price?”
“ A hundred and twenty guineas.”
“May 1 have a look at it?”
“Certainly. You seem to know how to handle a chrono-
meter,” continued the pawnbroker, as Treadwell took the
instrument in his trembling hands and rapidly examined
every part of it. ,
“ Yes. and I have handled this one before to-day, and
a very bad one it is. Y r es, this is the instrument,” he
said, solemnly. . . , .
“ Indeed,” said the pawnbroker, puzzled as to what lus
strange customer was driving at.
“It belongs to the Government. It was stolen frost
H.M ship Hecuba, in the Downs.”
U 1 am sorry to hear that. It was pledged here uioie
than two years ago by a man who said he was the captain
of a merchant vessel in bad circumstances; and ae cer-
tainly looked like a seafaring man. I advanced him iitty
pounds on it.” , ~
“ What sort of a. man was he? ' asked ireaU'-»eiJ
eagerly


“ Well. I could swear to him anywhere, for we were at
least three-quarters of an hour higgling over the loan.
He wanted seventy-five pounds, and I could not go be-
yond fifty. He was a shortish, thickset, broad-shouldered
fellow, rather bow-Lgged; broad, flat face, black eyes,
black as jet and very sparkling, with a cast in one of them
which gave him a very strange expression of countenance
and helped to impress his face on my memory. His lower
]aw protruded rather, and the bridge of his nose had
seemingly been broken.
“ Good heavens !” exclaimed the old master, “ you have
described Captain Knatchbull.”
“I have described the man who pawned that instru-
ment.”
“You must not part with it till I have seen you again,
ft will be to morrow—perhaps this evening,” and with
these words the old man left the pawnbrowker’s shop.
He made the best of his way to the Admiralty, where
he sent up his name and a note to the First Lord, whom
he requested the honour of seeing on a very serious
matter.
The First Lord sent back a verbal message to the effect
that he would not see Mr. Treadwell, and the messenger
when asked to take up a second note refused to do so.
“ There is no help for it,” sighed the old man ; an i from
the Admiralty he wended his way to Bow-street Police-
court.
The presiding functionary at the last-named institution,
was not so difficult of access as the First Lord.
The old man's statement was taken down, his certificates,
of which he always carried several about with him, care-
fully inspected a note made of the names of the pawn-
broker and of the famous chronometer-maker in Cornhill
who had supplied the instrument, and certain instructions
given to two of the most expert officers of the court.
Then old Mr. Treadwell was requested to be in
ftttendance at the court at noon precisely on the following
day.
How the officers obtained Captain Knatchbull’s address,
how, when, and where they found him, and how they
placed him face to face with the man with whom he left
the chronometer in pledge, need not be recapitulated
here.
But the next day, when old .John Treadwell made
his appearance at Bow-street, he was informed that the
prisoner was in custody, and that as soon as the night
charges were disposed of, the case would be called on. •
It was called on, and that very afternoon George Knatch-
bull, commander R.N., stood committed to take his trial
at the Old Bailey.
It was too late for his relation at the Admiralty to think
of devising means for averting a felon’s doom from a scion
of his ancient house.
A reporter's pen had been beforehand with him; the
evening papers contained a full account of the transaction,
and the public as one man were moved with sympathy with
the poor old master who had been so cruelly treated, and
with indignation at the ~onduct of his scoundrelly
superior.
And old John Treadwell stoutly refused to be “ bought
(To be conthiutd.)
PICTURE
BOARDS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
THE 41 ANONYMA ” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
out of the way,” for the insult he had received at the Ad
miralty when he had last sought an intorview with the
First Lord rankled in his breast.
Captain Knatchbull was convicted, and sentenced to ba
transported for fourteen years, and in due course was
landed in the colony of New South Wales.
At that time many men who were gentlemen of birth
and education, and whose friends in England possessed
sufficient influence with the authorities to bring about the
result, were treated with great consideration on their ar-
rival in the colony under sentence of transportation.
If they were not emancipated on arrival, they were
suffered to be at large, sometimes without the formality of
a ticket-of-leave.
Some of them, being amply supplied with funds from
their relatives in England, lived in the most comfortable
style, and, in more than one instance, shared the hospi-
tality of Government House.
Knatchbull, however, soon forfeited all right to such
treatment, and his career in the colony was one of vice
and crime.
After suffering slight terms of imprisonment for various
offences, he was arraigned before the Supreme Court of
Sydney on the charge of forgery, and sentenced to trans-
portation to Norfolk Island.
What life in Norfolk Island was has already been
spoken of.
So dreadful were the convicts’ sufferings that gangs of
them used to toss up which amongst them should be a
murderer and which a victim.
The murderer would then put the other tc death, and
the remainder of the.gang would come forward as wit-
nesses with the sole object of being taken fora time from
the scene of their daily miseries to appear in court at
Sydney, and give evidence against their comrade, though
they knew very well that after his execution they would
be only remanded to their former haunt of wretched-
ness.
As to the murderer, he would frankly admit that he had
no ill-feeling against the man whose brains he had dashed
out, but simply wanted to bring abo*-* a happy release for
them both.
So notorious did this fact become, that a Legislature
enactment was made providing for the trial of criminals
on the island by special commission, after which such
occurrences became less frequent.
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby. | Woman.
The Soiled Dove. . „
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of Tlie Beaut| ful Demon.
a Fascinating Woman. ‘ Revelations of a Lady Detective.
La <* «»
Passion. Paris Life at Twenty.




.NED KELLY; IRONCLAD BUSH RANGER.
*• U j,g well known that for many years Ned Kelly had rmde himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipod.-s
ts Dick Tm-pin’s Black Bess m these islands.” — Telegraph, 7th July, 1881
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward's corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kblja s
Brother the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“ The history of Ned K lly and his celebrated black horse Marco Polo, will ever live is the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performanc e of Black Bess, are rame besidi those of ‘ Nkd
♦xd hip Nag in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.” — Press, July.
CHAPTER CXXX — Continued.
On one such occasion some prisoners were subpoenaed
who could by no possibility have witnessed the crime, the
only object being to give them a spell of absence from
the island.
Some ol them had been two or three years there, and,
though all under thirty-five years of age, their sunken,
glazed eyes, deadly pale faces, hollow, Hes Mess cheeks, and
limbs shrivelled and withered up as if by premature old
age, created a thrill of horror.
There was not one of them who had not from time to
time undergone the punishment of a thousand lashes,
though they were as little reclaimable by the lash as if
so many drops of water had been poured on their backs.
As one of them said
“ When I landed here I had the heart of a man, but
you have plucked it out, and planted the heart of a brute
in its stead.”
Two men named Champly and Shirley were convicted
on circumstantial evidence of a burglary committed at
the house of a Mr. Atkinson, at Oldburg, and sentenced
to death, but the sentence was commuted to transporta-
tion for life to Norfolk Island.
They had been there.a year when a bushranger, named
Webber, was tried and capitally convicted.
The day before the one fixed for his execution Webber
sent for the Attorney-General, and confessed to bim that
he alone had been engaged in the burglary for which
Champly and Shirley had been convicted, and substanti-
ated his statement by revealing a hiding-place known
only to himself, in which the bulk of the property stolen
was found hidden.
In consequence of this disclosure orders were at once
given for the two men to be liberated, and an offer was
made to Webber that, if he would disclose how he had
disposed of the proceeds of the many robberies he had
been for years engaged in, his life would be spared.
This suggestion was made to him after his death-war-
rant had been rea l t > him, and when he had only four-
and-twenty hours to live, but his reply was—
“ I will disclose nothing. All I should gain by it would
be to he sent to Norfolk Island, and I would rather be
hanged than go there.”
Such was the op xiion generally held amongst the con-
vict population of the place to which Capt. Knatchbull
was now about to be shipped, on board a vessel chartered
by the Government for the purpose of conveying convicts
to the island.
She was a brig armed the Wellington, and a few days
later she sailed for her destination.
CHAPTER CXXXI.
ON BOARD THE WELLINGTON.
The passengers, if such a tern? may be used, oa board the
Wellington consisted of fifty convicts, and twenty soldiers
of the regiment of foot then quartered in the colony de-
tailed to act as their guard.
The same official protection that Knatchbull enjoyed in
the colony followed him on board ship, and would no
douct nays mitigated even the iron severity of the dis-
cipline at Norfolk Island, r.ad he ever reached that
favoured spot.
He was, when once clear of the harbour, freed from his
irons, and allowed, to a certain extent, the run of the ship.
Of this he resolved to avail himself, and began to con-
coct one of the most daring schemes of mutiny ever origi-
nated.
He was not of opinion that the more the merrier, but
rather held that too many cooks spoil the broth, and
resolved that the secret of the hell-broth he was going to
brew should only be confided to a select few of his com-
panions in crime and misfortune on whom he could rely
implicitly.
For although a few years’ docent behaviour in the
colony would have secured him every privilege and a free
pardon, his naturally base instincts led him to seek liberty
in preference by crime.
Many of the convicts sailing with him had been his
associates either in low debaucheries or in the numerous
petty crimes he had perpetrated since his arrival in the
colony.
Amongst them was a man named Crawford, who had
been transported for forgery, committed under the most
startling circumstances.
He had resorted to the ingenious device of putting a
living Jig into the mouth of a dead man, and then guiding
his hand to trace his signature to a document purporting
to be the will of the deceased.
When probate of this was disputed, he swore, with
audacious assurance, “ that he saw the testator sign the
will with his own hand whilst life was in him."
Crawford, since his arrival in the colony, had turned his
legal knowledge to account by acting as a thieves’ attorney,
and in this way had become acquainted with all the leading
scoundrels of Sydney.
Knatchbull resolved to turn this knowledge to account,
and got him to pick out eight of the cleverest and most
reckless of the convicts on board, to each of whom in
turn the project of the mutiny was imparted.
They were ordered to hold themselves in readiness.
The Wellington was within two days’ sail of Norfolk
Island whe?. Knatchbull found a chance of putting his plan
into action.
The captain and first mate were working out the reckon-
ing, the second mate being in charge of deck, and the
officer in command of the troops in his cabin, when a mes-
sage was sent aft requesting the surgeon to go forward
and attend to one of the convicts who had a fit.
Hastily providing himself with some remedies he com-
plied.
During his absence, Knatchbull managed to slip down the
companion-way to enter the surgeon's cabin and abstract
a large quantity of arsenic.
Carefully concealing this about him be regained the
deck.
The meals for convicts, crew, and guard we»e all pre-
pared by the ship’s cook and his mate, with the assistance
of a couple of convicts.
One of these latter was in the secret, and to him Kna-LCfc-
bull handed tUe arsenir* with instructions how to use la


The soup and burgoo for the whole of those on board
was made in n huge kettle, and into this the next morning
the convict slipped the deadly drug.
Dinner-time came, and the various messes had their
allowances served out.
Knatchbull, Crawfora, dud their associates, either
pleaded illness or made a pretext of eating, so as not to
provoke suspicion.
The captain of the brig, one of the mates, the surgeon,
the purser, and the officer in command of the guard, dined
together in the cabin.
The meal was hardly over when a spasm of pain shot
across the captain’s face.
“ I feel very queer,” he remarked to the surgeon.
The mate also complained, and in a short time the whole
party found themselves suddenly prostrate.
A voice was heard at the door, and the mate who had
been left in charge of the deck entered the cabin.
“ The man at the wheel has fallen down helpless,” he
gasped, “ and one or two of the others are just as bad. I
am in fearful pain myself, doctor; for heaven’s sake give
me something! I fancy it is cholera, for my inside is on
fire.”
The surgeon strove to rise in order to comply with this
request, but sank back in his place with a damp sweat
breaking out over his face, which was distorted with agony.
The mate dropped forward like a log and rolled on the
cabin floor, whilst the remainder of the party, in equal pain,
could only utter feeble moans for help, being powerless to
move a finger.
Suddenly there was the sound of a scuffle on deck, fol-
lowed by a loud plash into the water.
This was repeated several times.
Then after an interval the cabin-door slowly opened,
and George Knatchbull, fully armed, stalked grimly in, fol-
lowed by four other convicts.
No sooner had the poison begun to work, than Knatch-
bull had proceeded forward, and, having deprived the
prostrate sentries of their muskets, had rapidly released
the selected partners in his villainy.
Their comrades followed their movements with wonder-
ing eyes, and a volley of blasphemous requests to be freed
in turn, to which, however, he paid no attention.
Aided by the same men he had selected, he proceeded
to batten down the hatches, and then throw overboard
the sentries and such of the crew as were on deck, they
being quite unable to offer any resistance.
Then, after arming himself and his companions, and
leaving Crawford and four others who knew a little sea-
manship, in charge of the vessel, he descended to the
cabin.
The ghastlv sight that met him might have appalled a
demon, but he merely smiled.
“ Good afternoon, gentlemen,” he began, addressing
the writhing officers. “ I have called to pay you a little
visit ”
“ Mutiny ! help ! ” the captain, who guessed what was
up, tried to shout, but the words only passed through his
parched lips in a hoarse whisper.
“ I think,” said Knatchbull, “ a little fresh air will revive
you. Come, my hearties, bear a hand and get these
gentlemen on deck,” he continued to his companions.
And, in a very short time the captain, the two mates,
the surgeon, the purser, and the officer commanding the
troops, were ranged along the lee-bulwarks.
Tnere was no need to bind them, for in their haL-
moribund condition they could neither move hand nor
“Now,” continued Knatchbull, chucklingly, “there is a
delicate little question of etiquette to be settled a ques-
tion of precedence.”
His comrades looked somv« fiat surprised.
“It is just this, whether the precedence in going over
the ship’s side belongs to the officer holding the Royal
commission, or to the skipper standing, cr, 1 should say,
reclining on his own quarter-deck.’’
There was a hoarse laugh at this brutal joke.
“ On second thought I think the soldier ought to go
since it is the duty of the captain to remain to tbe itst
board in positions of danger. So now, mates, catch
infernal lobster by the legs and arms and swing him ever.
The fiends raised the unfortunate officer, who css too
far gone to make any appeal for mercy as told.
“ Now then, boys, watch her as she rolls. Uaa, two,
three, and over,” and then the next moment a sudden
plash to leeward announced the fate of the hapless
soldier.
“Clear the deck of the idlers,” laughed Knafcchbull,
“Now old Nipcheese, you'll never stint any more poor devils
of their allowance in this world,” he continued, as the men
lifted the purser. “ When you take your last drink along-
side, perhaps you’ll think of all the six-water grog you’ve
served out.”
“ Water,” moaned the sufferer, who was quite uncon-
scious of what was passing around him, but whose ears
had seized some of the last words.
“ All right, my son, there’s plenty of it alongside,” and
the next moment the purser was hurled over the sicb»
“ Doctor,” Knatchbull went on, addressing the next vic-
tim, “ I really must compliment you on your drugs.
It’s a case of the engineer hoist with his own petard,
you know, but I’m sure such a testimonial to their efficiency
as you could now give, would be invaluable to Apothecaries’
Hall.”
The doctor followed the purser, and the two mates
were in turn committed to the deep.
The captain, who had partly recovered, moaned feebly
for mercy.
“ I—the only man—can navigate the ship,” he gasped,
in the hope of getting them to spare his life.
“Sir," said Knatchbull, with mock politeness, “ I regret
exceedingly being forced to deprive myself of your pro-
fessional services for the rest of the voyage, but, at the
same time, I would have you know,” and here his tone
changed to one of wolfish ferocity, “ that I have held her
Majesty’s commission as commander in the Royal Navy,
and know ten times more of seamanship and navigation
than such a blind, old, mad, groping skipper of a rotten-
timbered, coasting hooker as yourself. Over with him.”
The skipper followed his companions, and then the
hatches were taken off and attention turned to the guard
and those of the crew who had been below at the moment
of the seizure of the vessel.
Most of them were already dead, and the remainder in
a dving condition.
Dead and dying were handed on deck and thrown over
the side in quick succession.
Even Knatchbull felt the horrible nature of the massacre
he had commenced, and had ceased to juke with his
victims.
“And now the others !” he said, when the last redcoat
had vanished over the side.
For a moment the men paused.
The soldiers and sailors were, so to say, their natural
enemies, and had stood in their way to freedom.
But the convicts ?
Their own pals ?
“ Curse you, you lily-livered swabs,” roared Knatchbull;
“do you mean to hang back now ? Look here, I am the
only man who can get you out of this mess, who can take
this ship across the Pacific to a South American port, and
make you free men and safe from all chance of recapture.
Obey me, or, by thunder, I’ll blow her up and you with
her !”
“ But,” expostulated one of the men, “cant we give
some of them a chance to get round? We are short-
handed."
“ There are quite enough of us, and as to giving them a
chance of getting round, ail who are not dead now will be
in half-an-hour. So just rout them out sharp, a nd get it
over.” .. .. ~
A sudden thought seemed to strike Knatchbull aa h*


gazed upon the remaining portion of the crew and con-
victs whom he had resolved should feed the sharks.
Whether he was sick of the murderous proceedings of
the last hour or so it is impossible now to conjecture, but,
telling them all to scuttle below, he called two or three
of his ruffians to hold a council, and it was determined
to land the half-dead or dying convicts, crew, and soldiers,
left from the wholesale butchery, on a barren island close
to Tristan D’Acuna, where they would soon perish from
the absence of everything necessary to sustain life on this
island rock.
This was done, and from that day to tli s no record of
their fate ever reached human ears.
CHAPTELI CXXXII.
SHARP PRACTICE.
Finding himself in absolute command of the Wellington,
George Knatchbull was not long in making up bis mind
what to do.
Indeed, his plan had been matured from the outset.
lie had resolved to run across the Pacific, and, round-
ing Cape Horn, make for some South American port,
where the brig could either be disposed of or fitted out as
a privateer in the service of one of the incessantly-squab-
bling republics.
There was, however, one preliminary difficulty to be
overcome.
The brig was amply provisioned, but the supply of
water on board was not enough to allow of the carrying
out of bis scheme.
Accordingly he determined to bear up for New Zealand,
and obtain the requisite amount of fresh water in the Bay
of Islands.
As there was a chance, however, of the Wellington
being recognised by someone on board the whaling vessels
that frequented this spot, he set all hands to work to alter
her appearance.
Her figurehead, representing the hook-nosed hero of
Waterloo, was removed, and replaced by a piece of wood
rudely carved into the semblance of a huge fish.
Her name was painted out, and the name of the Bonita
substituted, and the streak along her sides changed from
white to red.
An American flag was manufactured, and the crew set to
work to practise speaking with a Yankee accent, it being
Knatchbull’s intention to represent himself as the skipper
of one of tho-.e American trading craft which knock about
from port to port in those latitudes.
So that when th o brig cast anchor in the Bay of Island*
any stranger would have sworn that she hailed from a port
on the North Atlantic coast.
It happened, however, that a couple of whaling ships
were lying at anchor in the bay when the Bonita put in.
The skipper of one of them, the Harriet, was a young
sailor named Duke, who had for some time been in the
employ of the firm that owned the Wellington, and had
made several voyages on board her.
As she came to anchor, something in her appearance
struck him as being familiar.
He had a boat lowered, and was pulled on board the
new arrival.
Captain Fitch, as Knatchbull styled himself, received his
visitor with great apparent cordiality, and thanked him
for his proffers of service.
Duke kept his eyes open during the visit, and felt certain
that the Bonita was neither more nor less than his old
ship the Wellington
On leaving her he proceeded back to the Harriet, but
at nightfall his boat was again lowered, and he went on
board the other whaler, the Sunflower, and communicated
his suspicions to her captain, an old seaman named Clark.
The two took counsel together, and the following morn-
ing Clark went on shore, and had an interview with the
missionaries who had established a settlement on the
shores of the bay. and who had acquTed great influence
over the natives.
The missionaries at once summoned a couple of chiefs
named Tau Tahi and Touma, and proceeded to concoct
with them a plan for the recovery of the vessel.
Meanwhile Knatchbull and his crew bad beet actively
engaged in getting water on boar'’
Such was the influence of the ex-commander over his
followers that they had obeyed all his orders without
hesitation, and had carefully refrained from any outbreak
likely to arouse suspicion.
They had worked well during the day, and Knatchbull
calculated that by noon the following day at the latest he
would be able to set sail.
At night he was pacing the deck in company with
Crawford.
Suddenly his eye caught sight of several boats putting
off from the shore and pulling towards the brig.
“ What is the meaning of this? 1 ' he thought.
The boats continued to approach rapidly, and ne could
make out that they were ad full of men.
Stepping to the vessel’s side he hailed them.
The answer *as returned in the voice of Captain Duke.
“ What is it you want?” asked Knatchbull.
The answer was unintelligible.
Knatchbull divined mischief, and gave Crawford hurried
orders to quietly rouse and arm the crew.
But before these could be carried out, the boats had
shot alongside the brig.
The next instant Duke and Clark with the greater part
of their crew, accompanied by fifty armed New Zealanders,
swarmed over her sides.
“ What the devil do you mean by this?” asked Knatch-
bull, boldly.
“ Captain Fitch,” answered Duke. “ this craft of yours
is not the Bonita, but the Wellington, of Sydney. I
know her well, although you have tried to disguise her,
You have got hold of her by some act of piracy or other;
so I call on you and your men to surrender her to me and
go back to Sydney.”
“ Piracy !” blustered Knatchbull. ;i What do you cal
this but piracy, seizing on a vessel at night ? 1 appeal to
the laws of nations, and as be spoke he glanced round to
see if there was any chance of an effectual resistance.
But the presence of the New Zealanders had cowed the
spirits of his men, and they stood motionless.
Captain Duke proceeded to secure them, and then, after
some little difficulty, got rid of his savage allies whom it
was no easy task to restrain from plundering the ship
throughout, but who carried' off, as it was, a lot of
booty.
An examination of her clearly established the fact that
she was the Wellington, and Duke, after verifying this
fact, put Knatchbull and his men in irons, and with the aid
of a portion of the crews of the Harriet and Sunflower,
succeeded in bringing her safely to Sydney.
During the voyage Knatchbull’s mind was not idle, and
he soon perceived a plan be thought could be put into
execution for his own benefit.
He exerted all bis eloquence to persuade his fellow-
culprits that there was no direct evidence against them,
and that, if they only remained true to one another,
their acquittal on the capital charge was almost certain.
They fell into the trap.
On reaching Sydney, they firmly refused to give the
slightest information as to the way in which the Welling-
ton had been seized, or as to the fate of her crew, the
guard, or their companions.
No one at first guessed the horrible tragedy tnat bad
taken place, and it was surmised that perhaps the remain-
ing convicts had been put ashore to hide, and that it was
the intention of the Bonita's crew to return ami pick them
up when she was watered.
Hopes, too, were entertained that the lives of th
and the guard had been spared.
No sooner, however, were the convicts separated
the thought occurred to Crawford that there might
fair chance of driving a bargain with the authorities.


“If, he thought, “ * turn Queen’s evidence, I am pretty
certain of a pardon.” J
Accordingly, the following morning he requested an in-
terview with the governor of the jail.
That functionary made his appearance later in the day.
“ 1 beg your pardon, sir,” began the convict, with great
mock humility, “ but I believe you are very desirous of
learning the true story of the mutiny.”
“ Well, yes, w.e were,” was the answer.
“ Oh,” thought the convict, “ this is feigned indiffer-
ence, put on to deceive one. And he continued, “I sup-
pose, sir, if anyone gave that information, it Avould be
taken into consideration at his trial ?”
“ Yes, it might.”
“ He would be rendering a great service, sir?”
“ Certainly.”
“And in consideration of turning Queen’s evidence,
would have a chance of a pardon ?”
“ A very good chance.”
“ Well, sir, if that is the case 1 am ready to turn Queen’s
evidence, and give full particulars of the affair.”
“ It is a very kind offer on your part,” said the go-
vernor, grimly, “ but I regret to say that we cannot avail
ourselves of it.”
“Not avail yourselves of it?”
“No.”
“But you said that the man who would turn Queen’s
evidence would have a chance of pardon—a good
chance ?”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, I am ready.”
'■ Quite so—only you are too late.”
“Too late?”
“Yes ; one of your companions has already volunteered
to be Queen’s evidence.”
“The sneaking hound! Who is it?”
“ Knatchbull.”
“ The treacherous devil! Why it was he who tried to
make us all promise to hold our tongues.”
“Very probably.”
“But he was the worst of us all, sir, the ringleader. 1
assure you, he planned the whole of it.”
“So you say,” said the governor, who imagined this
outburst was merely a bit of spite on Crawford’s part on
finding himself forestalled in his revelation.
“ But I assure you, sir, 1 swear to God,” began the ter-
rified wretch, who began to see the terrible trap into which
he had fallen. •
“It is no use, my good man,” said the governor,
“Knatchbull has been accepted as Queen’s evidence, and
one informer will be quite sufficient.”
And so it proved.
The occult protection that shielded Knatchbull had led
to his offer to play the part of informer being accepted
without any demur.
At the trial he was allowed to give his own version of
the mutiny.
According to him he had strenuously refused to take an
active part in it, and would have been slain with the other
convicts but for the fact of his skill in seamanship being
known to his comrades.
It was this alone, he asserted, that led them to spare his
life, and he insisted that, although nominally in charge of
the Bonita, he had been in reality the mere slave of her
crew,
Whether the authorities believed this story or not, they
pretended to do so. _ ...
The consequence was that, despite all the recrimination
of his companions, thev were found guilty, and the whole
nine were hanged.
Not only was Knatchbull pardoned for his share in the
crime, but his original sentf ace of transportation to Nor-
folk Island was remitted.
He continued to live in Sydney, and had obtained the
command of a small coasting craft, with a crew of five or
ii‘t men.
CHAPTER CXXXIiI
the Canary bird
Ihe Canary Bird was the name of an inn situate on the
road from Sydney to Goulburn,
It had originally been a little shanty of a grogseller’a,
started by a crippled miner, and took its name from the
fact that when it was first opened one of the chief attrac-
tions it offered to its few customers was the presence of a
real live canary.
In the early days of the colony this was s rarity, and
men came from a distance for the mere sake of hearing the
bird that reminded them of home in the old country.
The landlord was offered sums comparatively enormous
to part with it, but he knew better than to get rid of the
goose that laid the golden eggs by listening to such
offers.
Gradually, however, as the traffic on the road increased,
the little shanty developed into a good-sized one, and was
no longer dependent for custom on the canary.
Canaries too were getting common.
So when the bird which had brought him such luck
died, instead of replacing it, old Bob Radley got a journey-
man painter on tramp to daub twopennyworth of gamboge
on to a square board, on which the departed favourite was
rudely outlined in charcoal, and, writing underneath “The
Canary Bird,” hung it out as a sign.
It was just as well he put the name underneath it, for
the picture might have been taken indifferently for a
representation of a canary or of a gosling.
Late one afternoon, a few days after Kelly’s escape from
the police, a tolerably numerous gathering of a somewhat
mixed character were assembled in the large room of the
Canary Bird.
Miners, squatters, stockmen, travellers, and various
other classes were represented, and a brisk conversation
was going on about a score of subjects at once.
Glasses were being rapidly filled and emptied, and the
lame landlord, and a couple of lathy youths who served
him as waiters, had all their work cut out for them.
In the midst of the contusion, two stoutly-built but ill-
looking fellows, dressed in a style partaking at once of the
miner and the sailor, entered the room, and, selecting a
table in one corner, sat down at it.
In accordance with their orders they were supplied with
a bottle of brandy, and after filling their pipes, they
stretched out their legs and remained with their eyes on
the open door, in evident expectation of an arrival.
“ 1 don’t much like Ned fixing on this crib,” said one of
them, who was no other than Cir old acquaintance,
Salmon Roe; “it’s a precious sight too risky.”
“ You’re about right there," said the o her, w. o was nc
other than Zeph.
“Yes,” pursued Salmon Roe, in an aggrieved tone;
“ it’s what I call sheer tomfoolery, to choose a spot on a
main road, where all kinds of people are popping in and
out all day long, and where every minute a man runs a
risk of being spotted.”
“Well, as soon as he does turn up, 1 vote we make a
move of it.”
The pair had come to the Canary Bird in confidence,
with a message from Ned, who had given them orders to
meet him there.
Meanwhile, the conversation at the adjoining table, at
which gold-digging, sheep, wool, stock-raising, and kindred
topics had been exhausted, turned on bushrangers.
“ Is it true,” said a strongly-built fellow named Sam
Smith, “ that the police let Kelly slip through their fingers
the other day, on the Murray ? ”
“Yes,” said his neighbour, a Welshman named Owen,
“ they did, and it’s not to be wondered at.”
“ Well, I’d only like to have a chance of getting hold
of him,” said Sam. “ What do you say, Tom? ” he con-
tinued, addressing his brother, who sat next to him;
“ he’d be a clever fellow to wriggle out of this.”
And he held out a hand like a shoulder of mutton.
“ Did you ever see him ? ” said Owen.


“ No.”
" Well- when you do, I’d advise you to leave him alone.
He’d be a better mao than you, Tom Smith, who can
tackle Ned Kelly,”
The other laughed
“ Just listen to me,” wont on Owen, “and I’ll give you
some idea of what the joker is like. It was last autumn
1 was in the bush out Yanko Creek way. I had pulled
up for a spell at a little out of-the-way shanty, and the
only other fellow there was a strapping chap with black
whiskers, 1 had a nobbier with him and the landlord, and
just let it drop that 1 was from the mines, which was,
perhaps, an infernal foolish thing to do, for I had been
doing a pretty good tiling there, and had about sixty
ounces of gold about me. It afterwards strucu mo that
both he and the landlord had a hard look at ray belt, but
I never thought any more of it, especially as he got on one
of the finest bits ol horseflesh I ever saw, and rode off
eastward, whilst I jogged along to the north where there
was a station I counted on passing the night at.”
“ Well, was it Kelly ?” asked Smith.
“Just wait a bit. 1 jogged on quietly till I got iu a
place about four miles from the inn, where the track nar-
rowed, and was quite walled in by scrub. There was no
news of bushrangers being about., but 1 kept my eyes
open all the way, and what should I see but a hat full in
the middle of the road ?”
“A hat?”
“ Yes, a felt hat. I was not going to get off to pick it
up, but I slackened speed, and a voice says, a little way
ahead of me to the right—
“ * Hullo, mate! don’t you hear what the hat’s a-saying
to you ?’ ”
There was a laugh at this.
“ Of course 1 guessed what was meant, and 1 felt pretty
certain I was covered. So 1 pulled out a long bag 1 had
with about ten ounces, and, undoing it, poured the lot
into the hat. 1 thought that would satisfy whoever it was,
for the deuce a soul could 1 see.”
“I'm Plowed,” growled Smith, “if I’d have parted like
that. Why didn’t you try a bolt if it was impossible to
show fight?”
“ ‘ I’ve not done yet, mate,’ says the voice. ‘ That ain’t
what the hat’s a-saying.’
“ ‘ What is it saying, then ?’ says I, and 1 was trying to
make out where the voice came from.
“ ‘ Why, it says just take off that belt of yours and
drop it in the middle of the road, or you’ll drop out of
the saddle like a ripe plum.’ ”
“ Oh, Lord !” laughed Smith.
“ 1 felt this was a bit too much, and thought to chance
it. My gun was strapped to the saddle, and I should not
have had time to loosen it, so 1 stuck the spurs iu and
tried a belt. Bang ! came a shot. My horse went down,
and 1 flew clean over lus head Before I had well got my
senses again, out of the bush conies my friend of the inn,
and holds a pistol to ray head.
“ ‘ It’s devilish little use being polite with chaps like
you,” he said, “and for two pins I’d blow your stupid
brains out. So just hand over that belt you were flash-
ing about just now, without any bother.’ ”
“ And you did?”
“ And I had to. lie meant what he said. I undid and
banded over the bolt, he covering me all the while, and
then he gave a whistle, the bush parted again, and out
there came, frisking and stepping like a dog that follows
his master, the finest horse, as I said before, that I ever
set eyes on.”
“ What was he like ? ”
“Black, with a white star on his forehead.”
“Ay,” said a man named Hill, “that’s Kelly’s M&rco
rdo, sure enough.”
“ I had a good look at him, and could swear to him In
a thousand. Kelly put my belt into his pocket, made me
pick up the hat, and put the gold-dust back into the bag,
and hand that over—watching me all the time like a cat
watches a mouse—and then made me lift my hands and
face round. As I stood with my back to him, 1 felt it
was the longest moment iu my life, for I did not know
but what he might take it into his head to tire after all.
But suddenly 1 heard his horse's hoofs clatter, and when 1
looked round he was vanishing in the hash, and before I
could get my gun loose he was out of fight.”
“I suspect he and the landlord were pals,” said Tom
Smith.
“ Very likely.”
“It was a very narrow squeak though,” said Sam. ‘it
was odd he didn’t send you under when you obliged him
to show you his face.”
“ Ned Kelly’s not such a bad fellow, after ah.’ 1 said
Hill. “He never robbed a man unless the fellow could
pretty well afford it.”
“Bravo, sir! that’s so,” said a hoarse voice at his
elbow.
Hill looked round.
The man who had spoken was Salmon Roe.
Salmon Roe had listened with great interest to Owen’s
adventure, and, in order to listen the better, had remained
silent.
But he had made up for his silence by quietly consum-
ing more than his share of the liquor set before him and
Zeph, and to this was to be ascribed his enthusiastic con-
firmation of Hill’s words of praise.
“ Do you know him ? ” asked Tom Smith, with a grin.
“No, 1 don’t know him,” said Salmon Roe. who saw
that his remark might lead to awkward consequences;
“ but I’m sure more than one will bear me out that it s a
commonly known thing that Ned Kelly only robs the
rich and gives to the poor.”
“ And 1 suppose,” said Owen, who had been watching
him narrowly, “ that you are one of the poor? ”
“ I’m none too well off, just now.”
“ Who are you, and where are you going ? ” asked Sam
Smith.
“ What the devil’s that to you ? ” retorted Salmon Roe,
who began to realise that he was in a fair way of raising
a wasps’ nest about his ears, and, not being able to see his
way out of it, was losing his head.
“ Hold your tongue, you fool! ” said Zeph.
Some of the others in the room had been attracted by
the story of Owen, and a man named Bassett had been
watching Salmon Roe narrowly since he had spoken.
“ I thought I knew your face, and now 1 have heard
your voice, lam sure of it. 'dates, this fellow is one of
Kelly’s gang. I will swear to him anywhere,” he shouted,
'i here was a sensation at these words,
The guests sprai‘,g to their feet and crowded toward*
Salmon Roe and Zeph.
“You cursed fool!” said the latter in an undertone,
“ here's a precious mess you’ve got us into.”
“Is this so ?” asked a gentlemanly-looking man, a
squatter, named Leath,
“ Yes.”
“ Well, I’m a magistrate. If you are prepared to swear
to the identity of tffis man, and he cannot disprove your
statement, I will take upon myself to have him arrested.”
Both Zeph and Salmon Roe knew that this would be
fatal, since no lack of evidence would be brought against
them from the police.
“ It’s a lie ! you’ve no right to detain me,” cried Salmon
Roe.
“ We shall see ; you had better give yourself up quietly,”
said Leath,
It was growing dusk and a couple of lamps had been lit
to illuminate the room, the corners of which were almost
in obscurity.
“ We must fight for it,” said Zeph.
“ Right you are,” was the answer. “ Are you ready?”
« Yes.”
“Now!”
Springing forward, the two men made a desperate effort
to reach the


£eph had armed himself with a bench, and a couple of
lows from this stretched Sam Smith and Hill sense-
Salmon Roe, close at his elbow, laid Owen’s head open
with a bottle and floored another antagonist.
So sudden had been their charge that for a moment it
seemed as if they would succeed in getting away.
But fresh foes interposed, and the next moment they
were forced to retreat to the wall.
Salmon Hoe, caught up a stool, and so fiercely did the
two fight that their antagonists drew back a little.
As yet no one had ventured to make use of firearms.
Suddenly the sound of hoofs was heard on the road
without, over which darkness had stolen.
There was a pause, of which the two ruffians profited to
place a heavy table in front of them.
“ You had better surrender,” said Mr. Leath. “ Here
are the police.”
As he spoke a horse’s head was thrust through the open
doorway, and next moment its rider had crossed the
threshold.
He was a strapping fellow in the uniform of the police.
“ You are just in time,” said Leath, “ to help us to secure
those two rascals,” and he pointed to Zeph and Salmon
Roe.
The stranger seemed to comprehend the whole business
it a glance.
“ All right, sir,” was his answer, given in a hoarse voice,
ind he advanced into the room.
The eyes of Zeph and Salmon Roe bad been fixed on
the horse, and now they turned on the man.
They exchanged a glance of intelligence.
“ Knife and pistol, mate,” whispered Zeph to his com-
panion, and the two thrust their hands into the pockets
in which their arms were concealed.
The trooper drew a brace of pistols.
“ If you don’t surrender by the time 1 count three,” he
said, “ I’ll drop you. I know them both, sir,” he con-
tinued to Mr, Leath.
“Now,” he resumed, addressing Zeph and Salmon Hoe.
and levelling his weapons, “ one, two, three ! ”
The surprise of Kelly’s arrival was one of the most
agreeable Zeph and Roe had ever experienced.
They felt their spirits rise, and their confidence in
speedy delivery brightened their hitherto fear-drawn
features.
“ I’ll take these scoundrels in charge myself, sir,” said
Kelly. “Just make out your warrant for their commit-
ment, and 1 11 have them in the nearest gaol before dawn
In the absence of bracelets, just give me a pair of stirrup-
leathers and I’ll make them as tight and taut as the
mainbrace in a gale of wind. They won’t get away from
me in a hurry, if they do it will be my fault.”
With well-dissembled reluctance, the two ruffians
allowed the novel “ darbies ” to be put on, and, with down-
cast looks accompanied the quasi-trooper, Ned Kelly, out
of the Canary, and, as they hoped, out of danger.
But just as they left the house a man in the guise of
a digger was observed to be eagerly conversing with the
magistrate.
“I’ll tell you it is him ; no mistake about it. I ought
to know when be robbed me of six months’ work. I’d
swear to him among a million and at once, as if des-
-epairing of convincing his auditor, roared out, “ Dont let
-him slip through your hands, you darned idiots, that’s Ned
Kelly, he’s worth £lO,OOO to any of you.”
A rush, headed by the magistrate, instantly took place.
Kelly heard it, and so did his companions, who now
thought the game was up
“Sharp to the right,” cried Ned, as they rushed after
him, and at the same time he unhooked Marco Polo’s
bridle from the fence where he had hung it up, whilst
his assailants, recovering from their infusion in some
degree, poured out after the fugitive*.
He saw the impossibility of his comrades getting off on
•fact, and he bad already hit upon a plan of escape.
lo the right of the Canary Bird rose its stables, a large
and strongly-built edifice formed of split logs.
it had only recently been put up, and replaced a number
of ramshackle out-buildings that had formerly served to
shelter the horses of travellers.
It was solidly constructed, because horses are amongst
the most valuable and the most frequently stolen property
that travellers are provided with, and hence it behoves a
landlord to do all he can to secure them.
Into the stables the three darted.
An ostler, who was seated on a bucket repairing a
saddle by the light of a horn lantern ; sprang up at their
entry.
Ned—who knew the place well, having several times
visited it in disguise—caught him by the throat before
be coaid utter a word.
“ Pick out a couple of the best “ prads,” and mount for
your lives,” he said to his comrades.
But, before this direction could be carried out, the
main body of their pursuers, who had followed as swiftly
as the darkness allowed, were at hand.
Ned could have sprung on Marco Polo and galloped
off safely, bub he resolved to stand by Salmon Roe and
Zeph.
Casting the half-strangled ostler to the ground, ht
pulled Marco Polo into the stable, and slammed the
door
It was a strong one, and was secured by a heavy bar.
Ned’s next care was to tie the ostler hand and foot.
As he leant over him for this purpose, he burst into a
laugh.
“What, Hopping Charley,” ho said, “is it you? I'm
sorry I squoze your gullet so tightly. Here, take a sip
of this to put it right again.”
As he spoke, he held out his flask.
Hopping Charley was an ex-convict who. on more than
one occasion, had been his partner in deeds of mischief.
An understanding was quickly come to with him, and,
as he bore no malice for Ned’s squeezing, he readily
agreed to do all he could to further their escape, and
even to accompany them.
“ I am sick of this place, and had made up my mind to
go off in a day or two,” the truth being that he had been
stealing and selling fodder, and was bound to bolt or te
be found out.
Ned quickly reconnoitred the place in which he fount
himself.
The stable was a long, narrow building, with a high-
pitched roof, the gable end being toward the road.
In the centre of this end wall was the door by which
they had entered, and which formed the only means of
ingress or egress.
Along each of the side-walls was a row of stalls.
Ventilation and light were given by a range of holes
high up in the walls—and too small to allow the passage
of a man—and by a window secured by a strong shutter
at the further end.
In the stalls were sixteen or eighteen horses.
The four men listened for a moment in silence as Ned
held up his hand and stepped softly to the further end of
the stable.
“I thought so,” he remarked, as he returned to his
companions. “ They have surrounded the place.”
“ The deuce ! ” said Zeph. “ I was thinking we might
have slipped out by that back window.”
“We couldn’t have got the horses through it,” said
Charley.
“ Wait a bit,” said Ned, “ and listen to me. I think I
eee a way out of this.”
“ Bravo !” said Salmon Roe.
“Charley,” began the bushranger, “do you remember
when you were in quod how Holy Joe used to be dinning
a lot of rot into your ears about those blessed old Jews
that were always fighting with their neighbours ?”
“Yes.”
-• Well, I'® blessed if ever I thought it would ever


any good to me, but I think I can get a wrinkle that’s
going to fetch us out of this fix, tight as it seems.”
“Don’t jaw then, but let’s have it.”
“ All right. Do you remember anything about a cove
named Samson?”
“Samson!—Samson I Wasn’t that the chap as pulled
down a house with the Jawbone of an ass.’
Zeph laughed at this.
“ You’re a strong fellow, Ned, but I’m blessed if I
think you could pull a house down, even if you had a
“ moke ” to help you ; and if you did pull th;s one to bits
I don’t see what good it would do us.’
“ No, that’s not it. Samson had a spite against a lot of
fellows, and he just set fire to the tads of a lot of foxes
and sent them scouting into the beggars’ cornfields, and
just played blue blazes with ’em. Now, that’s my
game.”
“I think I see it,” said Zeph, “but where’s your
foxes ?”
“ Here ! ” said Ned, pointing to the horses.
He then advanced to the end wall at the side by which
they had entered.
“We’re in luck,” he muttered. “ Have you got any
tools here, Charley?”
“There are some picks and shovels.”
“ That’ll do, first-rate.”
Ned then proceeded to give his orders.
The end wall was constructed of longitudinally-arranged
logs, and was secured to the side walls by iron clamps.
Armed with a pickaxe and lever, Zeph and Salmon Roe
proceeded to loosen the-e clamps in such a way that a
very slight effort would be needed to remove them alto-
gether.
Ned meanwhile, with Charley’s help, had picked out and
saddled the three best horses in the stable, and had led
them to the upper end.
Then he returned to assist the other two in their work
of demolition, while Charley proceeded to arrange and
tie up a number of small bundles of the dried fodder on
which he could lay hands.
Meanwhile, the assailants, on finding the door closed in
their faces, had retreated, and held a short council of
war.
A detachment was posted in observation on each side of
the building.
“ By Jove !” roared Tom Smith, “ I only wish I could
get a fair smack at that devil of a trooper who made such
a fool of us.”
“Did any of you notice the trooper’s horse?” asked
Barrett.
“Yes,” answered one or two.
“ Well, wasn’t it a black with a white star on its fore-
head?”
“Yes.”
“Black with a white star on the forehead?” said Owen,
who had been insensible when the false tiooper had made
his appearance. “ Why, it’s no mistake. It is Ned
Kelly!”
“Of course,” exclaimed Hill. “By Jove, boys! the
trooper is Kelly himself.”
This announcement had a different effect upon his
Eieaters according to their temperament.
Some were fired with the prospect of capturing and
putting an end to the depredations of the bushranger, but
others could not help thinking that discretion was the
better part of valour.
Those, however, who had been hurt in the scuffle with
the two ruffians were eager to revenge their injuries, and
their outcries prevailed.
“ Can’t we make a rush at the doer and carry it ?” sug-
gested Tom Smith.
“ Or rig up a beam and batter hei in,” said Owen.
This plan was at once adopted.
A stout log was selected and a party advanced with it in
their arms.
“ By all th»,Vs lucky,” said Ned, who discovered the
manoeuvre, “ these fellows are going to do our work for
us after all.”
A couple of thundering blows shook the d/mr, which,
however, stood firm.
Encouraged, however, by the fact that no shots were
fired from the stable, the assault was renewed.
“ This won’t quite do, after all,” muttered Ned. “ Look
here, lads, shore up the door as strongly as you cam”
This direction was obeyed. For a while the repeated
strokes of the assailants were of no avail.
“ I wonder they don’t fire at us,” said Mr. Leath.
“ Perhaps they’ve no more powder.”
“ What a lark if they haven t.”
“Stop a bit,” said Leath, “ the door stands firm, but it
seems to me as if the whole of the wall is loosening bodily.”
“ That is so,” said Owen, “it is getting loose all down
the sides.”
“ Well, then, let’s rig up a couple more rams and drive
it in altogether.”
“ This advice was quickly taken, and soon, under the
repeated blows, the whole of the wall began to sway and
shake.
“ What a lot of trouble they are saving us,” chuckled
Ned. “ I meant to push it outwards, but they are going to
drive it flat in. Look here, though, we must clear away
the posts of the first three stalls so that it may fall flat.”
This order was obeyed.
Next, by order of Ned, the horses were led from their
stalls, and each had one of the bundles of dry fodder
fasiened to the crupper.
They then had their heads turned in the direction of
the door.
Zeph and Salmon Roe, active as all sailors, each took
his position on one of the cross beams running across the
stable close to the end, and from this position proceeded
to loosen the last of the clamps.
Ned mounted Marco Polo at the further end of the
stable and took the bridles of the three other horses that had
been chosen in hand.
Charley took his position in rear of the loosened
horses, with a torch in either hand, and the lantern open
before him.
“ Are you quite ready?” said Ned, in a whisper
“ Half a minute,” said Zeph. “ This cursed clamp still
holds. There it goes.”
As he spoke the whole of the wall forming the-
fur her end of the stable began to oscillate violently.
The blows of the battering rams were redoubled.
Suddenly it swayed inward, and fell with a tremendous
crash.
A dense cloud of dust rose.
Suddenly from behind this there flashed a bright
light.
Charley, at the signal, had lit both torches, and now-
applied them in swift succession to the bundles of fodder
fastened to the horses.
Frightened by the light and maddened by the pain,
these°sprang forward in the only direction that lay open
to them.
On they bounded like a living avalanche.
Before the assailants had time to realise their position,,
the maddened animals, urged on by shots and shouts from
Ned and Charley, were upon them.
Some few managed to dart aside, bn l - the majority were-
knocked down and trampled upon.
Kelly and his party took good care id be in the rush
with the frightened and tortured animals, who came tear-
ing on and through Kelly’s enemies, scattering them like-
chaff before the wind. In the midst of the scared ani-
mals were to be seen the bushrangers with heads bent
almost to the withers of their horses, urging with voice
and heel the frightened brutes to racing pace, and quickly
disap p earing from the view of their would-be captors.
“ Head westward,” said Ned. “ I am bound for Sydney,
for it is just the last place they wiU ** jk of looking for u«t
after this little caper.”


CHAPTER, CXXXIV.
A WORTHY ALLY.
Three weeks afterwards Ned *as sitting in the parlour of
a public-house at Sydney
He had discarded his- trooper’s uniform, and was got
up in tolerably decent style as a settler from up the
country.
He had made up his mind to keep quiet for a day or
two, and to see how the land lay, and not to venture
into any haunt whero he was known; still, as a measure
of precaution, he had put on a wig and whiskers.
He felt a trifle lonely, and was not sorry to see a door
open and a man enter the room.
The new-comer was a short, thickset man, with a
intellectual-looking forehead, deep-set black eyes, a short
lose that had at some period sustained severe damage,
tod was constantly moved by a nervous twitching, a long
apper lip, good teeth, a mouth expressive of ferocity and
daring, and a very prominent jaw and short neck.
He was dressed in a semi-nautical style, and, despite his
somewhat unprepossessing appearance, was not without a
certain fascination of manner.
He entered into conversation with Ned, and, after a few
words, introduced himself as Captain Fitch, commanding
a coasting schooner.
After their glasses had been replenished several times,
their talk grew more confidential.
The stranger let out that he had been sent across the
herring-pond at the expense of Government, and Ned,
without revealing his real name, admitted having been
guilty of several crimes that ought to have been rewarded
with the Order cf the Hempen Cravat.
“ Fitch—Fitch ! ” said Kelly at last; “ why, ain’t you the
fellow that helped to physic the lubbers on board the
Wellington ?”
“ Yes,” said the other, with a grin.
“By Jove, old pal! tip us your hand. Why, you must
be one of the right kidney.”
“ I think so.”
“But, stop a bit; if I remember right, Fitch ain't your
right name.”
“ Perhaps it is not; but, as I don’t know yours, we’ll
let it serve for the present.”
“Mine!’’said Ned, with his usual recklessness —“oh,
you can read it on the wall of every police station in
Sydney.”
“ Why, who are you? ”
The bushranger caught him by the wrist with a grip of
iron, and looked him full in the eyes.
“You’d like to know my name? Well, I’ll tell it you.
I’m Ned Kelly.”
“ Oh ! that’s it, is it? ” said the other.
“Yes. Now, who are you ? ”
“lam the brother of an English baronet,” was the
answer, given with a certain p ide; “and 1 once held a
commission in the service. My real name is Knatch-
bull.”
“ Of course ! ” cried Ned ; “ I have heard all about you.
You have got a ship? ”
“ A little coaster.”
“ What do you do with it? ”
“ Well, I’ve helped more than one fine fellow on the
way to freedom, and I do a lot of smuggling.”
“ Do you want a couple cf good hands? ”
“ I should not grumble at them.”
“ Good! I can find you a pair of beauties.”
And Ned proceeded to recommend Zeph and Salmon
Roe, in terms that decided Knatchbull to enrol them.
“ But what are you thinking ot doing yourself? ’ he
Asked.
“ WeP, 1 am gung in for what I fancy is a clever dodge.
Everyone thinks I have gone up country, and whilst they
are scouring the country for me T jriean to get to v. orx
here.”
“ What’e the lay?”
“ Burglary, I fancy.”
“Good! lean put you up to a fine thing, i suppose
you know we have got a new chief of police ? ”
“ Yes ; and the darned fool—he’s a greenhorn from the
old country—has gone up country after me. He'll find
some few things wanting to be put straight.”
This last statement of Ned’s was a fact.
When Kenneth and Muriel had recovered from the
effects of their struggle with the waters, they had started
for the interior.
Fortunately they came across a party who had noticed
the wreck, and were hastening down to the seashore.
The shipwrecked pair were at once taken to the nearest
station, and received every attention.
Horses were provided to take them on to Sydney.
Arriving there a twofold surprise awaited them.
Muriel learnt that her uncle, instead of being a poor,
struggling fanner, was in reality one of the richest of
squatters on the Murrumbridge, and had come in person
to Sydney to receive his niece and destined heiress, and
escort her to her future home.
Kenneth’s surprise was not so pleasant.
He had no sooner assumed his new position than he was
overwhelmed with accounts of Kelly’s atrocities and out-
rages.
He saw that his post was likely to be a much more diffi-
cult one than he had perhaps anticipated, unless they were
put a stop to.
Although ignorant of the bush, he a thorough
sportsman, and the prospect of a man-hunt, with all its
attendant perils, seemed rather attractive.
So after roundly blaming the clumsiness of the troopers
who had allowed Ned to slip through their fingers, he
started in person for the scene of the bushranger’s last
exploit, vowing that he would either catch him or hunt
him out of the colony.
“ Now,” said Ned,” what’s this scheme of yours ? ”
Knatchbull proceeded to unfold it.
At the corner of one of the streets of Sydney was a
pawnbroker’s shop, kept by an old fellow named Goodered.
He was, contrary to many of his class, a thoroughly
honest man ; and this fact had brought down on his head
the enmity of several members of the criminal classes
whom, to their great amazement, he had dared to hand
over to the police when they had brought him stolen pro-
perty to dispose of.
Several attempts had been made to rob him, in revenge :
and, in consequence, he had not only fortified his house
till it was as strong as a jail, but had a hired watchman
to keep guard outside.
On the premises he al'owed no one after nightfall, save
himself and an old housekeeper.
Mr Knatchbull had taken a roomy but very dilapidated
tenement, three doors higher up the street, in the name
of a man called Hopkins, with a view of using it as a depot
for smuggled goods, and to this he suggested Ned should
accompany him, in order to unfold his plans.
Ned agreed; and the pair proceeded to the house,
which was, ostensibly, that of a dealer in ships’ stores in
a small way.
The door was opened by Hopkins, a man of about
fifty, with a grizzly beard fringing a forbidding coun-
tenance.
Ned and Knatchbull were soon seated at a table in the
room behind the shop, with a bottle of whisky between
them.
“ I think you agree with me,” said Knatchbull, “ that
old Goodered’s crib is about as good a one to crack aa
any in Sydney ? ”
“ That’s so. Why, a sack wouldn’t hold the haul in
watches and jewellery alone.”
“ Well, do you see a way to do it? ” and Knatchbull
looked into the other’s face with a grin.
“It’ll be difficult,” said Ned. “The crib is as strong
as a jail, and there’s no getting over the watchman ; he «
an old soldier, and true as steel. Besides, the police keep
a special eye on it.”


“ And don’t you see a way to outwit them ? ”
<« No. I don’t,” said Ned, surlily, for he began to dislike
the other’s chaifing manner.
Well, 1 always heard you were so clever ! ” and as he
spoke, Kuatchbull continued to grin.
* “Just stow all that rot, add come to business if you
mean it,” cried Kelly, whose temper was getting roused.
“ All right. But the reason I asked you—indeed, the
verj reason why I fancied you as a pal in the job, was be-
cause it can be best done by taking a leaf out of your
own book.”
“ Out of my book ?”
“Yes. 1 remembered that plant of yours to rob the
bank here. You’ll have to handle the pick and shovel for
a night or two.”
“”Ycu don’t mean to tunnel under the street, do
you?”
“ Nc, there’s an easier way than that. What do you
say to starting a tunnel under my cellar wall, and ending
it under old Goodered’s?”
“But there are two houses between.”
“ Yes, but they are untenanted and untenantable. The
owner wants to sell them because he is too poor, he says,
to pull them down and rebuild them, and can’t get any-
one to take them as they are.”
“ That alters the case,” said Ned. “But does anyone
ever visit your cellar ?”
“ No ; for- th t is where I stow away the little odds and
ends 1 don’t care for the police to find lying about in case
they put their prying noses into the shop. The only
entrance is by a nicely-fitted trap, on which the four legs
of my chair are resting at the present moment.”
“Shall we have to tunnel the whole distance?” en-
quired Kelly.
“No, we have only to make a passage large enough to
crawl through under the three foundation walls.”
“It looks pretty good. Do you mean to let anyone
else into the secret ?”
“ Only Hopkins.”
“When shall we begin?”
“ What do you say to to-morrow?”
“1 don’t oare.”
“ W eil, then, you had better stop here to-night. There’s
plenty of room. Then to-morrow, after breakfast, well
set to work, whilst Hopkins minds the shop. A.t night,
when we knock off, he can take a hand.”
“ All right.”
Hopkins, who had been in the outer room during this
conversation, was ca led in, and Kelly presented to him.
Such was the awe and reverence which the latter in-
spired amongst the class to which the man belonged that,
despite the price set upon him, no thought ot betraying
him crossed the fellow’s mind.
The three wound up the evening with a, hand at cards
and the relation oi their former exploits and escapes from
the hounds ot the law, and then turned in.
CHAPTER CXXXV.
HOW THEY DID IT.
Two nights afterwards die weather was wet and drizzling.
At eleven o’clock, old Goodered, who had put up his
shutters some three hours before, made a final round of
uis premises, to see that everything was securely fastened.
He and his housekeeper then ascended to their respective
rooms.
After putting out his light, the old man looked out of
the window to ascertain the state of the weather, and then
retired to rest with a pistol beside him.
Tnree hours later—towards two o’clock—when all sleep
the soundest, two figures crawled like huge vipers out of a
hole tunnelled under the wall dividing Goodered’s cellar
from that of the adjoining house.
They rose to their feet, and one carefully removed tho
slide of a bull’s-eye lantern, and by its aid the pair sur-
veyed the place in which they found themselves.
Both were masked, but anyone acquainted with their
voices would have had no difficulty in identifying them aa
Kelly and Knatchbull.
Hopkins had remained in the farther cellar.
“ Hare we are,” said Knatchbull, “ safe and sound, and
the watchman outside knows no more of what is going on
in here than you ever will of what is going on inside
heaven.”
“Hullo! someone has been at work here lately,” said
Kelly, pointing to a heap of shavings and the ends of
several newly-planed planks in one corner. “It was well
he didn’t hear us.”
“ Oh, that was four or five days back. The old boy
had a carpenter in to fix up some shelves and partitions.
But now the first thing is to get upstairs and find the
keys of the safes. They’ll be in the old mans room, I
reckon.”
“ Do you know where he sleeps? ”
“Yes; I know which is his room by watching the
lights from the outside. I’ll tackle him if you’ll attend to
the housekeeper.”
“ That’s a bargain. Come on.”
They stole up the cellar-stairs like cats.
The door at the head of the stairs was locked and tha
key was on the other side.
This, however, was no check to their progress.
With the aid of a convenient implement with which he
was provided, Knatchbull turned the key almost as easily
in the lock as if he had held the handle in his hand.
They were now on the ground floor, and after softly
closing the door behind them stood without moving for
a few minutes and listened.
“ Shall we go through the lower premises now, or go up
and make things safe at once ?” said Knatchbull, in a low
whisper which lent a horrible significance to the word
“ safe.”
“Go up,” whispered Ned. “No; stop a bit. Let’s
cast an eye over the premises so as to see the best way out
in case we have to make a bolt of it.”
A quick inspection showed the position of the back and
front doors, and having ascertained this they with the
same catlike stealthy tread slowly ascended the stairs and
on the landing again halted to listen and reconnoitre.
“ What is that?” whispered Kelly, as his ear caught a
faint voice.
There was a pause for a moment and then Knatchbull
replied-r-
“ It’s the old man snoring, 1 do believe.”
It was so !
The heavy breathing of the old man would have indica-
ted to the prowling wretches the room he occupied had
Knatchbull been unacquainted with it.
They listened again, and could in addition now detect
the regular sound of the respiration of the housekeeper in
the adjoining apartment.
“ There lies your way, this is mine,” said Knatchbull, to
his companion.
The two separated, Knatchbull approaching the bedroom
of the pawnbroker, and Kelly that of the housekeeper.
The doors of both were ajar, and before either entered
they allowed a pencil of light from their almost closed
bulla’-eyes to play over the floor, in order to show them
where to step without falling over anything.
They were careful to only let tins flash of light play
over the ground, and to keep it thus low in order that it
might not strike the eyes of the siumnerers, and so arouse
them.
It served, however, to point ou-t the position of tne
beds.
Knatchbull stole quietly across the room, and drew neat
the bedside of the unconscious pawnbroker, who was
sleeping even more quietly than when the burglar had first
caught the sound of his breathb g,
His mind was made up for every evil.
Had he so willed it, he might have merely sought to
secure his victim and not to slay him.
But no ; death, he argued, was the only sure wjy.


But death with no outcry, no shrieks, no groans, no
dying gasps.
He held the dark lantern in his left hand, and raised
one of those tomahawks so common in colonial settlements
in his right.
Then, allowing one flash of light to fall on the old
man’s silvery hair and guide his aim, he struck home
heavily.
His aim was sure.
There was no struggling, no writhing, after that one
dull, heavy thud with which his axe-blade had sunk into
the old man’s brain like a thunderbolt from a storm-
cloud.
Satisfied that his victim was dead, the robber gathered
up a few valuables that were lying within Ins reach, and
then rummaged Goodered’s garments for his keys.
With these in his possession he quitted the room, but
he had scarcely crossed the threshold when a stifled
shriek, followed by a gurgling sound and the noise of a
scuffle, reached his ears.
He rushed into the room whither his comrade in this
foul night’s work had gone, and found him holding a
pillow over the face of the housekeeper with one hand,
and trying to strangle her with the other.
“Why, Ned, I thought you understood the business
better. I’ll show you the way to do it, that you may be
better up to it next time.”
And, raising the blood stained tomahawk, he struck the
writhing woman a blow on the temple, which instantly de-
prived her of life.
“The old devil woke just as I was getting my knife
out,” said Ned, “ and 1 had to drop it and stuff the pillow
into her mouth, or she would have screeched out and
ruined all.”
“ Well,” said Knatchbull, “ the worst of the job is over,
and we’re monarchs of all we survey.”
“Speak loAver,” whispered Ned. “We might be heard
outside. Have you got the key of the safe ?”
“ I’ve got a pretty big bunch of them, and if one
doesn’t fit, another will,” was the reply.
“ But we must get to work cautiously, and take care
that the light from our lanterns does not play on the
doors or shutters, for fear it should show through the
cracks.”
With this caution Knatchbull led the way downstairs to
the business premises, and, placing a light under the
counter, they set to work.
The large safe was first opened, and the contents —
watches, jewellery, and other valuables—transferred to
the bags with which they were provided.
A smaller safe yielded a similar store, «nd then they
turned their attention to the drawers and cases containing
silver and plated goods, packages of cutlery, pistols, nau-
tical instruments, ornaments, and other articles of value.
All the silver was secured, and a hasty selection made
of the choicest of the remaining things.
Several more bags were filled with this plunder and
conveyed to the mouth of the tunnel by which the mur-
derers had gained an entrance.
Knatchbull proceeded to turn the key of the cellar in
the lock in the saw* fashion in which he had opened the
door. . , ,
After a drinu. >i: the two men approached the
hole by which they had entered the cellar.
“ Are you there, Hopkins? ” whispered Knatchbull.
“ Yes,” was the reply.
.Kelly produced several stout cords about eight or ten
feet in length, and attached one to each bag.
Then, getting down on to his hands and knees, and
taking the loose end of one of the cords, be dived into
the hole, and on reaching the other side of the wall
beneath which it was tunnelled, he drew his bag of
plunder through after him.
Knatchbull followed his example.
The pair then returned, and the remaining bags were
disposed of in the same way.
By the same moans the stolen property was conveyed
into the cellar of the second empty house, and from there
again into the one below the premises tenanted by Hop-
kins.
It may be asked why this trouble to take the plunder
through the tunnel instead of through the front door.
The answer is—fear of the police, who, knowing Knatch-
bull well by sight, would have overhauled him at once.
They had several times “ had ” Sir Edward, as they called
him (after his brother the baronet), and looked upon him
as one of the most dangerous ticket-of-leave holders out,
game for anything—from robbing a church to murdering
the incumbent—if anything was to be gained by it.
The job was not yet over, however.
The three men returned to the cellar adjoining tlu»
pawnbroker’s premises and proceeded to push the earth
back into the cavity leading into Goodered’s cellar, striv-
ing to throw it as far forward as possible so as to fill up
the hole on the other side.
Kelly and Knatchbull then returned to the cellar under
the empty house adjoining the one in which the plunder
was now stowed.
Then they, working on their side, and Hopkins, who
had remained in the cellar next to GooJered’s, on the
other, removed all traces of the connection between the
two by filling up the hole and levelling and beating down
the earth.
Hopkins’s retreat was apparently cut off; but ibis
was pre-arranged.
Knatchbull then proceeded to pass into the cellar of the
house rented by him; and, with Kelly working on the
other side, this hole was filled up in a similar way.
Knatchbull then unfastened the shop-door, without
opening it.
Kelly, left in the empty house, undid the dilapidated
door, after first cautiously peering into the street to make
sure no one was about, slipped out, pulled it to after him,
and darted into Hopkins’s dwelling.
Hopkins, observing similar precautions, followed him.
The next msrning the watchman, who had been at tuo
back of the premises during the half-minute required to
accomplish this last feat, knocked at Goodered’s door to
rouse him, and help to take down the shutters before
going off duty.
There was no answer.
He knocked, and knocked again, without result, and,
getting anxious, started for the police-station.
He soon returned with a couple of policemen, and found
several early customers wondering at the shutters not
being taken down with the usual punctuality.
The police, after examining the outside of the building,
rudely pounded at the shop-door for some time, but with-
out result.
The back door was assailed in the sanu< way, but ao
signs of life appeared.
“There is something wrong here,” said one of them,
and, whilst he kept guard with the watchman, the other
returned to the station, and came back accompanied by the
inspector and a couple more constables.
A fresh pounding at the door followed, and then
the inspector gave orders to one of his men to fetch a
locksmith.
In a few minutes a locksmith, furnished with keys
and picklocks, made his appearance, and was ordered
by the inspector to open the door of the shop.
The lock soon yielded to his skill, but not the door,
which was barred on the other side.
The other door was then assailed, but with the same
result—that, too, having fastenings on the inside which
the locksmith could not reach.
The shutters were then tried, but it was found that
they were so well secured that they could not be opened.
The inspector saw that the only means of effecting
an entrance was to break down the doors.
An axe was procured, and, the back door having boon
broken in, an entrance was effected.


At a glance round the shop, the inspector saw that a
robbery had been committed, and, from the state of the
doors and shutters, he felt satisfied that the robbers could
not have entered the house from the street.
Witliout permitting anything to be disturbed, he ascen-
ded with twu of his men and the watchman to the sleep-
ing room above.
The stillness of death prevailed, and, not one of those
present did not instinctively divine that the shadow of a
greater crime than that of robbery brooded over that
silent dwelling.
On entering the housekeeper’s room the sight of her
corpse confirmed their worst suspicions.
Her head was almost split open by the blow from
Rnatchbull’s tomahawk.
The room of the old pawnbroker revealed a similar sight
of horror.
“Good Heavens!” exclaimed the inspector, “a more
atrocious murder I never was called to look upon. How
on earth did the murderers effect an entrance ?” he con-
tinued, addressing the watchman.
“ Certainly nut from the outside,” replied the man.
‘ The only thing I can think of is that they hid themselves
on the premises somewhere before they were closed.”
“But how could they have escaped without my seeing
them, and leave all the doors and windows locked and
bolted behind them?”
“Perhaps they are still hidden here,” suggested one of
the police.
“That's an idea,” said the inspector, and, after station-
ing a couple of men so that no one could leave the house
unseen, he proceeded to the attics and commenced a
thorough search.
The fact of the attic windows being fastened like those
in all the other rooms on the inride, proved that the
thieves had neither entered nor left the house by means
of the adjoining roofs.
Every nook that might have afforded a hiding-place,
cupboards, lofts, chimneys, were all peered into, without
result.
A similar search on the first floor proved equally
futile.
“ It’s evident that they have not only got off, but taken
a tremendous amount of property with them,” said the
inspector, “ but how they have managed it completely
gravels me.”
The door of the cellar now caught his eye.
“ Where does that lead to ?” he asked.
“ To the cellar,” answered the watchman.
The inspector darted forward but found the door locked
and the key on his side.
“If they came in this way I don’t see how they got
out,” he muttered.
On descending the steps, however, he began a careful
examination of the walls, and the heavy trap-door of the
side walls, which he found securely fastened on the
inside.
At length the loose and broken appearance of the surface
of tke ground close to one of the walls caught his atten-
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES
PICTURE
BOARDS.
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Adventure
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
Passion.
CHAPTER CXXXVL
THE FENCE.
(T» he continued.)
Woman.
The Beautiful Demon
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
On examining it he found that it was soft, uneven, and
had evidently been recently disturbed.
“Hullo! this looks like a clue,” he said, and at once sent
for spades and commenced to clear out the loose soil from
the tunnel leading into the adjoining cellar.
In a short space of time the loose soil was cleared from
the hastily-filled-up tunnel, and, passing through this,
they found themselves, as they had anticipated, in the
cellar of the empty house.
“This is how the entrance was made, and this is how
the murderers got off,” said the inspector.
A thorough search of the premises followed, but here
again they were baffled.
The earth filling up the second tunnel had been levelled
and beaten on the surface, in a way that defied detection
without the closest investigation.
Some loose soil from the first excavation, too, had been
scattered all over the surface of the cellar to add to the
deceit.
Search, however, revealed the absence of any fastening
to several of the windows and doors, and the conclusion
come to was that the murderers had escaped by means of
them into the street.
The only man not concerned was the watchman.
“ I don’t see how several men—for there must have been
several to carry off all that swag—could have got into the
street without my noticing them, especially if carrying
bundles,” he said to himself, and resolved to do a little
search on his own account.
Meanwhile the murderers had, after a few hours’ sleep,
been engaged in sorting out their plunder.
There was comparatively little ready-money, the bulk
of the articles secured being watches, plate, and jewellery.
It was necessary to find some method of disposing of
these.
Of course it would have been madness to have tried to
have pledged them or to have offered them for sale at any
respectable tradesmen’s.
OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




• It is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incomnatible With
the civilisation of the nineteenth centuiy. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known to. Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“It is notox-ious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of N kd Kellv's
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“The history of Ned K> ley and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in ibe recollection of tfct
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performanc s of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ N*l >
and ms Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.” — Press, July.
CHAPTER CXXXVI. — Continued.
The only plan was to get rid of them to a dealer in
stolen goods or “ fence ”
Of these there was certainly no lack
At this period a tx-affic in stolen goods, on the largest
possible scale, was carried on between England and Aus-
tralia, and firms of the highest outward respectability
were engaged in it.
Their dealings amounted to thousands and thousands of
pounds per annum.
There is a perfectly authenticated story of an English
officer quartered at Sydney recognising in the window of
a leading jeweller of the town a magnificent jewelled
comb, which had been stolen from his wife two years
before in London.
He at once entered the shop, and gave the jeweller the
choice of handing over the comb or of informing him of
the name of the parties by whom it had been consigned
to him from England.
The jeweller unhesitatingly accepted the former alter-
native.
Ho could not afford to betray his correspondents across
the herring-pond.
Knatchbull’s schooner had been actively employed in
landing packages of a character that it was not decired
should pass through the custom-house, and he was, there-
fore, well acquainted with most of the leading dealers in
stolen goods.
One of these, to whom he had made up his mind to
»pw}, was a Jew, passing under the name of Mendez.
He was a most mysterious being.
No one could exactly tell who or what he was, or where
he lived.
But any one of his numerous customers having need of
him, who knew how to set about it, had no difficulty in
finding him out.
Accompanied by Ned, Knatchbull walked forth in the
course of the forenoon.
A crowd was assembled in front of the old pawnbroker’s
house, for the news of the double murder had already
spread through the town.
Avoiding this gathering, the two proceeded along several
streets, till they reached a small watchmaker’s shop with
the name of Durlacher over the door.
They entered.
A stout, round-shouldered, heavily-built man, with a
pale face, huge spectacles, and a mass of hay-coloured hair
and beard, was sitting behind the counter, fitting a glass
into a watch for a customer.
On the walls a number of clocks of all shapes and sizes
were ticking away.
Conspicuous amongst them were several German cuckoo-
tlocks.
On one of these Knatchbull fixed his eye.
No sooner had the customer left the shop, than the
watchmaker began to fumble in a drawer in the counter.
Directly he did so a little bird popped out of the front
of one of the clocks, and his cry of “cuckoo ” sounded.
“ Have you any .watch-keys in stock?” asked Knatch-
“ Yaas,” was the answer.
“ I want a large one —a ver>. large one.”
The watchmaker stepped into a little glass den at one
end of the shop, and began to look for the article re-
quired.
“Silver-gilt,” continued Knatchbull, his eyes all the
while being fixed on the row of clacks on the wall.
From the front of one of these amther bird popped
forth, and the cry of “ cuckoo ” sounded twice.
The hands of the clock began to revolve suddenly over
the dial, and it struck ten.
The watchmaker came forward with a tray of keys, and
Knatchbull, after selecting and paying for one, left the
shop with Kelly, who was in a state of bewilderment.
“ What did you want to go in there for? ” asked the
bushranger.
“To settle about getting rid of the swag,” was the
reply.
“ Then why the devil didn’t you do it? ”
“ I have done it.”
“ What do you mean ? ”
“I asked him if he had any watch-keys in stock.”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, that might mean I wanted a key; but it also
meant that I had some stolen goods to dispose of.”
“ I see.”
“ 1 told him a large silver-gilt key, which meant a lot
of gold and silver.”
“That’s all blessed fine, but how and when and where
are the things to be got rid of? ”
“ At a crib in Pitt-street, at ten o’clock the night after
to-morrow.”
“ But he never said that.”
“ No, but the clock did.”
“ What do you mean? ”
“ Why, directly we went in I spotted there was 3 eua-
tomer. If it had been safe to speak before him the cuckoo
on the first clock you heard would have popped out and
sung. But it didn’t, so 1 held my tongue till he was gone,
and it gave the signal all was clear.”
“ But why didn’t you speak out then ?”
“ Because you were with me, and, not knowing you, lie
might have refused to answer; so 1 spoke about the watch-
key.”
“ Well, but how do you know when and where he will
buy the swag?”
“ The second clock is a house in Pitt-street, two cries
of ‘cuckoo’ mean the night after to-morrow; and ten
o’clock, striking the time.”
“ But, if it had net suited us, what then?”
“ Why, I should have said ‘ this key won’t fit; can you
get me one by say eight o’clock to-morrow?’ or whatever
hour I wanted, and so on.”
“ All that’s infernally artful. Of course the beggar never
says a word to compromise himself, and you t' swear to
what the clocks mean if you want to peach. Do you know
how he works it ?”
“ Oh, there’s some system of wires and springs, aod
electricity, I believe, but, of course, he keeps all thati
dark as possible.”


Pitt-street was a thoroughfare running parallel to the
one in which Durlacher’s shop was situate.
The tenement inhabited by the old Jew Mendez was a
tumble-down sort of a dwelling of one storey high, stand-
ing back some distance from the road, and having a toler-
ably spacious garden in front of it.
It was a relic of the early days, when many homes in
the main streets were surrounded by a large patch of
garden-ground, which has since, in most cases, been re-
sold, at an enormous profit, for building upon.
But Mendez had firmly refused to part with his garden,
or to rebuild his house on a larger scale, or let it.
Ostensibly he was a kind of pedlar, and was frequently
accusto jjed to be absent for weeks together.
On euca occasions his house would be closely shut up
and left uninhabited.
Indeed he was not nominally at home more than a few
weeks in the year, and very few of his neighbours had ever
done more than catch a glimpse of him.
These described him as a tall old fellow, with a grey
beard, usually wearing a long gabardine-like garment.
But it was a strange thing that, even when Mendez was
supposed to be up country peddling, a man who knew the
right way to work could always manage to see him by
giving due notice to Durlacher.
At half-past nine on the night set apart for the inter-
view between the receiver and the thieves, darkness and
solitude reigned in the Jew’s dwelling.
It was a strongly-built house, the windows being all
secured by iron bars.
The back premises extended to the boundary-wall di-
viding it from the yard attached to the house occupied in
the parallel street by Durlacher,
At the end of this yard was a deserted shed filled with
lumber
As the clock tolled the half-hour, a figure glided along
the yard and entered this shed, the door of which it care-
fully closed after it.
Five minutes later a creaking sourtd was heard in the
cellar running under the Jew’s house.
A portion of the avail savung aside, revealing a dark
opening, through which stepped a figure, bearing a lantern
in its hand with the bull’s-eye almost closed.
Traversing the cellar, it approached a flight of steps, at
the summit of avhich was a heavy trap-door securely
bolted on the inside.
Kemoving the bolts and lifting the trap, the stranger
stepped into a large room on the ground-floor, avhich was
the only one, as already noted.
The aspect of this room was peculiar—not to say
striking.
It was divided into two by a massive counter running
right across it.
From this counter several stout wooden uprights ran
up to the ceiling, and the spaces between them avero filled
with a strong network of brass avire.
In two places, however, the wire was arranged so as to
leave a pigeonhole-shaped opening like that in a railway
booking-office, about eighteen inches by fifteen.
On the further side of the counter there was simply a
blank space, the only furniture of avhich consisted of a
bench fastened against the avail.
The windoaa r , avhich was on this side, avas not only de-
fended by iron bars and thick and strongly-secured
shutters, but by a species of padded mattress fixed over
its whole surface, and the object of avhich avas evidently
to deaden sound. . .
On the other side of the counter was an iron safe, a
tall desk, a large wardrobe with two upright avmgs, and an
armchair. , , .
The figure that had entered the room proceeded to
light a couple of lamps fitted with semi-circular reflectors.
It placed these on the counter so that the light illumined
the inner half of the room. . ■,
By this light the stranger stood revealed as the . toiid,
sleepy-looking German watchmaker.
The next act performed by this individual was to re-
move his huge goggles and reveal a pair of jet-black,
piercing eyes strangely at variance with his lymphatia
aspect and fair hair and beard.
A single twist of the hand, however, removed them,
and displayed a closely-cropped head of jet black hair.
He then removed his coat and waistcoat, which wera
thickly and heavily wadded and swung open one of the
wings ot the wardrobe, disclosing a recess filled up with
a washing apparatus.
After sluicing his face with water, he turned round,
and instead of a hulking, clumsily built, fair-haired,
pasty-faced German, stood revealed as a square-shoul-
dered, upright fellow of about forty, with sparkling black
eyes, a dark complexion, and keen features of a Jewish
type.
His next step was to open the other wing, the inside
of the door of which was lined with looking-glass, and
which contained a number of shelves fitted up with all
the requisites for what is known in theatrical parlance as
“ making up.”
He took a wig representing a bald forehead, fringed
with scanty whisps of grey hair, and a long grey beard,
and fitted these on.
A pair of bushy grey eyebrows were next attached.
Then, by the liberal application of paint, his com-
plexion was converted to a sallow parchment-tint, and his
countenance scored with innumerable lines and wrinklen
He looked a man of seventy at least, and when he as-
sumed a long grey diessing-gown, and bent his back,
rounded his shoulders, and hollowed his chest—the decep-
tion was perfect.
The various traces of this metamorphosis having been
hidden away, Mendez unlocked the safe and took from it
a couple of pairs of scales, weights, files, nippers, bottles
of acid, and sundry other appliances, and ranged them
on the counter together with a brace of pistols.
Then taking from his bag, he had brought with him a
bundle of notes and some coin, he put them in a kind of
till, turned the lamp* so that the reilectors cast the light
towards the outer side of the room, drew up his armchair,
sat down in it, and waited.
At that moment three men were staggering dawn the
street.
They were dressed as sailors, and each bore on their
backs one of those canvas bags in which Jack is accus-
tomed to convey his portable property about when on
shore.
But either the men were very tired, or the bags were
more than usually heavy, for the three lurched and
siiiiubled along avith apparent difficulty.
At last they arriwed opposite Mendez’s house.
After glancing around to make sure that no one was
paying attention to their movements, they entmed the
garden.
At the front door they halted.
One of them, after groping about for some time, found
a avire, which he pulled twice.
The door opened, and the three men entered.
They found themselves in utter darkness, and the next
moment the door closed behind them.
“ Well, I’m blowed!” grumbled one of them, avho was
no other than Ned Kelly, “ but I don’t like this game.”
“ It’s all right,” answered Knatchbull.
The three were in a narrow passage, as Kelly could tell
by tne feel of the avails.
Who ish dere?” suddenly demanded a snuffling voic»
at some little distance. , ~
“ It’s me ; Fitch and two pals,” answered Knatchbull. _
“Very well. You know de rules. Vun at a time, if
you pieash.” . ,
A door on their right opened a feav inches.
Taking his bag in his hand, and dragging it after him,
Knatchbull squeezed through the opening, which was im-
mediately closed behind him.
Ned could hear the murmur of voices inside.


At last, after he had been for some time growing im-
patient, the door again opened, and Knatchbull slipped
out.
“ Who is de nexsht?” enquired the voice.
“Here, curse it! you’d better go, Ned,” said Knatch-
bull. “ and try il you can make any better terms for your
bagful with the old hunks than I have.”
Kelly slipped through the door, which was opened as
before, and found himself in the outer half of the room
already described.
The' door which he found was worked by a system of
rods and levers from within the grating.
He advanced towards the counter, and found himself
confronted by Mendez, whose face, however, remained in
the shade whilst the full glare of the light was turned to-
wards the visitor.
“ You will excushe all dis trouble,” said the Jew, with
an apologetic air. “lam a poor, weak old man, very
ill and feeble, and I am very frightened of rough
people.’’
The voice in which he spoke was an admirable imitation
of the quavering tones of extreme old age.
“All right, mate,” growled Ned.
“ Yell, vot have you to sell?” enquired th® Jew.
Ned hoisted his sack on to the counter, and displayed
the contents to the other.
“Posh dem in vun by vun,” said Mendez, taking his
place at one of the wickets already mentioned.
One by one he took the articles of plate and jewellery
handed in by Ned, and scrutinised each in rapid succes-
sion.
When he appeared in doubt as to the genuineness of
any one of them, he tested it with a file and acid, and in
the same way removed several of the stones from their
settings and examined and weighed them apart.
Though this work was quickly done, it was done most
conscientiously, yet all the while his eye never left Ned,
whom he watched like a cat.
After weighing a few of the things, he took a certain
sum in notes and gold from the till, and pushed it towards
Kelly.
“ What’s this ?” growled the latter.
“ Yun hundred and dirty poundsh,” was the reply.
“ Here, but dang it all, the swag's worth a blessed sight
more than that. There’s a good twelve hundred pounds’
w orth of stuff, if there’s a penny, or I’m a Dutchman.”
“ But dere io de rishk.”
44 Riflk be blowed!”
“ Oh, very veil. If you vant to blow de rishk, you
*nau open one shop in Sydney, and sell de goots acrosh
counter, and den perhapsh you vould get de twelve
tounared poundsh and perhaps not. Only it shtriketh me
vmi vouid not only blow de rishk, but blow de gaff ash
well.”
And he chuckled grimly.
“ Come now, spring something more.”
“ Your friend will have told you dat I have only one
prishe. Take it or leave it.”
Knatchbull had, indeed, assured Ned of this before-
hand, and the bushranger retired, growling like a bear
with a rore head.
Hopkins was admitted in turn, and after an interval
rejoined the others in the passage.
Then the outer door was opened by the same invisible
means, and the three passed out into the garden.
On comparing notes the three found that the total sum
they had received was a little over four hundred pounds.
“Curse it all!” roared Ned; “why there was a good
three thousand pounds’ worth of stuff. By Gosh ! I don’t
wonder that the blasted old babcon keeps behind a wire
cage. 1 felt blessedly inclined to try and tear his old
heart out I '
“ It is riling, ’ said ..natchbull; “ but there is no other
way of getting nd of the stuff hut through those fellows,
and they know very well whes© they" have the pull
Of UJ
“ He iiiust be rich at that game,” said Kelly.
“ Net a doubt of it. 1 expect he has no end of coin
invested.”
“Do you think he it stowed away ”
“ No, no; he’s too sharp for that.”
“ But he must always have a tidy stock of things on
hand, not to mention the coin to do a deal with.”
Knatchbull laughed.
“ I believe you are hankering co have a go in
him ? ”
“Do you feel that way inclined?” asked the bush-
ranger.
“ No, no ; he’s a bit too useful—and knows too much,”
he added to himself, and then said aloud, “ But you? ”
“Oh, I,” said Kelly, “I’m blowcd if I’ll meddle with
going after watches and spoons again. Give me a digger
with a belt full of dust, or a squatter with a pocket-book
full of notes. That’s my style, and I ain't going to depart
from it.”
Nevertheless, Kelly separated from his comrades in . n
hour’s time, under pretext of an appointment with a
friend.
But instead of going where they thought, Ned was
hurrying back to the house of Hopkins, muttering as he
went—
“ I’ve a good four hours before me, and I’ll not sleep
to-night till I’ve put matters straight with that Jewish
ape, who thinks ho has got the better of Ned Kelly! ”
CHAPTER CXXXVII.
DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.
It was shortly after midnight and Mendez or Durlacher
was peacefully sleeping the sleep of the just in a room
over the watchmaker’s shop.
After the departure of the three robbers he had reassumed
the garb of the watchmaker, cleared away the scales and
other paraphernalia, and stowed the articles purchased
from his late visitors in a spot prepared for their reception.
Then be had returned to his dwelling, eaten a hearty
supper of fried fish and salted cucumbers, sopped up by
just a thimbleful of rum and shrub, and had turned in.
As he slumbered a little alarum suddenly rang out above
his head.
He started up at once.
“ Ah! someone trying the house. 1 had my idea it
would be so,” he muttered.
Hastily striking a light he glanced at the particular
alarum which had sounded.
“So, so,” he muttered, softly, “one of these fellows
come back, I’ll wager. I’ll read him a lesson he won’t
forget in a hurry.”
Hastily dressing himself he passed out of the back door,
traversed the yard, entered the street at the end, and a
few minutes later had noiselessly arrived at the room
where the bargain had been concluded.
Noiselessly cocking a brace of pistols, with which he had
come provided, he stood still and listened in the darkness,
for he kept his lantern darkened.
Straining his ears he could catch a low grating sound.
“ They are cutting through the window bars,” he thought.
“The idiots, they do not know that even a hand cannot
be laid on shutter or door without warning me.”
The faint grating sound ceased.
Then came a faint click and then another.
“Two burs sawn half through, and then snapped,"
thought Mendez.
A fresh noise of a grinding character followed.
It was that of a centre-bit at work on the shutter.
ihe ripping sound of a knife cutting away the mattress
followed.
Then Mendez, whose ears were wonderfully sharpened,
could make out that a hand had been Hirust through the
opening, and was groping for the bolts of the shutter.
“ The fellow must ha /e had a wonderfully sharp eye to
have spotted the defences so well,” thought the Jew
“ Upon my word I want to see him.”


Another hole was cut in the same way, so as to enable
the unseen burglar to reach the second bolt.
When this was drawn the shutter was swung gently in-
wards, for there were no casements to the window of the
room.
A huge figure slipped across the window-sill, pushed the
shutter carefully to behind it, and then, facing round,
began to withdraw the slide of a bull’s-eye lantern.
“ Very neatly done,” said Mendez, in clear, ringing
tones, very different from those in which he had hitherto
spoken.
As he spoke he, in turn, drew the slide of his lantern
aside and flashed the light full on the burglar, covering
him with his pistol at the same time.
It was Ned Kelly.
Quick as thought Ned drew a pistol and fired in the
direction of the voice and light.
But another report rang out simultaneously with his
own and Kelly, after turning half-round, dropped heavily
to the ground.
There was a pause.
Mendez kept the light of his lantern turned on the
prostrate form of the burglar, but the latter never once
stirred after his fall.
Then the receiver of stolen goods, advancing to one end
of the counter, drew a bolt and pressed a spring.
A section of the counter swung inward on hinges, and
Mendez, diving beneath the grating, passed through the
opening with his lantern in one hand and his second pistol
in the other.
Arriving close to the prostrate figure, he listened again,
with a view of detecting if anyone without had been
startled by the pistol shot.
There were, however, no signs of this.
Then, stooping down, he turned Kelly over.
The bushranger presented a most ghastly spectacle.
The bullet had struck him on the head, and his face
was smothered in the blood that had flowed from his
wound.
“ I did not want to fire,” muttered Mendez, “ but there
was no choice. The question now is, what the deuce lam
to do with this carrion. That is just the awkward part of
the question.”
After thinking a few minutes, he took a large bag, with
which he noticed Ned had come provided, and tied it
round the corpse’s head, with a view of stopping the flow
of blood on to the floor as far as possible.
Then, taking Kelly by the legs, he dragged him through
the opening in the counter, closed this, and, after some
difficulty, succeeded in transporting the dead body, as he
deemed it, to the cellar. ... „
“ 1 haven’t time to settle what to do with it just now,
he thought, and. passing through the aperture in the wall,
he ascended a flight of steps leading to a trap-door, giving
access to the shed at the end of Durlacher s yard, and
again sought his bed.
For some time after the departure of the Jew Kelly re-
mained motionless. ,
The truth was that the bullet, which, after striking the
skull at an oblique angle, had glanced from the bone,
and merely cut a long and deep gash in the scalp, had
stunned him.
He had partly recovered consciousness when Mendez
turned him over, but resolved on playing ’possum to the
Vst of his ability. , „ , ,
He was dimly aware of his head being muffled, and then
became partly insensible again.
When he came to himself, he was lying on his back on
what seemed to be soft sand.
His head was still partly muffled up, and he could not
very well see or hear anything.
He waited for some time, listening to the best of his
ability. . . . ,•
AU was quiet, and at length be ventured to raise his
hand and ihe bag.
Then he Et;Rna*sed.. with some difficulty, for his head
was aching and dizzy, and he was faint from the loss of
blood, to raise himself in a sitting position.
He pulled out his handkerchief, and bound it tightl/
round his wounded head.
After which he succeeded in stagger, ng to his feet, an{
examined the place in which he found himself, by the ai<
of some matches and a taper.
It was a large, dry cellar, with a soft sandy floor and
brick walls.
A number of barrels and boxes of various shapes and
sizes were scattered about it.
Ned had still his tools about him, and, after tapping
the barrels until he discovered a full one, be speedily
broached it with his centre bit.
A stream of spirits rewarded his exertions, and, afteb
swallowing & little, caught in the hollow of his hands, he
felt better.
After bunging up the barrel, he began to cast his eye*
about in search of some way to escape from the cellar.
The only entrance he could discover was by the flight
of steps leading to the trap down which he had been
brought by Mendez.
Ascending the steps, he examined the trap-door, and
found that it was secured by some catch that he was un-
able to fathom the secret of.
He resolved, therefore, to bore a hole with the centre -
bit, and then cut away the wood with the saw.
The steps were awkward to work on, and he set to work
to form a more commodious piatforra.
In order to do this he shifted several of the boxes and
barrels.
On moving one of the latter his eye noticed a gleam ol
metal, and the next minute his toe had caught in a ring
partly buried in the sand.
Stooping down he found that it was the ring of another
trap.
In the hope that this might reveal some other mode of
egress, he lifted it.
A square hole was revealed, and on holding the taper
over it, the light was reflected back by a host of sparkling
objects, amongst which Ned recognised the spoil they had
disposed of that night.
It was one of Mendez’s temporary hiding-places for
valuables awaiting shipment.
It was a fearful job for Ned to stoop his wounded head
over the hole, for the pain caused by the of blood
upwards every time he leant forward was terrible.
Hub forgetting everything, even the fac of the peril in
which he found himself, in his greed for gold, ignoring
blin fly the circumstance that Mendez might return at any
moment, and that every second’s delay might lessen his
prospect of escape, he did not rest till he had completely
emptied the cavity.
This done, he paused a little to recover himself.
The sight of all this wealth became, however, simply
maddening, when he reflected suddenly that it would be
impossible to carry it all away.
He began rapidly to sort it over, selecting from tha
glittering mass only the smaller and more valuable articles,
such as watches and articles of jewellery.
As there were a number of these, in addition to those
he and his companions had brought, he managed to make
a parcel less bulky, though of almost equal value, to those
they had disposed of so cheaply.
He stowed this away in the bag, and then, changing his
idea about the trap, shifted his platform, and set about
attacking the boards which formed the ceiling of the cellar
near the walk
Thoroughly convinced that Kelly had been sent to his
last account, the Jew felt altogether easier in his mind
from the belief that one at least of the evidences of his
receivership of stolen property was out of the way.
Full of this and other thoughts ho retired to rest (?)
after having hauled Kelly into the cellar, and closed the
door leading thereto.
He even thought of searching Kelly before he retied.


Had he done so, the history of Ned might have been pre-
maturely ended.
ilis mind was so agitated that he forgot, when closing
the door to the cellar to shoot the bolt; and it was not
until Kelly had bored a hole in its vicinity to enable him
to draw back the bolt, that he discovered the omission,
and that the door was simply on the latch, and that a good
push from the shoulder would have opened the path to
his release.
Overjoyed at the discovery, he quickly made his way
out of the house, vowing to be the death of Mendez.
It was broad daylight, however, by the time he emerged
from the window by which he had entered, and went
staggering down the garden.
Fortunately for him, Mendez had neglected to re-fix the
alarum communicating with the window in question.
The sight of an apparently drunken sailor staggering
along, with a broken head and a decided air of having
been tip all night, was too common a one in Sydney to
excite attention, »d Kelly reached Hopkins's iu-use un-
molested.
Neither of the other two had returned,
Ned set about patching up bis broken sxull, and then,
.browing himself on to a bed, fell into a sleep that was
only broken by the arrival of his companions.
When asked how he came in that plight, ho contented
himself by spinning a yarn concerning a row he had got
into in the s’.rcet, resolving to keep his expedition a secret
for the present.
The bag he had carefully hidden away.
As for Mendez, he postponed his visit to the cellar till
the following night, when great was his horror to find
the supposed dead man had not only come to life, but
had carried off an amolint of plunder the loss of which
made the Jew almost frantic.
CHAPTER CXXXYIII.
FRIENDS IN THE ENEMY’S CAMP.
D preacher, alias Mendez, gave a howl like that of a
trapped wild beast when he realised the loss that had be-
fallen him.
His rage and anguish were unbounded.
Sbylock suffered a great deal at the loss of his ducats
■and his daughter, but it is to be questioned whether
Mendez did not suffer more at the loss of the money alone.
Moreover, he felt a twofold grievance against the
•robber.
In the first place, it was abominable, unnatural, detest-
able that he should have been robbed by one of a sot of
men whom he was continually in the habit of obliging, by
buying stolen goods of them at only seventy-five percent,
below their value.
And, in the second, it waa the uukindest cut of all to
find he had been bested by a man whom he flattered
himself he had so thoroughly got the better of as Ned.
Under ordinary circumstances, he would not have
dreamed of betraying a customer, no matter what reward
might have been offered by the police authorities.
But in this case he felt justified in using every effort to
bring a villain who had pillaged his benefactor, as he con-
sidered himself, to justice.
He was. however, ignoi-ant of one very important fact,
and that was Ned’s name, for he had never seen him before
the bushranger had visited him in company with Knatch-
bull.
And at the same time he felt it would be rather a tick-
lish job to bring the matter directly under the notice of
the police, who would be certain to make some very awk-
ward enquiries as to the circumstances of his encounter
with the burglar.
No, it would not do to say a word of that.
If his customers once learnt he had betrayed one of them,
farewell to all future dealings.
Perhaps to life, for they might take it into their heads
io avenge such a breach of confidence with a knife-blade
•r a bullet.
Still he might do something indirectly.
He had heard of the burglary and murder at ftoodered’g,
and had divined that the goods offered to him by Ned an<
his accomplices had been plundered from the haplest
pawnbroker's.
lie resolved, therefore, to see if by any means the police
could be quietly and unsuspiciously put upon the sight
track, careless whether he involved Knatchbull and Hop-
kins in the punishment he wished to have meted out to
their companion.
Meanwhile, Kelly had been somewhat troubled as to
what he was to do with the plunder he had carried off
from the receiver’s.
As he had won it single-handed, he had come to the
conclusion that he alone was entitled to its proceeds.
Bub for the time he was at a loss to whom to dispose
of it with safety.
Accordingly he resolved to conceal it in a natural hiding-
place he had noted in the rocks near the harbour.
Accordingly he hired a boat in the course of the after-
noon, and managed to hide the treasure without exciting
the suspicion of his companions, both of whom were bent
on continuing the spree they had commenced overnight.
With his wounded head, Kelly was wise enough to see
that a quiet life would be the best he could lead for a week
or so.
Accordingly he took up his quarters with a widow who
let lodgings at a short distance out of the town, and con-
fined his excursions to an occasional visit to the tavern
where his sister Kate was acting as barmaid.
Through her ho was able to learn all the latest gossip,
most of which turned on the terrible tragedy in which he
had been engaged.
He was careful to keep the part he had taken in it a
secret, even from Kate.
Knatchwull had started on a cruise, and, although Men-
dez was on the watch, he had failed as yet to run against
the man who had despoiled him.
“ I’ve a bit of news for you, Ned,” said Kate to him one
evening when he called in.
“ What is it ?”
“ The new head of the police is back.”
“ I could have told you that. lie turned up in Sydney
yesterday.”
“Ah! but he’s been here this morning.”
« What’s he like ?”
“Oh! awfully handsome, and no end of a swell. Almost
as tall as you, straight as a ramrod, with a splendid raous
tache, and the whitest hand you ever saw in your life,”
“Um ! I reckon he’d better not try to clap those wLit<
hands on mo, or he'll run a precious good chance of hav-
ing them snapped off by the wrists,” said Ned, with a lose
of his head and a jerk back of his shoulders that meant
that he was not over pleased at hearing bis as yet unknown
foe thus favourably spoken of.
“ Perhaps not, but, by the look of his eye, he’s the boy
to try it, or anything besides.”
“What! I suppose he’s beeu telling you some foolery
or other, eh ?”
“ Oh, you need not get in a flutter. He’s the sort ol
man that has a pleasant word for any girl he comes across,
but don’t you suppose Pm going to listen to any foolery."
“ I should hope not.”
“ Only, Ned, you might just remember one thing, that
the more he says to me. the more I may have to tell you.”
“ That’s true enough. It’s a capital idea. Play up at
him all you can, Kate, get all the information you can out
of him, and between us we’ll lead him such a devil’s dance
as will make him with himself back in England before a
month’s out. That’s the game, my girl,”
“ Well, I can’t qaite promise as mnah as that, but you
may be sure I will try.”
It was quite true that Kate Kelly had found Kennetti
Rothsay a remarkably agreeable, not to say fascinating,
individual, during the short visit he had paid that morn*
ing to the bar over which she presided.


But she was not the only one who entertained similai
opinions by a long way.
During his expedition after Ned on the Upper Murray,
Kenneth had halted at the abandoned station where the
bushranger had so successfully defied the police, and had
seen the girl who had aided him in this scheme. To her,
also, thedashing ex light-cavalrymanhad done his best to
render himself agreeable, though it is sad to relate that
the innate perverseness of the convict’s daughter led her
to compare him unfavourably with the bushranger, over
whose slumbers she had so tenderly watched.
Kenneth, returning from his fruitless chase, aad been
startled first with the news of Ned’s exploit at the Canary
Bird, and, secondly, with the horrible intelligence of the
murder of Goodered
A crime like the latter occurring in a city under his
charge was, he felt, a serious blow to him, and he felt
bound to spare no possible exertion to bring its perpetra-
tors to justice.
He had ridden a few miles out of the city one evening
and was reiuraing in somewhat pensive mood, at a foot-
pace, with his reins held loosely in his hand.
It was getting almost dusk, when he caught sight of a
female figure some distance ahead.
There are some men who cannot see a woman walking
along in front of them without being seized with an irre-
pressible wish to see her face.
The result is very often disappointing, out they persevere
none the less.
Kenneth could not help scanning the fair unknown, and
quickening his pace to overtake.
Hecould make outatall elastic figure splendid shoulders,
clean ankles, and a swinging, supple gait.
It only remained to be seen if the face corresponded
with the decidedly promising outline.
Someone else, however, was bout on a similar investi-
gation.
A fellow of a somewhat shabby appearance who had
been sitting by the roadside had risen at the girl’s
approach, and had made some remark which Kenneth
could not catch.
Neither could he make out the answer, which was evi-
dently a sharp one.
The fellow, however, was clearly not to be shaken
off easily, and he shambled alongside the girl, and con-
tinued to address her.
To tell the truth, the conversation had run something
as follows:
“What, Carroty Jess! you back again? Why, what
brings you here, my girl?”
“ Nothing that concerns you, Joe Hubbard.”
“ Oh, we’re very high and mighty since we’ve been in
the country for the benefit of our blooming health ! ’
“Just mind your own business. I don’t want anything
to do with the likes of you.”
“ The likes of me ! I am good enough company for
the daughter of an old lag any day. What d’ye mean by
all your stuck-up airs? I’m not going to put up with it.”
“Look here,” said the girl, as he approached her, “if
you lay a finger on me, s’elp me ! I’ll set my ten command-
ments in your face, and mark you so that none of your
pals will know you.”
“ Oh, that be Mowed for a tale! Come, give us a kiss
for old friendship.”
Whether the girl haa caught sight of the horseman
behind her or whether the hoofs of his steed had
apprised her of his approach is doubtful, but it is certain
♦hat this last remark of Joe Hubbard’s led her to utter
a very nicely-modulated melodramatic scream that brought
Kenneth up alongside her in double-quick time.
Meanwhile Mr. Joe Hubbard, exceedingly disgusted at
what he considered a most ridiculous display of prudery
on the part of a young lady who, during their former
acquaintance, had been distinguished by anything except
an excess of that quality, resolved —in his own words to
“take th 3 blooming nonsense out of her.”
With this view, he caught her vMry roughly round the
waist, and was striving for the kiss he had spoken of.
But the girl continued to struggle and scream with sur-
prising earnestness and not too much noise.
His lips had just touched hers when he received a
gentle tap on the head with the butt-end of his riding-
crop that caused him for a moment to imagine that one
star had fallen on his head and that thirty thousand more
were dancing before his eyes.
Only for a moment, however, for the next he was lying
at full length in the road.
And the young la iy was enthusiastically clasping the
hand that held the riding-crop.
“ Oh, sir! how can I thank you?” she exclaimed, look-
ing up with a most candid and dove-like expression to hei
deliverer.
‘What!” cried Kenneth, who, with a soldier’s trained
memory for faces, recognised her at once. “My little
beauty of the Murray!”
“ Dear me, Mr.—ah ! Captain Rothsay, is it you?”
“Myself. But what, in the name of wonder, brings you
to Sydney?”
Jess proceeded to explain at length.
She had been so terribly frightened by her adventure
with Kelly that she no longer dared stay at the station.
She had, therefore, started off to Sydney, where she
hoped to get some place.
She had come in a drag, which had broken down late
one afternoon, and had resolved to hurry on ou foot to
reach the city before nightfall.
All of which in reality meant that she had guessed Ned
Kelly would make for Sydney, and was determined to see
him again.
Kenneth gazed on her with admiration.
It was a failing of his that he always did gaze on pretty
girls with admiration.
“ You want a place ?” he said.
« Yes.”
Probably if any disinterested person had asked Kenneth
Rothsay when he started for his ride that afternoon if:
he knew of any vacant situation for a young woman, he
would probably have answered “No,” and with truth.
But, looking at Jess, it suddenly occurred to-him that
he had heard of a vacant situation.
He was living with a Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, since ho
had not yet had the leisure to start an establishment for
himself, and he felt certain he had heard Mrs. Fielding
express a desire for a nurse, or a governess, or a cook, or
a housemaid—he was not quite sure which—a day or two
before.
Here was a chance for Jess.
If Jess had been a dowdy looking weneh it is probable
that the remembrance of this chance would not have
occurred to him, but he liked to sec pretty faces about
him ; aud, accordingly, he told the girl of the vacancy.
It was, he now recollected, a nursemaid.
He also mentioned that he was living in the same house
as the lady who wanted the domestic in question.
And, after some further conversation as they strolled
along, he at last felt bound to quicken his pace and leave
her,°for they were entering the outskirts of the city, and
Sydney has its scandalmongers like every other spot where
men do congregate.
As for Mr. Joe Hubbard, both had forgotten him, and
he lay insensible till a passing teamster, finding he was in
the way of the traffic, considerately drew him to the sida
of the road, and, after emptying his pockets, left him there
to come to or not as it pleased him.
He came to, with a bump on his head like an ostrich-
cog, and then managed to stagger home.
Jess, on reaching the city, had gone straight
to a venerable matron who had on more than one occasion
befriended her.
This estimable old lay furnished her, after due consider-
ation, not only with a suitaMe outfit but with three written
testimonials of the highest character.


Armed with these, she went to Mrs. Fielding, and one
of the testimonials, purporting to be signed by an eminent
clergyman, impressed the good lady so favourably that she
engaged the girl at once, despite her good looks.
Servants with good characters were scarce, and, with the
head of the police staying at her house, it was impossible
to be too particular.
But what was better than all was, that despite her good
looks the girl evidently shunned, rather than courted,
observation.
CHAPTER CXXXIX.
A TRAP.
Mendez found his task a more difficult one than he had
anticipated.
Knatchbull being away, he had no chance of questioning
him, and when he got hold of Hopkins and sounded him
he found to his disgust that the latter either would not or
could not give him any information as to the man who had
been their companion on the night of the burglary.
Chance, however, at last did more for him than all his
scheming had been able to bring about.
In the rather flashy get-up of the well-to-do middle
Israelite of sporting tastes, he had been of late a constant
visito r to hotel bars, gaming rooms, sporting publics, and
the like, where he thought there might be a chance of
running against the man who had robbed him.
Walking down one of the main thoroughfares during a
breezy afternoon he saw the hat of a tall, broad-shouldered
individual, striding along a few paces in front of him,
carried off and whirled away.
The stranger turned with an oath to catch it.
Mendez noticed that one side of his head was done up
with strips of sticking-plaister.
This, with the fact of the man’s height and bulk, served
to identify him r despite his change of dress and sundry
other attempts at disguise.
Mendez was almost certain that he had the man whom
he had seen but twice, and then in the dress of a sailor,
before him.
But it was necessary to make sure of this.
He resolved to follow him quietly, _
Ned Kelly—for the unknown was indeed he—had just
paid his usual visit to Kate and was now on his way home-
ward.
As he strolled carelessly along the fancy took him to
proceed by a roundabout route which, as chance would
have it, led him past Mrs. Fielding’s.
Just inside the fence stood a girl, in whom he had no
dilliculty in recognising Jess, with a couple of young
children playing about her.
For the moment she did not recognise him, and, when
he halted, leant his elbows on the fence and began to pass
the time of day in a pleasant manner, put on an air of scorn
and began to walk away, which said plainly enough as
words that she was not going to have anything to do with
loafers.
Ned saw she did not know him, and quickly called out
in low but distinct tones—
“Jess, don’t you know me? Don’t you remember the
night in the hut on the Murray ?”
The girl started.
“ I’m Ned, you know.”
She did, and a wave of colour swept over her face as she
came back to the fence.
Their conversation was brisk and animated.
“ I cannot stay any longer,” she said, at last, “ or these
kids will get talking to their mother about it But I will
meet you later on.”
“When?”
•* I will let you know.”
“ How? H
“ Where are you living?”
Ned informed her of this and also of the alias under
which, he was known, and she promised to communicate
with him.
Neither of the two paid much attention to the some-
what stylishly-dressed Jewish gentleman who had found
it necessary to sit down on a pile of lumber at a short dis-
tance and remove his shoe in order to shake out a pebble
that had got into it, and who continued to sit there till
Ned moved off.
Nor did they pay much attention to a loafer coming
along in the opposite direction, who pau, to look at Joss
as she moved up towards the house with * T and
growled out something that was certainly njt a blessing.
The Jew heard him, however, and said—
“ Who’s that girl, and what makes you swear at her? '
The fellow paused, and the answer which rose to the
top of his tongue was
“What the devil’s that to you, you blooming
Sheeney? ”
But he thought better of it, and said
“ A blessed bit of stuck-up impertinence who got me \
broken head the other night.”
“Ah ! how was that?”
“ Oh, no matter. I’ll be even with her.”
“ But who is she ?”
“Who is she? A fine lot to bo giving herself airs
She’s the daughter of a wretched old swindler who keeps
a grog-shop somewhere up country, and since she made
Sydney too hot to hold her she’s been stopping with
him.”
“ But what’s she doing here ?”
“ Blest if I know—playing the correct and proper.
Though I’ve known the time when ”
Here Mr. Joseph Hubbard—for it was he—gave some
details respecting Jess’s early career which were not of a
particularly edifying character.
Perhaps, if it had not been for his indignation, he
would not have been so communicative to a perfect
stranger.
Mendez’s shrewd mind guessed there was something to
be made out of the connection with the man he was fol
lowing and the girl.”
He glanced after Ned, who was almost out of sight.
The road, however, was a straight one, and it would be
easy to catch him up.
“ Look here,” he said to Hubbard, “do you want to
earn a pound or two ?”
“ Rather.”
“ Well, just call at that address this afternoon, and ask
for Mr. Simeon.”,
Having spoken, he handed Hubbard a paper, on which
was the address in question, and walked on after Kelly.
He saw the latter enter a respectable-looking cottage-
dwelling, and then, dropping into the nearest public,
managed to learn that it was the residence of a widow
named B >wles, who let lodgings.
Also, that the tall man living there was named Dawes.
Mendez then returned to the city to perfect his scheme.
His object was rather to frighten Ned into yielding up
the property than to betray him to the authorities ; or, if
the truth must be told, he thought he mighty manage to
terrify him into giving it up first, and could then, if he
judged fir, hand him over at leisure afterwards.
If he had known that Dawes was Ned Kelly, with a big
reward on his head, he would have denounced him.
Ned went into the city the next morning as usual, and
was leaving Kate’s bar, when a little red-headed Jew-boy
stepped up to him.
“ Mister Dawes ?” said he.
“ Yes,” answered Ned.
“ A young lady living at Mrs. Fielding’s wants to sea
you,” said the lad, blandly.
Ned started.
“V/here is she?” he asked.
“ At Hill-street”
Ned fell blindly into the trap in which chance serve*
Mendez better than ever he had bargained for.
Jess had said she would let him know where he could
meet her, aud this was evidently her messenger.


It was rather habit tig**. wty sense of instinct that led
him to ask—
“ What young lady in
“ Miss Jessie—a tali young lady, with red hair ”
“ And how did you know me ?”
“Miss Jessie said to am this morning, ‘Go down to
Mrs. Bowles’, and tu*. gentleman there, Mr. Dawes,
that I shall be in Hitt-street this afternoon.’ When at
last I got there, for I could not get away as early as I
wanted, I found you were out. I had seen you two or
three times before, and Mrs. Bowles said you were gone
into Sydney. ‘ Well,’ I said, ‘ I’ve got to go into Sydney
myself, and X may run across him, but if he comes back
in the day, tell him the message.’ ”
All this was rattled off so glibly that Ned was con-
vinced.
“ The young lady said this afternoon?” he asked.
“ Yes.”
“ And what is the number in Hill-street?”
“ Number fourteen.”
Ned gave the lad something, and started off in the
direction indicated.
Hill-street was not one of the cleanest or the most re-
putable in Sydney, but this very fact made it all the more
likely to be the spot that Jess would select as a rendez-
vous.
Number fourteen was a dingy-looking dwelling of small
size.
Ned knocked at the door, which rvas opened by a blear-
eyed, slipshod hag.
“ Is a young lady waiting here for Mr. Dawes?”
“ Yes, sir ; step this way—this ; she’ll bo down in a
minute, sir,” mopped and mowed the old harridan, as she
ushered him along a narrow passage.
At the end was a door, which she opened, revealing a
spacious and tolerably clean-looking kitchen.
“ Just sit down for a moment, sir,” continued the hag.
Ned entered, and, throwing himself heavily into a chair,
growled out
“Now then, old Mother Brimstone, let the gal know
I’m here.”
The old woman passed out of the door, closing it after
her, and the next moment Ned heard the sound of a bolt
®n the outside shot into its socket.
As the door clanged, and the sharp sound of the bolt
fell on his ears, Ned jumped to his feet.
What was the meaning of this ?
He glanced round the room in search of a way out.
It was a large and tolerably well-furnished kitchen, with
a very fair-sized window, but his brows knit as he noted
that the window was provided with a strong range of iron
bars.
A jerk at one of them showed that a file or spring saw
would be needed to overcome the obstacle they presented
to flight.
The door was of unusual strength and as firm as a rock.
Escape being impossible, resistance was his next idea,
and a howl of suppressed rage escaped him as he realised
the fact that he was unarmed.
His eye fell on the heavy kitchen poker, resting on the
iven-door, and he at once possessed himself of it.
The table-drawer, hurriedly ransacked, yielded him a
long, sharp-bladed carving-knife.
Suddenly a gleam of anticipated triumph passed across
his face as he noted a battered cruet-stand upon the
dresser.
He counted upon finding the most effective weapon of
all there, nor was ho disappointed, for the peper-castor was
almost full
Filling his hands with the precious and pungent dust,
he entrenched himself behind a barricade hastily con-
structed of chairs and tables, and awaited the result with
perfect calmness.
“ If it’s the police,” lie thought, “they’ll call on me to
surrender, and I’ll gammon them that I’m going to, and then
try wad bolt! But I don’t think it is the police, for they’d
have been quicker over the job. And if it’s not the noHc*
but a bit of private spite, why I’ve all the more chance’
since they will hardly dare use firea?*ns in broad daylight*
on account of the row.” ' ° *
There was no sign of the foe as yet, and Ned could not
help feeling a little impatient.
“ They’ll never be such fools as to try to starve me out.
If I set at that window seriously I can get those bars
down in an hour with the knife. I wish they’d come, t
feel equal to a brush with half-a-dozen,” he muttered,
still glancing round with quick, keen eye and pricked
ears, and gathering bis mighty limbs under him like a cat
about to spring.
The sound of approaching voices and footsteps in the
passage was now audible.
Suddenly he recognised the tones he had heard on the
night Mendez had fired at him.
Yes, he could not be mistaken.
Instinctively he divined the whole affair.
He had been ensnared by the Jew in order that the latter
might recover his property.
But he asked himself, was Jess an accomplice ?
The bolt was withdrawn and the door fell back, reveal-
ing Mendez in the costume he had worn the previous
morning, accompanied by three sturdy-looking fellows in
the garb of labourers.
All four were equipped with bludgeons and cords.
Without giving his adversaries time to advance, Ned
bounded over the barricade and dashed a handful of
pepper, right and left, slap into the eyes of the two foremost
of them, one being Mendez.
With shrieks of agony they dropped their weapons and
clapped their hands to their faces.
Backing a step and snatching up the knife and poker,
Ned advanced to the attack of the remaining couple.
The fellow on his right aimed a desperate blow at his
head.
Holding the poker in the middle, Ned threw it up-
wards, caught and turned aside the descending bludgeon
with it, and then dashed the knobbed end full in his adver-
sary’s face, knocking several of his teeth out and levelling
him to the ground.
Almost simultaneously, the man to his left had also
aimed a downward blow at him.
He could avoid it, but managed to jerk his head
aside, so that it only alighted on his shoulder, though with
such stunning force that his left arm was for the time dis-
abled, and the knife fell from his numbed fingers.
Raising his left foot, however, he gave his assailant a
kick in the stomach that doubled him up in agony, and
sprang through the doorway.
The outer door was closed, and the passage in darkness.
He slammed to the door behind him and, stooping do wn,
sought for and shot the bolt.
As he did so he heard footsteps, and, before lie could
rise, had received a violent though ill-directed blow from
a fifth man, who had been stationed as sentry just under
the outer-door.
Rising to his feet, he struck in turn with the poker at
this new assailant, but without effect.
Pushing forward he found himself grappled with at a
disadvantage.
His left arm was still too numbed for him to make
effectual use of it, indeed it hung almost useless by his
side.
His adversary had caught him round the waist, and was
striving to lift him and throw him on to his back.
At any other time Ned would have laughed at his effort,
but with one arm the case was a little altered, and be had
to do all he knew to keep up.
At length the bushranger brought bis right arm across
to the left side of his chest, and dashed the elbow smack
aside the right side of the other's head just by the ear.
The fellow’s grip slackened, and Ned repeating the blow
with his fist cacoad him to leave go entirely, and to ataggei
back half stunned.
IS


Then beating him down, he kicked him into insensi-
bility, and stepping rvev his prostrate form gained the
front door.
After some little grop’Mg he succeeded in opening it,
ind arranging his clothes as straight as possible, and pick-
ing up a hat lying in the passage, to replace his own,
which nad been i*«c m the first scuffle, he passed out into
the street and made his way quickly but speedily in the
direction of his abode.
By the time Mendez and his friends were released from
'die kitchen by the old woman, who had kept upstairs dur-
ing the shindy, he had a good start.
CHATTER CXL.
A CLOSE SHAVE
Ned was resolved on having an explanation with Jess and
on his way home halted opposite Mrs. Fielding’s.
The girl caught sight of him and managed to run out,
told him to come to the boundary at nightfall, and ap-
pointed the trysting-place to be at the foot of a large tree,
well known to both of them.
Acconihiglv, after going home and eating a hearty meal,
Ned armed himself, lit a cigar, and strolled out to the
appointed spot.
He had not been there long before Jess joined him.
He told her of the peril he had just escaped, and how
he: name had been used to lure him.
Jess indignantly denied all knowledge of the plot or the
plotters, seemed greatly agitated at the news of Ned’s
danger, and it did not take long to make her confess that
she had come to Sydney on purpose to renew her acquain-
tance with Ned.
“ There’s one thing that's rather comical,” she said.
“ What’s that?” asked Kelly.
“ I suppose you know that the new chief of the police
is living here ?”
“No ; is it so ?”
81 Yes. And, do you know ? he’s a very nice young fellow
indeed,’’ she said, archly.
“I’ve heard that,” growled Ned.
“And I really think he admires a pretty girl whenever
ha comes across her.”
“ W hat do you mean ?” said the bushranger fiercely.
“Oh ! don’t get in a wax. He’s got some ridiculous, old-
fashioned idea that he ought not so much as to pay me a
compliment because he happens to be under the same roof
as myself, but there’s a look in his eye which just says what
he’d say if it wasn’t for that stupid notion.”
“ Stop a bit, Jess,” said Ned. “Do you think you could
get him to bo regular spoony on you?”
“ Well, I won’t say I couldn’t”
“ Then try it on, my gal, try it on.”
“ I don’t quite see what you’re driving at,” said the girl,
evidently hurt at the seeming want of all due and proper
jealousy implied in Ned’s remark.”
“ He's chief of police, isn’t he?”
“Yes.”
“ Well, then, with you to wheedle all his little plans out
o? him, and mo to thwart them, I will be able to carry on
my little game without the chance of being “ lagged.”
The girl laughed.
“ Suppose,” continued Ned, “ we were to try something
of the sort at once V”
“What?”
“ Why, you see, 1 have robbed a good many people, but
not a chief of police yet. It would be a fine feather in my
cap to do it.”
“ Ah! Well, w'nat is it you want me to do, for I sup-
pose you are driving at something ?”
“ Right again. I want you to leave a window unfastened
to-morrow night ”
“ Yes, I can manage that. The second from the left
And on the ground door.”
Good,”
he after some further conversation that need not be rc-
pated,Ned took his leave
His last attempt at burglary single-handed had, though
in the end successful, been attended with some peril, and
he thought that on this occasion the services of a friend
would be useful.
Accordingly he looked up Hopkins.
Hopkins did not seem overmuch pleased at the proposal,
which offered a great deal of risk and not much prospec-
tive profit, as far as he could see.
But Kelly persuaded him, and he agreed to meet Ned
the following night.
The following night Ned retired to rest at his usual
hour.
His landlady, who was a quiet old soul and rather deaf,
had already sought her pillow.
But, after remaining in his room about half-an-hour.
Ned, who had not undressed, removed his shoes, and stole
quietly downstairs with them in his hand, putting them on
when he reached the door.
He opened the door and crept quietly out.
Having gained the gate and stepped into the road, he
advanced a few steps to the left
He halted, and, picking up a couple of stones, began
to tap them smartly once or twice together.
The brushwood to his right rustled, and a figureemerge
from it.
“Is it very late, mate?’* said a voice he recognised as
Hopkins’s.
“ All right,” was his reply to this innocent sentence,
which had°been fixed on by them as a password.
The two quietly passed up the road.
Arrived opposite Mrs. Fielding’s house, they halted for
a moment to see whether the coast was clear.
Satisfied on this point, they got over the fence, and
stole like two phantoms towards the house.
Here all was in readiness.
Mrs. Fielding was a woman who every night used to go
round her premises in person, and satisfy herself, with her
own eyes, that every bolt and bar was shot.
But Miss Jess was a very soft-footed young person, and
after Mrs. Fielding had retired for the night, this young
damsel stole out of her room, crept downstairs like a cat,
and undid the window, as promised by her to Nod.
Consequently the two burglars had not any difficulty in
effecting an entrance.
Once inside all was plain sailing, thanks to Jess’s infor-
mation, and they set to work at once.
The lower rooms were quickly ransacked, but they did
not yield very much, for Ned’s chief object was rather the
glory of robbing the dwelling of the chief of the police,
than actual plunder.
“The plate’s in the old folks’ room, ain’t it?” said
Hopkins.
“ Yes. We cm risk it if we’re pretty quiet.”
Accordingly the two stole upstairs, and went straight to
the room occupied by Mr. and Mrs. Fielding.
Halting outside the door the burglars listened.
All was quiet within.
The door was not locked, and opening it, Hopkins, who
was a far lighter man than Ned, stole in with noiseless
tread.
With wonderful quietness and dexterity he appropriated
a couple of watches, a small jewel-case, and the plate-
basket, which it was Mrs. Fielding’s habit to carry up to-
bed with her every night.
Ned meanwhile stood at the door, pistol in hand, pre-
pared for any emergency.
The things secured, Hopkins rejoined his companion.
Ned was divided in opinion as to whether he should
enter the room in which Kenneth was sleeping.
He wavered as to whether it would nut be, as he put it,
a very good move to go at once and cut the throat of a
man who was no doubt destined to give him a great deal
ox future trouble.
A reflection came in time to stay his hand
The new chief of police, tie argued, was young, wa*
green, and was liable to be impressed by women.


Two women—Kate and Jess—had already Raid this.
“Therefore,” argued Ned to himself, ‘it will be far
better to spare a man whose secrets can be wheedled out
of him by two girls who are devoted to mo, than to kill
him and make room for some hard-headed brute who
doesn't care for the wenches.”
He therefore signed to Hopkins fca follow him, and the
two stole s'Tlently downstairs again.
They had almost reached the bottom when Ned’s foot
slipped, and with a tremendous clatter he rolled at full
length into the passage.
He was up again in a moment, but the mischief was al-
ready done.
Voices were heard in the upper part of the house, there
was the scuffling of hurried step’s, and the sound of lights
being struck.
The two burglars hurried on to the window by which
they had entered the house.
They reached it safely .with their plunder, and swung
themselves out of it.
Then they struck out swiftly across the lawn.
Suddenly they heard a sash go up behind ttuia. and there
was a hail to them to stop.
Bang ! rang out a shot.
Hopkins staggered, and dropped his burden.
•‘Curse it! they have hit me,” he gasped, as the pfUJ
tore on.
A couple more bullets whizzed over their l eads but at
that moment they gained the cover afforded by icme
trees.
•‘ Come on quick to the road,” cried Kell / , ‘ *ve must
cross it, and then make a bend to throw -hen off the
track.”
Hopkins’s steps grew slower and slower i,s hue/ reached
the fence.
“ Ned,” he said, “ give me a lift over. Jr> pretty well
done up.” .
Meanwhile the house was thoroughly uraised, and it
was evident that in another minute tlvA' would be
in hot pursuit.
It was lucky for them both that there w-tis no dog, and
that the night was a dark one, or they would have been
almost certainly discovered.
Ned glanced as well as he could in the darkness at his
companion.
“ Hullo !” he said, “are you badly hurt i
“ Yes ; lend roe a hand to get over.”
“ And have dropped the swag?” continued the bush-
ranger, as he helped him across the fence.
“Hang it! yes. I wish I’d never seen it.”
“Look here,” said Ned, “we’d better divide, and I’ll
try to draw them off, so that you can make the best of
vour way into Sydney.” . i
* There was something in the tone in which this remark
was made that struck Hopkins. L ,
“No, no,” he cried; “I don’t see that. \ou must stick
by me, or I’ll never be able to get along at all. ’
He spoke with difficulty.
All the while tins conversation was go ng on, iNed had
been helping Hopkins onwards.
He gave him a lift over the boundary running along the
other side of the road. „
“ Now,” he said, « you strike off that way.
“No, I’m hanged if I do,” cried Hopkins. “If you
leave me in the lurch like this and I’m nailed, Im hangec
“Don’t what?” hissed Ned, in tones that froze the
other’s blood. “ ‘ Don’t split,’ you meant to say, eh , By
Jingo ! you shan’t get a chance of doing that, and as he
spoke he drew a pistoL . . ~ . . . .
“ For God’s -jako—" began Hopksns, his voice rising to
But. clapping the pistol to his head, Ned pulled the
trigger, and, as the wretched fellow sank to the groum a
eorpse, kis murderer bounded off with the speed ot a
Guided by the pistol shot, Kenneth and Mr. Fielding
were soon on the scene of this tragedy.
“ It must bo the fellow I fired at,” exclaimed the former.
“ But what could that shot have meant?”
Meanwhile Ned, straining every muscle, had darted
down the road, and then quitting it had made his way by
a somewhat circuitous route to Mrs. Bowles’s.
Here all was quiet, and opening the front door, he stola
noiselessly up the stairs and gained his room.
Turning in, he was soon sound asleep. He had no
conscience to trouble him.
CHAPTER CXL I.
A PRACTICAL JUDAS.
The sensation which followed the attempted burglary at
Mrs. Fielding’s was tremendous.
Coming as it did after the similar crime which had
ended in the murder of the old pawnbroker, people
naturally maintained that there was a connection between
the two offences, and that they must be the work of the
same gang.
And they began to ask themselves, w ith an uneasy feel-
ing, who was likely to be the next victim.
The death of Hopkins, too, was not without au element
of mystery.
Kenneth, at the inquest, swore that he had fired at
the burglars from the window of his room as they retreated
from the house.
But the wound that had put an end to Hopkins was of
such a nature that death must have instantaneously fol-
lowed its infliction, and hence it was certain that he could
not have proceeded to the spot where he was found, had
he received it at the time Kenneth fired.
Further investigation, too, showed that the bullet that
had put an end to his existence did not fit the bore of
Kenneth’s pistol, whilst both the latter and Mr. Fielding
could swear that a shot was fired which helped to guide
them to a spot where the body was found.
Both were certain of thy*.
The only conclusion, therefore, was that Hopkins had
been accidentally shot, either by his own hand or by that
of an accomplice, in endeavouring to scale the fence, for
no one went so far as to imagine that his life had been
purposely sacrificed to secure his comrade’s safety.
His death led, however, to a somewhat important dis-
covery.
He had been identified by several people as a man re-
siding a few doors from the murdered pawnbroker, and,
on Ins home being searched, a number of articles, the
products of the former burglary, which it had not been
thought worth while disposing of to Mendez, were found.
Some of these articles were identified, and led to a
strict examination of his premises.
In clearing away the rubbish which filled the cellar, it
was noticed that the earth along, the wall separating his
house from the abandoned tenement next door did not
seem so solid as elsewhere.
On examination, it was found that it could be easdy re-
moved by a spade, and that the deeper they went the less
compact it became. .
The police proceeded to work at it, and soon traced
the tunnel that had been opened into the adjoining
house, , .
With this clue, the rest was easy, and it was soon per-
ceived how the plunder had been removed and the
searchers for the time thrown off the scent.
It was resolved to keep a sharp look-out on all who
had visited Hopkins, but, as it turned out, no one had
noticed Ned during his few visits, and he remained quite
U Tco e uple' of days after the burglary Kenneth was at
breakfast, when a card was brought in with the request
that its owner, a Mr. Simeon, wanted to see him at once.
The youn" chief of the police had been pestered with
visitors evcr°since the perpetration of the double murder,
and had got disgusted with the countless number who had


jnly come to bother his life out with suggestions of im-
possible plans for securing the offenders and bringing
them to justice. . ,
“ Please ask him to send in word what he wants with
me ” he said to the servant who had brought the card,
md added to Mr. Fielding, “ If it’s another of those
fellows with a cock-and-bull scheme, I shall step quietly
out of the house and down to the office. If he’s got any-
thing to say, he must say it there. ’
“ Please, sir, he says he must see you in private on a
most important matter of business,” said the servant,
returning. , , ... ~
“ Tell him that if it's business, and he will name a time,
{ will see him at the police office. Pm hanged if I'll be
worried out of mv life like this. To be willed before one
has time to swallow one’s breakfast, is too bad. Well,
what is it now?” he continued to the servant, who had
again re-entered the room.
“ Ho says, sir, he must and will see you @n a matter ot
the highest importance, and that if you refuse to receive
him at once, the matter will not rest here. .
“ Confound his impudence 1 Tell him I’ll join him in
half a minute. By Jove, if he’s come on any humbugging
game, I’ll give him a lesson he won’t forget in a hurry.
This conversation had b«en carried on in such a manner
as to reach the ears of Jess, who happened to be passing
the open breakfast-room door.
The girl felt a strong desire to learn what this Mr.
Simeon, who was so particularly anxious to see Kenneth,
had to say. , ...
Her sympathies, it is needless to remark, were with the
criminal orders ; and she thought that if Mr. Simeon s <g-
vclatious were of a character to prove harmful to her
friends, she could not do better than to make herself
acquainted with them.
Nothing could be easier. ,
Mr. Simeon had been ushered to wait m ft room with a
window opening on to the verandah.
The window was open.
Jess slipped out, and. stealing round, placed herself con-
veniently outside it.
When Kenneth entered the room, Mr. Simeon rose to
receive him. , _ ...
He was a well-dressed, middle-aged wearing
one of the largest green shades that can be imagined ovex
his eyes. , ...
“Aha! a disguise,” thought Kenneth; “wait a little
Sit, my fine fellow.”
“Mr. Simeon?” he began interrogatively.
“ That is my name,” said the stranger.
'* You wished to see mo on business. ’
“Yes; if I am addressing Captain Kothsay, of the
police ?”
*• At your servict./ 5
“ You will pardon me,” said Simeon, raising the shade
and revealing two of the most inflamed-looking eyes ever
seen outside an ophthalmic hospital, set in lids suggestive
in appearance of raw beefsteak, “ but I did not recognise
your voice. I see it is you, Cup tain Rothsuy. I %
•ery important communication to make to yon.
“ In connect* >n with my official duties T
“Yes.”
“Ah! now I have you, my friend,’ thought Kenneth
“I presume air, you are aware,” said he, putting on the
red-tape ai- of a Foreign Office clerk, “ that such communi-
cations are usually received by myself or by one of my re-
presentatives at the police office, where every attention
ia at once paid to them, and that your seeking me here at
ray residence, when half-an-hour later you would have
found me at the office in question, has somewhat the air
of an intrusion.”
Kenneth paused, thinking to see Mr. Simeon, figura-
tively, bowled over.
But he was not.
“Sir,” he replied, very politely, but very firmly, “ you
have, you will pardon me for reminding you of it, not
held your present position very long, and are not perhaps
thoroughly up in some of the peculiarities connected with
it. This is not England, Captain Itothsay, and I may
take it on myself to tell you that there is a very peculiar
impediment which will at all times hinder men from
crossing the threshold of the police-office in order to gi\e
you information. May I have the honour of mentioning
it?”
“ Certainly,” said Kenneth, with a vague idea that his
visitor was oithei* a most covertly insolent scoundrel or a
madman.
“ It is that they run the risk of having their throats cut
if they are seen coming out of it.”
This answer rather confirmed Kenneth in his previous
idea. , ,
“ You seem well acquainted with the little ways of the
dangerous classes over here,” he said.
“ I am—so well that I am, with your permission, going
to put one of the worst of them in your hands.
Kenneth started.
“ Ah! an informer,” he said, contemptuously.
“If it were not for informers, I don't think the police
would reap much honour,” was the answer.
liothsay began to see that he was not likely to get the
best of it at this game.
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
by W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards. # Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Demons of the Sea.
Love and Adventure.
Run away from Home. —A Life of
Adventure.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“ The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Koad to
Million.
The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search
of a Big Diamond.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Diamond Polished.
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lordmer,
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of tne “Thundes,”




v It is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series (A crisses wholly iucompai ibl* who
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well kno*n at tne Anupod-s
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.” — Telegraph, 7th July, 1831.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr, Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kki.lt j
Beothek. the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.’’— Times, July.
“ The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse. Marco Polo, will ever Jivo in (he recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of • N«p
akd ms Nao in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July,
CHAPTER CXLT.— Continued.
“ Well, sir,” he said, “ pray proceed.”
“I am prepared to put one of the men concerned in the
Goodered murder in your hands. There is a reward of
five hundred pounds offered, I believe.”
It would have been in better keeping for Mr. Simeon
aot to have made this remark, but he could not help it;
he wanted to hear the fact officially stated.
“ Yes,” said Kenneth, “five hundred pounds.”
“ Well, I know I can trust to you, Captain Rothsay,
and that you will forgive me if anything I have said has in
any way annoyed you. I am willing, on your assurance
that if my u..urination results in his arrest I shall receive
the reward, to put you in possession of his name and
hiding place.”
«Indeed.”
“But, as I have said before, 1 cannot give you the
information officially.”
“Why not?”
“ You are new to this country, and cannot understand
all its ways. The honestest man amongst us would
hesitate before risking the enmity of such a powerful
body as the criminal classes and their admirers are ”
“ Or the chance of losing their custom?”
This was a mere guess shot of Kenneth’s, but the other
did not like it.
“ You will perhaps more readily understand when I
toll you that the murderer is a man for whom an immense
reward has already been offered, but who has evaded
capture on account of the aid and sympathy be has
received from almost all classes.”
“Who is he?”
Simeon rose and approached him.
“Ned Kelly,” he said, in a low whisper.
“ Ned Kelly!” repeated the other in amazement.
“Hush!” cried Simeon, looking round with an tSr of
alarm.
“ You say he did this murder?”
“ Yes.”
“And you know his hiding-place
•* Tes. :;
“ Then I call upon you to reveal it, sir.”
“ Exactly. 1 am going to do so ; only I will venture
first to remind you of the reward that has been offered
for bis apprehension, and which I claim, in addition to the
five hundred offered for the Goodered murderer.”
It was the fact of the large amount of this reward that
had led Mendez to abandon the principle that had guided
him throughout his career and give up a man to justice.
His first idea had been to secure the man who had
robbed him and drive a bargain with him for his restora-
tion tc liberty.
This scheme had proved abortive.
He hid unsuccessfully lured Ned into the house in Hill-
street, hat the bushranger had escaped.
Up to that time be had been quite unaware wno his
plunderer really was, and the men who had helped him,
and who were mere ruffians he had hired for a few pounds,
had merely thought the affair was a bit of kidnapping for
auavate vemreanco.
But when one of those who were knocked down in the
kitchen picked himself up, his first words were
“ By thunder ! that’s a strong fellow ; he’s just the cut
of Ned Kelly, too.”
Thest words led Mendez to think, lie mentally com-
pared things together, and it flashed across him that, when
he had purchased the stolen s-00-ds, he had noticed a scar
on the left hand ot their vendor.
No doubt it was Kelly.
And, if it were, why the reward would more than covet
the value of the things Ned had carried off.
It was this argument that had brought him to Mrs.
Fielding’s as soon as his eyes were well enough for him to
bear the light out of doors.
“ That is true,” said Kenneth, in reply to his last remark.
“Well then, sir, to earn me that reward, and yourself
the reputation of ridding the colony of a most dangerous
malefactor, you have only to proceed to Mrs. Bowles's,
half-a-mile down this road, and you will find Ned Kelly,
under the name of Mr. Dawes.”
This statement startled Kenneth.
It startled another listener much more, however.
This listener was Jess, who had not lost a word of the
conversation.
She was delighted she had made up her mind to listen
to that interesting stranger, Mr. Simeon, and at once
began to scheme how she should warn Ned.
Meanwhile Mendez and Kenneth had rapidly arranged
the plan for Nod's capture
The former was to loiter about the road, and keep
•watch at a distance over the cottaare occupied by Mr.
Dawes.
The latter was to ride at once into the town, and put
himself at the head of a sufficient number of Ids men to
render all resistance on the part of the bushranger futile.
With this agreement they separated, and Jess was left
racking her brain for a chance of slipping away and giving
Ned warning of this impending peril.
CHAPTER CXL I 1.
A SUDDEN ECLIPSE.
The best-Bid plans of mice and men, as wc arc informed
by the poet Burns, often fail.
And usually by some unforeseen trifle.
So it was in the present instance
Mendez, sauntering out from Mrs. Fielding’s residence,
proceeded, with the air of a mere idler, towards that occu-
pied by Ned Kelly.
Despite the green shade he could see pretty well, and
he kept a close lookout as he went along, and carefully
scrutinised everyone that passed him.
He met no one, however, resembling Ne t.
Arriving in sight of the dwelling tenanted b; the latte*,
he rubbed his hands joyfully.
“Aha!” he thought, “my fine fellow, you sliall see if
I won’t give you cayenne in return for pepper.”
Meanwhile, the girl Jess was in a terrible state of
anxiety.
In vain she sought for a chance of getting away fro»
the house for half-an-hour.


She knew it would be useless to ass tue permission of
her mistress.
As it happened, the housemaid had left in a great hurry
the preceding evening, after what can only be styled a
“row,” and consequently Jess had to do more than her
usual share of work.
It was impossible to slip away on the quiet, for Mrs.
Fielding’s eye was constantly on her.
For a moment she thought of breaking into open rebel-
lion, and bolting; but a moment’s reflection showed her
that this would only arouse suspicion.
Almost at her wit’s end, she scribbled a few words of
warning to Ned on a piece of paper, and kept this in readi-
ness to send by the first messenger who might present
himself.
But time went on and no messenger presented himself
at all.
As she looked from the front of the house towards the
road, she saw Kenneth Rothsay pass by at a brisk trot,
followed by four troopers.
She clenched her hands, and drove the nails into the
palms with rage, as she watched them sweep on in the
direction of Ned’s abode.
Mendez, who had been waiting with equal anxiety on
Hie road, felt a load lifted from his mind aa he saw them
approach.
They were soon alongside him.
“Well,” asked Kenneth cheerily, “any sign of our
friend yet? ”
“ No,” answered the Jew, “ he has not stirred.”
“ I suppose I must invest this place with all the forms
and ceremonies of war? ” said Kenneth with a smile.
“ I assure you you cannot take too many precautions,”
replied Mendez earnestly; “ the fellow is as strong as a
lion, as slippery as an eel, and as cunning as a fox. He is
a perfect demon.”
“I should think he would be to slip through the fin-
gers of five of us—eh, Gaskell?” and as he spoke
Kenneth turned to one of his men.
“ Yes, sir,” was the answer, given with military prompt-
itude and conciseness.
“Very good; so we will give the devil his due for
cunning. Gaskell, ride up to the back of the house, and
see no one escapes that way. Bell, you push on to the
further end. Now trot.”
Leaving the road the party made a sudden irruption
into the little domain of Ned’s landlady, the Widow
Bowles.
Gaskell, taking up his position in the rear of the house,
unslung his carbine, and covered the back door; Beil took
up his position on the further flank of the building, and
Kenneth, dismounting with one of his men, left their two
horses in charge of the other, and rapped at the front
door.
The Widow Bowles, in great alarm at this sudden irrup-
tion, hastened to open it.
“ You have a lodger here named Mr. Dawes, madam? ”
said Kenneth politely.
“ Yes, sir; but— : —” stammered the widow.
“ I must see him at once, on matters of the utmost im-
portance,” continued the chief of police, advancing over
the threshold.
“ Really, sir, but I ” exclaimed the embarrassed
woman, gazing up in his face in blank wonderment.
“ Which is his room? ”
Perfectly speechless, she could only point to the stairs
in silence.
“ The door in front? ” asked Kenneth.
“ Yes, sir; I—he—that is——”
“ All right. Come on.”
And, followed by his subordinate, Kenneth stepped up
the stairs two at a time, and, without waiting to knock,
threw open the door and stepped into the room.
His eye ran over it in a second.
It was empty. . ,
“ What the deuce is the meaning of this ? he cried'
and, darting out of the room again, sprang down the stairs;
and faced the astonished landlady.
“ Where is your lodger, madam?” he exclaimed. “In
the Queen s name, I call upon you to answer me.”
“ He is gone out, sir,” said the bewildered woman.
“ Gone out ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ When? How long ago?”
“ This morning.”
“ itarly ?”
“ Yes, sir; quite early. I said to Mary, sir—Mary, you
know, sir, is the girl that comes in to help me ; she’s the
daughter of Mr. Jarvis, who used to keep the tobacconist's
” and the woman, who was just recoverving herself, was
about to enter into one of those eternal rigmaroles in which
her class delight, when Kenneth cut her short with—
“ At what time did he go out?”
“ Well, I think, sir—let me see—it was half-past seven,
or, to be more exact, twenty-five minutes past seven;
because, you see, I said to Mary, ‘ Now, Mary, it's quite
time ’ ”
“ Confound Mary! I beg your pardon, madam, but I
am in a hurry, and this is a serious matter. Do you know
where he went?”
“To Sydney, I think.”
“ And when will he be back ?”
“ Well, that, I’m sure, sir, I can't say. I said to him,
said I, ‘ Mr. Dawes, shall I get you anything for dinner? ’ ”
“ Well, and what did he say ?”
“Why, sir. he just said, ‘Dinner be ’ you knew
what, sir, and went off.’’
“Confound it!” exclaimed Kenneth. “It seems as if
the bird has flown. However, with your permission," I
will just run an eye over the place.”
“ Certainly, sir,” gasped the bewildered landlady; “ but
I’m an honest woman, sir, and should like to know what
is the meaning of it all, sir?”
“ The meaning of it is that your lodger, Mr. Dawes, is
neither more nor less than Ned Kelly the ironclad bush-
ranger.”
“ Ned Kelly!” screamed the affrighted woman. “ Why,
wc might all have been murdered in our beds !” and she
fell into a chair in a half-fainting condition.
Kenneth half regretted having mentioned the bush-
ranger’s name; though, as the interview progressed, he
had grown more and more convinced of the woman’s
honesty.
A brief council of war followed the futile search, and
it was decided that two of the troopers should remain in
ambush at the cottage.
Followed by the remainder, Kenneth galloped back to
Sydney, and a thrill of satisfaction shot through Jess's
breast as she noticed that he was unaccompanied by any
prisoner as he passed, and that his face did not wear the
triumphant expression that denotes the return of a leader
from a successful expedition.
The real reason of this failure was a very simple one.
Ned had taken it into his head to have a day’s fishing
in the harbour.
He had started off earlier than usual, hired a boat at
Sydney, and, w hilst his pursuers were wondering ivhat had
become of him, was sailing towards the Heads.
Towards evening he returned, well pleased with his
sport.
Amongst the first persons he ran against on landing was
Knatchbull, whose schooner had come in during the
afternoon.
They greeted ons another cordially; and, of course.
“ nobblers ” were propose;!.
Ned suggested that they -mould adjourn for this purpose
to the hotel at which his sister was serving as barmaio,
to which Knatchbull made no objection. _
Accordingly they started in that direction
Meanwhile the report that Ned Kelly was" biding in
Sydney or its neighbourhood was rapidly spreading
abroad.


Despite the almost piteous appeals of Mr. Mendez that
he would keep the matter dark, Kenneth Rothsay had at
once set all those acting under him at work to track the
bushranger—a description of whose person had been
forthwith circulated. .
Mendez—who had gnashed Ins teeth with disappoint-
ment at the failure of the expedition of the morning—was
still more enraged to find so many now engaged in a pur-
suit, the threads of which he wanted to keep in his own
hands. , ,
Kelly did not notice that, as he passed through the
streets with Knatchbnll, more than one passer stared a
little hard at him, though such was the case, but, as it
turned out, his disguise was so good that those whose
attention had been caught by his height and figure came
to the conclusion, on looking at his lace, that they must
have been mistaken in identifying this passing stranger
with the notorious bushranger.
One man, however, seemed in doubt, and followed the
pair at a distance, till he watched them enter the hotel bar.
He was a short, stout-built, red-bearded man, with a
quick, keen eye. ,
After waiting for about a minute as it m doubt, He
started off down the street at a brisk pace.
On entering the bar-room, Ned, somewhat to his sur-
prise, saw that Kate was not at her place.
However, there was another girl there, and after being
supplied with dnnk.3, Kelly and Knatchbnll stood con-
versing together.
They had been engaged in this manner for some minutes,
Kelly being anxious to see Kate before leaving, when that
young lady entered the bar.
At the sight of Ned she gave a start of surprise.
“ Good heavens, Ned ! You don’t mean to say you are
leafing about here ?” she exclaimed^
“ Why not?” was the answer.
“ Don’t you know the police are 051 your track, and
that they are hunting for you high and low, all over
Sydney ?”
“ No. How’s that ?”
“ I don’t know ; but Captain Rothsay has been in here
this morning, and several others, and it seems that
the police have been warned to keep a lookout for you.”
“ That’s very awkward ”
“ For goodness sake be off at once.”
As the girl spoke the outer door opened and three men
entered the room.
“ By goles !” exclaimed Ned as he caught sight of them,
“ it strikes me your advice comes a little too late.”
“ What do you mean?” said the girl anxiously.
“ Hush ! don’t do anything out of the way and likely to
attract attention. But I know one of these three fellows,
: and, what is worse, he knows me.”
“ Confound it!” ejaculated Knatchbull, who began to
feel uneasy on his own account, “so he does.”
The first of the three new-comers was the red-bearded
man who had watched Kelly and Knatchbnll enter the
hotel-bar. . , „ T . ,
The second was an individual of Jewish appearance,
wearing a large green shade over his eyes, which were very
1 much inflamed. .
The third was a tall, stiff-looking, wooden-limbod indi-
vidual, bearing that peculiar aspect of awkwardness,
1 observable in the ordinary policeman when in plain
clothes.
The first was a detective named Smithson.
Ho had never seen Ned Kelly, but when the latter
passed him in the street, he could not help thinking that,
making allowance for certain changes that could easily be
produced by disguise, the latter would very well pass for
the man of whom he was in quest.
Besides, the mere fact of the stranger being in company
with Knatchbull, a ticket-of-leave-man, was in itself
suspicious. •
He watched the two enter the bar-room, and then set
off in quest off someone able to clear up his doubts.
Chance favoured him.
lie had not gone far up the street before he mot
Mendez, in company with the third man, a policeman
named Cann.
Smithson knew from Kenneth that it was Mendez who
had given the first information about Ned, and also that
Cann had on one occasion met the bushranger face to face.
lie told them of his suspicions, and they at once re-
turned with him and entered the bar-room.
They took up their places near the door so as to cut off
all retreat, and began to run their eyes quietly over those
present. _ _ ,
“That’s the man I mean,” said Smithson; “t ie big
fellow with the grey coat.”
Mendez and Cann both glanced in the direction indi-
cated. . . ,
It had grown dark by this time, but the gas in tlic bar
had been lit.
“ Yes,” said the former, “ that’s him.”
Cann remained silent for a minute.
“ I don’t know, I’m not quite sure ; if it is, lie has
altered a great deal,” he said at length, with an air of
doubt. “ The light is not very good.”
“There’s a way of settling it,” cried Smithson, struck
with a sudden inspiration “I’ll go up in a minute and
ask him to pass me a light for my weed, and 1 b have a
squint at his hand.”
Having been boating Ned had omitted to put on gloves.
On his part, directly he saw these foes enter, Ned had
set his wits to work to try and find a way of escape.
At first he thought of making a dash for it, but there
were three powerful men against him, and amongst the
other people present a number of respectable people a\ho
if called upon would probably help the olhccrs. .
The only way to get out would be by a trick.
“Look here Kate,” he said, to the girl in as uncon-
cerned a tone as if giving her an order or paying one of
those trivial and impertinent compliments your bar-
lounger delights in, “ this is a tight fix, and I am not ect -
tain how we shall get out of it. You must lend us a
hand.”
“ Very good.”
“ They don’t suspect you. Can you leave the bar lor r»
minute and slip out by the side door of the hotel ?
“Yes.”
Slip out then, call a cab, and get the driver to draw up m
the side street ready to bolt off at full gallop directly Ins
fare comes. Tell him, by the way, his fare will bo two
gentlemen, one tall and the other short”
“ Is that all?”
“ Yes, for the present.”
“ All right, I’d do it.”
A few minutes later Kate left the bar.
Smithson, Cann, and the Jew seemed to be in some
hesitation as to what course they should pursue,
“ It strikes me,” said Kelly to his companion, “ that
these fellows are not quite certain after all whether they
have got the right pig by the ear. I suppose the popper
I put in that chap's eyes has blinded him a bit and lie
can’t see clear yet. That’s it, and they do not care to
kick up a shine by collaring the wrong man in a respect-
able place like this. Stand so as to keep between me and
them as much as possible, whilst I try to work out a
plan to fix them. Do you see any way yourscll V”
“No, confound it! However uncertain they may be
they don’t take their eyes off us, and I can’t seo how to
get out of this unless by breaking through.”
“No good that,” muttered Ned, “look at the crowd.”
The evening frequenters of the place were now drop-
ping in, and it was getting pretty full.
“ I have it,” said Ned, suddenly looking round.
The bar-room was oblong in shape and the only docu
giving access to it was situate in the centre of one of the
longer sides.
It was by this door the police had taken an tioir
position.


Ned and Knatchbull were standing together near the
end of the room to the right of their enemies, and near a
■window looking on to the side street.
Leaving his companion Ned advanced towards the bar,
as if to order another drink.
Smithson lounged towards him carelessly.
“ Will you give me a light? ” said he.
Ned complied, and the detective returned to his friends.
“There’s no doubt of it,” he said: “I spotted the
fellow’s hand.”
Meanwhile, Kate had returned to the bar.
“Two more whiskies,” said Ned, in a loud voice, to
her, and then added in a low tone, “ Is it all right? ”
“ Y'cs, the cab’s outside.”
In a whisper he gave her some further instructions.
“ At once? ” she enquired.
“ At once,” he said, and rejoined Knatchbull, whom he
took by the arm, and hurriedly gave warning to hold him-
self in readiness.
“Shall we collar him off-hand?” asked Cann of
Smithson.
“In a minute. Isn’t the patrol due about this time?”
“ Yes, they will be by in about a minute.”
“ Very good. You step to the door, aid directly you
catch sight of them signal them to come up. Then there
will be no chance of a rescue, and, big as he is, he won’t
shake off the three of us.”
Cann strolled to the door and looked out.
Half-a-minute had hardly elapsed and he stepped out-
side.
Then he re-entered.
“They are close here, and I have signalled them,” he
whispered to Smithson.
“ Good. Now let us throw ourselves on him ”
Carelessly, and with an affectation of indifference, the
three men began to make their way towards the end of
the room at which Kelly and Knatchbull were standing.
As they moved away from the door, it was pushed
partly open, and the lights of the bar-room fell on the
uniform of a couple of policemen.
Suddenly the bar-room was plunged in utter darkness.
There was a slight scuffle and a confusion of voices.
A rush of feet was heard, and a scrambling, tumbling,
confused sound prevailed for a second or two.
A partial silence followed.
Surprise or apprehension seemed to produce this
momentary quietude.
Then cries resounded on all sides.
“Helloa! what's up! Strike a light, and look sharp
about it.”
“ Mind the door, men,” shouted the detective ; “ don’t
let anyone out.”
Matches were quickly struck, when it was explained that
in moving some bottles the gas bad been accidentally
turned off at the main, the tap of which was behind the bar.
The jets were quickly relit, and Smithson cast his eyes
round in search of his destined prey.
Neither Kelly nor Knatchbull was visible.
They had vanished from the room.
Smithson, careless of attracting notice, darted through
the throng, and was soon satisfied that neither of the two
men was there.
“ Sold again by that infernal scoundrel. I have my
suspicions that all is not square here,” he muttered.
“You are sure nr one passed you in the dark ? ” he con-
tinued to one of T .he policemen at the door, who had re-
cognised him.
“ Certain, sir. We were here before the lights went
out, and not even a mouse could have slipped between us.”
CHAPTER CXLIII.
RUN TO EARTH.
Kelly’s escape had been effected in the simplest manner
possible.
The gas had been turned off purposely by Kate, in
accordance with his whispered order.
No sooner was the room plunged into daikneaa than he
seized Knatchbull by the arm and led him in the direction
of the window, which, in consequence of the prevailing
heat, was nearly always left open.
Through this aperture the two felons made their escape.
Loth were active men, and it was only the effort of a
moment to jump through the open window, a mode of
egress they had both measured tor some minut s before
they availed themselves of such a means of escape.
“ I’m hanged if it ain’t quite providential! such a
chance,” grinned Kelly.
“ You're lost in such a limited sphere, Kelly ; your re-
sources are marvellous. You are the Napoleon of
‘ fakers.’ D me, but I almost respect you, my boy,”
said Knatchbull.
Kelly knew nothing about the great emperor, but felt
his friend was paying him some compliment or other.
A cab was waiting in the side-street in readiness.
Ned and his companion jumped in, and, long before the
fact of their absence had been ascertained, were driven
out of sight of the hotel.
Dismissing the cab when they had gone some distance,
and watching until it had driven off, Kelly and his friend
separated.
The former, ignorant of the visit that had been paid
to his domicile in the morning, and looking on his recog-
nition by the Jew as a mere accident, resolved to return
to his lodgings.
Walking rapidly and quietly along the road, he ap-
proached the widow’s house.
Unfastening the gate, he entered the garden.
Everything seemed quiet, and he judged that, as usual,
his landlady had retired to Iced at an early hour.
lie took the key with which he was provided from his
pocket, and prepared to open the door.
He little thought that every movement was watched.
The two troopers who had been left in the house had
passed the entire day on the look-out.
As evening drew near their eagerness increased.
The landlady had told them that when Ned went to
Sydney and stayed beyond a certain time he very seldom
returned till late.
Accordingly at dusk they installed themselves in a room
on the ground-floor in the front of the house, with a
window looking on to the garden.
They would thus be able to discern his approach, and
to hold themselves in readiness to seize him the moment
he entered the house.
It was a bright moonlight night, with only a few floating
clouds; and, as Ned came up the garden, he was plainly
visible to the two watchers.
They saw him pause before the door, and at once stole
from the window and placed themselves at the door of the
room which opened into the passage.
Their idea was to throw themselves on to him directly
he had entered and closed the outer door behind him.
Just as Ned was about to put the key into the door a
sound fell on his car.
It was the neigh of a horse.
And coming from the rear of the house, too.
The events of the evening had roused his suspicion*
until he felt the most trivial event had a meaning.
He knew the widow bad no horses.
What, then, was the meaning of the neigh he had
heard, and which in reality came from one of the troopers’
horses temporarily stabled in the woodshed at the back of
the premises?
Instead of putting the key in the lock he terned away,
and moved off in the direction of the gate, intending to
proceed to the rear of the house and investigate the source
of the noise that had startled him.
Hearing his retreating footsteps, the troopers judged
that he had in some way learned their presence
Throwing open the door they darted out.
At the sound of the opening door Ned turned his head
He recognised the uniforms at once.


Hastening to the gate, he sprang out and darted dow ll
the road.
I!e turned to the left towards the town.
Without troubling themselves about their horses, the
troopers dashed after him on foot.
In the moonlight he was clearly visible.
Nod was a splendid runner, and had no fear of being
unable to distance his pursuers.
However, they proved better goers than he anticipated;
and after a chase of about half-a-mile he found tha.t,
although he was gaining on them at every stride, they still
kept up their pursuit.
He was preparing for a final spurt, prior to quitting the
road and taking shelter to the right or left, when the
noise of horses’ hoofs approaching from Sydney caught
his ear and caused him to pause.
A party of horsemen were evidently coming forward in
such a way as to cut off his advance.
He cou’d plainly discern the peculiar c’ank and jingle
produced by a trooper's accoutrements.
The new-comers evidently belonged to the police as
well.
Thus taken, as it were, between two fires, there was
nothing to do but to quit the road and try and throw the
pursuers off the scent.
A faint hail from behind showed that during the minute
or two he had paused had enabled them to gain on him,
and that they, too, heard the approaching horsemen, who
were drawing nearer every moment.
Dashing r/t the fence to his right, he caught the bough
of a large tree tlxat projected over the road, and by its
aid swung himself over.
This act had been marked; and in a few moments both
parlies of police had met at the point where he had quitted
the road.
Leaving their horses to the care of two of their number,
they pressed on in pursuit.
Ned had left the road just beyond Mr. Fielding’s, and
now, turning back, and, keeping a course parallel with the
road, he found himself approaching that gentleman’s
premises.
In doing so, he was throwing himself into the very jaws
of the lion.
Kenneth Rothsay was in the house, and there were
several police about.
One of the two men left with the horses galloped along
the road to the front of the house, and shouted to put
them on the alert.
With Kenneth at their head, they turned out.
Ned, crushing through the belt of ornamental trees and
shrubs that bordered Mr Fielding’s garden, became aware
of an unusual animation at the house.
Lights wore flitting about from room to room, and soon
Kenneth and his men began to search, spreading them-
selves out, so that it would be impossible for anyone to
pass through their line.
Kelly found himself in a very ticklish position.
The party in his rear were getting nearer every minute,
and to advance would be to fall into the hands of Ken-
neth and his men.
Flinging himself flat, he crawled over an open space,
and gained a thick clump of trees and shrubs on the edge
of the lawn and scaled a tree.
The two parties now united, and an active search began
in all parts of the garden
Glancing from his post of elevation across the lawn,
towards the verandah. Ned noticed a female figure stand-
ing by an open wi n dow.
Even at the di tanco, be thought that he recognised
Jess.
A bold idea struck him.
It was to hide, with her aid, in the house itself—pro-
vided he fould only gain it unobserved.
The troopers were dispersed about the garden, and in a
low tone Ned gave a signal with which the girl was
familiar.
She heard it and looted up.
Ned pushed aside the branches.
She could not make him out, but she could discern a
human figure in the tree, and, guessing whom it was,
urged him to approach.
lie was just about to comply, when suddenly a trooper,
named (Haskell, appeared round the corner of the house.
For a few moments he stood as though uncertain which
way to go.
Then, as though he had made up Ins mind to remain
where he was, as a sentry, he took up his position on the
lawn.
The girl drew back at once into the house without hir
noticing her.
“ Curse him!” thought Ned, “ is he going'to stay thcr*
all night?”
The man kept pacing up and down, and casting keen
glances around him, as though he thought it likely the
fugitive would cross the open space.
He walked backwards and forwards, as on I. is beat, from
the house 10 the edge of the lawn.
Every time he slightly lengthened his promenade, and
at last it extended to the clump of trees amongst which
the bushranger was concealed.
At length he paused at the end of one of these tramps,
with his back to the trees.
At that moment a slight rustling sound in the tree be-
hind him caught Iris car.
He was on the point of turning round to discovc” its
source, when all at once it seemed to him that a house I.nil
fallen on the top of him, and he dropped forward on his
face perfectly senseless.
Ned had sprung from his perch, and alighted full on the
top of him, almost breaking Ins neck
Satisfied of the trooper’s insensibility, (he bushranger
darted across the lawn to the house.
Jess met him ac the window.
“ I’m here,” she whispered, “ they are all at the back
of the house, and no one will see you. Quick, take od
your boots,” she continued, as he entered the room.
Ned complied, and the girl led him cautiously upstairs
to her bedroom.
“ I am going to leave you here, and lock the door on
the outside,” she said, when about to quit him.
“What?” he cried, hoarsely, catching her by the
arm.
“It is the best plan,” she answered, “ for then, if time
search the house, they will never dream you are concealed
here. Later on, I will join you, and arrange for your
escape.” %
When the stunned trooper was discovered no further
proof was needed that the fugitive was, or had been, close
at hand.
But Gaskcll could not tell in what direction Ned had
gone, and the turf had not taken the imprint of his foot-
steps
It was resolved to search the house, though Jess, like
all the other inmates, vowed she had neither seen nor
heard anyone.
As there was no reason to suspect her she was be-
lieved.
A search, however, took place, and in Ins place of con-
cealment Ned heard the tramp of feet ascending the
s airs.
He thrust his hand in his pocket to feci for the
revolver that since his struggle with Mendez had never
quitted him for a moment.
To his horror it was missing.
In his mad race through the timber he had lost it
The footsteps paused outside the door, and the per-
spiration started from his forehead as he drew hmiself up
prepared to dart out the moment the door opened.
But to his great relief a voice said, He can’t be here,
the door is locked on the outside. ”
The next moment he heard the pursuers descend tht
stairs, and all was unbroken silence.


CHAPTER CXLIV.
THUNDER AND LIGHTNING.
Ned, as the time went by, began to grow bitterly weary.
He had every confidence in Jess’s devotion, but spite
of this doubts would steal across his mind.
He kept wondering what had become of her, and why
ehe had not returned.
The minutes went by like hours as he was occupied
with these reflections, and the suspense began to grow
intolerable.
A clock in the basement of the house struck midnight,
and each stroke seemed to reverberate dolefully in his
breast.
Almost immediately after, and, as if responding to the
signal, a low muttered grumbling sound was heard in the
distance and a flash of pale light lit up the darkness of
the room for about a second.
Then all again was dark and silent.
The flash of lightning and the distant muttering were
the forerunners of a storm on the point of bursting
forth.
A sudden hope rose in Ned’s breast, and he started to
his feet.
“Thunder and lightning!” he muttered, “nothing
could serve me better. The one will show me the way,
and the other drown the noise I shall make in getting off.
If the girl is only square, all is as right as a trivet. I wish
she’d come. I’ve a good mind if she’s not here in another
quarter of an hour to risk it alone.”
About ten minutes elapsed.
At the end of this time, Ned, whose oars were on the
alert, caught the noise of approaching footsteps on the
landing outside the door.
“1 suppose it’s her,” he thought, “ but it’s as well to
be prepared,” and grasping a chair he held it in readiness
to hurl at the intruder.
He heard the door open almost noiselessly and the
dazzling light of another flash showed him a female figure
standing on the threshold.
It was Jess.
She carried no light, and next instant darkness resumed
its sway.
Where are you, Ned?” she asked, in an almost inau-
dible whisper.
“ Here !” he growled.
Closing the door behind her, she advanced on tiptoe in
the direction of his voice.
Another flash of lightning revealed that her hair was
rather more disordered than it ought to have been, that
her face was rather flushed, and that her bosom was
heaving with the effects of past or present emotion.
She sat down by Ned, and the bushranger, despite the
perils surrounding him, passed one arm around her waist
and drew her towards him for a kiss.
“ Stow that, Ned, there’s a good fellow,’ said the girl,
“I’m in an awful pucker how I’m to get you away, and
we must manage it at once, somehow.”
“How’s it to be done?”
“ Ah! that’s just it.”
“ Can you let me out of the door below ? „
“No, they are locked, and Mr. lidding has the keys.
“ And the windows?”
“ No chance, the noise of opening them would arouse
the sentinels.”
“ The sentinels ?” .
“ Yes, we have a whole lot of the police here.
“The devil you have? Come, tell me all that has
happened.” , ,
Jess rapidly narrated what had taken place since
search. . . ~
Kenneth Rothsay had not been able to get over his idea
that Ned was hiding close at hand.
Accordingly he had resolved to keep the sergeant and
the four troopers close a*, hand and to resume the search
&t “Yam certain the fellow is somewhere abouA, Mr, Field-
ing,” he said, “ and if we have to unroof the house we’ll
have him.”
With the fact of Ned’s vicinity thus strongly put before
him, Mr. Fielding was only too glad to have the police on
the premises as a safeguard.
At ten o’clock, however, a change in the arrangements
was necessitated by the arrival of a messenger from Sydney
requiring the presence of Captain Rothsay at once at
Government House.
He had been obliged to ride off, but left word that a
strict watch must be kept, and that if he were not back
by daybreak the search was to begin without him.
The sergeant left in command posted a sentry with in-
structions to keep a watch over the front of the premises
and another in the rear.
Then, with the remainder of his command, he took up
his quarters in the kitchen.
Here Jess did her best to render life agreeable to them.
She listened to their compliments, laughed at their jokes,
and did not show too much anger when an arm was slid
round her waist and a moustached lip pressed to her cheek.
Furthermore, she obeyed the orders that Mr. and Mrs.
Fielding had given to look after their creature comforts
with the utmost zeal.
Not only was an ample supply of cold provisions set
before them, but she whispered to the sergeant—
“ Look here, I can’t do it before the 'cook, but as soon
as she goes up to bed I’ll bring you a bottle of whisky.”
This was carried out.
The cook went up first, Jess saying she would follow
her in a minute, but, instead of doing so, she produced
not one, but two, bottles of the promised spirits and sat
drinking with the troopers till close on midnight.
Then, when the sergeant rose to see after the sentries,
she took advantage to slip off to Ned.
“ Look here,” said Ned to her, “ can’t I manage it out
of this window ? I won’t stop here to be caugat at last
like a wild dog in a pitfall.”
“ That way won’t do,” said the girl. “ This window
opens, you know, on the front of the house. There's a
sentinel there and you would be shot down to a certainty
before you could cross the lawn.”
“ Can you get me into a room looking on to the back ?”
“ Yes, there is an empty lumber-room.”
“ Let’s go there.”
Ned stooped down and took off Irs boots, and the pair
crept quietly into the room she had spoken of.
'1 he thunder and lightning continued, and were coming
nearer and nearer, though as yet no ram had fallen.
Ned opened the window with every possible precaution
to prevent a sound being heard.
Patting his head carefully out, he could distinguish the
top of the verandah that ran round the house.
“ Where is the stable?” he asked.
“ That building to the left,” was the answer.
“ Good,” he replied, as a flash of lightning showed him
the building in question standing about ten yards to the
left of the house. “ Are all the horses in it?” he added
drawing in his head.
“ Yes.”
“ Is there a fence all round the garden ?”
“ Yes,”
“ Any way out except through die gate going on to the
road ?”
« No. Stop a bit; there is a gap in tl»e further corner,
beyond the stable there, it is only stopped up by bushes.”
“ Can a horse clear them ?”
“ Marco Polo could,” said the girl, with a remembrance
of Ned’s former escape freshly before her.
“ Yes, but 1 haven’t got Marco under my hand just now,’
remarked the bushranger, grimly.
He looked up at the sky as he spoke.
The night was a strange one.
One half the heavens displayed a dome of burnished
silver, studded with innumerable stars.
Put across the other.an iekj veil, the edge of which was <


«3 gharply defined as that of a knife, was being slowly
drawn.
From time to time a flash of dazzling light leapt forth
from its blackness. _
“ We shall have it in bucketfuls in three minutes,” said
Ned, “ and then I’ll try for it.”
At that moment they heard the sound of steps below.
The sergeant having visited bis sentry in the front of
Che house, had come to look after the one entrusted with
the guard of the rear.
They heard the man’s challenge, and the officer s re-
sponse, which was almost drowned by another clap of
thunder.
44 It’s going to be a rough night,” said the sentry, who
happened to be Gaskell, the trooper, whose neck Ned had
almost broken.
“ Yes,” was the answer, “no chance of your falling
asleep with that row going on overhead.”
“Going to sleep,” growled the other; “ every blessed
bone in iny carcase is aching too much for there to be any
chance of that. If I could only lay my hands on the fel-
low, I’d give him something to remember his little game
of leapfrog by.”
“Well, keep a sharp lookout, for there may be some-
thing in the captain’s idea that he is hiding hereabouts.
Fire at once, without challenging, if you see anything sus-
picious. Here, I have brought you out a nip of whisky in
the bottom of this bottle; it’ll serve to keep the damp
out if the rain comes down.”
Another dazzling flash of light and crash of thunder fol-
lowed.
The next moment, as if this had been the signal, a blind-
ing cataract of rain descended.
The sergeant darted into the house, and directly he had
gone the soldier incontinently took shelter under the
verandah, on the roof of which the rain was beating with
a noise almost deafening.
Ned put his arms round Jess, and, hugging her close,
pressed a dozen kisses on her willing lips.
Then he swung himself out through the window.
His feet touched the roof of the verandah.
There was another crash of thunder, and profiting by
this, he let go.
The tremendous noise of the storm drowned the noise
he made
For a moment he lay flat and motionless on the roof,
which sloped slightly, but not enough to render his posi-
tion a very difficult one.
Then slowly he began to edge himself inch by inch
towards the corner of the house.
Crawling like some gigantic lizard, with the rain descend-
ing like a cataract from the eaves above him, on his back,
lie made his way along.
The faint, scraping sound of his progress was drowned
by the torrent of falling wa,ter beating on the roof of the
verandah like a succession of rapid blows from a gigantic
drumstick.
Even to the sentry beneath its shelter, the sounds were
i n distinguishable.
At length Ned teached the corner.
The verandah continued along the side of the house,
and he made his way till he had arrived at the centre of
that portion of it running along the side.
Here he paused
“ It’s pretty well certain,” he reflected, “ that the sentry
in front here lias followed the example of the sentry at the
back, and has taken shelter under the verandah. Now if
one is at the front and t.#e other at the back, neither can
sec me if I jump down from the centre of this part of the
concern. The only danger will be from the lightning, as
1 make my way to the stable.”
He watched and waited.
Another flash of lightning lit up the scene.
Another clap of thunder follow ed.
Profiting by the noise of this, Ned slipped down one of
the pillars of the verandah.
But instead of making his way at once to the stable, he
flung himself flat on to the ground amongst the climbing
plants at the base of the pillar, and rolled himself close I
up to the supports of the wooden flooring.
It was as well he did so.
The tramp of feet sounded on the floor, and the sentry
in the front of the House hailed his comrade.
“ Gaskell.”
“ Yes,” was the answer.
“ Did you hear anything just then?'’
“No, only the thunder.”
“ I don’t know, but it seemed to me I heard something
on this side of the house. Keep a sharp lookout for the
next flash ”
At the next flash the two men strained their eyes.
It revealed to them the garden with its drenched trees
and tne stable discernible through the falling sheets of rain.
“Ail right,” said Gaskell, “I’ll go round and have a
look at the other side.”
As soon as he heard them move off Ned darted noise-
lessly over the saturated earth in the direction of the
stable.
The door was on the latch, and, unfastening it, he darted
in and closed it behind him.
Upwards of half-a-dozen horses were in the stalls, and,
to his great joy, the majority were saddled.
It was impossible in the darkness to make anything like
a choice.
He unfastened the first that came under his band from
the manger, slipped the bit into its mouth, tightened the
girths, and led it to the door.
Then waiting for the next flash, he threw open the door
at the moment the interval of darkness commenced, led
out the horse, jumped into the saddle, and darted off in
the direction of the gap in the fence of which Jess had
s )oken. . .
" The sound of the rain dxowned the noise of the horse’s
hoofs.
The two sentries, after all, however, were not keeping 'i
bad lookout. , , , , ~ ,
Passing back and front along tne verandah, they halted
every time the lightning flashed, in order to glance around
Glancing in the direction of the stable, Gaskell fancied
he could distinguish that the door was open.
Doubting for a moment the evidence of his senses, he
resolved to make sure, and awaited with anxiety the
second flash.
There could be no doubt of it.
The stable-door was open.
To jump from the balcony, and to tear across the
garden to the stable was the work of a moment.
In less than that he verified the fact that one of the
horses was missing. .
Stepping to the stable-door, he fired his carbine into the
air and shouted to his comrade, who at once began to
thunder at the door of the house.
Before five minutes had elapsed the troopers had all
turned out and had mounted m hot haste.
By the light of a stable-lantern Ned’s tracks were
plainly discernible, and, remembering the opening m the
fence, they headed at once in that direction, since it was
impossible that he could have passed out of the front gate
unobserved. . , . . f
Jess, who had been observing the whole affair tiom the
lumber-room window, darted back into her bedroom
directly the alarm was given, and presently emerged, half-
di’fssed, as though aroused from sleep.
“ I don’t think they’ll catch him, considering he has a
fair five minutes’ start on a night like this,” she murmured
to herself.
CHAPTER CXLV.
PLAYING ’POSSUM.
Ned’s start was, however, in reality, lose than eilh r the
girl or his pursuers imagined.


lie was, even in a country of daring riders, acknow-
ledged by one and all to be one of the finest horsemen
■that ever crossed a saddle.
Confident in his skill, he urged his horse straight at the
gap in the fence, feeling certain that he couli lift the
beast over the barricade of thorns and brushwood with
which it was blocked.
The horse, however, on which he had laid hands,
though a powerful beast, was a heavily-built, lumbering
kind of animal, and had not recovered from the fatigue ol’
the three preceding days.
Twice he refused the jump, and when the third time
Ned, gripping his ribs like a vice and taking well hold of
his head, rammed him at the obstacle, he rose, it is true,
but only to jump short and come floundering down
amongst the brushwood just as Gaskell’s carbine rang
out.
There was nothing for the bushranger to do but to
spring from the saddle and clear a passage for the strugg-
ling animal, which took some time.
At last the breach was cleared, and Ned, to whom every
sound from the house in his rear acted as a spur, sprang
into the saddle again with the hope that he would distance
his foes.
The road from Sydney lay before him, and along this
he galloped furiously, intending to strike off across
country as soon as he got well into the open, with no
chance of finding his career suddenly checked by a fence
or other enclosure.
But, to his horror, he found himself unable to get any-
thing like a decent rate of speed out of the exhausted and
lumbering animal he bestrode.
In vain, in the absence of spurs, he touched up the
brute with his pocket-knife.
The poor beast did its best, but it was evident that it
could not long continue even at the pace he was then
getting out of it.
“Oh for an hour of Marco Polo!’’ thought Ned, “to
ride clear away from those crawlers,” as, on arriving at the
summit of a somewhat steep ascent, he became aware that
the troopers were following closely on his track.
The man had slackened speed, though the lightning still
continued, and a gust of wind carried the sound of their
advancing hoofs to his ears.
He listened, and became convinced that they were gain-
ing on him almost at every stride.
To add to his misfortunes, his horse, who also heard it,
and recognised without doubt the presence of its habi-
tual companions, neighed loudly in reply.
Digging his knife furiously into the poor brute, he
urged it, at the risk every moment of breaking their necks,
down the further side of the hill.
Nothing but his almost marvellous horsemanship saved
them from going a cropper at least half a dozen times
during his frantic descent.
At the bottom of the hill he turned sharply to the
right, left the road, and struck off straight across country,
in the hope that his pursuers would ride straight on along
the road.
His hope was, however, destined to be frustrated.
At the very moment that he thus strove to double on
his pursuers, the lightning, which had ceased for a few
minutes, in a succession of brilliant flashes lit up the
scene as far as the horizon.
The troopers had just gained the summit of the hill
down which Ned had galloped, and from it they could
plainly discern the fugitive vainly urging his exhausted
steed across the plain below, as plainly, indeed, as if it had
been day.
They uttered a simultaneous cry of triumph, which
sounded clearly and ominously on Ned s ears.
Then one of them quitting the road in turn, at the
summit of the hill, tore like a madman down the rugged
slope. , , ...
His horse seemed to skim over the broken surface like
some gigantic night-bird, rather than a four-footed
animal, and the rider seemed as reckless concerning hii
own neck as Ned himself.
In an incredibly short time he was at the bottom of the
hill, and speeding across the plain.
This rider was no other than Gaskell, whose debt of
vengeance against Ned had been yet further increased by
the events of the night.
It happened that the horse on which the bushranger
had laid his hands was no other than that of the trooper.
Consequently when the order of pursuit was given, the
latter found himself at a loss to obey it.
But amongst the animals in the stable was a magnificent
thoroughbred belonging to Kenneth.
Acting on the principle that necessity knows no law,
and trusting that excess of zeal would be accepted as an
excuse for his action, Gaskell clapped a saddle on this
animal and mounted with his comrades.
Thanks to the superiority of his mount he was able, on
catching sight of Ned, to ride right away from them, and
by the time he had gained the plain, had secured an ad-
vance of about a quarter of a mile.
A few minutes more and he was within pistol-shot ol
Ned.
“I’ve got you at last, my lad!’’ he growled, un-
sheathing his sabre.
The bushranger glanced back.
The case seemed hopeless.
The lightning showed him that the thoroughbred was
gaining at every stride, and flashed on the gleaming blade
held in the hand of its excited rider.
Ned was unarmed save for his knife.
He felt that further flight was impossible, for his horse
was ready to sink under him at every stride, whilst resist-
ance against six men armed to the teeth seemed equally
hopeless.
He began to wonder why Gaskell did not open fire on
him at once.
“It looks like a case of all up,” he thought; “ but at
any rate they shall only get my carcase.”
And he resolved to fight tooth and nail like a wild beast
until they killed him rather than surrender.
Suddenly his horse, winded and urged beyond its
strength, fell under him so suddenly that it almost seem,.* i
as though one of the flashes of lightning that from tim ■
to time darted from the heavens had stricken it to the
earth.
As it fell, Ned disengaged his feet from the stirrups,
and, by a desperate effort, succeeded in preventing him-
self from being shot over the animal’s head.
Nevertheless he was thrown forward in the saddle.
As he struggled to recover himself his hand encountered
something cold and hard.
It was the butt of a pistol kept in the holster !
A cry of joy almost escaped him at this uulooked-for
discovery.
Quick as lightning he plunged his hand into the other
holster, which he found similarly provided.
This was the reason Gaskell had not fired.
He had left his pistols in the holster, and had not found
time to reload the carbine with which he had given the
alarm.
Ned was a man of quick resolutions and fertile in re-
source.
He at once hit on a plan which promised to ensure his
escape.
It was “ p’aying ’possum.”
Taking a pistol in each hand, he disengaged himself
from his horse and threw himself flat on his back beside
the animal, which*seemed unable or unwilling to rise.
Stretched Ihtis upon the ground after a violent fall he
appeared dead or stunned, and Gaskell, coming up at full
gallop, did not doubt this for a moment, but exclaimed to
himself with glee—
“ Now I’ve got him !”
The trooper reined in his horse.
Springing to the ground, he slipped his left arm turough


the reins and bent over the prostrate figure of Ned in
order to ascertain whether the bushranger showed any
signs of life.
Kelly had foreseen this movement, and was prepared
for it accordingly.
As the trooper bent over him he raised ids right arm
with the speed of thought and pulled the trigger.
His aim had been a sure one, for the muzzle had almost
touched his victim's head.
Shot through the brain the trooper fell forward upon
the man whom a moment before he had considered so com-
pletely in his power, and whose face and garments he de-
luged with his blood.
Casting off the dead body with an exulting curse and
triumphant chuckle, Ned sprang to his feet.
Then, disengaging the reins from the arm of the corpse,
he sprang with one bound into the saddle of the thorough-
bred.
The noble animal recognised the hand of a master, and,
to Ned’s reminders, darted off at a rate which promised
soon to shake off all pursuit.
The sergeant at the head of the little troop had seen
by the aid of the flashes of lightning the horse which
Kelly was riding fall, and Gaskell come up with the
dismounted fugitive.
He heard the shot, and, imagining it was the trooper who
had fired, spurred furiously on, shouting at the top of his
voice—
“ Don’t kill him—take him alive ! ”
What was his horror to find, on reaching the fallen horse,
that the corpse stretched beside it was not that of Ned, but
of Gaskell, and that the fugitive had obtained a start which,
mounted as he was on a horse fresher and faster than
those of any of his pursuers, rendered all hope of riding
h m down utterly futile.
CHAPTER CXLYI.
TEH THOUSAND POUNDS REWARD.
Whilst the troopers were gathered round the corpse of
their unfortunate comrade, Ned, bending over his new
mount’s neck, continued to push onward at full speed,
heedless cf all obstacles.
His only idea was to distance his pursuers, and also put
as great a distance as possible between himself and Sydney
before daybreak.
For three hours he held on his way, until the heaving
sides of his horse warned him that he was pushing the
poor beast too far.
He saw that he must slacken his pace, or the same fate
would again overtake him as had befallen him with the
trooper’s exhausted animal.
Besides, he reflected that the start he had now gained
had put him out of all immediate danger.
Consequently, he gradually slackened his horse’s pace
to a walk.
Day broke and revealed around him a wide plain dotted
with scattered clumps of timber, and bounded by a dis-
tant range of hills.
He strained his eyes in search of a dwelling, but in
vain.
He saw something, however, infinitely less pleasant,
it was neither more nor less than what looked like a
sheet of paper stuck up against a tree-trunk.
On riding up he found it to be one of the police
handbills, offering a reward of ten thousand pounds for
his apprehension.
Another and another soon met his eye.
The vast silent bush was filled with these mute de-
nunciations of his crimes.
Even in this apparently trackless solitude, only occa-
sionally traversed by shepherd, stockman, or teamster, his
crimes had proclaimed him an outcast and a felon, had set
a price on his head, and called on all good men and true
to join in hunting him down like a wolf.
As He rode on, he saw on tree-trunk after tree-trunk,
posted up by the sides of those advertisements of “ Hol-
loway’s Pills and Ointment,” with which the whole Aus-
tralian Continent has been so lavishly beplast'jred, the
same white police-bill, with its terribly significant lines,
“Murder! £lO,OOO Reward!”
And below a full description of himself.
“ This is getting altogether too boiling,” he muttered,
and instinctively urged on his jaded horse.
Steering by the sun that had just rise®, he continued to
ride away from Sydney.
At length he caught sight of a column of smoke rising
behind some trees, and pushed on cautiously in its di-
rection.
He soon came in sight of a shepherd’s hut.
Halting for a moment, he proceeded to reflect whether
it would be safe to advance, since, with the exception of
the undischarged pistol, he was without means of de-
fence.
It behoved him, therefore, to be cautious, lest he should
fall into the company of foes.
Watching the hut, he noticed a man come to the door,
shake a rug, and then retire.
He came to the conclusion that this was the hut-keeper,
and that the shepherd had probably already started to the
ranges with his sheep.
After waiting a little longer, he resolved at all hazards,
to put this surmise to the test, and pursued his way to the
little dwelling.
As he drew near the same man that he had seen before,,
a sullen-looking, beetle-browed fellow of about thirty,
with a face presenting a compound of imbecility and cun-
ning, again come to the door with a pail in his hand.
He stepped across the threshold and advanced some
steps, and then, suddenly catching sight of Ned—whose
approach at a walking pace he had not heard, on account
of the softness of the saturated turf—he started back,
with a mingled look of surprise and terror.
It seemed as though he was about to bolt back into the
house, but Kelly did not give him time.
“ Hullo ! mate,” he cried, “ whose place is this? ”
“ Mr. Morley’s,” was the answer, in a sullen tone.
' How far am I from Sydney ? ”
“ Close on thirty miles.”
“ You can give me some grub, I suppose ? ” said Ned,
dismounting, and feeling sure of that hospitality never
refused to the wayfarer in the colonies.
The man continued to stare at him, and muttered some
unintelligible answer.
“ Hell and fury, mate! ” cried Ned, his suspicions
rapidly aroused by the man’s manner, “ what the devil
makes you stare at me like that, man ? Do you know
me, eh ? ”
The fellow looked more confused than ever.
“That blood,” he muttered.
“What blood?” thundered Ned, who had forgotten
that, when he had shot Gaskell, the blood of his victim
had spurted all over him.
“ Why, your own, 1 should have thought,” replied the
other, with a look of suspicion. “ Don’t you know you're
smothered in it, face and all ? ”
The recollection of the death-struggle of Gaskell re-
curred to Ned.
With an effort he recovered himself.
“ Well, I daresay I do look something like a butcher in
a slaughter-house, mate,” he said with an attempt at
joviality; “but you needn’t be scared on my account.
The blood’s none of mine, but comes from as big a scoun-
drel as ever tried to plunder a poor chap of his hard-
earned dibs. It comes from one of Ned Kelly’s gang.”
“Ned Kelly’s gang ! ”
“Yes. Just give me a swig of something to clear my
throat—for I am as dry as a lime-kiln—and I’ll tell you
all about it.”
The curiosity of the other was excitgd by this, and he
stepped into the hut, followed by Nt i to whom he at
once handed a pannikin of tea.
The bushranger would have preferred something


stronger, but he swallowed it gratefully, being parched
and exhausted.
“ 1 suppose you wouldn't be sorry to get some of the
blood off your face? \ou don’t seem to know it, but it
covers you like a mask,” said the hut keeper,
“All right. Get me a bucket of water, mate, and I’ll
soon get rid of it Only I’ll put my beast to rights first,”
answered Ned.
lie passed out of the hut, followed by the hut-keeper
—who continued to eye him with something like sus-
picion—and proceeded to rub down his horse, in which
occupation the other lent him a hand with seeming
willingness.
“It's a decent beast you’ve got there,” said the hut-
keeper.
“ Yes,” replied Kelly.
“ But you must have taken something out of him last
night to bring him into this state,” continued the hut-
keeper, critically scanning the animal, whose hair was
matted with sweat, and its legs and belly caked with half-
dried mud.
“ I just think I did,” responded Kelly, “ considering I
had to ride for my life.”
“Ah ! How was that? ”
“ I was bound for Sydney, and being in a bit of a
hurry I pushed on through the night, thinking to reach a
station I know, where I could get a fresh horse. I never
thought of any dangers, when all at once in the darkness
two fellows popped out of the bush and seized the bridle.
There was a bit of a scuffle, and one of them pulled
trigger at me, but, luckily, the cap had, I suppose,
fallen off, and his pistol did not go off. However, they
pulled me out of the saddle and got me down. One
had got his knee on me, and the other was trying to
check my horse fr im bolting, when I drew a pistol and
shot the fellow holding me. He fell on me and deluged
me in blood. I jumped up, knocked over the other, and
got into the saddle. Just as I did so, two shots were
fired from the bush, and not mowing how many more
there might bo, I was off like a shot.”
“ By Jove ! a close shave,” said the hut-keeper.
“ I could hear horses’ hoofs behind me, and drove ahead
at top speed, till in ihe end my beast got the bit between
his teeth and fairly bolted, and by the time I pulled him
up, I’m hanged if 1 knew where I was.”
“Ah ! I see. 1 wondered how it was that you said you
were bound for Sydney, when you rode up here turning
your back on it,” remarked the hut-keeper, with a grin.
“ I suppose they were some of Ned Kelly’s gang?”
“ Of course ; no one else is about here now, is there ?”
“No. Could you make out what sort of a fellow it
was you bowled over?”
“Well, it was as dark as soot, but as far as I could
judge he was a cross-built fellow with a beastly ugly
mug.”
“ Hum, then it wouldn’t be Kelly himself.”
“Why not?” enquired the bushranger,
“Oh ! Kefly’s not at all a bad-looking chap, and I know
his description by heart. I’ve got one of the police hand-
bills in the hut, and I’ve studied it over often enough.
They are stuck up over the bush, too, so that anyone may
read.”
“ The deuce you have,” thought Ned.
“ I should know him if I set eyes on him, but I
never ran across him yet, though I did meet one of his
gang the other day.”
“ Oh, how was that?”
“ I’ll tell you. But you’d better give yourself a sluice,
and come inside and wolf something.”
The horse was rubbed down by this time, and Ned, after
sluicing the blood off his face, entered the hut, and began
to devour a meal of cold chops the other set before him.
The hut-keeper lit his pipe, and sat down on a stool.
He eyed his guest curiously and closely.
“ Well,” said Ned, between two mouthfuls, “how about
i,your meeting with Kelly’s gang ?”
“ Oh, it would take a long time in telling,” implied the
hut-keeper. “ I had been down to the station to get th«
month’s supply of flour and groceries, and was coming
back through the bush with the load on the back of an old
pony, when all at once a big fellow with an awful squint
stepped right out in front of me. 1 kind of guessed what
he was, but you know the bushrangers never meddle with
us, so I just gave him good-day and was going on, when—
“ ‘ What have got there in that bag?’ says be.
“ ‘ Flour and such like,’ I said.
“ ‘ Well, just hand it over.’
“ I s dd, ‘ It’s too bad to want to take a poor chap’s
victuals like that. You’ll get mo in a blessed row with
the boss; he’ll never believe I’ve been stuck up.’
“ ‘ Oh, that be blowed!’ says ho. ‘ Hand over the bag,
straight,’ and he whips out a pistol, and covers me as if
I’d been a parrot.
“ There was nothing to be done, and I gives him the
bag, and he was off into the bush without even a thank-
you, before you could say knife.
“ And a blessed fine row I got into with my mates when
they found there was no damper, and with the boss, who
stuck cut that I ought to have kept the things at any
cost. I’d have liked to have seen him risking his blessed
neck for the sake of a few pounds of mouldy old flour.”
And the hut-keeper puffed savagely at his pipe.
“A tall, squint-eyed fellow, did you say he was?” tn
quirod Ned.
“ Yes.”
“Sandy beard?”
“ Yes. Do you know him?”
“ No ; but it seems to me, as well as I could make out
by the lightning, that the chap I sent to kingdom come
last night was just about such another.”
“And a very good job if it was,” growled the hut-
keeper, who all through the meal had been eyeing Ned
with an attention that the latter could nob help feeling
uneasy about.
“I suppose,” he said, “that since it is known Kelly’s
gang are about here, the police are on the alert after
them?”
“ Oh, the police are a pack of asses. No one cares a
rap about them ; they’ll never do any good,” said the hut-
keepor, who probably at some period of his career had
come into disagreeable contact with the authorities in
question. “But a lot of the leading squatters have
banded together to hunt the fellows out of the district,
and they’ll find it very difficult work trying to get away
from men who know every inch of the country.”
“Just so,” said Ned.
“ I only wish I could catch sight of the chap who boned
my flour,” continued the hut-keeper. “I’d bowl him
over pretty quick.” And as he spoke he glanced at a gun
in one corner of the hut.
Then he turned his attention again on his guest, and
continued his examination of his features.
Ned, having finished his repast, rose.
“Look here, mate,” he said; “my name is George
Dawes, and I’ve got a little station up the Macquarie. If
ever you are that way I won’t forget the turn you’ve done
me ; but in case you don’t, here’s something for your
trouble.”
And he handed him a sovereign.
This very act of liberality served to confirm the other’s
suspicion.
A man who paid so high a price for an act of hospitality
that would have been amply repaid by the gift of a fig of
tobacco must be a queer customer.
As Ned got into the saddle and was about to ride off,
the hut-keeper darted back into the hut, muttering
“I am certain it’s him. I can’t be mistaken. But if it
is 111 land him. The reward is too good to be lost. Ten
thousand pounds ! Oh, crikey ! I’d be a swell for life ;
have my own shay, and lush for a dozen.
When he stepped outside his door again, his gun w:u*
in Ids hand. •


P *diy,had moved slowly away, and was about twenty
off.
N ed!” shouted the hut-keeper.
Mechanically, on hearing his name, Kelly checked his
horse and turned in the saddle.
“ Yes,” he answered, unconsciously betraying himself.
“You've forgotten something.”
“ What?” said Ned, turning his horse round, and pre-
paring to return to the hut.
“ That you’re worth a fortune, dead or alive.”
And as he spoke, the hut-keeper raised his gun and fired
straight at the bushranger.
CHAPTER CXLVJI
FAMILIAR FACES.
The shot sped.
Ned felt the thoroughbred bound convulsively beneath
him
Uttering a fearful oath, Ned, his eyes blazing with
anger and vengeance, sprung-from his horse, but stuck to
the reins, and drawing his pistol, dashed after the hut-
keeper, who, having discharged his gun, was about to
re-enter the hut.
Ned knew he now had the fellow at his mercy, and ap-
proaching the cowering dog with t a ferocious expression
in his firmly set teeth and glistening glances, roared out a
volley of not very choice adjectives at the would-be
murderer, who felt his attempt deserved and would meet
with no mercy at the hands of Kelly.
lie was livid with fear, and saw his only chance was to
make a rush for it out of the hut.
Kelly felt he had no time to lose, even for vengeance,
and sending the contents of his pistol into his enemy’s
body, quickly remounted and was off.
The traitor uttered a loud cry, and stumbled over the
threshold.
The ball that had been destined for Kelly entered
the animal’s nock.
Ned had not noticed this ; and when, after about ten
minutes, the pace of the thoroughbred visibly slackened
he attributed it to the fatigue of the preceding night, and
urged the poor brute on in order to gain the shelter of a
belt of woodland discernible at some distance.
Neither spur nor hand was able to get much more out
of the gallant animal.
The noble creature made a hast effort, and cleared the
space separating them from the trees.
But no sooner did Ned draw rein in order to slacken
his pace on entering their shelter than the poor brute
fell.
A convulsive shudder shook his limbs, and, stretching
them out in one final quiver, he lay motionless.
It was only then that Ned became fully aware of the
extent of the mischief.
What he had taken for simple exhaustion was actually
death.
A fearful oath burst from his hps, and, in his rage, he
fiercely kicked the stiffening corpse of the creature who
had served his end so well and to whom he owed his
life.
THE “ANONYMA”
PICTURE
BOARDS.
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Oelilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
He cursed the luck that deprived him of a horse at the
moment when one was needed.
It was indeed necessary that he should pur; as great a
distance between himself and the district in which he now
found himself as soon as possible.
The hut-keeper had told him that the Ueprecfations of
men whom, he had no doubt, belonged to his band had
roused .he country-side against them, and that, probably,
they would be tracked like wild beasts.
And now the slaughter of the hut-keeper would inevi'
ably lead to this result.
It was necessary to get away at all cost, if the
hut-keeper were only wounded I cou ]d pu t the shep-
herds on the scent when they returned to hut; and, even
if he were dead, there would be efforts made to track his
murderer as soon as the body was discovered.
Ned determined to try to steal a horse from the next
station he came across.
He took from the holsters of the saddle the pistols,
now useless, since he had no means of re-loading them'
and thrust them into a belt which he fashioned from the
stirrup-leathers.
He was in hopes of coming across someone who would
supply him with ammunition.
After glancing round to make certain that there were aa
yet no signs of pursuit, he plunged into the bush.
For two hours he made his way onwards, working in
tne direction of a range of hills he could perceive in the
distance.
At length he reached the foot of the first slope, which
he began to ascend, after first bathing his face and hands
in a little stream that trickled at its base.
Despite the herculean strength with which he was gifted,
and the terrible danger that kept spurring him on every
moment to fresh exertions, fatigue and want of sleep had
begun to tell upon his iron frame.
His legs seemed at times ready to give way under him,
and the inequalities of the ascent caused him from. time to
time to stop and stagger like a drunken man,
A dozen times he was on the point of throwing himself
down and taking the of which he was in such sore
need.
SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby. | Woman.
The Soiled Dove. ■ . D ..„ . _
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of 16 Beau t |^u * Demon.
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The Lad with the Camelias>
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion. Paris Life at Twenty.




Nld KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
“Ills well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess m these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kellt*
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.’’— l'imes, July.
1 he history of Ned Killy and his celebrated black h >rse Nlarco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performings of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Nkd
and ms Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure tiction.”— Press, July.
CHAPTER CXLYll.— Continued.
“ No,” he would mutter, resolutely trying to shake off
the overpowering effects of fatigue, “I’ll go on, I’ll go
on. till I find a safe landing-place to lie in till nightfall ”
lie made his way up the slope, though each moment his
progress germed more difficult.
His bead swam, there was a ringing in his ears, and
from time to time a mist passed before his eyes, and veiled
the rocks and crags that he kept scanning as he advanced
in the hope of disc ivering some hiding-place.
“ There must be some hole about here that I can creep
into, and the stones luckily will show no trace of my
passage,” he thought.
Twice his legs failed him altogether, and he fell
heavily, but, game to the end, he rose again and staggered
onward.
At length his expectations were realised.
On the right, beneath a projecting spur of rock, he
caught sight of what appeared to be the entrance of a
■cave, partly veiled by brushwood.
He made his way to it with some difficulty, across the
broken ground.
The opening was low and narrow, but, after crawling
through it, he found himself in a kind of cave, some ten
or twelve feet deep, and almost high enough for him to
stand upright.
It was perfectly dry, the floor being of gravel, on which
were strewn some large boulders, that had evidently fallen
at some remote period from the summit.
Ned dragged himselve into the cave, and, moving some
of the stones, constructed a rude barricade just within the
entrance.
This precaution taken, he stretched himself at full
length on the gravel, and, despite the hardness of his
Tjouch, was soon fast asleep.
His was the heavy slumber of exhaustion, which a
cannon-shot will hardly break.
When he awcke he was in utter darkness.
He moved to the mouth of the cave, and, after
•cautiously demolishing his barricade, sallied forth.
Night had come on, clear and starlit, and he afe once
glanced to the heavens in quest of the Southern cross, in
order to steer his way by this Australian substitute for the
Pole star.
Ned had recovered from his fatigue, but he felt fear-
fully hungry.
“Curse all, I wish I’d got a bit of ’bacca, even,” he
growled.
lie continued to make his way up the slope, which was
evidently one of t ; >e bottom spurs of the range of hills.
The ascent became every moment more difficult in the
darkness as the hours went on.
Several times he nearly missed his footing, and more
than once was really puzzled as to how he should advance.
At length, after missing his footing and rolling down a
steep incline, he lit upon what, os far as he could make out
Lu the darkness, had some resemblance to a beaten track.
Its sides wore bor’ered, however, by steep rocks,
iioongst which it wound.
Suddenly a new incident caused Ned to forget at once
the difficulties of the route and the hunger that had
assailed him.
He heard about ten paces off a sound which those
accustomed to it have no difficulty iu recognising.
It was the click of a gun-lock.
The next moment a tall figure stepped from behind a
tree growing at the side of the path, and, levelling a gun,
exclaimed in a hoarse voice—
“ Halt, or I fire.”
Ned’s first thought was that he was in the presence of
the men engaged in hunting out his followers.
“If there is a gang, luck’s against me,” he thought;
“ but if there’s only one I’ll try to funk the beggar.”
And pulling one of his empty pistols from °his belt, he
cocked and levelled it with the speed of thought, shouting
as lie did so—
u btow that. Drop your gun or you are a dead man,
you blasted bushranger.”
“Hi! hullo! stop, don’t fire!’ yelled the stranger, as
soon as Ned had spoken.
“ your gun before I count three, oi PII drop you,”
said Kelly, advancing in order, if possible, to grapple with
liis foe before the latte* was aware of his intention.
“All right, Ned, don’t be in such a blessed hurry,”
replied the other, complying with the order. “ Don’t you
know me?”
■•What! Zeph?” exclaimed Ned.
“ Yes, Ned, I and Salmon Roe are here ; and, what 1
suppose will gladden your heart to know, we’ve got Marco
Polo all right at hand.”
“ Yes,” replied Ned, “and a pretty couple of fools you
and Salmon Roe have been making of yourselves.”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ Hasn t it always been my standing order only to take
from those who could afford it, and never to meddle with
a poor man eh ?’’
“ Yes.”
“ Isn t that the only way to have friends and spies
amongst all the hut-keepers and the shepherds and the
like, so that one may be sure of help and information as
to what the police are up to ?”
“\es,” replied the other with a downcast air, for he
began to see what Ned was driving at.
“Well, then, what do you mean by plundering such
peopje ? W hat the devil put you up to such a mean trick
as to rob a poor, honest, hard-working hut-keeper of a
few mouthfuls of victuals ?”
Ned thundered out this moral lesson, as he considered it,
in the most impressive fashion
Zeph continued to look downcast, and really to
feel ashamed. °
Resides, he was tremendously puzzled as to how Ned
had become acquainted iu such an accurate fashion with
his malpractices.
If ho had only known that Kelly had just put a bullet
into the “poor, honest, hard-working hut-keeper” in
question, not only would his astonishment have ceased,
but he might have been tempted to enquire whether rob-
bing a man did him more harm than shooting him.
“ Come,” continued Ned, “I don’t want to cut up rough


with such an old pal, but you must see that such a game
can only end in rousing the whole country against us.
What other devil’s tracks have you been up to since we
parted ?”
“ Why, the tact is that the country is pretty well roused
against us as it is. Those cursed bills with the reward
have set men’s mouths watering, and neither Salmon Roe
nor myself has dared to go into St hut or approach a
station, lest we should bo mistaken for you and shot down
off-hand, or else collared as belonging to your gang/’
“ Yes,” said Ned, meditatively, “you are right. Things
are getting too hot in this quarter. I think we had either
better knock off work altogether for a spell and lie close,
or else cross the herring-pond.”
Whilst they had been speaking, Zeph had been piloting
his captain across the tolerably smooth track leading almost
parallel to that by which he had ascended the hill.
It ended in a small natural basin almost entirely fdled
with trees.
Through their trunks the glow of a fire was discernible,
but so steep were the sides of the hollow and so remote
its situation, that the flames could only have been sighted
by someone coming along the path they were traversing.
A figure lounging beside the fire started up at their
approach and raised a gun.
It was Salmon Roe.
A whistle from Zeph assured him that they were friends
approaching, and a minute later he was welcoming Ned.
A huge frying-pan was soon brought into requisition,
and chops, cut from the carcase of a sheep hanging to the
bough of a tree, were fried for supper.
Ned glanced at the sheep.
“ Where did yon get that mutton ?”
“Why, to tell you truth,” said Zeph, in an apologetic
fashion, “we had ts bone it off Morley’s run the other
alay, we were so sharp set. We can t starve, and, as I told
you before, we daren’t show our faces.”
Ned smelted in silence for a few minutes.
“ Where’s Marco Polo ?” he asked, abruptly.
“ Close handy, and your iron plates too. Shall I bring
•him?'
“ Yes, and bring the armour, and give me some powder
md bullets. Y'ou’ve raised such a hornets’ nest about us
jhat we may have to bolt at any moment.”
After examining his horse, Ned reloaded the pistols of
the dead trooper.
“ I feel a little more able to take my own part than i did
half-an-hour ago,” he remarked, “ when I tried to bully
you with an empty pistol.”
“An empty pistol!” cried Zeph.
“Yes,” answered Ned. “You’ll never have such
another chance of getting rid of me, as you had then, and
he laughed grimly.
Though he said this as if in jest he was not exactly easy
in his mind, remembering the treachery of former com-
Hides.
Tracked and harassed as they were, Zeph and Salmon
Roe might be tempted to give him up to secure immunity
for themselves.
“Look here, boys.” be said, after a pause, “ Ivo got a
(Man that I think we had better act on.
“ Spit it out,” said Salmon Roe.
“You two had better start to-morrow for the Murrum-
bidgee, where you are not known, and be quiet foi a
month or two. You must take Marco Polo with you and
leave him there. Then get quietly down to the coast and
ship for England,”
“ For England? ” _ „
“Yes. iam going there ; this is too hot for me.
“ Are you going with us? ” ... . ,
“No. I must get back to Sydney, despite the nsr.,
because I have got a lot of plunder buried there. 1 snail
lie by in the day-time, and travel at night. Once m ..lie
town” I can disguise myself and take my pas-
sage before the very nose of the police.”
After dividing the money he had about lum with ms
two pals, ami arranging for their meeting in England.
Ned and Salmon Roe lay down beside the lire, leaving
Zeph on the watch.
CHAPTER CXLVIIL
CAPTURED.
The following morning Zeph and Salmon Roe started
leaving Ned monarch of all he surveyed.
His idea was to keep quiet all day, and set cut on hu
travels at nightfall.
If he saw a chance of doing so, he meant to procure e
horse.
“ Procure,” to his mind, had a very elastic signification,
like Shakespeare’s “ Convey.”
It meant either to buy one, if he saw a chance of doing
so without arousing any suspicion as to his identity, or to
steal one, and after riding to the outskirts of the town be
turn it loose.
As he meant to travel at night he judged that a good
long nap in the afternoon would do him no harm.
The recollection of the cave in which he passed the pre-
ceding day occurred to him.
He resolved to take shelter in it.
He took up a gun which Salmon Roe had left him, and
made his way towards it.
Creeping into it, he stretched himself on a rug with
which his friends had also provided him, and, lighting his
pipe, found himself exceedingly comfortable.
Meanwhile, things had been taking a very unfavourable
turn as regarded his prospects of reaching Sydney,
The hut-keeper whom he had fired at was only
wounded.
lie was unable to leave the hut and give an alarm, but
on the shepherds’ returning home he informed them of tbt-
occurrence.
The police were at once communicated with, for {ho
hut-keeper made out that Kelly had made a brutal and uu -
provoked attack on him, and thereby aroused a feeling of
sympathy with himself, and disgust against the bus),
ranger. ,
lie was very careful not to say that he had fired first,
with a view of gaining the reward.
The news reached Kenneth Rothsay.
The young chief of the police had begun to feel some •
thing like a personal animosity growing up against u.y
daring ruffian who had so often foiled him.
On learning that Ned had been seen on Mr. Money's
station, ho at once started for it.
Travelling through the night, he reached the shepherds
hut at daybreak the morning after the struggle.
A number of people were assembled there, for the mos>
part settlers of the better class, who had reason to dreau
Ned’s depredations.
Kenneth at once assumed the direction of operations.
The tracks by which Kelly had left the hut were so
up by others as to be almost effaced, aud to attorn/"
pick them out seemed hopeless.
At length it was suggested that a shepherd in the neigt
bourhood hacTa dog of wonderful skill and sagacity that
might be of service. _ .
A considerable time was lost in sending for the annual
and its owner, but at length they arrived,
A fresn difficulty was to get the man to consent to take
part in the chase ; but at length he agreed to try.
It was in vain, however, that a handkerchief left behind
by Nod was shown the dog, for he could not or would not
track him.
At last someone explained the reason.
Kelly had left on horseback.
The case seemed hopeless again, when a scout who had
been sent out returned with the news that a dead horse
had been found just within the nearest timber. ,
It? description tallied with that given by the hut-Reaper
of the animal ridden by the bushranger.
; A party headed by Kenneth at once rode off to tfta gpo«.
1 in question, but by this time it was getting late m the day.


The dog was again brought into requisition, and after
some trouble was put on Ned’s track.
Fortunately no one else had passed that way, and the
animal, having at length made out what was required of
him, went along steadily on the trail.
Kenneth followed close at hand.
At length the track led up into the hills, and the pur-
suers, on reaching the foot of the slope Ned had ascended,
were obliged to abandon their horses.
They scrambled after the dog on foot, and Kenneth, in
his eagerness, far outstripped the remainder.
Kenneth saw the dog dart with a growl into a hole be-
neath a projecting spur of rock.
Before he could follow it across the broken ground, a
figure darted from the mouth of the cave, and, catching
sight of the young chief of the police, turned and fled
upwards along a narrow and broken path.
It was Ned, Avhose slumbers had been rudely disturbed
by the sudden arrival of the dog, which had rushed into
the cave when following the track taken by the bushranger
the day before.
On seeing it, he guessed the purpose to which it had
been put.
Not knowing how close the pursuers were at hand, he
refrained from firing, lest he should guide them by the re-
port, and, seizing a huge stone, dashed it bang on to the
head of the unfortunate animal.
Then, seizing his gun, he rushed out as described.
Kenneth started in hot pursuit, and the remainder of
the tracking party on reaching the spot found their leader
bad disappeared.
Their only guide as to the direction which he had taken
was a distant shout, evidently given to guide them in the
now thickening gloom.
Following in the direction from which this proceeded,
they advanced some way at a slow rate, when suddenly
the report of a gun at a considerable distance ahead in-
spired them to fresh exertion*.
Meanwhile Kenneth had kept on kz hot pursuit of
Ned.
Young, active, agile, and accustomed in his youth to
scramble over the hills and crags of Scotland, the chief of
the police was perhaps a better mountaineer than the
bushranger.
As regarded training they were both in very fair condi-
tion, for the sea voyage and the days since spent in the
saddle by Kenneth had completely recovered him from the
effects of his London life of frivolous dissipation.
But Ned knew he was running for life, and this made
him put forth a pace that Kenneth had all his work cut out
to equal.
Gradually, however, the bulk of the bushranger began
to tell, and he began to find his progress more difficult as
the ascem grew steeper.
The leap from ro k to rock jarred his mighty frame.
Bitterly ho longed for Marco Polo, and cursed the luck
that had led him to separate himself from his gallant
steed.
He saw, however, one chance.
It was rapidly getting dusk, and if he could only pro-
long the chase a little while longer, he would Lave a very
fair prospect of getting off in the darkness, when pursuit
amongst the hills would be quite out of the question.
He would hove had no hesitation in stopping and grapp-
ling his pursuer, who would have been almost a child in
l, : s herculean hands, but he judged the duration of a
struggle would have afforded his pursuers time to arrive
o.i the scene, and by numbers overpower him.
From time to time he glanced back, and his hopes re-
vived at seeing only one pursuer.
Ho wondered why Kenneth did not fire, but the latter
had resolved not to do so if he could possibly avoid it,
being desirous at all hazards to take Ned alive.
The track the two were now pursuing led between two
"trsLpitous walls of limestone.
& short distance ahead it turned abruptly to the right.
Ned put on a desperate spurt, hoping to get out of sight
round this corner, and thus effect his escape.
Kenneth in turn redoubled his efforts.
lie saw the bushranger turn the corner, and just at
that moment his foot caught against a loose pebble and
he almost fell.
When he recovered himself, Ned had disappeared round
the angle.
lie hastened onward.
Rounding it in turn, he found himself in face of a small
natural amphitheatre, some forty feet across.
The bare limestone sides rose almost perpendicularly to
a height of twenty feet.
The surface of the soil forming the floor was covered
with smooth green turf, dotted here and there with a few
dwarf shrubs.
Kenneth stood at the narrow opening which seemed the
only way in, and gazed round him in amazement.
The perpendicular sides defied all attempts at further
progress, the bushes would hardly have given shelter to a
rabbit, and yet Kelly had vanished.
It was impossible that he could have scaled the rocks,
and equally impossible that he could have hidden himself
in the bushes.
Kenneth caught sight of something like a dark fissure
in the rocks on the further side.
He stepped into the little amphitheatre, pistol in hand.
“If you move a step nearer you arc a dead man,” rang
out the outlaw’s challenge, and the barrel of a gun was
protruded from the fissure that had attracted his attention.
Kenneth feared no single man on earth, and stalked
onward.
“Go back,” roared Ned, “go back. I’ve sworn to lay
low the first man that steps over that strip of turf. Back,
or I fire.”
“ Fire, then, for I have sworn to take you back to
Sydney tied to my horse’s tail, or wet the turf with my
heart’s blood. Fire then,” he added, though at the sam®
time he veered to one side instinctively.
A bright flash shot forth in reply from the fissure,
but his aim for once failed him, and the bullet merely
grazed Kenneth’s cheek.
Thrusting his pistol almost contemptuously into his
belt, and unsheathing the heavy sabre he had retained in
his hand during the pursuit, Kenneth sprang forward.
As ho did so a figure, looking gigantic in the dim
light, bounded from the fissure with clubbed gun to meet
him.
A fearful downward blow shivered his weapon in his
grasp; bu> -Lifting forward, he dashed the hilt in Ned’s
face, and moment they were locked in deadly
grapple.
Ned met his man boldly at tms game, Dut tound he
had to do with an antagonist who was able apparently at
one and the same time to convert himself into an eel, an
india-rubber spring, a rod of elastic steel, and a bar of
unwrought iron.
To and fro they wrestled over the turf.
“Curse your spurs!” snarled Ned, as the rowels of
Kenneth’s “persuaders” tore open his calf in an attempt
to back-heel him.
“ You’re right,” replied Rothsay, grimly, as they caught
in a trailing bramble and almost brought their wearer to
the ground.
Ned tried all he knew to get rid ol his formidable foe,
in the hope that if ho could only accomplish this ho
might retrace his steps from the species of ‘ no thorough-
fare ” in which he found himself, before the arrival of the
remainder of his pursuers.
Twice in succession Ned lifted his man and swung him
round, but each time Kenneth alighted like a cat on his
outspread feet instead of upon the broad of his back an
the bushranger had anticipated.
A third time Ned drew his opponent to his cheai
and whirled him round, and it looked all over with Ken-
neth, but just as he was falling he managed to click hi®


adversary with one leg and make a step outwards with
the other, so that the two foes came heavily to the
ground side by side.
Before cither could secure any further advantage
there was a shout, and the remainder of the pursuers,
rushing into the arena, threw themselves like a living
avalanche upon the prostrate form of the bushranger.
Ned fought desperately, writhing and plunging like a
snared beast, and striking out with fists and feet indis-
criminately at his foes.
Twice he almost gained his feet, but only to be borne
down again by weight c/ numbers.
With one hand he ra saaged to seize one of his assail-
ants by the throat, and had almost choked him into insen-
sibility before a violent blow on the head from the butt of
a pistol forced him to relax his grip as he fell back half-
stunned.
Before he could recover himself a pair of handcuffs
were slipped on to his wrists and Lis elbows pinioned
behind him with a carbine-sling.
A cord was then attached to his ankles, so that he could
not step more than a certain distance at a time.
“ You had better put a bullet through me at once,” he
growled, when he had realised the impossibility of any
further resistance,
“ Not a bit of it,” answered Kenneth, wiping his fore-
head, for he was almost as exhausted as his antagonist,
“ I prefer to take you alive to Sydney, and let the autho-
rities settle your fate.”
Ned relapsed into sullen silence, and, refusing to walk,
was half-dragged, half-carried to the spot where the
horses had been left.
Mounted on one of these, with his legs fastened beneath
its belly, and escorted by Kenneth and the troopers, ho
was conveyed to Sydney, and, after a brief examination
before a magistrate, committed to prison to await his
trial.
CHAPTER CXLIX.
HOIST WITH HIS OWN PETARD.
On the very day that Ned was committed for trial “ Kit
the Cruiser ” put into Sydney.
On learning the position of his brother he resolved to
leave no stone unturned to help him, and, being un-
known, his efforts would not challenge attention.
The first thing he did Avas to hasten to the hotel Avhere
Kate Avas employed as barmaid.
From her he learned the full details of Ned s capture,
and also that his condemnation to death would be the
certain result of a trial.
“Wo must get him out of this fix somehow, he said to
Kate “ but I’m hanged if 1 can see the way to do it just
yet. ’Are any of his pals handy? they might put one up
to a wrinkle.” ,„ t ~ T e
tt x don’t think so,” answered Kate, “ 1 fancy they are
all up country.” . , , , , .
“That may be aivkward if one wants a hand lent at
anytime. It doesn’t do to trust everyone when there r
such a bumping reward offered.”
tt a u that a Avoman can do, I will, said the bar.xi-.id,
“1 managed to get him off pretty cleverly a few days
back ” and, to Kit’s great amusement, she related lioav she
bad baffled the detectives by turning out the gas.
tt That’s the sort of thing avg must trust to. _ Doddery,
not violence,” said Kit, “but the first thing is to get w
interview with Ned and let him know we re going to worfc
f ° “ I expect that will be rather matter ; you aaull
have to get a magistrate’s order.”
The girl’s anticipation was correct. .
On Kit presenting himself at the door of tne jail he
was informed that under no circumstances could he be
allowed an interview with Ned, unless furnished wit i an
order signed by a magistrate and countersigned by the
Another interview with Kate, he learned the
name of the softest-hearted and most muddle-headed
magistrate in Sydney.
The next day, got up in the most correct rig-out of a
skipper ashore, he presented himself at the> private resi-
dence of the gentleman in question.
He played his part to perfection.
lie looked and acted the honest, uprignt British tai
utterly befogged by all shore-going customs to the life.
Ho drew tears from the worthy magistrate's eyes b> the
little picture he sketched of his feelings on learning
that his brother, whom, despite his crimes, he had never
ceased to cherish, was a prisoner awaiting trial on such
terrible charges.
“ Many a time, sir, when I’ve been pacing the dock' at
night with the old barky quietly slipping through the
water. I’ve looked up at the stars above and thought ct
the time when we two were laris .at our mother’s knee.
And I’ve said to myself that, after all, it was as wel
that the poor old soul had gone aloft before one of her
boys should turn out so badly as my unfortunate, mbs
guided brother.”
This was pitching it very strong, but, fortunately, th
magistrate was unarqu tinted with the details of Ned’
birth and parentage, uni swallowed Kit’s lies one after
another like oysters.
But he would not at once give the order, whereupon
Kit called upon the prison “ parson,” a young prig, who
was <as fit fr-v the reclaiming of felons’ souls as for re
claiming the Bog of Allan.
All hie efforts would bo about as successful in the out
case as the other.
When Kit called, I’ho pious pastor was reading a fas»
French novel, which are generally only one remove from
the work of that worthy pair, Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant
in their notorious “ Fruits of Philosophy.”
Kit could make no impression at nrst upon the young
clerical, but the golden key apparently acts as powerfully
upon these concierges of the portals of Heaven as upoH
the “ Jeameses ” of other establishments.
Offering to subscribe £lO in gold towards the charitable
fund under the control of his youthful reverence, the
application received his support, and the order was even-
tually obtained.
Furnished with this, he proceeded to the chief police
office and obtained Kenneth Rothsay’s signature to the
document.
Thence he started for the prison.
Before applying for admission he walked round it twice,
and examined the outside in detail.
At certain points he shook his head dolefully, but when
he found that one side looked into a narrow and coir
paratively deserted lane, a smile of satisfaction crossed
his features.
His survey completed, he presented himself at the en-
trance. . , T
The officials, having such a desperate character as JNcu
under their oaie, were on their mottle.
Kit's order Avas examined and scrutinised by half-a-
dozen in turn, and at length being satisfied cf its genuine-
ness, permission was given for him to be taken to Nod’s
cell after he had first undergone a search, lest he should
have come provided Avith any implement to aid the prisoner
in effecting his escape. „ r ~ , . . „
“ It’s lucky 1 did not bring the stuff I thought of,
he said to himself. .
The regulations there Avere not so strict as at soma
places, and though, when Kit and Ned Avere placed
face to face, there was an iron grating between them,
so that it Avas impossible to pass anything to the prisoner,
there Avere no Avarders to listen to their conversation.
After a brief greeting, Kit said—
u Look here, Ned—-we moan to got yen out of tins.
Are there any pals in the town who can lend a hand m
the job?” . , . , ..
it i think not. Slop a bit. Dc you tlnax a girl wouM
be any use?”


“1 don’t think so; besides, there’s Kate.”
“Well, if you should want one, there’s a girl ca’led
Jess, at a Mr. Fielding’s, whom you’ll find as sharp as a
needle and as true as steel. Don’t forget the name,
now ! ”
“All right. And now, do you know anything about
this place you’re in ? M
“Anything about the place?”
“ Yes ; about the shape of it, the build of it, and such-
like V”
Ned laughed.
“ If I’d laid every blessed brick in the old caboose with
my own hands I could hardly know it better. I’ve talked
with old lags till I know the inside of every jail in the
colony as well as you do the cabin of your ship ”
“ Capital! Now, on which side is the exercising-yard,
east or west?”
“ To the east.”
“ Just inside the high wall fronting the street ?’’’
“ Yes.”
“ Well, what is the range of buildings on the other side
—the west?”
“ The infirmary.”
“ Better and better. We shall fix it all right."
“ But how ’?”
“ Just have patience a minute. As you’re only com-
mitted for trial, you’re allowed to bring what you like to
eat ?”
“ Yes.”
“Where do you get your grub from?”
“ Oh there’s a kind of a cookshop outside that serves as-’'
a canteen. But it’s no use trying to send in files in loaves
or any of those kind of dodges—they’re certain to b A
smoked.”
“ Never fear; they won’t smoke my dodge.”
“ But what is it ?
“ Well, I’ll tell you part of it. Let’s see, to-day’s Wed-
nesday. Well, next Monday you order a roast duck—a
cold one—for dinner.”
“ Well ?”
“ Eat the legs and wings, but don’t touch the carcase.
Take out the stuffing, tie it round your knee like a
poultice and keep it there all night, and next day you’ll
be in the infirmary.”
“ I begin to see.”
On Wednesday or Thursday night you’ll hear an organ
playing ‘Garryowen’ outside the walls. Half-an-hour
after it stops hold yourself in readiness to slip into’ the
courtyard the infirmary looks on. Have you got a good
nerve ? ”
“Yes, I guess I have.”
“ Well then, when blazes seems to have broken loose,
slip out of the infirmary window, get into the left-hand
corner of the courtyard, and when a stone comes over
pick it up.”
“ Time’s up,” interrupted the warder, cutting short the
interview.
Ned could not quite understand the plan of escape thus
sketched by Kit, but he resolved to follow out his
brother's instructions to the letter.
On leaving the prison, Kit strolled back to the hotel-
bar.
“ A girl has bv.en here asking after you,” said Kate.
“ Do you know who she is ?”
“ Yes ; her name is Jess, and she knows Ned. She has
learnt somehow that you’ve had an order to see him given
you, and she wants to know how he is ”
“ Where's she to be found? Ned spoke of her ; and 1
think she’ll come in handy.”
Kate told him, and that very evening he managed to
have an interview with Jess.
The girl expressed her perfect willingness to aid him
in his schemes.
The next morning she had a tiff with Mrs. Fielding, and
left her situation at a moment’s notic-'—a thing so common
in the colonies that it excited aospiciou.
She at once joined Kit, who had taken a small furnished
house in the older part of the town.
The first care of Kit had been to remove a number of
packages ashore from his schooner, and then send her
round to the mouth of the llawkesbury River.
He would not risk her in Sydney with the job he had
in view.
His next task was to purchase a barrel organ which
played “ Garryowen ” among other tunes, and to provide
himself with a long, loose coat, peaked hat, and a grey
wig and beard, by the aid of which he could completely
disguise himself.
When these were on, his bronzed face aided the decep-
tion and gave him the appearance of an old Italian
organman.
Thus equipped and with Jess, disguised by means
of dye applied to her face and hair and equipped with a
tambourine, he began to play about the streets in the
vicinity of the prison, so that people might get used to
his presence.
On Saturday he sent Jess out to market to buy a duck.
This was duly plucked, stuffed with the sage and onions,
and roasted by the girl the following day.
When it was cold Kit withdrew the skewer fastening
the flap of the neck and took out the stuffing, which he
p’aced on a plate.
Then taking a brown powder from a small box, evi-
dently of Oriental manufacture, he sprinkled it over the
stuffing, mixed it up thoroughly, and returned the sage
and onions, thus flavoured, to its original place, and re-
fastened the flap.
Jess looked on in wonderment; but a few words of ex-
planation satisfied her.
Prisoners awaiting trial were allowed to purchase food
at the canteen already spoken of, or to have it sent in
from their homes.
In every case, however, it was subjected to a most
careful examination by the authorities, and in Ned’s case
precautions were redoubled.
In order to break ground for Kit’s plan, Kate had sent
in several little delicacies for her brother, which had all
been examined and found all right, and on Monday morn-
ing the duck was presented as if from her.
“Ah ! it’s well to be a fine-looking fellow, and have all
the girls take an interest in you,” said one of the warders
who, like his comrades, fancied that Kate must be Ned’s
sweetheart and not his sister. “ What a beautiful bird !”
“Well, I for one shouldn’t care to change places with
that fine-looking fellow. It’s not many more ducks he’ll
have the eating of in this world,” said his comrade.
“ All the same it’s a beautiful bird!” r plied the other,
eyeing it regretfully. “ And to think that that chap inside
will bolt the whole of it, like the shark lie is.”
“He has a devil of a twist! But come, let’s have a
look at the duck.”
Taking it up, he pulled out all the skewers, examined
the giblets, which were fixed beneath the wings, and
then, taking up a knife, split the bird down the centre,
and turned out the stuffing.
“Nothing there,” he remarked.
“ How nice that stuffing smells !” said the other.
A few minutes later the duck was placed before Ned.
He carefully followed the directions given him.
Pulling the bird to pieces, for he was not allowed the use
of a knife or fork, he picked the legs and wings with great
relish.
Then, taking out his handkerchief, he placed it on the
table and folded it in the form of a bandage.
In tire centre of this he placed the stuffing, and, rolling
up one leg of his trousers, tied this novel about
his knee.
He had just pulled the trouserdeg down when the
warder re-entered the cell to clear away.
“ Hullo !” he said, noticing the carcase Ned had not
touched, “ off your feed to-day, eh ?”
u Xaa-” answered Kelly, “ I feel a bit seedy.”


The man grinned.
“it is no use trying the malingeryng game, my boy, if
that’s what your up to,” he thought.
Strictly following Kit’s injunction, Ned kept on the
poultice when he turned in.
After a time a kind of itcning, tingling sensation began
to manifest itself in his knee.
It was rather unpleasant, but not absolutely painful.
At the same time the knee seemed to swell, and several
times in the night he slackened the bandage arouui it.
The first he did on awakening was to glance at
his knee.
The sight that met his eye filled him with horror.
The joint had swollen to twice its normal size.
The skin, distended almost to bursting-point, was of a
deep purple tone, verging here and there on a greenish
black, with spots of whitish yellow.
“By , here's a pretty go !” gasped Ned. “ What
devil’s trick has Kit. been up to ? 1 shan t be able to
move for a week.”
But, to his intense amazement, he found, on venturing
to move the limb, that, despite its morbid appearance, the
joint moved freely and without stiffness, or even pain of
any kind.
lie began to see the trick.
His first care was to get rid of the poultice, and then,
returning to bed, he began to groan heavily.
Shortly afterwards the warder entered the cell.
“ Phew ! what a stink of sage and onions!” was his
first remark. “ Hullo, Kelly, ain’t you up yet?”
Ned groaned in reply.
“ What’s up, man ?”
“ Oh ; Lord, my knee!” groaned Ned,
“ What’s the matter?”
“My knee -oh, the awful pain !”
And Ned made a face that caused the man to start back
in astonishment. . , ...... ,
“ Come, let’s have a look at it,” he said, half-incredn-
°“ Gently, gently!” cried Ned, as the other laid his
hand on the bed-clothes to draw them aside and inspect
the seat of pain. , .
“Good heavens!” exclaimed the warder, as the knee
appeared. “ This is awful. Here, I’ll go for the surgeon
at once ” , . A . ,
And he darted out and locked the door.
Ned continued to groan ; and about a quarter of an hour
later the warder made his reappearance, accompanied by
the surgeon, a fussy, bustling little man, who, to tell the
truth, did not appear particularly inclined to credit his
subordinate’s report. , ,
“ As big as a cannon ball and as purple as a beetroot
von say ?” were his words as he entered the cell. ‘1 ooh .
nonsense! Come, my man,” he continued, addressing
Kelly, “ let’s see this knee of yours. ‘
But no sooner had he caught sight of it than he seemed
absolutely dumbfounded.
“Why—why, this?’ he gasped.
Approaching the bed, he laid his hand on the kneecap.
He did not hurt it in the least, but, no s oo »er had his
fingers touched it. than Ke ly uttered a roar that would
have done credit to a prize bull.
“Is it painful?” asked the surgeon.
“ Oh, oh ! I should just like you to have it and see,
groaned the bushranger.
The doctor bent over the afflicted limb.
“ Most singular case -serious, too. We must have him
111 the warder, who was a slave
to duty, “ we have strict orders from the governor that
he i“CtCris iS Jl'r returned the peppery doctor
whose dignity was hurt at this answer. “ Unless he leaves it
at once fll answer that he’ll only leave it in a coffin. Unless
he’s taken at once to the infirmary, ™ n h °*
life. Besides, how the devil do you think the man can
escape when he can’t even put a foot to the ground?
However, call the governor, it you like.”
The governor was accordingly summoned, but, In?
presence of Ned’s knee and with the doctor’s assurance that
he must be at once removed, he did not hesitate to give
orders for him to be carried at once to the infirmary.
Ned played the part of an invalid, according to hi*
lights, to perfection —not only by howling with feigned
pain when lifted on to asi c c, but by cursing the
governor, the doctor, and th • v w : the prison in
terms that made his hearers 1»: "in cold, at every jolt
that occurred during the transit.
Placed on a bed in the Ldv m my, he lay back and closed
his eyes, as though exhauste i.
The doctor placed a hau l up-m his knee.
“Hold hard!” roared Kelly ‘lts as if you prodded
me with a red-hot iron.”
“ When did the pain begin ?” enquired the doctor.
“ Ever since one of those cursed cowards who caught
me kicked me, I’ve felt it,” replied Ned.
“ But why didn’t you tell me?”
“ Because I’m not a blessed milksop, to make a fuss
over it. Only to-day I couldn't stand it any longer.”
The doctor asked a few more questions, looked grave,
and ordered the application of cooling lotions during the
day.
At nightfall the swelling had not diminished, and next
morning the knee looked if anything, worse.
The doctor examined it, shook his head, and at uooi.
sent a note to one of his colleagues, the most eminent
surgeon in Sydney.
In course of the afternoon he arrived.
His colleague of the prison briefly explained the cause
of the injury, and then together they examined the
patient.
“Are you still in pain?” enquired the prison-surgeon.
“ No, I feel a little easier,” replied Ned, who was be
ginning to get tired of howling.
The doctors exchanged a significant look.
They then drew apart.
“Mortification?” said one.
“ Pm afraid so.”
A brief consultation followed.
Then certain orders were given to tke two male
nurses.
One of them left the ward, and returned with a case of
instruments. , . . . ,
The other began to arrange sundry basins, towels, and
the like. . . , , . . . .
Ned watched these preparations with a certain interest.
He had an idea they concerned him.
Nor was he wrong.
The prison-doctor approached him.
“ My poor fellow,” he began, “ I know you are a man of
courage, and I must tell you that you need it all now.
“What do you mean?” . .
“Why, from The appearance of your knee it is plain
that mortification is setting in, and amputation is in-
“ Amputation ! What the devil is amputation ? cried
“It means, my poor fellow,’ said the other doctor, ad-
vancing, “that in order to save your lile we shall have to
cut off°your leg.”
CHAPTER CL.
ESCAPE.
Cut off his leg to save his hfe !
Ned felt his blood rim cold. *
What an awful position he was in I
If he confessed that his illness was feigned, it would hb
guessed at once that it was meant to cover an attempt at
escape, and he would in future be watched both night ana
But then, on the other hand, if he did not confer*,
doctors would have bis leg off.


Mentally, and with touching impartiality, he cursed
hem and Kit. who, he felt, had led him into this hole.
He resolved to make an appeal.
“Do you think you need cut it off? It feels much
easier tins afternoon.”
“ Just so, my man. That’s the worst possible sign ; it
means mortification.”
Bitterly Ned regretted his lack of medical knowledge.
If he had only known that much, he thought, how he
would have howled.
At that moment there was a knock at the door of the
infirmary.
One of the attendants went to open it.
“A message from Government House for Dr. Philpott,”
ae said, returning with a note.
‘ Give it me ” said the prison-surgeon’s colleague.
1 Good heavens!” he exclaimed, on opening it. “ Lady
Belmont has been thrown from her carriage and is still in-
sensible. 1 must be off at once.”
“Certainly,” said the other.
‘lt’s a pity. This is such a curious case that I should
certainly have liked to have performed the operation my-
self.”
Quite so. It is a curious case, and, to tell you the
truth, I really don’t like to undertake it single-handed. I
do not think a few hours’ delay will make any material
difference. Suppose you come here the first thing to-
morrow morning ?”
“ Well, after all, we may be mistaken about the mortifi-
cation, for—to tell the truth—l never saw a limb present
such an appearance before. Let it be as you say. I will
call to-morrow morning at seven,”
Ned watched him hurry off, and saw the basins, etc.,
put away.
“ Don’t you mean to cut it off?” he enquired anxiously
of the prison surgeon.
“No; we are going to give you another chance. So
good-night. Renew the dressings every other hour,”
he continued to the nurse, and then took hi? departure.
Kelly began to breathe more freely.
“ That was a precious narrow squeak,” he thought. “ A
very little more and 1 should have had to have blurted
out the truth. I wonder what the devil kind of stuff Kit
put in the stuffing that has bamboozled the doctors so.”
Not even Kit could have answered that question.
The East has its medical secrets that have baffled the
most skilful European enquirer, and he was ignorant of the
very name of the drug which had been given him—to-
gether with instructions for its use—by an old Malay
pirate whom he had once befriended.
As the afternoon approached, Ned began to grow
anxious and to lift his head at the slightest sound.
A dozen times he fancied he could hear the strains of
“ Garryowen ” rising in the air, but, after straining his
ears for a minute or two, found that he had been self-
deceived.
The suspense began to grow intolerable.
At last, just about dusk, he raised his head again.
Yes, it was the signal.
As the brisk and stirring notes of one of the liveliest
fighting-tunes ever written rose in the air Ned’s pulses
began to throb in unison, and he felt tempted to fling
himself from his bed.
Recovering himself he began to think matters out.
He would have half-an-hour in which to act from the
moment at which the music ceased.
True; but the question to him was whether he would
have one or two nurses to deal with when the moment came
for escaping.
It was not that two, men could stop him, but it is
difficult for one man, however powerful, to get the better
of two without making a noise.
And a noise was above all things to be avoided.
'lhioue again favoured him.
« nurses relieved each other at intervals during the
Ned happened to be the only patient in hia waKi, wm&a
was a small one especially set apart for cases reunion*
surgical operations that could not be well carried on before
the other patients.
As he was to all appearances a complete cripple, only
one man had been told off for the night watch, and ha
came on duty just as the organ ceased playing.
The day attendants whom he relieved quitted tie ward
a few minntes later.
Ned fixed his eyes on the clock at the end of the ward.
The hands seemed to him to creep with leaden slow-
ness.
At length when they marked fifteen minutes after the
music had stopped, he gave a low groan and called feebly
to the attendant.
“ What is it, mate ?” enquired the latter.
“ Just lift me up and give me something to drink,” said
Ned.
The attendant approached, and, passing his arm behind
Ned’s back, raised him up.
But no sooner was the bushranger in a sitting position
than he suddenly threw both arms round the other with a
jerk that almost drove the breath out of his body, hauled
him on to the bed and threw himself on the top of him.
So sudden was the attack that the nurse had not even
time to cry out before he was on his back.
Then he opened his mouth to do so, but before he could
utter a sound Ned stuffed his cotton night-cap into it and
stopped him.
He followed this up by squeezing the man’s throat until
he was almost strangled.
When he had choked the hapless wretch into insensibi-
lity, Ned tied a handkerchief over his mouth, which still
contained the night-cap, and then bound him hand and
foot with the bandages that had served for his own knee.
He then rose and was about to proceed towards the
window’
Sudd ) T _ly a very important want occurred to him, and
one which unless it was supplied would render all further
attempt at escape useless.
He had no clothes.
Patients were not allowed to have their garments in th«
ward, and though a flannel dressing-gown had been placed
by his bedside, it was utterly impossible for him to maks
his appearance in public in such attire.
After a moment’s reflection he returned to the atten-
dant, and, temporarily slackening his bonds, peeled off has
coat, waistcoat, and trousers.
Even with these he was not much better off.
The man he had despoiled was about five feet six, an I
though he was fortunately a very fat fellow, the coat would
not button across Ned’s chest, the waistcoat revealed sis
inches of shirt below it, and the trousers did not com*
much below his knees.
After fowling his feet in the shoes, he set about tearing
the sheets into strive which he fashioned into a rope.
With this in rc-ivinc-ss, he approached the window.
The clock denoted half-hour had elapsed.
Suddenly a bright illumined the sky, there was ?
roar like thunder, s osacussion that shook the prison
to its foundation
During the aftemu- oki orgauman, who for several
days had been favouring the neighbourhood with hit
music, had gone wm his usual round.
He was—as 'ws/i as could be judged from a stoop ac-
quired by his instrument—a tall old fellow ol
about sixty, vdili a bronzed face almost hidden by a thick,
grey, bushy l>*wr.d, aud long grey hair streaming from undef
his pointed b*k
He seemed heavily and clumsily built, and moved stiffly
and awkwardly under the weight of his organ, which was
an uncommonly large one.
He had paused at the end of the lane running down
west side of the prison, and bad played “ Garryowen ” fot
about ten «inutes.
Then starting off again after two or three more halts, be


himself again in its neighbourhood some five-and-
tvonty minutes later.
But he seemed to have given up all idea of playing for
the time being.
Indeed, the stocK of tunes seemed very few, for, with the
exception of “ Oarryowen ” and a couple of slow, melan-
choly airs, he had played nothing that day.
The street running down the east side of the prison was
not a very lively one.
On one side was the high, dead wall enclosing the place
of punishment, on the other a row of small houses, the
residents of which were lor the most part employed during
the day away from home.
Down tnis street the old man passed slowly.
When he had got about halfway down, he paused and
glanced around.
Not a soul was about, except a couple of children play-
ing in the gutter.
The old man stepped up to the prison wall, and, un-
slinging his organ from his back, rested it against the
boundary.
Then striking a match, he proceeded to light his pipe,
carefully turning his head away from the instrument as he
did so.
But, his pipe alight, instead of throwing away the match,
he applied it to a bit of greyish paper protruding from the
side of the organ.
A fizzing, hissing sound followed, and the old man.
striding rapidly away, turned the corner of the prison.
Hardly had he done so before a terrific explosion took
place in the street he had left.
The dynamite efforts of the Fenians had thus found an
imitator at the Antipodes.
The prison-yard wall was levelled with the ground for
a distance of several feet.
The stones and splinters, hurled forward with incredible
force, were dashed against the walls and windows of Ihe
building itself.
Doors wore driven in and windows smashed, the splin-
ters of broken glass inflicting serious injury on several of
the prisoners who were engaged on that side of the
building.
The houses on the other side of the street had suffered
to a like extent.
Throe of them were so injured that they collapsed as
though built of cards, and the groans and cries of the
people buried under their ruins were appalling.
The inhabitants of those adjoining them also suffered
from falling or flying ilehris.
A cloud of smoke and dust served to partially veil, yet
at the same time to heighten, the horrors of the scene.
A simultaneous rush took place in the prison towards
the scene of the disaster.
The officials were inspired with a wish to learn the
extent of the disaster, and the prisoners with a desire to
escape.
Several of the latter succeeded in gaining the yard, and
a desperate struggle took place to prevent their escape.
The very patients in the infirmary wards adjoining the
one occupied by Ned had risen from their beds and striven
to gain the staircase, under the impression that the prison
was on fire, and no one kept watch on the courtyard.
Ned, though for a moment startled, did not lose his
head.
He remembered his brother’s words, and guessed that
the noise he had heard was intended to favour his
escape.
One end of his improvised rope was already secured to
a bedstead drawn up to the window, and by its aid he
quickly lowered himself into the yard.
He darted across it to the left-hand corner, and just as
he reached it a stone flew over the wall, and fell at his
feet.
He picked it up, and found it was attached to one end
of a fine but strong cord, the other end of which disap-
peared over the wall.
He at once guessed what he had to do, and haulod at
the cord.
Soou the further end of it came to view, with a Knotted
rope attached to it.
Meanwhile, the organ-grinder had darted round to the'
side of thi prison on which the infirmary courtyard
This side was bounded by a narrow lane, flanked on
either side by dead walls, and seldom troubled with pas-
sengers. 1
The only occupant was a girl, who was at that momcui
engaged in freeing herself from a very singular kind of
crinoline—neither more nor less than a coil of rope con-
cealed beneath her petticoats.
After a glance at the new-comer, she continued her oc-
cupation.
Then, knotting one end of a cord she had in readiness
to the coil, she threw the other, to which a stone w-u
attached, over the wall.
“Bravo!” said the organman, “I never saw a girl
cast the lead so well before.”
Half-a-minute had hardly elapsed before the cord was
pulled on the other side, and the two saw the end of the
rope dragged after it over the wall
“ Now,” said the organ-grinder, “ catch hold of one end
with me, and bear firm with all your weight,”
As soon as Ned had the end of the knotted rope in his
hand, and had satisfied himself by a steady pull that it
was equal to his weight, he began to scale the wall by its
aid.
This was not such an easy task as might be imagined.
His weight caused the rope to hang close to the wall,
and his hands, knees, and knuckles were scraped and
bruised c msiderably as he worked his way up
The nearer ho got to the summit the greater became the
difficulty, and when he got his hands up to the level of the
top of the wall they were almost crushed by the rope
against the brickwork.
However, after a desperate effort, he managed to hook
one leg sideways over the coping, and a few seconds later
was seated astride it.
He looked down.
“Is that you, Kit . J " he asked, on catching sight of the
organ-grinder, whose disguise was perfect.
“ Yes,” was the whispered answer.
“ Look here ; how the devil am Ito get down? It s
too far to risk a jump, and there’s nothing to fix the rope
to.”
“ All right; haul up one end of it.”
Ned complied, and found a large but light hook attached
to the end of the rope.
Hooking this over the top of the wall, he slid down,
and was soon by the side of Kit and Jess.
Whilst he was descending the former had pulled off his
coat and turned the sleeves inside out.
When he had worn it, it had appeared a dirty drab
garment, but, turned inside out, it was transformed
into a tolerably smart coat of blue pilot-cloth.
He then divested himself with the rapidity of a “trans-
formation dancer ” of waistcoat and tiousers.
The cause of his stiffness and awkwardness of gait was
now apparent.
Underneath his organ-grinder’s dress he wore a smart
sailor’s suit.
As he had laid aside his garments, Ned had assumed
them, and found they fitted him to rights.
They had, indeed, been modelled on some of his own.
The organ-grinder’s hat was double, a light grey felt
with a low crown being concealed with it.
With this on his head over a fair wig, which, with a pair
of false whiskers, was produced from Kit’s pockets, the
transformation was complete.
Kit, discarding his grey wig and whiskers, asavaitu a
smart blue-cloth cap.
The clothes of the nurse whom Ned had stripped,
together with the knotted rope that a ierk served 'oa-


tach from the wall, were then made into a bundle of which
Jess took charge.
The trio then separated, Jess proceeding in one direc-
tion and Ned and Kit in another.
The alarm in the prison gradually subsided, though for
some time the officials were fully occupied in defending
the breach in the wall from the prisoners attempting to
break out, and the excited mob that had assembled with-
out, and sought to surge through at intervals.
At length the arrival of the police restored order.
The roll was called, and it was found that three pri-
soners had escaped through the breach.
It was not till the excitement arising from this was al-
layed that any investigation was made in the infirmary.
An attendant, at length, entering Ned’s ward, found his
colleague lashed to the bed, and almost in the last stage
of suffocation.
On being released he could only point to the window.
The rope formed of the bed-clothes, hanging from this,
caught the eye of the attendant, and he at once raised the
alarm.
The courtyard was reached, but without success.
The lower rooms and ward of the prison were then in
turn examined, but no trace of Ned could be discovered.
The warders, one and all, swore that they had not seen
him on the eastern side during the confusion ; bub, never-
theless, the only conclusion arrived at was that he had
slipped through the breach during the excitement created
by the explosion.
But how a man whom the doctor was willing to stake
his professional reputation was a helpless cripple had
managed to accomplish such a feat was a mystery none
could fathom.
As to the idea of his having scaled the courtyard wall
in his crippled state, it was so preposterous that no one
even thought of it.
CHAPTER CLI
OFF AMD AWAT.
Toe sensation caused by Ned’s escape was tremendous.
How it had been accomplished was a mystery.
A similar mystery enveloped the means by which the
prison wall had- been blown down.
At length one of the children who had been playing
about when Kit had placed the organ against the wall, and
who, like his companions, had been severely injured, re-
collected what he had seen.
The authorities kept a sharp look-out for the organ-
man, and for the girl who had accompanied him on his
rounds, but it is hardly necessary to state that neither of
the pair ever appeared in public again in Sydney.
The way in which Kit had blown down the wall was
simple enough.
Prior to starting on his rounds that morning, he had
removed part of the works of the organ, and had replaced
them with a package of dynamite.
The enormous power possessed by this terrible agent of
destruction is well known.
A very small packet of it will wreak an amount of
havoc appalling to contemplate, and Kit had not been
sparing of it.
Ned had accompanied Kit to the latter’s house, where
Jess joined the pair later on.
The fugitive remained concealed in it all the next day.
But on the following morning Kit, who had sallied
forth in quest of news, returned s-omewhat disheartened.
He had seen Kate, and she had told him that the sus-
picions of the authorities were aroused with regard to his
visit to his brother, and that the. e was a strong possibility
of bis house being searched under a warrant, as the police
were of opinion that Ned was still hidden somewhere in
the town.
It was necessary, therefore, to get Kelly with all speed
til the Hawkesbury river, where Kit’s schooner wag
blessed the forethought that liad led him to send
her on there, for every craft leaving Sydney was so tho-
roughly overhauled that it would have been impossible to
have got Ned off in her had she remained in the harbour,
even had they succeeded in smuggl ng him on board of
her.
How to get him to the Hawkesbury was vae next ques-
tion.
The police were scouring all the roads out of Sydney..
“ I think I’ve hit it,’’ said Ned, suddenly.
“What's your idea?” asked Kit.
“ Well, what do you think is the slowest fashion a man
would choose to travel ?” was the reply.
“ On foot, I suppose.”
“Just so. But wouldn’t he go even slower if he was
pushing a wheelbarrow in front of him?”
“ Bravo !” cried Kit and Jess, simultaneously.
Accordingly, that very afternoon Ned sallied out into
the streets, got up as a labourer, and pushing a wheel-
barrow, with some tools in it, in front of him.
The trick was successful.
No policeman dreamt of stopping a man who appeared
to be on his way to some job a few hundred yards or so
further on.
Ned got clear of Sydney, and took the road to the
Hawkesbury, where the same impunity awaited him.
It never crossed the minds of the numerous lookers-out
for Ned Kelly that a hunted fugitive would encumber
himself with such an impediment to quick travelling us a
wheelbarrow.
To one or two who exchanged a few words with him
he simply said that he was going to a iob of work he had
on hand a little further on.
Before starting, he had revealed to Kit the marks and
bearings of the spot where he had hidden the spoil he
had taken from Mendez.
Accordingly, the skipper took a boat and made his way
to the place indicated.
Having unearthed the swag, he returned with it to
Sydney.
Jess, meanwhile, had not been idle.
She had hired a trap to drive to Hawkesbury, and was
waiting for him with this on the wharf.
The spoil was transferred to the trap, and the pair
drove off.
The sight of a sailor with a pretty girl beside him
rattling along the road was too common a one to excite
much attention.
Nevertheless, such was the vigilance exercised, that one
policeman insisted that Kit must be Ned ; and it was only
after a long palaver, and an adjournment to a public-house
and appeal to the company there, that the man was con-
vinced of his error.
“ If that chap’s Ned Kelly, he has shrunk pretty con-
siderably since he has been in Sydney jail,” said the land-
lord. “ Why, Ned is a head and shoulders taller, and far
bigger altogether.”
“ He’s devilish like the description though, anyway,"
said the policeman; and this was true, for there was a
decided resemblance between the two brothers as regarded
their features.
“ Perhaps so ; but it’s very hard that because an honest
man happens to resemble a scoundrel he’s to be a rested,”
said Kit, in tones of great indignatior
“Just so,” chimed in one of the bystanders. “ Besides,
the scar on the hand by which Ned Kelly has been recog-
nised a score of times is wanting on this gentleman’s fist.”
The policeman was at length convinced by these argu-
ments, and allowed Kit and Jess to resume their journey.
A considerable loss of time had, however, taken place
from the delay, and it was almost nightfall when they
vvertook Ned, who was sturdily trudging along the road.
They drew up beside him, and a brief consultation fol-
o«ed.
It was arranged that he should join them the next morn-
mg at a certain point near the mouth of the river known
to both.


They tuon drove on, and Ned, when night set in, drove
hia barrow as far as a thick clump of scrub at some dis-
tance from the road, and, turning it upside down, laydown
on the turf, with it serving as a pillow.
Abandoning his shelter early next morning, he started
for the appointed npot.
It was where a little creek emptied itself into the
Hawkesbury.
As he approached a low whistle fell on his ear from the
surrounding bush.
lie looked round.
The brushwood parted a few paces off, and the face of
Kit the Cruiser was revealed.
“ Hush ! ” he exclaimed, in tones raised but little above
a whisper; “ come here quietly.”
Ned complied, and found Jess with Kit.
“ What is the matter?” he asked.
“ Som thing very awkward,” said Kit. “ They evidently
suspect the schooner, and she is being watched.”
“ Watched ?”
Yes ; there are police lurking in the trees on both sides
of the river, and, what is worse, there is a Government
whale-boat with four men cruising about.
“ That’s nice."
“Yes; 1 have not dared to signal her to send a boat
ashore, for fear of arousing their suspicions, though I am
sure the mate will begin to wonder why I have not turned
up as arranged.
“ Is the boat always about?” .asked Ned.
“Yes; and I am afraid they’ll have a revenue cutter
round if they get very suspicious ”
“ And your schooner—is she ready for sea?”
“ Quite. We could slip moorings in a moment if we
were on board of her, but I’m hanged if I can see a way
of getting there.”
The three fugitives, concealed by the trees that bordered
the stream, made their way to the water’s edge, and peered
cautiously forth.
The sight that met their eyes was tantalising in the
extreme.
There lay the broad expanse of water, where the river
met the ocean, and there lay the schooner, evidently
ready to slip her moorings and hoist sail at a moment’s
notice.
But there, too, was the whale-boat, manned by five men,
cruising up and down in such a way as to cut off all com-
munication with the vessel and the shore.
“ Could we swim it?” asked Ned.
“ We might, but I don’t see how the girl could.” replied
Kit; “and then our only chance would be at night. The
police on the banks would spot us to a certainty, and sig-
nal us to the whale boat. Besides, we should have to give
up all hope of getting the plunder on board.”
“ That’s true. The police are watching it, you say—
are you sure ?”
“Sure! Keep still; why, there’s one on the further
bank now ”
Ned plainly saw the sentinel in question.
“ There’s ouL one thing I can think,” he said, after some
time spent in reflection. “We must be as close as possi-
ble. It is not unlikely that the boat will put into shore
some time or other. If the men land from her on this
side of the river we must try to seize her and make for the
schooner”
Kit agreed to this.
About an hour later the whale boat pulled to shore,
touching the bank about thirty yards from the spot where
they were concealed.
Four of the crew landed, the fifth remaining as boat-
keeper in the little craft, which was beacned on a spot
where the Dank sloped.
The men who had landed proceeded to gather sticks and
make preparations for lighting a fire.
Noiselessly making their way through the bushes, Ned
and Kit, followed by Jess, reached a point not more than
a dozen yards from the boat.
Beyond this point they could not expect to advance
unseen.
Then, at a sign from Ned, both darted from their place
of concealment, and raced towards the boat.
Before the sailor left in her had time to assume a defen-
sive attitude they were upon him.
A blow from a stick carried by Ned laid him senseless.
“ Hurry up, Jess,” roared Ned.
The girl, who was encumbered with the bag containing
the property plundered from Mendez, advanced cut
slowly.
“ Hurry up,” shouted the bushranger again, “or we
shall have to leave you.”
As he had been speaking, he and Kit—putting their
shoulders to the boat—ran her off into deep water.
Kit, seeing how matters were with Jess, darted up to
her and helped her onward.
As soon as she joined them, the three tumbled, with
their plunder, into the boat and shoved off.
Ned and Kit seized a couple of oars, and began to pull
like demons iu the direction of the schooner.
Jess, who was at home ou the water, acted as steers-
man.
Before the sailors, who had witnessed the capture of
their craft, could gain the bank, the fugitives were several
lengths on their way.
Heading the boat down stream, the pace they were
enabled to put on would soon carry them out ot Ml
danger.
A new peril however, awaited them.
A sentinel on the further bank a little lower down had
his attention attracted by the shouts of the sailors.
Advancing to a point overlooking the water he awaited
the passage of the boat.
As it came abreast of him he raised his gun and fired.
He had aimed at Ned, who was pulling the stroke
oar.
Fortunately for the bushranger the marksman had not
quite allowed for the speed got on the boat, and the bullet
hew between him and Jess.
“ A close shave!” said Kit.
The danger was not yet over.
Roused by the shot the other watchers sprang to their
arms, and those within range opened fire.
A bullet tore its way from above through the planking,
near the stern, just at the water line.
The water began to bubble through the hole.
Jess bent forward, and, while steering with one hand,,
thrust the fingers of the other into the aperture.
A few minutes later the little craft shot alongside the
schooner.
The three fugitives were quickly on board, and every-
thing being, as Kit had foretold, in readiness, the moor-
ings were slipped and the sails set.
The breeze was fresh and favourable, and the tidy little
craft was soon standing out to sea.
By the time the news reached Sydney and a Govern-
ment vessel was got ready to pursue her, all prospect of
such pursuit proving successful was quite hopeless.
By Ned’s orders she was headed for Singapore, it being
his intention to take the P. and O. steamer there for Eng-
land.
After an exceedingly fair passage, the town in question
was reached.
Ned went on shore and put up at one hotel, giving ordem
to Jess, who was to represent herself as a widow, to stay
at another.
He had disguised himself, and was careful to behave
with strict decorum.
A few days later the steamer he was expecting put in,
and he and Jess went on board her, still pretending to be
perfect strangers.
Several other passengers who embarked had landed at
Singapore from a vessel which had arrived from Sydney.
Amongst them, to his amazement, Kelly recognised hi*
old friend Count Anatole.


CHAPTER CLII.
THE CLAIMANT IN CLOVER —TWO OLD FRIENDS.
When they were well under way Kelly went up to Count
Anatole.
“ Well, my lively Mounseer,” he said, “ what has made
you turn back on Sydney, eh ?”
The Frenchman started.
“Ah ! Mistare, Mistare—” he began.
“Dawes,” broke in Kelly.
“Mistare Dawes, yes; I am charm—l am enchant to
see you, but, ma foi, I ask, in turn, what bring you here,
away from your—how do you call it, your bush, hein ?”
“ I reckon my bush, as you call it, got a little too hot to
hold me, thanks to the cursed simplicity of some of my
pals, so I am going to try the old country a bit for a
change. They want me back there. You see they have
had a long spell from my little games. I shot a police-
man there one night when he was rather in my way, and a
fearful muss was made about the life of a bobby. My
friend Peace, who put me up to a dodge or two, always
cleared the way with his revolver ; and the law says, you
know, you may use firearms when you’re afraid for your
life. Now, if a * copper ’ nabbed me, I should be uncom-
monly afraid for my life; therefore, in giving a bobbj
the contents of my barrel-organ , I only obey the law.
Ha! ha! ha! But you, have you made your fortune in
Sydney ?”
“ No, my friend, alas! no. Your colonies are too rude,
barbarous, brutal, for a man of taste, of elegance, of fine
feeling.”
We do not give the conversation in the halting English
of the count.
“ You couldn’t get on ?”
“Ah, no! there was no scope for talent. Now, for in-
stance, there is a very pretty little scheme of making a
nice certain income that I have practised in Paris. It takes
some time, some trouble, some thought, but, ah ! it repays
them all; it does vraiment
“ And what’s the name of this pretty little game?”
“ It is called by the police and other objectionable per-
sons who interfere with its exercise chantage .”
“ And how do you carry it on ?”
“ Very simply ! though, as I said before, it requires time
and trouble. You spot— yes, that is the term —a man who
is rich, honourable, in a good position. You make it your
business to find out all about him. Perhaps he gained his
riches dishonestly. Good, Perhaps he was not always
honourable. Good. Perhaps he has relations who have
suffered for some crime or of whom he is ashamed, or
secret vices which he dare only indulge in private.”
“ Well, what then ?”
“What then? AVhy, the richer, the more outwardly
'Honourable. the higher placed he is, the more anxious be-
ts that s,uch things should not be known. You find them
out after a great deal ot trouble. You smte to him a very
pretty little letter informing him how grieved and shocked
you are to learn of such things, and you deliberately hint
at the time and expense this trouble has cost you. Do
yon fire now?”
“No, I’m biowed if I do!”
“ And yet it is as clear as day. He either takes no
notice of your letter, or he requests an interview. In the
first case, you write again, telling him you cannot think of
keeping facts of such great importance from ths public ;
in the second, you arrange an interview. And it; ends by
his making you a handsome present, as a return for your
silence and discretion.”
“Ah, I see.”
“ Not quite, I think. The scciet lasts W che present
does not. So you call on him r !-<* ,e, thrice, four
times in the year, like a landlor Ai\ ffiw. v,i\ t Do you see
now?”
“ Yes ; but it’s a pitiful business '
“ Pitiful business !” cried the Frenchman, lifting up his
hands in protestation. “ Pitiful business ! Why, there
are hundreds of men in Paris, who move in good society,
and draw handsome incomes from it. I did well myself,
very well, till, helas! I was forced to leave Paris by the
police.”
And he sighed.
“And you thought to try the same game on in Sydney,
eh?” said Ned, with a grin.
“Of course. I said to myself, here is a nice field-
superb ! I begin to make enquiries. Magnificent! I
learn that this public man’s father was transported for
forgery; that that fine lady’s mother was a fis i-fag. And
I rejoice. I wait. I get all my facts, and then I go to the
first on my list. He is a great man, a public man—a
minister. I introduce myself, I tell my little history,
and I say—
“ ‘ My dear s:r, I have learned certain facts about your
father which fill me with profound grief.’ ”
“And what did he do?” asked Ned.
“He stared at me like a wild beast. Yes ; and thou I
w T ent on delicately, very delicately, to hint that it would
bo a serious pity if such a thing was to be known to the
leader of—what do you call the other party in the Cham-
ber—the Opposition, hein ?”
“ Yes.”
“ When I have done, and he understands me, he bursts
into one great roar of laughter.
(To be continued
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“ Tin Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Published at 2/-
Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
Love and Adventure. Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
Run away from Home.— A Life of a Scapegrace.
Adventure. The Cloud King.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Ha’.f-a- Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Million. i Huin.
The Idol’s Eye. —Adventures in Search One in a Thousand.
of a Big Diamond. Andrew Lorrimer,
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough : Robert the Rover.
Diamond Polished, The Mutiny of the “Thunder,”




NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
* t ‘ It ie well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompa f ible vfitb
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Iv llv’s celebrated sr.eed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess m these islands.”— Teleyriph, 7th July, 1881
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s mrpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly's
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.” — Times, July.
“The history of Ned Killy and his celebrate! hla k horse Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performanc e of Black are tame beside ih >se of ‘ Ned
a>o ais Nao in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin's is pure fiction.”— Press, July.
CHAPTER Cl ll.— Con tin ue*.
“ ‘Ah !’ he say, ‘ you are ai raid that it will reach his ears
that my father was transported for forgery!’
“ ‘ Yes,' I say.
“ ‘ Oh, you need not worry yourself then, for he knows
it just as well as I and everybody else in Sydney knows
that his grandfather was hanged for horse-stealing. But
we don’t trouble our heads about such matters here.’ ”
“And what did you do after that?” said Ned, with a
*oar of laughter.
“ What did I do? Why, I went out like one very little
dog with my tail between my legs. It was no use trying
any appeal to the finer sentiments in such a barbarous
country. No, my friend, for the man of genius there is
only one place for the exercise of his talents, and that is
Europe.”
“ Europe, eh ? What do you mean to do when you get
there?”
The Frenchman looked into Kellv’s face.
“ 1 have what you call more than one string to my bow,”
he said, with an air of mystery.
“ Well, take care you don’t find one of them twisted
round your neck,” growled Ned, who was offended at this
seeming want of confidence.
“ Oh, there is no chance of that. But, though you will
excuse me saying that they are rot all of a kind to interest
you, there is one in which I should feel honoured by your
distinguished co-operation.”
As he spoke he bowed slightly.
“ You grinning monkey 1 ” grumbled the bushranger, “ if
you’re chaffing me I’ll smash your baboon face against the
bulwarks.”
“ Oh ! Mistare Kel—Dawes, I mean—how can you make
such remarks when you know we have worked together
like two gentlemen? Hare you come to think I would
insult you?” and, as he spoke, Count Anatolc drew him-
self up with dignity.
“No ; perhaps I’m wrong. But what’s the job you have
on hand that’ll suit me
“ Why,” replied the other, in a voice scarcely raised
above a whisper, “ I want a man of pluck to help me to
rob the Calais mail.”
“The Calais mail?” echoed Ned,
“Yes. Oh, it is all arranged for! ”
And Anatolo proceeded to give Ned full details respect-
ing the scheme in which he required his assistance.
During the remainder of the passage nothing particular
ensued.
Kelly, keeping the character of a colonial who had made
a fairish pile and was on his way home to spend it, freely
engaged in all the games of chance and skill that are in
vogue on shipboard, but, though he had both luck and
address on his side, he was too wary to win too much.
With Kit and Jess ho pretended to be on no better
terms of acquaintance than with the rest of the passengers,
concealing his intimacy even from Anatole.
At length the shores of England were sighted, and a
few hours later saw the whole party in London.
Ned, in accordance with r, n agreement he had come to
Kfith Aaatole, had tEsolf* N . to take a quiet suburban
lodging and live sedately for a week or two, until the
time came for their great scheme.
He fixed upon the district of Peckham.
Hr got himself up as respectably as he could, and
started in search of lodgings.
He was not long in finding a place that suited him, ana
having engaged rooms and paid a week’s rent in advance in
order to avoid giving references, he returned to the railway
station and took his place in a train bound for Ludgatc-
hill, in order to fetch his luggage from the hotel he had
put up at.
Ho was alone in a first-class carriage.
At one of the intermediate stations his train stopped.
At the same time, a train coming in the opposite
direction, drew up also.
Kelly glanced mechanically into the carriage compart-
ment parallel with his own.
It only had one occupant.
An enormously fat man, engaged like himself in smoking
a cig
Kedy looked again.
Surely he had seen that face before.
And that figure ! yes, there could be no mistaking that
enormous corpulence.
It was Castro, alias Orton, the Wagga-Wagga butcher,
looking fatter than ever, but, to Kelly’s surprise, got
up in a suit of superfine broadcloth and a glossy hat, and
wearing a huge gold chain strong enough, apparently, to
have held an ox, coiled across his prominent paunch.
“ Hullo!” thought Ned, “what’s the meaning cf this?
Castro in luck ? No end of a swell. I wonder if there
was any truth in that yarn of his.”
Ho at once made up his mind to renew their
acquaintance.
The only question was how to manage it.
Castro was in a train about to proceed he did not know
where.
If Ned lost sight of him now it was perhaps a thousand
to one against his ever catching sight of the ex-butcher
again.
There would, he feared, be no time to leave his car-
riage, run round to the other platform, and enter the
train conveying the man he wished to track.
Nevertheless he was about to attempt this, when sud-
denly another idea struck him.
A whistle and a snort announced that the train con-
veying Castro was about to start.
Before it could get under way, Ned sprang back from
the door of his compartment opening on to the platform on
to which he had just been about to step.
He jumped to the other door facing Orton’s train, and
threw it open.
Orton’s train had just begun to move.
Like a cat Ned easily crossed the three feet or so of
space intervening between the two trains, and alighted on
the footboard of the carriage in which the hero of Wagga-
Wagga was seated.
His hand caught the door-handle of the compartment.
So neatly and silently had this been done that r.o oaa
noticed it.


Softly turning the handle, he stepped into the carriage
and sat down in front of Castro,
The latter had been half dozing.
For a moment he took no notice of the entry of the
new comer, whom he merely thought to be a passenger
rather behind time.
lie did not even notice the peculiarity of Ned’s mode
of entry.
It was not until the train was well in motion that he
looked up, but without recognising Kelly.
Ned, sitting opposite him, stared him full in the face,
and then calmly scrutinised his get-up from head to foot.
Castro had already acquired a certain notoriety, and had
got accustomed to be stared at.
But he did not like the way in which Ned was regarding
him.
The idea of an attempt to rob him flashed across his
mind, and he glanced round to see if there was any means
at hand for alarming the guard.
Kelly guessed his thoughts, and grinned
“You don’t seem over-well pleased at meeting an old
chum,” he began.
“ Old ehum ! what do you mean ? ” asked Castro with
a very well put-on look of astonishment.
“ Why, surely you’re not going to say you Jeu't know
me ? ” said Ned.
“ Know you, know you ;ah ! yes. Let me see, did you
serve with me in the Carabineers, or was we at Stoney-
h urst together ? ”
“ What?”
“Or was it in South America? Or, stop a bit; how
can I be so stupid as not to recollect an old Hampshire
friend ? ” and he held out his hand with a look of enquiry.
“I don’t know what the devil you mean,” was the
answer. “ But I recollect very well the last time we two
met in Australia.”
“I am afraid there is some mistake,” said Castro, with a
wave of his fat hand, on which, Ned noticed, a fine
diamond was sparkling. “ You mistake me, 1 think, for
someone else.”
“ Who are you, then?” asked Ned, ironically.
“I am Sir Roger Charles Doughty Tichborne, a barrow-
knight of the United Kingdom.”
“ Alias Tom Castro, the butcher of Wagga-Wagga;
alias Morgan of Gippsland; alias Arthur Orton, the
horse-stealer, and pal of Ballarat Harry,” said Kelly, with
a laugh.
The other sat dumbfounded for a moment; but, re-
covering himself, scanned Ned Kelly.
“ You make a mistake. I have passed under the name
of Castro, it is true, but I am Sir Roger Tichborue.”
“Oh ! that be blowed ! ” broke in Ned. “ 1 heard all
that yarn in Sydney; and how Bogle coached you there,
and you were shipped off to England.”
“ Where I have been recognised by my mother, Lady
Tichborne.”
“An old idiot! ”
“ And by many hundred ”
“ Fools or rogues—which, eh ? Come, it won’t do. I
have heard your version of affairs, but in the hush I came
across au old pal or two who could tell me all about that
little mess of Reedy Creek and the rest, and when you
first came to the colony,”
“ Who are you, then?”
“Y r ou ought to recognise me with that wonderful
memory of yours, that recollects all about death s-head
pipes and stripes on shirts.”
“ And so I do,” suddenly cried the other ; “ you’re Ned
Kelly.”
“Just so. You see, 1 know you.”
The fat man beirau to recover his coolness.
“Look here, Ned,” he began, “ we did not do much
truck together, but it was all right, eh ?”
“ Quite so.”
“ And it’s not Like you to put a spoke in the wheel of a
“ Not if that pal behaves as such.”
“ Well, of course 1 ain t come into ray property—it’s
fifteen thousand a-year yet, but I do, I’Ll come
down something handsome.”
“ I’d like something on account. You’re a long way
further from that property than you think for.”
“ Well, then, see here,” said Castro, taking a thick
pocket-book from his breast “ I’ll give you these.”
And with the air of a millionaire he pulled forth a thick
roll of papers, and selecting a score or so, handed them to
Ned.
“Why, what are these?” ejaculated Kelly, as he tried
to puzzle out the spelling of the documents in question ;
“ they’re not bank-notes.”
“ No,” replied Castro, grandiloquently; “ but they are
worth as much. They are Tichborne bonds.”
“ Worth as much,” roared Ned, in a rage; “ why the
infernal things ain’t no more account than curl-papers.”
“Oh ! ain’t they, though ! You only keep your eyes
open, and you can plant them at a good price, even if you
are such a fool as not to stick to them.”
“ There’s something in that,” assented Ned ; “ though
I’d rather have something else, that sparkler on your
finger, for instance.”
“ Oh, come now, you can’t expect that. And now. if
you won’t mind a word of business, Ned, I may just hint
that, with a reward ot ten thousand pounds on your head,
you are hardly likely tc go into court to swear anything
about my affair.”
“ Right you are.”
“ Well, I hope you don’t think of driving a great bar-
gain with the other side ; in fact I can’t suspect you of
such a thing.”
“ Such a thing as what ?’
“As sending all you know to them in writing.”
“ No fear of that,” answered Ned, who could not quite
see what the other was driving at.
“ Very well, then, I shan’t, on my part, think of sending
word to Scotland-yard that Ned Kelly is in Loudon in
disguise.”
‘lf 1 thought ” and as Ned spoke he rose from his
seat with a look that chilled the other villain, cool scoundrel
chough he was, to the marrow.
“ But you don’t. Here, Ned, here’s the sparkler you
fancied, as a token of friendship,” and he pulled off the ring
and handed it to him.
For a moment Kelly seemed to hesitate whether he
should take the ring or seize Orton by the throat.
Next moment the train shot into the station.
“ Here, take it. This is my station. Good day, old
pal,” and Castro bundled out of the carriage, shaking like
a jellyfish, and muttering to himself, “ By Jove ! a lucky
squeak—another moment and I believe he’d have strangled
me.” _
Ned gazed after him with mingled rage and admiration.
“That’s a clever beggar,” he muttered, “and a plucky
one. It would have been a pity, after all, to have choked
him ; he’ll cut a fine shine before his little game is ended,
and give the lawyers—curse them ! —some trouble.”
CHAPTER CLIIL
ALL HIS WAYS WERE “PEACE.”
Ned took up his quarters at his new lodgings.
They were situated in a quiet street at Peckham,.
As he had nothing particular to do, and had promises
Anatole not to show himself abroad, time hung som*
what heavily on his hands.
H e spent the greater part of the day indoors, and passed
the evening either in taking a walk about the neighbour-
hood, or in the parlour of a quiet public.
Fant'e da mieux, he turned his attcOion to watching his
neighbours.
He soon became, in spite of hiraiwlf, interested m the
occupant of the house on his right.
This was a very precise-looking, elderly little man, M
about sixty, with a clean-shaven face and long white hair.


He was usually dressed in a black frock-coat and very
white shirr, and collar, and presented the perfect type of
ths retired small tradesman, with a dash of the dissenting
minister.
Ned was particularly amused by his quiet, precise ways
and intense respectability.
He saw very few visitors, though occasionally a friend
or two would drop in of an evening to practise music, of
which the old fellow was extremely fond.
A constant caller, however, was a friend with whom the
stranger, who went by the name of Smith, was engaged in
perfecting a scheme for the raising of sunken vessels.
The old fellow had a light trap and pony, which Ned’s
experienced eye set down at once as a capital bit of horse-
flesh.
Sometimes his neighbours would borrow the turnout
for the day, and amongst those making use of it in this
way was Ned’s landlord.
This led to a certain intimacy, which was fostered by
the exchange of certain neighbourly services on both sides,
such as are common in the suburbs.
At last one evening Smith asked Ned’s landlord into
his house to supper.
Mrs. Smith, a tall and not bad-looking, but nervous and
careworn woman, and two other friends, were all who
were present at the meal.
Smith delivered a very long and very formal grace
before they began their repast.
Supper over, he and his friends betook themselves to
music with great gusto.
Ned’s landlord was amazed at the number of musical
instruments lying about the room, and at the proficiency
on many of them shown by his host.
Smith had half a dozen violins, and the same number of
French horns and concertinas, not to mention trombones,
oboes, flutes, ophicleides, and the like.
When Ned’s landlord returned he told Kelly of the
manner in which they had spent the evening, much to his
lodger’s amusement.
A few nights later, Kelly on going up to his room felt
restless and unable to sleep.
After partially undressing, he put out the light and
seated himself at his open window, pipe in mouth.
It was a bright moonlight night, and he could see
everything almost as plainly as if it had been day.
The little street, however, was quite deserted, and not a
light was seen in any of the houses.
Kelly sat and watched thus for some time.
Suddenly his attention was aroused by the sound of an
opening door, rendered doubly audible by the prevailing
silence of the night.
Putting down his pipe he looked cautiously forth.
It was Mr. Smith’s door that had opened.
Presently Mr. Smith emerged from his house and closed
the door behind him.
He was dressed in a rough tweed suit and soft felt hat,
forming quite a contrast to his usual attire.
Then he went to his stable, which stood on the other
side of the street, unfastened the door, and a few minutes
later led out his pony and trap.
He got into the trap, touched up the pony, and soon
disappeared at the end of the street.
Ned could not helo thinking it strange that so quiet and
methodistical man as Smith appeared to be should choose
such an hour for starting on a journey.
He thought, however, that he might have some business
or other at a distance.
He turned in, and did not rise till ten o’clock.
Looking out at the back, however, he saw Mr, Smith
pottering about in the garden amongst his flowers, in his
usual orthodox get-up.
Ned could not help feeling a bit puzzled as to when he
had got back.
The next night ne resumed his watch.
Sure enough Mr. Smith left his home a little after mid-
night in the same fashion.
Ned remained watching at the window this time.
Several hours passed without anything fresh occurring,
and he was just thinking of turning ir when the sound of
approaching wheels caught his ear.
A few minutes later, Smith pulled up his pony before
his door.
It was just getting light, and Ned could make out that
the little animal was covered with sweat and foam.
It was evident that he had been driven far and furious.
Smith left the pony and cart, and, approaching his door,
tapped at it softly.
It was evidently a signal.
The door was noiselessly opened in reply.
Smith returned to the cart and took from it in suc-
cession a variety of parcels and other objects of various
shapes and sizes, some apparently very heavy.
These he handed in at the dooi*, where they were received
by someone whom Kelly could not see, but whom he
guessed to be Mrs. Smith.
When the trap was unloaded, Smith led the pony with
it into the stable, and after a space of time, evidently spent
in unharnessing and rubbing down the animal, came out
again and entered the house.
Kelly was more and more puzzled.
For a man of such strict outward respectability to go
in for these midnight journeys began to strike him as sus-
picious in the extreme.
He recollected that on more than one occasion he had
caught the sound of returning wheels in the small hours,
and that they w?re in all probability those of Smith’s
trap.
Ned resolved to quietly investigate the mystery.
In the course of the day, he took the opportunity of ex-
amining the lock of Smith’s stable on the quiet.
It was a perfectly ordinary one, and of a kind for which
a key could be easily found.
Ilis object in examining the stable was not quite clear to
himself, but he had a kind of hazy idea that something
might turn up.
He was not far wrong.
Lying on the ground near the trap was a scrap of
printed paper. That paper had a heading, and under that
heading was a bill for 3s. 6d., paid the evening before at
the Falcon Inn, which was situate in the outskirts of
Pcckham.
“What’s he up to?” thought Ned. “I saw one of
them bills before. I’ll find out, old bloke, what's your
little game. Can’t be a woman snre-ly. But them white-
chokered codgers are so cunning. Blowed if I don’t start
off to the Falcon, and watch the old beggar. I should
like to have the pull of his reverence—it might be useful
to have his prayers if I get into trouble. Ha ! ha! ha! ”
laughed the ruffian at the thought, for his instinct told
him that Mr. Smith was, as he styled it, a “ rum ’un.”
He consequently started at once, and took up his posi-
tion about two hundred yards from the Falcon, on the
road he knew Smith would follow.
He soon heard wheels slowly approaching, and quickly
recognised his saintly neighbour.
After a short pause he saw Smith alight.
Then the mysterious stranger took the pony’s head and
led it a short distance forward.
After proceeding for a few score yards Smith halted,
after turning sharp round a corner.
As far as Kelly could judge, the last part of the journey
had been performed over a very rutty road.
Smith drew the pony and trap close to a fence.
Then he got into the trap.
Kelly thought that he had only been leading the pony
on account of the badness of the road, and that he would
now drive on.
But, instead of that, the bushranger heard a kind of
scraping sound, and saw the trap sway a bit to one side,
and then grow lighter.
For a moment this puzzled him.
The next, he guessed at the solution.


Smith had avfcfeatly uaads a»e of the trap as a ladder to
f»t over the fence by.
The bushranger could not help thinking that this was
a very singular time and fashion for such a very respectable
person as Smith to pay visits.
After waiting a few minutes, he became certain that
Smith had got over the fence.
As far as he could make out in the darkness, he was in
a narrow lane shaded with trees, turning out of a broader
kind of road, but one equally rural-looking.
The pony and trap were drawn close up to what seemed
to be a high wooden paling.
Kelly was a tall fellow, and reaching his hands up,
managed to place them on the top of the paling.
It was garnished witli spikes, but there was room enough
between these for his fingers.
He drew himself up by his arms and looked over.
He could just discern the outline of a large house,
separated from him by a lawn studded with trees and
shrubs.
It was evident that Smith was paying a visit to the
house, and a great desire to follow him stole over Ned at
the thought.
What puzzled him was how the little man had managed
to scramble across the palings without some damage to
his skin, or, at any rate, to his outer-garments, from the
spikes on the top.
By getting into the trap and examining the point where
he had crossed, this was explained at a glance.
He had thrown the seat-cushion from the trap over the
top of the fence, so that the spikes were neutralised.
Ned’s ears were as keen as those of most men accus-
tomed to hunting and being hunted in a wild country.
As he stood there in the trap, he detected the faint
sound of splintering glass from the house.
“Oh!” he thought, “so my pious friend was not an
expected guest there, after all.”
Then came the faint click of a window-hasp being pushed
back from without by a knife-blade ; then the noise of a
sash being quietly and cautiously raised.
Ned still listened.
A faint whirring noise denoted that a centre-bit was
being employed to drill a bole in the shu'ters.
Then he heard the saw enlarging it, and then the low
clank, as a hand was passed through this hole and the
shutters unfastened.
The fact that a burglary was being committed Hashed
upon his mind.
“ He’s in now,” he thought. “ I wonder how long
he’ll be?”
Ho began to debate mentally as to the best course to
take on his own account.
The artfully-played game of Smith filled him with
great admiration for its player.
Who on earth would suspect a burglar in this quiet,
respectable, outwardly-rcligious man, living in a modest
but comfortable way in a suburban street, and devoting
all his spare time to his music and his Ho iers ?
It was all the more admirable to Ned as he felt it was
ao utterly out of his own line.
Indeed, he looked upon it as the lowest branch in the
profession.
But, then, what an invaluable ally such a man was likely
to prove, if he could secure him as such.
He resolved to make his acquaintance.
The question was, when ?
Should he quietly introduce himself to Smith when the
latter returned from his excursion over the paling, or
Gaffer him to depart, and interview him at home on the
morrow ? ,
Whilst ht, was debating, bis ear caught a fresh sound.
It was not, however, from the house this time, but from
Ifc was the peculiar tramping step of a policeman on
night duty.
Ned debated for a moment what to do.
If he was caught by the policeman where ho wr; Le
would certainly be arrested at once as an acoomplici, and
this would not suit his book at all.
Suddenly he thought of the raodo of escape, he had prac-
tised at Sydney when chased.
Stepping on to the summit ol the fence from the trap he
balanced himself for a moment and then caught hold of the
bough of a tree.
With this he was about to swing into the garden, whep
on second thoughts, he changed his mind.
His hunter's experience had taught him that a man is
always looked for below rather than above.
So, instead of swinging himself to the ground, bo mad*
his way upwards into the tree.
He had not been long ensconced before a gleam of light
caught his eye.
It proceeded from the bull’s-eye of the policeman, who
had arrived at the end of the lane.
He halted there for a short time.
He seemed to be hesitating whether to turn down the
lane or to continue his way along the road.
At length he decided on the former.
He had advanced a few steps when he came to » sudden
halt, in evident surprise.
He had caught sight of the ppny and trap.
He at once took in the situation.
He again halted, after advancing a step or two.
Apparently he was unable to decide whether to advance
to the house and give the alarm, or to try to capture tl.e
burglar, or burglars, on their retreat.
He was a plucky fellow, and decided on the latter course
after but slight hesitation.
After glancing around for a place of concealment a
thought seemed to strike him.
Bending down, he hid himself under the trap.
Several minutes elapsed.
At length Ned heard Smith approaching from the house
across the lawn.
He was heavily laden.
After depositing his plunder at the foot of the fom e on
the inside, he returned for another load.
This was placed with the former, and then he returned
for a third. . , ,
Then, by means of a garden chair which he placed against
the fence and stood on, he passed the objects one by one
over the boundary and let them fall into the cart.
r pony was evidently accustomed to this kind of work,
for he stood like a rock.
This task accomplished, Smith stepped over the fence
in turn, and, after arranging his spoil in the trap got down
to turn the pony’s head and lead it back into the high load.
This was the moment for which the policeman uad been
" As Smith leaped from the trap the policeman darted from
beneath it and seized him.
A desperate struggle ensued.
To Ned's astonishment, Smith, although far the smaner
man and assailed at a disadvantage, was for some timeab.e
to hold his own with his intending captor
He twisted like an eel, and fought like a wild cat. _
At last, by a desperate effort, he succeeded in freeing
himself from the policeman’s grasp.
He thrust his hand into his breast, evidently in scare a
of some weapon concealed there.
Before he could draw it, however, the policeman had
sprung at him again, with such violence as to bring him to
the ground.
Ned saw that, if he was to interfere, now or never was
u mist nv, was cieoating, ms ear wugu.» „•• a „„
It was not, however from the house this time, but from ho £ his bough) dropped from it like na
the mam-road they had left. , , , , , , , , r. pa r into the road, and reached the combatants
Kelly had not been long in England, but he had heard o - P P li(jeman had planted a knee on his opponent’*
it before in the watches of the night, and recognised i m - yas c h o kin" him into a state of ic sensibWty-
PPCe- " ’ “ 20


Ned clenched his fist, and caught the unfortunate
fellow a blow with all his force just behind the ear.
He rolled over like a smitten ox.
Catching hold of Smith by the hand and pulling him to
his feet, Ned tumbled him into the trap, pulled the pony’s
head round, and, jumping up, rattled away, heedless of
rats and jolts, towards the main read.
After driving a few score yards along this he slackened
speed, and turned Ms attention to Smith, who was just
recovering himself.
“Look here, old man,” he began, “ you’ll understand
I’m a pal by the way in which 1 have pulled you out of
that little mess you were in with the bobby.”
“ Quite so,” answered a voice which Ned would not have
recognised as Smith’s, and caused him to marvel at tne
fellow’s resources of deception.
“ 1 think you’ll own up that, if it hadn’t been for me,
you’d have found yourself in a pretty tight fix? ”
“ Eight,” was the answer. “So now, what do you want
for helping me? Name the price.”
This answer almost disconcerted Ned,
lie felt that a man he had saved from such peril in the
colonics would hardly have assumed such a huxtering
tone.
“No,” ho said, somewhat surlily, “that’s not the point.
I don’t want any price for catching a bobby a clip under
the ear and getting one of the right sorb away from
him.”
“ Well, what is it you do want? Before you tell me,
however, you had better give me the reins. I know the
road and the beast better than you do, and shall get more
out of him.”
“ You re right there,” said Ned, impressed by the other’s
business-like style. “ But what struck me was that you
seem a clever fellow and a plucky one. I have some little
reputation in the same way myself, and I fancy we might
get on together.”
“No offence,” was the reply, “but I prefer to work
alone.”
“ You found it a bit awkward to-night, though,” said
Ned, with a grin that the night concealed from his com-
panion.
“ Yes ; but I see how to avoid that in the future. I shall
have a strap to fasten my barker to ray wrist,” ho continued,
half to himself, “then it will always be handy, and no
time lost in feeling for it.”
This business-like argument filled Ned with admiration
for his companion’s coolness and forethought.
“ You wouldn't mind potting a bobby then ? ” ha said.
“Nor anyone else,” was the calm reply, given in a firm
but quiet tone.
Ned saw that he had before him a man even more dan-
gerous to society than himself, even as the serpent’s bite
is more dangerous than the tiger's claw.
In this cold, crafty, calculating villain he recognised a
master hand.
But at the same time he determined to have the best of
the game he meant to play.
“So you do not care about me for a pal?” he said.
“No ; I am used to work by myself, and I believe that
is why 1 have always got on. I treat matters from a
strictly business point of view. But I should like to know
what brought you to the spot so very conveniently for me
just now.”
Ned paused for a moment before replying.
Should he tell Smith that he knew him, and how he bad
followed, or rather accompanied, him all the way from his
house?
He judged that, on tne whole, he had better not.
He knew enough of his companion to guess that he
would not hesitate at am thing to get rid of anyone ob-
noxious to him, and that he carried a revolver and the
road was deserted.
Not that he feared Smith, but he felt he would rather
tame him than have to quarrel with him.
IL-sidcs, he might be useful.
Suppressing, therefore, with a great-effort, his natural
impulsiveness, ho said—
“ Well, to tell the truth, 1 was after the same game aa
yourself, but you were beforehand with me.”
After proceeding a little further, Smith checked the
pony, and said— _ ,
“I don’t know where you are bound for, but i don t
suppose our roads are quite the same. However, if it ia
anywhere near my way, I’ll drop you, if you like.”
“ Oh, you artful fox !” thought Ned.
And he added aloud—
“ Where are we now?”
“ At Lee (a falsehood) on the main road to Loudon,” _
“ Oh, well, if you’ll put me down a little further on, it
will do for me.”
This suited the other very well.
“ Where shall we meet again ?” asked he, “ for I sup-
pose I must pay you back the turn I owe you.”
“ Oh, where you like.”
“Well, I’ll be at the Elephant and Castle at nine
to-morrow evening,”
“ All right, that’ll suit.”
At the top of the hill Ned got down.
“Remember, the Elephant and Castle at nine,” nulled
out Smith. . ,
“Right, I’ll be there,” cried Ned. “ Good-nignt!
“ Good-night!”
And Smith drove off, looking round from time to time
to see that he was not followed.
Neither had the slightest intention of keeping the ap-
pointment, and Smith drove on at full speed, chuckling
at the thought of how he had jockeyed his preserver.
As for Ned, he made his way quietly along the road,
and, after several enquiries, made of the few wayfarers
abroad at that early hour, succeeded in finding the way
back to his dwelling.
All was silent, and he rightly judged that Smith had long
since reached home.
Letting himself in, he stole upstairs, and, throwing him-
self on to his bed, was soon asleep.
CHAPTER CLI V.
THE HOLY ALLIANCE.
Ned possessed the power of waking up almost at will.
At eight o’clock his eyes were open, and shortly after-
wards he was down to breakfast.
After breakfast he took up a position commanding a
view of the back gardens.
Before long he noticed Smith amongst his flowers.
In turn, he sauntered out into the garden.
Approaching the party wall dividing the gardens, he
hailed the other.
Smith looked up.
“Can I have a word or tw j with you, Mr. Smith?"
said Ned, as politely as he could and in a soft tone.
“ Certainly,” replied the other, somewhat astonished
for, although he knew Kelly by sight as his next-door
neighbour’s lodger, he had never spoken to him.
Consequently, he had not recognised him in the obscu-
rity the night before.
“No time like the present, then,” said Ned.
And, putting his hand on the top of the wall, he vaulted
over.
“ Really, sir!” began Smith.
“Listen to me,” said Kelly, who had made up his mind
what tack to pursue. “ I’ve got a word or two I want to
say to you on the quiet. So just come along t® the bottom,
of the garden. I see you’ve got a summer-house there,,
and we’ll talk things over.”
Smith was puzzled.
“ Suppose we step indoors,” he said, feeling always on
his guard, and thinking there would be a better chance of
both escape and resistance, in case of any unpleasantness,
in the house than out,
“ No, you don’t,” said Ned, catching him by t&e wrist,
with a grip of iron, “come where I said."


“ If you don’t release me, sir,” said Smith, with dignity,
after one effort to jerk W arm from Ned’s clutch, “I
ehaJi call for assistance."’
“Shut up, or i’ll call for the police and give you
into custody for the burglary committed last night at
Leo. With the stolen plunder in the house, things would
go rather hard with you."
“Who are you, then?” asked Smith, somewhat stag-
gered.
“ The man you flattered yourself you made such a fool of
last n'ght, bub who wasn’t inclined to go cooling his heels
at the Elephant and Castle for nothing, old foxy.”
Smith glared at him like a trapped wolf.
He was not used to being “ bested.”
“ Look here,” said Ned, “ you’ve no need to cut up so
shirty because other people are as smart as yourself.
You are a very leary one, but I’ve had my peepers on you
for some days past. 1 saw you start last night, and what’s
more, I saw you working.”
Smith felt this w r as true.
He saw that Ned was not only as brave, but as cunning
as himself
He resolved, therefore, to make a virtue of necessity.
“You are a smart fellow,” he said, “what is it you
really want of me, now?”
“ I want you as a pal,” said Ned.
“For what?”
“ For a job or two in your own line. Ob, I know what
you said about working alone, but there are jobs, and
those of the best and biggest, that cannot bo worked
single-handed, be a man ever so much up to the
knocker.”
“ Right you are.”
“ Well, I don’t care for peddling work, I can tell you.
I’m on the lookout for a job that will bring me in a lump-
ing sum for my share, and the same for whoever works
with me.”
“ A lumping sum in hard cash?” repeated Smith.
“ Yes. It’s not at all the first time I’ve landed a few
thousand,” said Ned, with a dash of swagger.
“ Why, who are you then?”
“ Who am I? I guess you’ve never been in the colonies
or you would not need to put such a question. I’m Ned
Kelly.”
“Ned Kelly?’’
“ The same.”
“ Oh, I’ve heard of you.”
“Very likely.”
“ Let’s see, aren’t you the man who has a wonderful
horse, a sort of Black Bess? At least, so I read in those
cursed newspapers that pull everything into the light—
curse them!’’
“Ay, Marco Polo, the finest bit of horseflesh that was
ever foaled under the Southern Cross. But who the devil
are you, and what’s your real name, mate ?”
“ I haven’t got one,” said the other with a smile.
“ What ?” roared Ned, half angrily, at what he thought
was chaff.
“ It’s quite true, I assure you. i am jusc the opposite of
you. You have almost always gone for big things, and
have done your best to attract attention. I, on the ether
hand, have been working for forty years in the quietest
way that is possible, and under fifty different names.
“ For forty years?”
“ Yes.”
“And haven’t yon been caught?”
“ Not often.”
“But sometimes?'’
“ Now aud then.”
“ But then the police know you?’
u Not at all.”
w But ’’
“ Let me explain. I have had twenty names and twenty
different identities, twenty separate existences.”
it, man, they must recognise your face,”
v j!)o you think so ?” said the other.
lie turned away for a moment and then faced Ned,
observing as he did so in an entirely different voice- -
“Do you know me now?”
Nod started back in amazement.
By some marvellous power acquired over the facial
muscles, Smith had transformed every feature.
If Kelly had not had him before his eyes the whob
time ha would have sworn it was a another man.
“But.” continued Peace, for that was the real name a,
the musical burglar, “you haven’t seen my Sunday School
face, fori always perform my Sabbath duties to the Sunday
School as regularly as either of our Lord Chancellors, or
that simple-minded old cove, Lord Shaftesbury. I put
the young ’uus through their facings, I can tell you. I
make ’em shout the Old Hundreth with fifty parson-
power, and I take good care the lot present hear my sweet
voice chanting away like blue blazes. Oh! it’s affecting;
very. I’m looked up to, I am, and blowed if I don’t de-
serve it! for I fulfil my Christian duties with regularity. I
rest on the Sabbath ; I never ‘ work ’ on the seventh day.
I'm too conscientious, I am. Now you see the advantage
of a good character and thorough respectability. It gives
one such a pull when a job’s up."
Kelly looked on with amused surprise.
“ By Jingo, you are a whole team and two bullocks to
spare, you are. You’re the stuff I like to meet. Why,
we could work together like a matched pair in the shafts.”
Smith, or Peace, evidently appreciated the compliment.
“ You’re too flattering,” he said, “ but I ‘ do my best in
that station of life to which God has called me,’ as the
prayerbook says,” ejaculated Smith, with an affected exag-
geration of the conventicle nasal twang, while his eyes
twinkled mischievously.
He then dropped the clerical mask and turned Ins head
aside once nore, facing Kelly again with the appearance
to which the latter was accustomed.
“But how the devil do you do it?” inquired Nod.
“ It’s mainly a natural gift, improved by years of prac-
tice. There are several men who give public entertain-
ments, similarly gifted. I can knead my nose into any
shape, like a piece of putty, screw up my eyes, bring
wrinkles on any part of my face at will or smooth them
away, alter the shape of my mouth and the slant of my
eyebrows, and, what is the best trick of all, I can thrust
out or draw back my lower jaw a couple of inches.”
“ Why is that the best of all ?” asked Ned.
“ Why, because I can do with it what is the mojt
difficult thing, to alter one’s profile and disguise the face,
not only when seen frontways, which is comparatively
easy, but when seen sideways. Now do you see what an
advantage it is to me to work alone and have no pals to
get me into scrapes and betray me, purposely or acciden-
tally.”
“ True ; but what is your real name ?”
“As I have said, I hardly know. I suppose the ono
by which I shall be handed down to posterity—if I ever
am to be handed down—will be the one under which I
shall be scragged.”
“ Scragged ?”
“ Yes, for I am determined to put a bullet into any man
who tries to take me as you saw tne other night. For if I
am nabbed its * life,’ so I say life for ‘ life.’ ”
This was a true prophecy, for it was for shooting a
policeman that Smith, in whom our readers have recog-
nised the burglar hanged under the name of Peace, was
arrested. , . .
“Well, I suppose, now, you won’t object to join me t
“ No, you’re a pal I believe any man would bo proud
to work with, and if you can put me on to a big thing that
will bring in as much as you say, I am game to join you.
“ All right,” said Ned ; u the man who is working the
affair has not fixed it all through just yet, but as soon as
he does lie will let me know.”
Peace remained pensive for a few momenta.
“Look here,” he said after a pause, “there is % job
that 1 have been turning over in my head ; but, fix it aa I


will, 1 can't see ray way to bring it off single-handed. With
yon it might be pulled off, though, all right.”
“ What is it?”
“ Well, it’s a crib to be tracked in town. I usually
prefer working in the suburbs, but in this case the swag
is too tempting to be neglected if there’s ever such a
little chance of getting hold of it.”
“ What is it?”
“ Why, the old fellow is a diamond merchant”
“ A diamond merchant?”
“Yes, one of the old style. He was a lapidary before
becoming a diamond dealer; lives down Hatton-garden
way, and sleeps on the premises. I knows he keeps a
large stock of stones in the house, and, once inside, it
would be easy enough to lay one’s hands on them if one
only knew where they were.”
“ That’s the rub, I suppose?”
“Yes. There’s no getting a chance of a squint round
the premises. If I could only get inside !”
“ Well, you might tell me where it is, and I’ll go and
have a look at the outside, at any rate.”
“ It is Mr. Malian, No. 21, Street, Hatton-garden.
He’s an old fellow, with a wife and one servant,”
“ Is there no chance of getting over her ?”
“ I’m afraid not. She’s devotedly attached to her mis-
tress ; that much I do know.”
“ But a handsome young fellow might have a chance of
talking her over ?”
“ Perhaps.”
“ At all events that game can be tried.”
“ I think,” said Peace, “ you and I have been talking
together quite long enough for the present. People will
begin to wonder what you have to say to me.”
“ Oh, blow ’em !” said Ned.
“ Not at all, my dear friend. Come, get back over the
wall at once.”
“ Well, when shall I meet you to go on talking over
this job ? None of your Elephant and Castle dodges
this time.”
“Do you know the Crown in Street? It’s an
old-fashioned sort of a place, and there’s hardly any one
there in the coffee-room of an evening. I’ll meet you
there to-night at nine.”
And as Ned scrambled over the wall, and his landlord,
who had stepped into the garden, stood in amazement at
his return, Peace continued, raising his voice—
“l am truly thankful, sir, to have made your acquaint-
ance, since it has enabled me to add my mite to this good
work. Truly, it rejoices the heart to help the afflicted.
Ah! Mr. Buttersby,” he continued, pretending to catch
sight of Kelly’s landlord for the first time, “ I am truly
pleased to have made the acquaintance of your lodger.
He has spoken to me of a great and good work, to the
successful carrying out of which I shall, by the grace of
Heaven, be only too glad to lend my slender aid.”
4 “ A born parson! ” thought Ned as he heard him.
‘ How he must have soaped down the chaplain whenever
he has been quodded. He’s just the sort of fellow who
shams sick and sorrowful, gets let off hard labour, and
spends all his time lying on his back and guzzling boiled
chicken and port wine in the infirmary. Oh ! he’s adow ny
card.”
The same night saw Kelly and Peace seated cheek-by-
jowl in one of the boxes in the large but deserted old-
fashioned coffee-room of the Crown.
The contrast between the two was all the more striking
by this proximity, <’■»
It would have been difficult to have found two more
opposite types of humanity than the reckless, broad-
shouldered, daring-looking bushranger in his somewhat
rough attire, and the sanctimonious little white-haired
burglar, something like a parson run to seed, in his black
coat r ml hat encircled with a mourning-band.
At the same time it would have been difficult to have
Sound two more thorough-paced villians.
The subject cf conversation between them was the best
method of effecting an entrance into the diamond met*
chant’s, and it was not until this had been thoroughly dis-
cussed that the two separated, though without settlinj
anything definite.
A few days later Ned started off to surrey tbe hous«
inhabited by Mr. Malian.
Jess, who had joined him in London, accompanied him,
though without being aware of what was passing in h»i
mind, or the object of his stroll.
He paced slowly down the street with the girl on LU
arm, looking at the house on the opposite side of the way.
No. 21 was one of the old-fashioned, strongly-buiH
houses to be found in the locality.
The lower floor evidently served aa work-rooms and
office, and the upper part as a dwelling-houe?
As he looked, a butcher, with his tray ©a hi* shoulder,
came up and rang the bell
A middle-aged, decent-looking woman, dressed as t
servant, opened the door in reply.
“ Well, this is funny,” said Jess.
“ What ? ” asked Ned.
“ You saw that girl who opened the door there ? "
“ Yes ; what of her ? ”
“ Why, would you believe it? she’s a returned convict!
She was in quod with me in Sydney; I knew her face at
once.”
“By Jove! ” exclaimed Ned, “ I’ve got it then. What’r
her name, Jess ? ” he continued to the astonished girl by
his side
“ Paramatta Sal.”
“ Hurrah! ” cried Ned. “ I see the way to do the
trick.”
CHAPTER CLV.
A SNAKE IN THE GRASS.
Paramatta Sal’s history up to a certain point was not at
all an uncommon one.
The offspring of criminals, she had been brought up
without ever having the difference between right and
wrong pointed out to her.
She was of a dull, yet affectionate disposition, and looked
up to and loved her wretched parents after a fashion.
They taught her to steal, and she stole without having
the slightest idea she was doing evil.
Her intelligence was indeed remarkably limited, and the
frequent ill-treatment she received did not do much to
foster its development.
As she grew up she began to steal on her own account,
and a little later became the slave of a man who used to
thrash her and squander the product of her thefts, but to
whom she displayed the dog-like affection that was part of
her nature.
At last her lover, who was named Tom Hill, was shot in
an attempted burglary, and she, being implicated in re«
ceiving stolen property, was sentenced to a rather long
term of imprisonment.
She had already undergone several short sentences, but
these had made no impression on her.
On this occasion, however, the death of her lover,and tin
admonition of the chaplain, who divined the poor woman’t
real nature, had a great effect on her.
It was a very difficult task for the chaplain to arouse in
her stolid mind a sense of the difference between right
and wrong, but, when he at length succeeded in doing so,
her repentance was genuine and profound.
He saw, however, that on her release there was great
danger of her returning to her old associates, and
that the best thing to do would be to gH her out of th«
colony.
Accordingly he found means to have her shipped to
England, and received there in a home for training ser-
vants.
From this she had passed into the service of Mr. and
Mrs. Malian, to whom she had transferred all the devotion
she was capable of.
She had gone so far as to tell them her story, and they


fully appreciated her evident wish to do right in all
things,
Mr. Malwi was a man of about sixty, with a frank,
open face, and a look of good nature which did not, how-
ever, detract from the shrewdness that had been acquired
during some forty years devotion to business.
His bright eye and clear complexion denoted a sound
constitution, and, despite his age, a life of sobriety
and activity had rendered him, even at sixty, one of those
men whom it is pleasanter to drink with than to fight
with.
His wife, who was somewhat younger, was a house-
wifely kind of body, stout and bustling, and occasionally
given to scolding-fits, but at the bottom thoroughly good-
natured.
Of this she had often given proofs, and one quite
recently, in her treatment of poor Sal, whose true charac-
ter she had guessed at and appreciated.
Sal one Saturday, a day or two after she had been
recognised by Jess, was scrubbing away at her pots and
pans till her face was as red as a peony.
She was hard at it when the kitchen door opened and
her mistress came in.
“Ah. you are at it again ?” said the new-comer.
Sue lifted up her head and look confused.
*• I3ut, ma’am,” she said, twisting her apron with her
/lands in an embarrassed manner, “ it’s Saturday, and I
felt bound to tidy things up.”
“Nonsense, girl! I told you before to have a man in for
this rough work. I don’t want you to knock yourself up
like this.”
“No fear of that, ma’am; I’m too tough, and you can’t
think how pleased I am to be able to show how thankful
I feel for your kindness by working with all ray might
and main.”
“Pooh-pooh! my girl, there’s no need of that; and
besides, it would be a poor way of proving your gratitude
to knock yourself up and give us the trouble of nurs-
ing you, eh ?” And the good woman laughed at her dwn
remark.
“ Oh, ma’am ! ” said the poor creature, “ I feel I never
can repay all I owe to you. How few people would
have taken in a poor girl like me, and treated me as you
have done.”
“Nonsense! Don’t talk like that. I’ve just run down
to tell you that I am going out for a couple of hours at
least, in case anyone calls. I shall be in about teatime,
tell your master when he comes in.”
A few minutes later Sal heard the front door slam after
her mistress.
“ Ah! ” she reflected, “ the more I think of it the surer
I am that no one else in the Avorld Avould have treated me
like they have. They know what I have been, and might
ahvays be thinking that I should let in some of my old
friends, especially Avith all those diamonds in the place.
But, God knoAvs. I’d rather have my throat cut first.”
At that moment the bell rang.
Wiping her hands on her apron sire ran up and opened
the door.
On the step Avas a tall young Avoman, plainly but com-
fortably dressed, and Avearing a thick veil.
She stepped into the passage before Sal had time to
utter any Avord of question as to her business.
“ Who do you Avant, please, miss? ’ said Sal.
The neAV-comcr raised her veil.
“Don’t you know me, Sal?” she said in a pleasant
voice.
A nervous tremor ran through poor Sals trame.
“ Jess Appleby !” she ejaculated, in agitated tones.
“Yes,” said Jess, cheerfully; “but you don’t seem
over-pleased meet an old friend, and I thought it
would be such a treat for ue to come together and have a
talk about the Colony, and the jolly sprees we had there in
poor Tom Hill’s time.” . , , , ,
“Be quiet—be quiet,” said Sal, placing her hand almost
fiercely on the girl’s mouth. “Do not speak that name
here. Say nothing more about those days, when 1 was a
wretched, lost woman. Do not speak of it.”
“What,” said Jess, somewhat disconcerted, “not even
a word about poor Tom Hill ?”
A look from Sal checked her.
Although spoken in a sympathising tone, these words,
instead of moving Sal as formerly they would have done,
seemed rather to be repugnant to her.
“Tom Hill was a villain; may God forgive him as I
do,” she said at length.
“ Oho Sal,” thought Jess, “ that cock won’t fight, t see
I must try another lay.”
“ Yes,” resumed Sal; “ now I have struggled out of
the mud into which I had fallen, and live among honest
folk, I see clearly and know what sort of companions *
used to have.”
“ Do you mean that for me, Sal?” said Jess, in a tone
of bitterness. “ I suppose now you can afford to despise a
poor motherless girl, who went to the bad when a mere
child, not knowing right from wrong?”
Jess Avas closely Avatching Sal, and saw that this last
remark had not been thrown aivay.
“ It’s true you Avere quite a kid, and did not know Avhat
you were up to,” said Sal, meditatively.
“ Oh ! if you only knew how I have repented of tin
past and tried to break off Avith it,” said Jess. “It is for
that I have come to England. I saved enough for my
passage, thinking to get rid of all my old Avicked asso-
ciates, but here in London there seems to be more wicked-
ness than even in Sydney. If you only knew what I have
had to fight against. Ah! how fortunate you have been to
find honest people to look after you. I only wish I could
get such a chance,” and she almost sobbed.
“ Have you been trying, Jess?” asked Sal.
“ Yes, indeed I have, Sal, and I hope to get a place of
some kind. I don’t care how hard I work, as long as I can
make a fresh start, and earn an honest crust.”
Poor Sal was deeply touched by this experience, so like
her own.
“ I am glad you think of going straight, Jess,” she said.
Jess suddenly staggered, and leant against the Avail.
“ What’s the matter?” cried Sal alarmed.
“ I feel a bit faint. I have not been living too tjM slime
I have been over here,” was the answer, in a low voice,
“ Poor girl. And to think of that— you, who neve r
wanted anything. Come doAvn into the kitchen, and I'll
get you a cup of tea.”
The pair descended into the kitchen, and Sal soon put
a cup of tea and some thin bread and butter before he-
guest, A\’ho, however, assured her she Avas too faint to eat
much.
She had, in fact, just dined with Ned.
However, the tea revived her, and they chatted rather
pleasantly about the colony.
“And what sort of a place have you here now?” aske 1
Jess, after a little time.
“ Oh, a capital one!” said Sal, enthusiastically. “ There
is plenty to do, but I don’t mind that, for the master and
mistress are just bricks, they are.’
“ i don’t know much about London houses,” said Jess ;
“but there seems to be a sight more Avork to be done
than at Sydney.”
“ Tes. And the beastly blacks and smuts makes things
tAvice as hard to keep clean. There’s a lot to do here,
« can tell you.
•Do you mind letting me look over the place?’’said
Jess, in the most innocent tones.
No. Como round and I’ll show you. It’* lucky
there’s no one in the house but me just uoav, both master
and missus have gone out. Hark! there’s the milkman.
Just Avait Avhile I get the milK.”
As soon as Sal left the kitchen, Jew* drew from her
pocket a small object which she began to knead in her
’lands, and then Avaited.
Her face had lost the meek and contrite expression ft
had Avorn during her inter Anew with SaL


In a minute the latter had returned.
“Come along,” she said to Jess, whose physiognomy
aad resumed its subdued aspect on her reappearance,
“ and I will show you round the place.”
She quitted the kitchen, followed by Jess, who smiled
behind her back in a singular fashion.
The house occupied by Mr. Malian was a tall, narrow
building, of three storeys in height.
The kitchens were underground.
On the ground floor, the front room served as a kind
of workshop, and the back room as Mr. Malian’s office.
The dining and drawing rooms were on the first floor.
Mr. Malian’s bedroom and a spare bedroom occupied
the second floor.
The servants’ room was on the third.
Jess and Sal first visited the upper part of the house.
The former praised the cleanliness and neatness of the
bedrooms, and then they descended to the first floor.
With justifiable pride, Sal pulled back the table-cover
tr show the dining-table, shining like a mirror from a
hberal application of elbow-grease.
“ I declare I feel really a better girl, Sal, only to touch
all these things that have all been honestly earned,” said
Jess, artfully.
“Well, I never! but that’s just what I feel when I’m
a-scrubbing of them. I says to myself, ‘lf ever there
was an honest house, it’s this,’ ” said Sal, quite charmed
at this remark.
“ Just so. And is this the drawing-room ? ”
“Yes. Isn’t it fine? They have had these things sL.ae
time, but missus is a rare tidy one, and they are as good
as new.”
“ I am sure there’s something in an honest bouse dif-
ferent from any other,” cried Jess, enthusiastically.
Poor Sal was enchanted.
It was just the effect the place, with its air of honest
hard work successfully wrought out, had had on herself,
and she fully believed Jess was similarly impressed.
“ And what is there on the ground floor ?” enquired
Jess.
“ The office and the workshop. Do you want to see
those too ? ”
“ Oh! yes."
“ Come along then.”
After descending the stairs, Sal opened the workroom
door, and ushered her companion into it.
The same order and cleanliness reigned here.
There was room for four men, and four stools were
ranged along the two benches for their accommodation.
“ So it’s here the men work? ” said Jess.
“ Yes; from nine till five and six,” was the answer.
“And the master ? ”
“ Oh, that’s his room,” and she pointed to the door
leading to the inner room.
“ Can we have a peep in there ? ”
“Oh, yes ; I dust it out every morning.”
They entered the office, Jess holding in her hand the
substance she had been kneading in the kitchen.
“Ah!” she said, glancing around, “that’s the safe, 1
suppose ?”
“ Yes.”
“ Where the books are kept?”
“And something better than books.”
“What?”
“ The diamonds,”
“ Ah! of course. I bad forgotten your master was a
diamond merchant. There must oe sometumg worth
having inside there. Four or five thousand pounds, per-
haps.”
Sal 2aughecr.
“ Twsnty or thirty thousand would be nearer the mark
sometimes,” she said.
“Keally? What a lot! I’d like to see twenty
thousand pounds’ worth of diamonds,” she said, reflec-
tively.
••It’s not much of a sight after all,” said Sal, innocently,
in a tone of consolation. “Master has shown me a lot
sometimes.”
After a few words more Jess took her leave, and hurried
off to a quiet public where Ned, Peace, and Kit were w.ru-
ing for her.
“Well?” said Ned.
“ It’s quite true, the man is a diamond merchant, ’’ said
Jess.
“ Good.”
* * And there are sometimes thirty thousand pounds’ worth
of sparklers on the premises at once.”
“ Thirty thousand pounds’ worth !” echoed Peace.
“ And a friend in the camp, eh, Jess?” said Ned.
“As to that, no. We can’t count on Sab”
« What!”
“ That’s where the mischief is.”
“ Did you sound her ?”
“Very carefully ; and it was lucky I was cautious. She
told me her story. She has gone in for virtue, fidelity,
and a most devoted attachment to her master and mistress.”
“ Bosh!”
“ Not a bit of it. All genuine.”
“Weil but, Jess,” put iu Kit, “you’re a clever girl,
couldn’t you talk her over ? Tell her we’ll go snacks.”
“You might as well try to persuade a Newfoundland
dog to drown his master.”
“Curse it!” said Ned.
“No swearing, my friends,” exclaimed Peace, in his
most sanctimonious tones, throwing up his eyes with an
expression of holy horror.
“ Perhaps this may be of some use to you,” said Jess,
with a smile, placing an object she had taken from her
pocket on the table before them.
All bent forward to examine it.
“ Yes,” said Jess, “the locks of the workshop and of
the office in which is a safe holding the diamonds.”
“ By all that’s glorious, Jess, but you are a brick,” cried
Ned, enthusiastically.
*“ Besides, I know all the ins and outs of the place and
shall call on Sal once or twice till I find out a good day
to work on.”
“ Capital.”
“ Well, it is to be share and share alike between us,
as arranged, I suppose ?” said Peace.
“Stop a bit,” remarked Ned. I’m expecting a friend
who may have a word to say about that matter.
“ Hullo ! ” said Peace, “ what's the meaning of this ?”
“ I’ll go and see if he’s in the bar,” said Ned, and, going
out, he returned with our old friend, the Count.
“ This is the pal who has the big job of which I spoke
to you on hand,” said Ned to Peace.
“ I remember,” replied the latter, gruffly, for he strongly
objected to a number of people being mixed up in any
affair in which he was concerned. “ But can one patter
before him?”
“ Yes, freely.”
“Oh, i will set you the example,” said Anatole with
smile. “ 1 know what you are up to now.”
“ Oh ?” said Peace.
“ Yes, the little matter of the diamond merchant, in
which 1 wish to figure as your partner."
“ Hum ! said Peace, “ 1 think tnere are enough of ua
in it, as it is, to pull it oU an rigid, and to snare the
dibs.”
“ The dibs ? the dibs?” aaid Anatole in a perplexed tone
of voice. “ What are the dibs ?”
“ The plunder,” said Ned, laughing.
“Well, suppose 1 show you how, in taking me as your
partner, you can double, treble your share of the—how do
you call it ?—the dibs.”
“ Oh, bosh !" said Peace.
“Stop one little moment,” said Anatole. “Suppose
the little affair, the job, over, and the diamonds—the
beautiful little diamonds—in your bands.”
“ Well ?”
“ Well, the diamonds are there—sparkling »o prettily


ah, yes!—on that table, and you divide them into four
lots, each representing—let us say—six thousand
pounds.”
“Certainly,” sa’d the three men simultaneously.
“Just so —and then?”
“ And then ?” repeated Peace.
“ Yes, what do you do? You can’t live on diamonds.”
“No, but we can sell them ”
“ Exactly ; that is what I wanted to come to.”
“ It’s simple enough,” said the old burglar.
“ Perhaps. You have the diamonds in your pocket.”
“ And we sell them.”
“To whom?”
There was a silence of a few moments.
Anatole went on—
“ Could either of you three go to a Bond-street jeweller
tne day after a big robbery, and offer him six thousand
pounds worth of diamonds ?”
The three looked at one another.
“It’s true,” said Kit. “We might arouse his sus-
picions.”
“ And cause him to send for the police—eh?”
“ That’s so.”
“ Then it’s no use thinking of Bond-street jewellers.”
“I’m afraid tot.”
“ But there are the wholesale diamond dealers.”
“ There are,” said Kit, puzzled at what he was driving
at.
“ Only they are just as mistrustful as the others, and
would bo equally well aware of the robbery.”
“Hang ic all! cannot a man sell diamonds in a free
country?” said Ned, who was getting impatient at all this
talk.
• Yes, if he has a connection, gives a correct name and
address to the buyer, and proves he has a right to them.
But now to return to the point. To whom can you sell
them?”
*■ Well, I suppose there are fences,” said Peace.
“ Fences! Ah, yes, the rccelenr, the receiver of stolen
goods. But, in the first place, where is the fence with
such a sum as thirty thousand pounds at leisure to lay out
in diamonds? And even if he had it—knowing the diffi-
culty of getting rid of the stones, and accustomed to pay
a shilling for what is well worth a pound—he would only
offer you a thousand for the lot.”
“ A thousand !” cried Ned.
“ Two, at the outside. You know it perfectly.”
The tliree were silent.
“The result of this would be that, unless you sue*
cecdcd in getting rid of your diamonds one by one to pri-
vate buyers, and then only at a loss and with great diffi-
culty and risk, your six thousand pounds apiece would
mean five hundred, just enougti to carry you on a few
months.”
•• You're right,” said Peace.
“ Well, then, I am ready to give you cash down, half
the value of the diamonds.”
“ Cash down ? 1
“ Yes, I am willing to hand the money over on delivery
of t'.ic goods, and i think our friend here,” and he mdica-
cated Ned, “ will tell you that I am a man of ray word.”
“ And, now, when is the job to come off ?” asked Peace.
“We cannot settle that just yet. Jess, however, will
bo on the lookout, and will let us know the best chance. ’
“ How about the other affair? ’ enquired Ned of Ana-
tole.
“ Oh ! that goes on slowly, but surely I think, and it
promises very well,” answered Anatole.
“ This is the pal whom 1 meant to help us in it,” said
Kelly, indicating Peace.
A brief introduction followed, and then drinks round.
The party separated in various directions.
Jess continued to visit Sal occasionally, feigning great
virtue, and at length learned that Mr. Malian was going
to give t a supper to celebrate tne twenty-fifth anniversary
bis wedding-day.
She told this to the others, and they came to the con-
clusion to attempt tire robbery on this day, as it would be
one on which such au attempt would be least looked for.
Furthermore, she got Sal to let her assist her in tha
preparations on the day in question, with the mistress's
permission.
CHAPTER CLVI.
AT THE DIAMOND MERCHANT’®,
The supper given by Mr. Malian to celebrate the twenty-
fifth anniversary of his wedding was a jovial gathering.
He was a man who had risen as it were from the ranks,
having begun life as a working lapidary, and made nc
attempt at pretension since he had realised a fortune.
He had asked a score of friends and relations to a good,
honest sit-down supper, to be followed by a song or two,
a round game at cards and unlimited grog.
The cooking of the supper was doue by Mrs. Malian
with the aid of Sal and Jess.
The guests began to drop in at about nine o’clock, ant
very soon a very merry and noisy party were gathered or
the first floor.
Mean while, the intending burg’ars had not been idle.
Peace had had keys made which it was pretty cortair
would easily open the workshop and office doors, though
the lock of the safe would probably present more difficulty
At length, on the appointed evening, the three met at
Kit’s lodgings, which were situated near Holborn,
“ Before we start,” said Peace, “ I should like to put ic
a word or two.”
“ Go it,” said Ned.
“Why the fir is this. It sometimes happens that at
the last moment something unexpected crops upaad spoils
the best-laid plan.”
“That’s true, hut 1 think we have foreseen every-
thing.”
“ Quite so. But it the last moment we may be sur-
prised by someone, and I know your temper and ways,’ and
as he spoke he addressed himself to Ned.
“ What do you mean?”
“ I mean that you are just the man to pull out your
revolver, and blaze away, so as to rouse not only the hou-m
but the neighbourhood ; such a game is all very well in the
bush, but it won’t do in London.”
“ You carry a revolver yourself.”
“ Yes, for country and suburban work, but not for this
sort of job. If killing a man will get one clear off. I’d
shoot one like a cat, but it would be madness to use lire
arms in a case like the present.”
“But I'm not going to use them. What more do you
want?” said Ned, savagely.
“111 tell you what more I want,” replied Peace, looking
him straight in the lace. “ I want you to caK.e your revolver
out of your pocket and place i& wan uime on the table
hero ”
“ And if X won’t V”
“ Then I’ll not stir another step in the matter.”
“ That is to say, you want to be cocx of the walk in
this affair, said Ned,swiftly supping - s uaud into his
pocket.
“I don’t want to be cock of the walk, but I want
you to agree to those conditions, returned the other,
imitating him.
“ Y r ou're a perky little sprat to talk about conditions,”
said Ned, pulling out his revolver and balancing it
threateningly.
“We shall see about that,” replied Peace, calmly pro-
ducing a similar weapon and imitating aim.
The two stood face to face for a moment
There was a striking contrast between the coarsely*
handsome and dashing, muscular rulfiau and the precise-
looking little old fellow in front of him.
At first sight it looked as if Ned could have oaten bin
adversary at a mouthful
But the pale grey eye of the odd little burglar wa«
full of that cold resolution that nought can quail.


41 Here, hang it all, don't be a couple of fools,” cried
Kit, throwing himself between them, “ This is not the
way to do business. Peac'' is right after all, and for my
part there is my revolver.”
As he spoke he placed it cm the table.
Growling like a bear with a sore head, and eyeing Peace
a manner that might have terrified a weaker minded
man, Ned followed his example.
“Very well,” he muttered as he did so, “but all the
jAiue, J think we are acting like a blessed pack of
fools.”
“You know your own tastes best, Ned,” said Kit;
“ but for my part I don’t ‘’■are about making the acquain-
tance of the Newgate drop if I can help it.”
“ And suppose three or four of the people in the
house catch us at the job, what are we to do then, eh?”
asked Ned of Peace.
“Try and break through them and get clear,” was the
answer.
4 All very fine,” said Ned to himself; “but although I
have given up my revolver, I’ll stick to my knife, and I
should not be surprised if it did not come in handy before
the night was over.”
“Come,” said Peace, 44 it’s about time t start. The
supper was fixed for ten, and by eleven ever, Jung will be
in full swing. They "ill be laughing and drinking and
making noise enough to wake the dead, and we shall not
he heard.”
41 It’s a capital day to choose,” even if they do hear a
noise, a robbery with all the guests in the house will be
}ne last thing they will dream of."
41 How are ws to get in?” asked Peace,
“ Oh, I’ve arranged a signal with Jess,” answered Ned.
Some twenty minutes later the three were standing out-
ride the house of the diamond merchant.
It was closo on eleven o’clock, and the street, rhe
houses in which were mostly let out in offices, was com-
pletely deserted.
Very few of the houses had any lights in their windows.
Tire night was a chilly one, and there was a slight
drizzling rain.
The three waited for a few moments making their final
arrangements.
It had been agreed that only Peace and Ned should
enter the house, Kit remaining outside on the watch.
The Irst named retreated, therefore, to the opposite side
of the street, while Ned gave a low but distinct coo-ee—
the Australian cry—which was the signal to Jess.
The girl, who was in the kitchen, heard it, and held her-
self in readiness.
Accordingly, when a ring came at tae bell a few minutes
later she said—
“ All right, Sal, I’ll answer it,” and started out of the
kitchen before the other girl had thought of stirring.
Running upstairs she opened the door and admitted
Ned and Peace into the passage
44 Who is it? ” suddenly called out Mrs. Malian’s voice
from the lauding above,
“A man wants to know if Mr,.Thompson lives here,
K!a«m,” was the ready answer.
its height.
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
At that moment the fur on the first floor bad reached
Supper was drawing to a close, and everyone's tongue
having been set wagging, jokes were being bandied about
on all sides, and all were trying to talk at once.
Corks popped, plates rattled, glasses jingled, and the
combined din was almost deafening.
Jess pointed to the workshop door and darted down into
the kitchen, where, as if inspired by the gaiety above, she
began to sing in a loud voice, and to wash up plates and
dishes with an accompanying amount of clattering that
threatened every minute to demolish them.
Meanwhile Peace had drawn a set of skeleton keys fro:*,
his pockets and applied one to the workshop door.
It opened easily, audthe two men,slipping into the room,
closed it quietly after them.
41 Pretty neatly done, eh? ” said Peace, with a chuckle.
“ Yes,” answered Ned, 44 but don’t let us lose time.”
The workshop was in total darkness, the shutter being
closed, so Peace struck a match and lit a lantern.
By its light they approached the office door.
“Tnere’s one advantage in the closed shutter,” said
Peace, “and that is that no one outbid? can see thi*
light.
He began to try the lock of the office.
41 Confound it! ” he said, after trying several keys one
after another, 44 this is a more difficult jo w than I thought
for. Hold the light clo«or.”
Ned obeyed, and, after a careful examination, Peace
selected another key.
44 1 think this one will settle it,” he remarked.
His prophecy was correct, and next moment the office
door was open.
The two stepped cautiously into the room.
The safe at once caught their eye.
It was a heavy but old-fashioned affair
44 This will be the hardest nut of all to crack,” said
Peace as he surveyed it.
Selecting a fresh set of keys he began an attack on the
lock, Ned eagerly watching him, and at the same time
listening for the slightest sound from without.
Kate Hamilton. Formosa, the Life ot a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby. Woman.
Ji h^4.^°il^ d o° V - e f The Beautiful Demon.
Skittles in Pans, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detectiva,
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The Lady with the Camelias.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and . , _ .
Bassion. Paris L,fe at Twent V-




WED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER
* lit is well known mat for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kellt's
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.’’— Times, July.
« xha history of Ned Kullt and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performance of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
ahd his Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin's is pure fiction.” — Press, July.
CHAPTER CLYI. — Continued.
A muttered oath from Peace caught his attention.
“ What is it? ” he asked.
i* The keys are no good here,” was the answer.
“ Hang it all! ” said Ned. “ What’s to be done ? ”
•* Oh, there are more ways of killing a dog than hanging
him,’'replied Peace, “and I have not come out without
all my tools.”
From his pockets he produced several crowbars of
different lengths, a number of wedges, and a hammer.
The tools were all made of the very finest steel, and the
tops of the wedges and the head of the hammer w.re
covered with leather.
“ Shan’t you make an infernal row with those ? ” asked
Ned in a somewhat uneasy tone.
“ No,” answered the other. “ Just wait till you see me
at work. I learnt this lesson from Casey, who so
astonished all the big-wigs at his trial when he showed
them that the strongest safe they could put together could
be forced with ‘a common councilman’ (a wedge), ‘an
alderman ’ (a bigger wedge), and ‘ the chancellor ’ (the
crowbar).”
Selecting an almost imperceptible crevice Peace suc-
ceeded in driving one end of a fine steel wedge into it.
Again the two paused for a while to see if the noise had
been heard.
No; all was right, and the din above continued.
The wedge having once bitten, the rest was easy.
With a marvellous knowledge of the power and prin-
ciple of the lever, Peace began to bring the crowbars into
play, and, aided by Ned’s immense strength, succeeded in
wrenching open the door of the safe, with, however, a
crash that it was impossible to avoid.
“ That’s awkward,” said Ned.
“ Sharp ! let’s clear it out,” was the answer.
The diamonds were nowhere visible, till Peace hit upon
a large, locked cashbox at the bottom of the safe.
“ This must be it,” he exclaimed, and seizing a crowbar,
began to force the lid off, for the box was too bulky to
remove.
“Quick —quick,” said Ned, “I hear someone coming
down the stairs.”
“ Curse this lid,” said Peace, redoubling his efforts.
Ned bent over to see if he could help.
As he did so the lid flew open, and at the same moment
a growl of pain and rage escaped him.
The crowbar, in slipping up, had caught him, in his
bending position, a sharp blow on the ear, and cut it
severely.
He fell forward on the box just as Peace had transferred
the contents into a bag be had in readiness.
At the same instant a hand was laid on the second door
of the office, opening into the passage close by cue stair-
case.
Peace sprang up, and, darting into the workshop, opened
its door, gained the passage, and began to unfasten the
street-door.
Ned also rose, ami was about to follow him.
But just as he gained his feet, the second door of the
office was thrown open, and a man, dashing in, threw Mitt"
self violently upon him and bore him to the ground, whilst
shouting at the top of his voice—
“ Help! murder! thieves! help!”
It was Mr. Malian.
During the conclusion of the supper, despite the din
going on all around him, the worthy diamond-merchant
had fancied once or twice he heard some strange noises
below.
The idea of burglars selecting such a moment for their
attack seemed to him, however, so preposterous, that he
iiad set the sounds down to mere fancy.
Still, as he had thirty thousand pounds’ worth of
diamonds in the house, he was naturally nervous.
At length the crash made when the safe was forced
caught his ears, and he could no longer restrain himself.
He did not wish, however, to needlessly alarm his
guests, and therefore slipped quietly away from the
dining-room.
He descended the stairs, and listened for a moment at
the second door of the office.
For a moment he thought he must have been mistaken,
but the forcing of the cashbox-lid and Ned’s growl of
pain caught his ears.
Pulling the key from his pocket, he unlocked and opened
the door.
Catching sight of Ned, he threw himself upon him, and
bore him to the ground as described.
The struggle was a short one, however.
Mr. Malian, though a powerful man for his age, was no
match for Kelly.
It is true that, by the suddenness of his attack, he had
succeeded in throwing Ned to the ground, and in planting
his knee on his chest.
But Ned, hearing the noise of footsteps descending the
stairs, understood that he was in fearful peril, and did not
hesitate in having recourse to extreme measures.
Drawing his knife, he plunged it into his adversary’s
stomach, before the latter suspected his danger.
The unfortunate diamond-merchant fell back with a low
groan, and Ned, springing to his feet, dashed out of the
olfice, along the passage, and through the outer door, just
as the first of the guests, whom the shouts of Malian had
aroused, reached the bottom of the staircase.
CHAPTER CLYII.
THE ACCUSATION,
Suddenly aroused from the festivities by the shouts of
Mr. Malian, the guests hurriedly quitted the supper-table
in a body, and descended the stairs in time to see Ned just
disappearing through the open doorway.
Whilst a portion of them rushed out into the street in
pursuit, the rest flocked into the office, on the floor of
which Mr. Malian lay pale and bleeding.
“ Help ! robbery !” were the first words he ejaculated.
“ Have mercy upon us! but he’s bleeding to death I”
suddenly exclaimed a voice.
And poor Sal threw herself oli her knees by her master’*
side.
“ Run for a doctor,” cried someone.
* Ail right. I’ll go,” said another.


“My poor wife 1” murmured Malian, “ where is she ?
Amd for it to happen to-day, too—our wedding-day!”
Mrs. Malian at that moment made her way into the
room, despite the efforts made to check her, and, at the
spectacle presented, stood as if she were thunderstruck.
Then, kneeling down beside her husband, she raised his
head and covered his face with tears and kisses.
“My poor old girl, it’s nothing,” he gasped, the sight
of her grief making him forget even his own agony.
Sal, meanwhile, had recovered her senses sufficiently to
descend to the kitchen, from which she returned with
water and linen for bandages
With a resolution and nerve none of the others seemed
to possess, she opened Mr. Malian’s garments, and, having
discovered the wound, set to work to staunch the flow of
blood as best she could.
Whilst she was thus engaged the doctor entered.
He at once proceeded to complete the task begun by Sal,
to whose prompt action he stated the patient probably
owed his life, and then ordered that he should have a bed
improvised at once in the office, as he was afraid to have
*»jm moved.
Hardly had this been done, before a sergeant of police
arrived, accompanied by a detective in plain clothes.
Notice of the robbery had been given at the station-
house, and he had been sent round to take charge of the
ease, and see if any information was forthcoming.
Mrs. Malian stepped out to meet him in the workshop.
“Good evening, ma’am,” said the sergeant, drily. “As
far as I can learn, this little job seems to have been a
* put-up ’ affair.
“ What do you mean ?” she replied.
“ Why, to speak so as you can understand it, the
thieves, whoever they were, had an accomplice in the house
before they set to work.”
“ Impossible!”
“That’s what people always say, ma’am,” said the ser-
geant, with an air of superior sagacity, “ but we are never
far wrong. You have servants, ma’am?”
“ Only one, the most faithful creature that ever
breathed.”
“ Yes, ma’am, that’s what they always are till they are
found out.”
“ Oh, I can answer for mine,”
“ Well, I’d like to see her, if you’ve no objection.”
“ Certainly not.”
And, going to the door, she called Sal.
The latter soon made her appearance,
“ Here she is,” said Mrs. Malian. “ Sarah, this gentle-
man wants to ask you some questions.”
“ I don’t think there is much need of that,” said the
detective, who, for his part, had not hitherto spoken, but
who had been watching everything that had been passing
with quiet persistency,
“ Ah, I thought you would tell what kind of a girl she
was at a glance,” observed Mrs. Malian.
“Oh ! yes, 1 know what sort of a girl she is,” said the
detective. “I never forget a face. She’s a colonial con-
vict named Sarah Benson, alias Paramatta Sal. Come,
young woman, the best thing you can do will be to make
a clean breast of it, or I shall take you into custody as an
accomplice.”
He had no right to make this threat, since he was rather
bound to warn her not to criminate herself.
Poor Sal gazed at him with her mouth half-open, her
features discomposed, and her eyes fixed.
It seemed as though her reason had left her, from some
stupefying shock.
Mrs. Malian looked on with amazement at the effect tne
detective’s words had produced.
The fact was that the poor creature, who for so long
past had been congratulating herself hourly on her escape
from all the horrible associations of the past, was com-
pletely paralysed at once more being brought into con-
tact with the dread and terror of her former existence —
the police.
“ Come along, my girl,” continued the detective. “Wo
shall want a word with you at the station-house.”
“Oh, Lord! sir— no, sir !” cried heart-bro Ken
tones, intermingled with sobs. “It cant be true. You
don’t believe it now, good gentlenKO—l’m sure you don't.
Not to the station-house ! Not mel No, you don’t mean
that you think I had a hand in helping the wretches who
have robbed and murdered my poor master! Why, I
would have been killed ten times over before a hair of his
head should be injured.”
“ Stow all that,” said the sergeant; “I’ve heard it all
before, and it won’t wash. So, come along, young
woman.”
The poor girl in despair threw herself at Mrs. Malian’s
feet.
“Oh, missus! my dear, good missus! don’t let their
take me away. Don’t believe what they say! You know,
missus, I would have done anything rather than the slightest
harm should have come to you. You know how grateful
lam to you both. You believe me, missus, don’t you?”
And seizing Mrs. Malian’s hands she kissed them franti-
cally, whilst the tears ran down her face, which was utterly
transfigured with grief and terror.
Her tones were so natural and heartrending that even
the officers were shaken.
As to Mrs. Malian, she was quite convinced of the poor
creature's innocence.
“ No, no, my poor girl,” she said ; “ I don't suspect
you ”
As she spoke she raised Sal to her feet.
The detective, shaken for a moment, had already re-
covered himself, and, accustomed to such scenes being
acted before him, was again becoming sceptical.
Besides, he knew Sal’s antecedents and how seldom a
convict’s repentance is genuine.
“You won’t let them take me, missus?” cried Sal,
wildly clinging to Mrs. Malian as if she had the power to
protect her against the law.
“No, my poor girl.”
“You’re very-kind, ma’am, I’m sure,” remarked the
detective, ironically, “but I suppose as you won't mind
us putting a few questions to this young woman that will
help to put us on the track of the thirty thousand pounds’
worth of property that has just been stolen, I’m told,
from this place?”
Those words acted on Mrs. Malian as though a bucket
of cold water had been thrown over her.
They restored her to a sense of her actual position, and
of the ruin that threatened her and her husband.
“ Certainly,” she said ; “ ask what you like.”
“ You say then,” he said, turning abruptly to her, “ that
you have had no communication with the people who
have carried out this robbery, and half-killed your
master ? ”
“No—no, sir.”
“ Has there been anyone else in the house to-night,
besides the guests invited? ”
“ No—yes—that is, only Jess.”
“ Who is Jess? ”
“ A young woman who came in to help me.”
“ With your nr stress’s leave ? ”
“ Oh ! yes, sir.”
And Mrs. Malian nodded in confirmation of this.
‘ ‘ Well, who is she ? ”
“A young woman, sir, I know.”
“ What’s her other name, and where does she live ? ”
continued the detective sternly; whilst the sergeant
glancod at Mrs. Malian in a way that plainly seld —
“ You see, ma'am, we’re on the track.”
“Jess Appleby. I think—l think she lives at Peck-
ham,” said Sal.
“ But you don’t know? ”
“No,” an&wered the girl, in evident trouble.
“ When did you first know her? ”
“In Australia. She was a poor lost girl like me, and
now she has reformed, and come over here to trv and


earn an honest living; and I spoke to my missus about
her, and as she was doing very badly missus said I might
give her the job of helping mo to-night.”
“ A very pretty story. Where is she now ?’’
“ I don’t know.”
“ Isn’t she in the house? ”
“ I haven’t seen 'jct since—since, let me see,” said the
girl, making a desperate effort to collect her thoughts, for
she began to rcabse the peril in which she stood. ‘-No,
I have not seen her since I ran upstairs on the first alarm.”
“ Did she run up with you ? ”
“ I think so ; but I was so flurried, I can hardly tell.
But she wasn’t in the kitchen when I went down for the
water and bandage for master.”
“And she isn’t in the house now, is she, ma’am? ’’ con-
tinued the man, addressing Mrs Malian.
A brief search established the fact of Jess’s absence.
“ Well, ma’am, what do you say to that?’’asked the
sergeant.
Mrs. Malian was thunderstruck. She looked at Sal.
“Oh! missus,” cried the latter, “ do you think I should
have had a word to say to her if I had not thought she
was an honest girl? No, I swear I shouldn’t.”
“ What did you say her name was ? ” said the detective,
who had been reflecting for a minute or two.
“ Jess Appleby.”
“ I thought so. You knew her in Sydney ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ I heard of her too there, when I was in chase of a
fraudulent bankrupt who had bolted there. And it is
only the other day the news came that she was suspected
of having aided the escape of the famous Ned Kelly, the
ironclad bushranger, from Sydney Jail. If she be here
it’s most likely he is here too, and they have done the job
together.”
“ Great heavens ! ” cried Mrs. Malian.
“ That’s it, and the girl here is their accomplice.”
“ Oh ! no, sir ! ”
“ I cannot believe it,” said Mrs. Malian, but this time
with something of doubt in her tone.
“You must come along with us,” repeated the sergeant.
“ No, no,” cried the girl, clutching her mistress’s dress.
“ Do you want to kick up a row, and oblige us to take
you by force? ” observed the sergeant. “ You know the
master you pretend to make such a fuss about is lying in
the next room, and that the least excitement, the doctor
says, may kill him.”
These words had a magical effect on the girl.
The kindness with which she had been treated by Mr.
and Mrs. Malian had produced a wonderful impression on
her, and devotion to them had become the religion of her
life.
Quitting hold of her mistress she stepped forward.
“ I am quite ready to go, sir,” she said simply.
Even the detective was touched at this sudden result
of his appeal.
“ Well, my girl, if you can clear things up, so much the
better for you, but they look black enough just now.”
“Missus,” said the poor creature appealing to Mrs.
Malian, “ you know what I owe to you, you who dragged
me out of the depths of sin and misery, and gave me the
chance of earning my bread as an honest woman. I can
bear anything but your suspecting me. If the girl, Jess,
has tricked me —oh, believe me, missus, in bringing her
here, I only thought of trying to help a poor lost soul as
you have helped me. Indeed I thought of nothing else.
1 can bear imprisonment—God knows lam used to it!
anything but your suspicions, anything but the thought
that you imagine I am a vile wretch enough to have
shammed nil the respect and gratitude I have felt for you
and master only to rob and plunder you the better in the
end.”
“ 1 believe you, Sarah,” said Mrs Malian.
“Thank you, ma’am —oh, thank you! They throw my
past at my head, but it is not my fault if I drew in vice and
uoisery with my mother’s milk, for she —God help her!—~
was a thief, and 1 never had a chance of tasting honestly-
earned bread till I came here, for I recollect how they
used to joke about my being weaned on a stolen pound-
cake. 1 knew no more of right and wrong, till the chap-
lain at Sydney taught me, than a brute beast. But oh !
when I once had learned the difference, how I suffered!
And when I found a new home, a new world, over here,
and learned to love those who had held out a hand to save
me from that horrid, shameful past, how grateful I was J
1 tried to show it by working hard, by trying night and
day to do my best to please you, and you know, ma’am,
that ever since I have been here I have had no other
thought.”
“ That’s certainly true.”
“ Well, now', because of my past, I am looked upon as
an accomplice of the treacherous girl I thought I was try-
ing to save. lam ready to go with these gentlemen ,
but there is one thing I’ll beg you’ll do, ma’am, and that
is to forgive me, and I ask it of you on my knees, for
bringing all this misery on you, though the God above us
knows it was innocently done.”
“ I forgive and believe in you, my poor girl,” said Mrs.
Malian sobbing, and the next moment Sal was led away
in custody.
CHAPTER CLVIIL
A RISKY REFUGE.
When Ned bounded through the open doorway, he glanced
hurriedly to the right and left.
Not a soul was in sight.
Peace had evidently got such a start of him as to have
disappeared, though the bushranger fancied he caught the
faint echo of flying footfalls to the left.
He turned sharply to the right, and dashed off at fail
speed, followed by the guests, who had devoted themselves
to his pursuit and capture.
Ned was a splendid runner, and the majority of those in
pursuit of him could have had no chance with him at the
best of times.
And now, having just risen from a hearty supper, there
should have been less prospect than ever of their catch-
ing a man, not only naturally fleeter of foot, but running
for his life and aware of his peiil.
Only they had the resource of calling others to their
aid in the chase.
At the cry of “ Stop thief! stop thief!” raised by them,
figures seemed to start out from all manner of unsus -
pected nooks and corners, and join in the pursuit.
However deserted a London street may seem to be, this
cry is quite enough to gather a crowd at any hour.
A mob of about thirty or forty people were soon
tearing along at Ned’s heels, and their numbers increased
every moment.
Twice he had been almost checked in his career by a
figure darting out of a doorway, and trying to seize him
as he passed, but in each instance the assailant had paid
dearly for his temerity.
One he had knocked senseless by a blow with his
fist, and his shoulder catching the other had hurled him
into the middle of the street on the broad of his back.
But on each of these occasions Ned had nearly lost
his own footing from the shock, and he realised well
enough that if tin's should happen his fate was sealed.
The yelling mob behind him would, in such a case, be
upon him befoi’e he had time to recover himself.
lie laboured, too, under another terrible disadvantage.
He was profoundly ignorant of the neighbourhood in
which he found himself at that moment.
It was his object to choose the darkest and least fre-
quented streets, in order to get out of sight of his pur-
suers, if it were possible.
If he could once accomplish this feat he felt he was safe
from them.
As he tore along his chest began xo burn and his head
to swim, from the tremendous pace he was putting on
He darted sharply down a dark and narrow street


The pursuers, among whom more than one policeman
was now included, kept on his track.
The street was dark and narrow and seemed quite de-
serted, and he thought that if he could only put on a
spurt and get a little way ahead, he could turn sharply to
the right or left, out of sight, and thus put the pack off
the scent. , ,
The street curved somewhat, which was, he thought, a
yet further advantage towards attempting this feat, though
he could not as yet, in consequence of this, see the end
of it. , _ . . ~
Suddenly, on turning the curve, he saw its termination
riglit ahead of him. , .
To his horror, he saw that the street lea into a broad
and brilliantly-lit thoroughfare, along which, despite the
lateness of the hour, he could distinguish a constant suc-
cession of passengers and vehicles passing.
To go on would be madness.
To turn back and face, his pursuers destruction.
He must turn off to the right or left.
He looked ahead.
Between him and the thoroughfare at the end of the
street in which he found himself there was only one soli-
tary turning visible. ... ~
It was a narrow street, narrower and darker even than
the one in which he found himself, running off to the
right. . .
He turned and plunged recklessly down it at lull
speed#
At the end of about fifty yards he pulled up suddenly,
in horrible perplexity.
There was no thoroughfare ! It was a cul-de-sac.
At the bottom of the street was a huge pair of wooden
gates, evidently giving access to the yard of some factory
or other, and securely fastened. . ...
Indeed, behind them he could plainly distinguish the
noise of work going on, and see the glare of lights waving
and flickering.
His position was maddening.
Retreat was cut off, for he could hear his pursuers
already at the upper end of the street down which he
had just turned, and which had proved such a fatal trap.
He glanced around him.
His first idea was to scale the factory gates, but he
noticed a kind of porter’s lodge attached, and guessed that
such an attempt would lead to certain detection from its
occupant.
His pursuers were approaching every moment.
He could not only hear their voices but distinguish the
dark outline of their advancing figures.
“ We’ve got him now for certain,” he heard one of them
exclaim in jubilant tones. “There's no thoroughfare
here.” u
“ Look into each of the doorways carefully as you pass,
said another voice, which evidently belonged to someone
in command. , XT ,
“ That must be a police sergeant, thought Ned.
Suddenly another voice cried out eagerly—
“ There he is ; see, at the end of the street, close by the
factory gates there.”
And a rush forward followed these words.
It was all up, they had seen him.
At that moment Ned noticed that the doo
house on the right hand of the street, a house, whe
from its position, evidently had something to do with the
fU HedaHed through the doorway, but before he had tune
to do so his pursuers caught sight of this movement.
Swinging the door to almost m their faces Ned groped
forward tiL he found a staircase and began rapidly to as
“Hewas barely halfway up the
dering knowing at the door announced that his pursuers
were still closely on his track. factory which
The house in question formed part of the facto },
was a tarpaulin-maker s.
There was a press of orders on hand, which accounted
for the men working at night and for the door of the
building in which the offices were situate being open.
At the knocking, a watchman who was making his rounds
on the ground-floor, and whom Ned had narrowly escaped
meeting, since it was he who had left the front door open
a minute or two before, went to the door, the slamming
of which had also reached his ears.
“ Who is there? what is it ?” he asked.
“ The police,” was the answer. “ A murderer has just
taken shelter in this house.”
“ A murderer ! Oh, Lord !” and, terrified at the idea of
being shut up in the house with one, the man at once threw
the door open without further parley.
A flood of people poured in at once, despite the efforts
of the police to check them.
Ned heard their voices in the hall.
The rooms on the first-floor landing were all fastened,
as he found on trying them in swift succession.
He darted up to the second-floor with the same result.
At last he reached the landing of the third-floor.
It was the last. .
And he distinctly heard his pursuers mounting the stairs
The watchman had briefly explained that it was impossi-
ble for anyone to have left the hall on the ground-floor
without being seen by him unless by way of the stairs, and
the police sergeant, after stationing a constable at the
outer door and one at a back entrance giving on to the
factory yard, began to ascend, followed by the rest of those
who had gained admission into the house.
Standing on the landing of the third storey, Ned held
his breath and listened to their approach.
J3 y the faint light of the moon which had broken through
the clouds and was streaming in from the landing window
he made a new discovery. . .
His hands, his wristbands, and the front of his shirt ana
waistcoat were stained here and there with half-dried spots
of blood. ~ , . , , , .
The blood of Mr. Malian which had spouted out over
him as he stabbed the hapless diamond merchant.
This was awkward, since it took away his last hope ot
mingling somehow or other with the pursuing crowd and
pretending to be one of them.
He drew nearer to the window in order to get a better
view of the damning stains on his garments.
They were not many, but on his right wristband they
showed very conspicuously. . .
lie had already tried the door on this landing in quest
of a hiding-place, and found that, like those below, they
were fastened. , , ~ .
It would not do to break one open, as to do so would be
only to leave another trace for his pursuers.
He looked out of the landing-window to see if there
was any means of descent.
It looked on to the court-yard of the factory.
Bv the faint moonlight he distinguished a kind of cor-
nice running along the whole of the side of the nouse, lor
S ° lt 6 was about a foot broad at the outside, and was
situated some three feet or so below the level ot the win-
dow-sill.
Tlicht was imperative at any price.
His pursuers had already reached the second floor an '
were trying the doors, of which the watchman had the keys,
and which were all found securely locked.
Ned noiselessly raised the window-sash, stepped out on
to the cornice, and drew the sash down alter him.
His situation was a fearfully perilous one.
Perched on a narrow shelf of masonry, some forty feet
above the level of the ground, he felt that to look down
“‘owing to the narrowness of the ledge his foothold was
a few steps away from the
window, the silt of which was level w.th his want, and
then remained motionless, listening with ad his oars.


He was just in time.
The crowd, now somewhat lessened in number as the
prospect of meeting a murderer at close quarters increased,
flocked up the stair.,; to the landing he had just left, and
the lights carried by them flashed across the window.
At that moment the moon, which had been feebly sinn-
ing a few minutes before, disappeared behind a thick veil
of°clouds, and all was dark as pitch without.
Ned heard an exclamation of surprise from the first who
had ascended the stairs, and gained the landing.
“ Not here 1 Why, where the devil can he have got to i
was his remark, in tones of astonishment.
“ The staircase goes no further,” said another.
“ He must be in one of these rooms, then,” said a voice
which Ned recognised as that of the sergeant.
“ Have you got the keys of them, watchman ? ”
“ Yes, sir.” , .
“Well, let’s have a look inside. You are sure the fel-
low went upstairs? ” ... .
“ Yes ; he could not possibly get any other way without
passing me in the hall.’ ’ ,
“ Then it strikes me he had some skeleton keys about
him, and has let himself into one of the locked-up rooms
either here or below, and refastened the door.
“ That must be it,” chimed in one of the police.
“ Well, it’s certain he’s on either the first, second, or
third floor. We’ll give these rooms up here a thorough
overhauling, and then work our way down in the same
fashion. One thing is certain, he can’t get out of the house,
since all the doors are guarded.”
The watchman handed the keys of the rooms to the
sergeant, and retreated to a prudent distance like the bulk
of the crowd. • , . . ,
They were evidently of opinion that the murderer might
jump out suddenly on them like a jack-in-the-box from
the room, directly the door opened.
The policeman smiled contemptuously as he suddenly
threw open the first door.
The room, like those below, was used as a store room;
but on this occasion it happened to be empty of evexy-
thing. , .
There was nothing to be seen but bare shelves, and not
a place where even a rat could have hidden himself.
The sergeant looked up the chimney and retired.
The other rooms were searched with a similar result.
“ Not a hole where he could hide ; he must be below,
said the sergeant, shaking his head.
All at once he caught sight of another door in an obscure
corner.
“ What is that? ” he asked. .
“Oh,” replied the watchman, “it leads to a kind or
cockloft up a few steps. No one ever goes there, and
there is nothing but some lumber.” '
“By Jove! that’s just the place for him, cried the
sergeant eagerly. “ Hullo! the doors locked too, he
added, as he sprang forward and tried it. “ Have you the
key V
On hearing these words a ray of hope shot across Ned s
mind. , . , , ,
If they all went into the cock-loft he might have a
chance of slipping back through the window and trying to
make his escape from one of the lower rooms.
He heard the door opened, and the sergeant and several
others ascend the stairs, and begin to rummage the lumber
stowed away in the cock loft. .. ,
He edged his way back towards the window, and risked
a sidelong peep on to the landing.
Three or four figures, amongst them that of a woman,
still were standing on the landing.
It was only a rapid glance he dared risk under the cir-
cumstances, but somehow or other the woman’s figure
seemed to strike him as a familiar one.
But second thoughts, however, convinced him that this
must be impossible. , , . ,
Hia plan of re-entering the house by the window was
Not only was there this group of people on the watch
on the landing, but most of them had a lighted candle >o
their hands.
Yet he felt he must decide on something, for to remain
where he was would be fatal, since daylight would at once
reveal his situation.
An idea suddenly occurred to him.
It was to edge his way along the cornice as far as lie
could, in the hope of gaining some other window which
might open on to it like the one he had passed through.
As far as he could make out in the darkness, the cornice
extended for a considerable length.
It seemed to extend as far again as the width of the
house on which he had found himself, and lie judged that
it must therefore run along one adjoining it.
If this were the case, it would probably have another
window opening from that one onto it, and corresponding
to the one through which he had passed.
If so, he was safe.
The task was a terribly perilous one, nevertheless.
He would have to edge himself along inch by inch on
the verge of a precipice forty feet deep.
Still if he could once gain a window he was safe.
Suddenly he heard a fresh murmur of voices on the
landing.
The police had returned from the cockloft and were
consulting together afresh.
They might take it into their heads to look out of the
window, and it was necessary above all things for him to
move on beyond the range otf their vision.
He no longer hesitated.
Moving inch by inch, and with every possible prcc
tion, in order not to lose his balance, he slowly tu
round so as to get his back to the wall and his face
wards towards the courtyard.
Then he began to edge himself sideways along
cornice, holding on by each window-sill that prese
itself to his wide-stretching reach.
In five minutes he had accomplished about twenty feet
of the distance, when all at once, despite all his iron nerves
and hardihood, a cold shiver ran through his frame.
Big drops of perspiration darted from his brow.
The cause of this shock was indeed terrible.
A portion of the cornice which he had just passed over
slowly detached itself from the wall and fell crumbling
into the courtyard below. .
The cornice Weis not of solid stone, zis lie htid imagined
when he first set foot on it, but of stucco !
At any moment it might give way beneath his weight
and precipitate him into space.
Fora moment after making this alarming discovery, his
very senses seemed about to leave him.
His head reeled, his eyes swam his breath grew short,
and it was only by a desperate effort of the will, that he
saved himself from topling forward headlong from his-
perch.
CHAPTHR CLIX.
A PERILOUS PASSAGE.
The fragment of the cornice which had fallen was from
the spot he had just quitted.
His eye involuntarily glanced down the gap it had left
to his right hand.
He could distinguish the courtyard, and could make
out that a little further onward in the direction in which
he was advancing it was brilliantly lit up, _
Making a desperate effort to recover his firmness, he
leant slightly forward, and, risking vertigo, actually dared
to look down over the cornice into the courtyard.
He saw that in advancing he would soon find himself
right over a kind of large shed with a glass roof, whence
the light proceeded. .
The light came from the fire lit under several immense
cauldrons, in which the composition for coating the tar
paulin was seething and bubbling.
A few steps more and he would be right over there.


“By ! if the infernal thing gives way under my feet
just there,” was his sudden thought, “ I shall be boiled
alive.”
At this idea reason again almost forsook him.
To fall from the height of a third storey through a glass
roof into a huge cauldron of boiling pitch, was a prospect
to appal anyone, however bold.
“I think I’d rather work back and face them,” was his
desperate idea on making this discovery.
But he found this idea impossible to carry out.
The portion of cornice that had fallen was not more
than two feet in length.
But to clear this gap of two feet it would be necessary
to bound sideways across the void.
Even if he succeeded in doing this without losing his
balance the shock of alighting an the other side would
infallibly carry away another section of the cornice, and
himself with it.
Meanwhile, however, he reflected that every moment he
remained in one spot increased the risk of the stucco
giving way beneath him.
He continued, therefore, to edge himself on till he
arrived at a spot immediately over the u naces that had
caught his attention below.
As he worked his way along this part of his journey he
trod as gingerly as ever a cat did on iiot bricks.
From time to time he glanced to his left, the direction
in which he was going, to see if there were any signs of
a window he had expected to find.
At length he fancied he could discern the sill of it in
the darkness dimly and close at hand.
His heart gave a bound of satisfaction.
“ Safe after all,” he muttered, and quickened his ad-
vance as much as ever he dared along the cornice.
Suddenly the same deathly sense of despair that had
before assailed him seized on him with redoubled vigour,
and caused a bitter curse to pass out between his parched
lips.
At the very moment of success the cup was dashed
irrevocably from them.
He could, indeed, distinctly make out the window some
twenty paces ahead at the most.
But between this harbour of refuge and himself the
cornice was missing for a space of at least four or five
feet in extent.
This was the severest blow of all.
To have a place of refuge before his very eyes,and to be
divided from it by a gulf that nothing short of wings
would have enabled him to traverse !
His situation was indeed a fearful one.
He could neither advance nor retreat.
And he was bound sooner or later to feel the section of
cornice on which he was standing crumble away beneath
his feet.
And then!
He would be precipitated headforemost into the seething,
flaming gulf below.
Hardened ruffian as he was, and game to the backbone,
the peril fairly appalled him.
His fate would be one of those horrible and inevitable
deaths in which a man died about ten times over in the
mere anticipation of them.
He set his teeth hard, and fixed his back against the
wall, as if glued to it, striving to bear as little on the
cornice as possible, ,
For a moment he had thoughts of ending this horrible
suspense by one headlong leap forward.
Then all his thoughts turned on the strip of cornice on
which he was standing. „ , ,
“ Will it hold ? ” he asked himself, though all the while
he felt certain it could not.
With his ears straining, with every nerve in his body
awake, he strove to tell whether he could hear it cracking,
whether he could feel it loosening itself beneath his feet.
He remained like this for a couple of minutes, silent
and attentive.
Then a fresh hope rose slowly in his breast.
“ If I could only manage to lie down at full length,”
he thought, “my weight would be more spread out, and
the cornice might hold out till I could call attention to
myself, for even capture would be preferable to this.
Besides, I might, after all, in daylight see some way of
getting off.”
As the cornice was fully twelve inches in width and Kelly
had nerves of steel, or rather no nerves at all, the feat
was not a difficult one.
With great difficulty, since every movement threatened
to precipitate him into the abyss below, he succeeded,
by degrees, in turning his legs sideways and sinking on to
his knees.
Then he gradually lowered his body till he was stretched
at full length, face sideways, on the cornice.
When he had succeeded in accomplishing this, the re-
action was so violent that his figure shook, like a leaf in a
breeze, with emotion and the prospect of safety, as well as
the possibility of being smashed up by a fall.
With his hand, he felt carefully the line where the
cornice started out from the wall.
The least gap or crack hero would have been a sign
that it was on the point of giving way.
He found no trace of this, however.
“Perhaps this bit is stronger-built than the rest,”
he thought. “ There may very likely be stone bits
here and there at intervals to stay the cornice, and this,
perhaps, is one of them.”
He felt again, and fancied the stucco seemed very hard
at this point.
“ It is stone, sure enough.”
He passed one hand outside over the edge of the cor-
nice, to feel if there was any support beneath, such as the
head of a pilaster or a bracket.
“It seems very firm here, after all,” he thought. “It
feels quite as hard as stone, too. If it was stucco, it
would already have given way. No, there must be some
extra stay or other here, and I am safe. I can wait
until ”
He was interrupted in this train of thought by a noise
so slight that, at any other moment, it might have escaped
him, but which at this critical juncture again caused a
shiver to shoot through every limb.
It was simply, however, a kind of faint, rattling sound,
like that produced by a shower of hail against the window-
panes.
It came from below, and, faint though it was, it filled
him once more with terrible Anticipations.
“What’s that?” he asked himself.
But, although he knew only too well, he dared not
answer.
Yet he felt he must know the worst.
Again he passed his hand along the cornice close to the
wall.
Yes, he was only too certain of the cause of the sound.
The cornice was slowly but surely crumbling away be-
neath his weight, and the sound he heard was produced by
its fragments rattling as they fell against the glass roof of
the shed below.
In another minute he would follow them!
Only, instead of rebounding against the glass, his man-
gled body would dash through it, bleeding and mutilated,
into one of the seething cauldrons.
It was horrible, most horrible, to think of.
He felt again.
His groping fingers discovered a crack that he was sure
had not existed a moment before, close to the wall.
It was, he felt, his death-warrant.
The cornice was parting from the wall.
A larger piece than had hitherto fallen rattled smartly
on the roof below him.
It was to him as his death-knell.
And what a death !
To have fallen in free, fair fight, with his gallant steed
beneath his knees, and the shots cracking fiercely around


him, waa a fate he had pictured to himself before now
without terror, and at the present moment it rose beiore
him by contrast like a vision of paradise.
Even the hangman and the scaffold appeared ten thou-
sand times preferable, since that fate would give-him, at
any rate, the glorv of dying game in presence of an ad-
miring crowd.
“ By Jingo ! it’s all over,” he gasped.
Involuntarily he closed his eyes.
Helpless, hopeless, he set his teeth, and, with his heart
full of blind rage and hatred against all things on earth
and in heaven, doggedly awaited his fate.
“ Game to the end,” he said, repeating what, to him,
was the creed of his whole life.
Suddenly he fancied that lie heard his name.
lie thought at first that it must be a delusion.
But, lo ! again a voice fell on his astonished ears.
“ Ned, N<Td !” it seemed to say.
Was it a wild hallucination of his last hour ?
“Ned. Ned, it’s me—Jess,” was repeated from above
him in tones unmistakably human.
“Jess?” he gasped, hoarsely.
“Yes, I’m here, at a garret-window, just over you.
Don’t move, and you are all right.”
The next moment a long waving object came dangling
past his eyes.
It was a rope.
Seizing it with both hands, he transferred his weight to
1 just in time, for he felt the crack in the cornice enlarging
m lie did so.
“ Hold on tight at your end,” he called to Jess.
“N i fear; it is fast, and, besides, I am not alone,” was
the encc u raging answer.
Grasping the rope firmly, Ned began to hoist himself up
hand over hand to a small window which he now perceived
some twelve feet or so above the cornice.
This was a trick he had often before done, but, in the
present ease, the agonies through which he had passed had
not been without their effect upon him, especially after the
reaction.
After mounting about two-thirds of the distance he came
to a stop, unable to proceed further.
“ Come on ! ” cried Jess, anxiously watching him.
“ I’m pretty well burst up! ”ho gasped faintly.
“Don’t throw up the sponge, old man,” cried the girl.
“If you stop you’re bound to leave go. Twice more hand
over hand will do it, for then I can reach your collar and
give you a lift.”
Nerved by this appeal, Ned hoisted himself a couple of
feet higher. .
Then, blind and almost senseless, he felt himself seized
by the collar and dragged through the garret window.
Ned sank partly insensible on the floor of the species
of cockloft in which ho now found himself, and which
was the identical one which the police had already searched
The moral and physical strain he had undergone had
temporarily overcome him.
“ He’s going to faint, I think,” said Joss.
“ Enough to make him after such a narrow squeak as
that,” said another voice.
Ned opened his eyes and rose to his feet.
“ Jess,” he said, “you’ve saved my life again my girl—
I shan't forget it.”
“ You are saved for a time, but you must pull yourself
together, Ned, for you’re not clear yet,” was the reply.
“ Where are we then?” ho enquired.
“ lu the garret of the house where the police are still
looking for you.”
“ But, how ever did you come here?”
“ Why, when they started in pursuit of you, I though t
the best thing I could do was to make a bolt too. as it
would not have done forme to have stopped in the house
any longer. I found that no one in the crowd knew me,
for old Malian’s guests had not spotted me indoors, so I
thought the very best thing I could do would be to follow
«nd see if I could be of any use. ’
“ You are a rare plucked one,” said Ned admiringly.
“ How you did varmints!” continued the girl. “ I had a
hard job to keep up, to ugh I am reckoned pretty smart
on my pins; but I reached this place just as the door
opene 1, and rushed in with the rest. 1 slipped upstairs
with them, keeping ray wits about me, and when the police
searched this cockloft I came up too, and managed to hide
and remain behind when they left it, on finding you were
not here. Then I began to look about me, and going to
the window saw you lying on the cornice just below.”
“If you’d have been a minute longer you’d have seen
me go flying head foremost into the courtyard. It was a
lucky idea of yours, the rope ”
“It was not ray idea. 1 quite lost my nut, and could
not even cry out to you at first.”
“Not yours? Whose was it then?” asked Ned, in
some amazement at this reply.
“ Kit’s,” answered Jess.
“What! jou here too?” said Ned, catching sight of
Kit.
“ Yes ; I had got to the end of the street when you
passed me, tearing along like a steam-engine. 1 joined in
chase with Jess, in the hope of helping you at a pinch, and
came on here. But, as the girl says, the job’s not over yet.
They are still hunting for you through the house,” was
Kit’s reply.
Kit had entered the loft with the police and Jess, and,
after they had left, he arranged to return and join the girl
in her efforts, whatever they might be, for Neds deliver-
ance.
Had it not been for Kit’s lending a hand to pull Ned
in at the window, the bushranger’s history would have
been a trifle shorter •, ho would have tumbled into a boiling
pit rather sooner than ho anticipated, and vanished, like
all demons, in a blaze of fire.
The sergeant of police felt certain, on comparing notes
with his followers, that the culprit had, as the watchman
asserted, gone upstairs.
But it was also evident that he had not gone down
again, and, as a rigorous search in the rooms on the first
and second floors revealed no trace of him, the officer
began to entertain the idea that he might, after all, have
got away somehow over the roof.
Once more he ascended to the third floor.
“Is there any chance that he got out of one of the
windows V” suggested one of his followers.
“Three storeys high—impossible !” said another.
Nevertheless the sergeant advanced to the window and
raised the sash.
“Nothing here,” said he. “No ladder or anything to
help him to get down.”
Kit, Jess, and Ned, in the garret above, could plainly
hear these words.
The situation was as critical as ever, as the sergeant
might take it into his head to search the garret again.
The sergeant was going to draw his head in when ho
suddenly checked himself, and lowered the light he carried
down towards the cornice.
“ Hullo!” he exclaimed, “ someone has been walking
along outside here, 1 11 swear !”
He examined it further.
«• Yes, there’s no mistake about it; there are tracks of
footsteps. It must be our man!”
“Blow it!” muttered Ned; and, glancing round the
cockloft, which extended over the whole of the house,
he caught sight of another window at the other end and
went towards it, “ he is on the right track !’’
The sergeant thrust his body out of the window as far
as he could, and held up his light.
“ There’s no doubt,” ho said. “ The traces of footsteps
are plain enough, but where they end the cornice ends
too. There’s a gap that, as < far as 1 can make out from
here, is freshly broken away.’
“ Then he must have fallen," said one ot the others.
“ No, for if he had we should have heard him crash
through the glass down below there. He must have got


beyond it just before it fell, for he can’t have passed over
it"
This logical reasoning sounded very unpleasant to the
sa>-s of the party in the cockloft.
“ Are you sure he has gone on?” inquired a policeman.
“ He could not have come back.”
“ Is there another window he could have got into fur-
ther on ?” suggested the other.
“ That’s an idea. No, there’s only one in sight, and
that’s a good twelve feet above the cornice, so he could
not reach it without wings, and he’s not the sort of angel
to have those,” said the sergeant, who, even with the aid
of the light, could not, from where he was, make out the
window that Ned had originally striven to gain.
“ Well, if he’s not somewhere on the cornice still, or
pitched into the courtyard, he must have got up to it
somehow or other.”
“Quite impossible!” said the sergeant; “but, still
there’s no harm in proving it. It must be the window of
the cockloP we were in just now, by its position, so we’ll
go up and another look round there.”
Nea, Kit, and Jess, had heard all this conversation.
“ It’s all up,” said Kit.
“They’ll be here in half a minute,” said the girl glan-
cing around her wildly.
“ It'll only take a quarter to save us,” said Ned, who
had been lost in thought for the last few moments.
Seizing a portion of an old grate that was lying in one
forner of the cockloft, he stepped lightly but swiftly to
the window through which he had been hauled a few
moments before.
Next instant a most frightful crash was heard in the
courtyard below.
It was the shock of the mass of iron, thrown out by
Ned. crashing through the glass roof of the shed.
The sergeant and all the other policemen rushed at once
to the window to look out.
“ That’s him, sure enough,” cried the sergeant. “He
had got further along the cornice, and this time it’s given
way beneath him and let him down.”
The next moment he and the majority of those with him
were hurrying downstairs, the rest remaining looking out
of the window.
“Now,” said Ned, “we’ve five minutes clear, and the
way is open,” and he pointed to the other window, which
opened on to a narrow alley.
“ But how are we to get down?” asked Jess.
“ You by the rope, and me any way after we have
lowered you.”
As he spoke, he placed his hand on a water-pipe running
down the wall.
CHAPTER CLX.
A BITTER SELL. —DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.
A few moments sufficed to place the three in safety.
Jess was lowered by the rope, which was fortunately
long enough for the purpose.
Ned followed her down it.
Then Kit, unfastening the end of the rope, in order not
to betray the route they had taken, stepped in turn out of
the window, and laying hold of the watcrpipe running
down the wall, slid down it with a sailor’s agility.
The three found themselves in a narrow alley running
between two houses.
It was closed at the end by a door.
This was locked, but, the lock being on their side, the
two men had little difficulty in forcing back the catch.
Stepping out through the doorway, they found them-
selves in a street lying to the back of the one into which
Ned had been chased.
They -were now in safety from immediate pursuit.
Their great difficulty was, however, to tAI where they
were, and in what direction to make off.
However, they judged that by working to the south they
should be certain at length to find themselves in Holborn,
and in a short time this expectation was justified.
“ I think we’re all right now.” said Kit.
“ Hang it all,” remarked Ned. but how am I to get
along with all these bloodstains about me ?”
A means was found of smoothing over this difficulty,,
Ned borrowed Kit’s large black sailor’s neckerchief. ,inc
tied it round his neck, spreading out the ends so as to
cover his shirt-front.
He buttoned his coat over his waistcoat, and tacked his
wristbands well out of sight.
Then the three kept their eyes open till they found a
drinking-fountain, at which he removed the blood that
had dried on his hands.
This completed, he received directions as to the route
he was to take from Kit, who knew London well, and,
quitting the others, started off for Peckham.
Kit and Jess also separated.
Ned’s first thought on waking the next morning was for
Peace.
The idea crossed his mind that the latter, finding him-
self in possession of the whole of the booty, might be
tempted to bolt with the lot.
It was with great satisfaction that he espied the little
burglar make his appearance in his garden.
Peace had indeed been tempted to act as Ned had
fancied.
Two things, however, had restrained him.
One was the fair value offered by Anatole for the
diamonds, and the other the chance of losing his share in
the other big robbery contemplated by Ned and the
Frenchman.
He knew that Anatole, being a firm pal of Kelly's,
would only plank down the coin under the original agree-
ment, which included the whole party; also, that it would
pay him better to get close on four thousand pounds for
his share in a lump, than to try and get rid of the lot
through other channels in detail.
Accordingly, he strolled close to his garden-wall on
seeing Ned, and in a hurried whisper agreed to accompany
the bushranger that same evening to the appointment
made with the Frenchman.
This was at a little hotel frequented by foreigners,
near Leicester-square, at which Anatole was temporarily
sojourning.
They picked up Kit on their way, and, on arriving at
the hotel and asking for Anatole, were shown to the
billiard-room, where they found him engaged in execut-
ing a series of his favourite cannons, his opponent being
a tall, black-bearded, and rather good-looking French-
As soon as the game was over, Anatole told a waiter
to take some “ grogs ” up into his room, and invited the
three visitors to follow him thither.
To their astonishment the black-bearded Frenchman
was one of the party.
When they had entered the rooj i, Anatole locked the
door and requested them to sit down and help themselves
to liquor.
Ned and Peace glanced at the stranger.
“And now, my friends, we will to business,” said Ana
tole, with a bland smile.
He spoke in broken English, but it would weary the
reader to give his peculiar English.
The three exchanged looks.
“What business?” said Peace, sharply.
“ What business ? Why, about the diamonds.”
“Stop a bit,” said Ned. “ Before we go any further,
1 want to know who this other mounseer is, and what h«
has got to do with the matter in hand ? ”
“ Aha! I see,” said Anatole, gaily ; “ I have emitted to
introduce you. I will remedy that. Gentlemen, let
me introduce to you my friend Monsieur Chose, of
Paris. Chose, vion ami, allow me V) present to you
Mistare Smeeth, Mistare Jones, ana Mistare Brown,” he
added, with ft great affectation of politeness.
“ Chouse, Chouse,” grumbled Ned, in an undertone.
“ I’ll take deuced good care he don’t chouse us.”


He was not aware that Chose is the equivalent in
Fseach for Thingamy or Thingumbob.
“Gentlemen,” said Chose, who spoke English like Ana-
tole, “ I am charmed to make your acquaintance.”
d jj u t what has Mr. Chose got to do with this affair .
said Peace, warily. , . . , .
u My friends,” said Anatole, facing them, with ais
shoulders shrugged up to his ears, and the palms of his
hands turned outward, “ when I say I will your
diamonds, surely you did not imagine that I was going to
buy them on my own account ? lam not a millionaire
nor a beautiful woman like Mees Jesv’ he kissed his
finger-tips; “and 1 do not see what I should do with
thirty thousand pounds worth of diamonds. Do you see
“I’m hanged if I do,” said Kit. “You promised to
buy them, and what you mean to do with tnem after, is
your affair.”
“ Exactly. I promise to buy tnem, but not tor myseli.
I am the middle man. Where should I find five, ten,
fifteen thousand pounds? I am but the agent of my
friend Monsieur Chose.”
“ Oh! I see,” remarked Ned, and he began to regard
the black-bearded Frenchman with his scowling looks.
“ Monsieur Chose is not only a capitalist but an expert.
He knows the value of the diamonds and is accustomed to
deal in them. And as you are all my friends he will give
you a fair price.”
“ And what do you get, old Wide-0 ?’’ cried Ned.
Anatole smiled.
“ Merely a little trifle of a commission, a bagatelle. Eet
us say ten per cent, on the sum paid you.
The truth was he was to receive twenty.
“ Well then, let’s settle things. Bring out the sparklers,”
said Ned to Peace.
The latter produced the bag from his breast pocket.
“ How much do you reckon the diamonds to be worth?”
remarked Chose, blandly, whilst Peace was unfastening the
string securing the neck of the bag.
“ The girl heard them say there were thirty thousand
pounds’ worth in the house,” said Ned, “and we copped
the lot.”
“ Copped the lot?” repeated the Irenchman, puzzled at
the phrase. .
“ Yes, collared the whole biliug, don’t you twig?
“ Bagged the whole of them,” explained Kit.
“ Ah°! Then I suppose lam to pay you from twelve to
fourteen thousand pounds?”
“ Fifteen.”
“We shall see.”
Peace bad unfastened the string.
Taking a newspaper from a chair he spread it on the
table and emptied the contents of the bag on to it.
The men held their breath as the diamond* rolled out in
a glittering stream.
Then every eye became riveted on the dazzling pile
flashing and glittering in the lamp-light.
The stones were none of them particularly large, but
were apparently good medium-sized diamonds that a man
in the trade could easily dispose of.
Chose’s face lit up with professional satisfaction.
He took the newspaper by the edge and drew it towards
him, the others keeping their eyes riveted on every move-
ment of his fingers.
He picked up half-a-dozen of the stones and lot them
run through his fingers.
Then he produced a magnifying-glass from his pocket,
and, placing three or four of the biggest diamonds on the
palm of his hand, gazed at them through it.
Suddenly he gave a start.
The expression of his face changed.
He applied one of the stones to the tip of his tongue and
uttered a grunt of surprise.
Throwing down those he held, he snatched another hand-
ful from the heap.
These he hastily scanned through the gla-s and then
rapidly tested them with his tongue like the former one.
Then, casting them contemptuously on the paper, he
rose to his feet, making a remark in a low tone, as he did
so, to Anatole.
The other four regarded this proceeding m amazement.
“ Impossible!” muttered Anatole, iu reply to the remark
of his companion. ... „ ~
“I give you my head to cut off if it is not so, said the
latter, and both the Frenchmen began to cast black looks
at the other three sharers ha this strange scene.
“ What the does all this mean?” demanded -Nee
rising to his feet with a fierce glare in his eyes.
“There’s something wrong with the sparklers, said
Kit, who understood French and had partly caught the
remark made by Chose to Anatole.
“ What’s that? What does he say about the diamonds i
cried Ned to Anatole. « Won’t he buy ?”
“Buy?” repeated the Frenchman, contemptuously,
“ buy? Do you take him for an ass, an idiot? Do you
expect him to give fifteen thousand pounds for what is not
worth so many pence ? Bah I”
“What?” yelled Ned.
“Aren’t the stones good diamonds?” asked Peace,
feverishly. _
“ Diamonds?” answered Chose, with a lau :u “ <na-
monds?” „ T 1
“ Curse your foolery ! what’s wrong with them ? By
, I’ll make you stick to your bargain,” exclaimed the
bushranger. _ T
“My bargain ?” said Chose, with some dignity. “1 am
prepared to buy thirty thousand pounds worth of dia-
monds whenever you like to produce them, but I did not
think you could dream that a man of my experience would
be taken in by such imitations as those.”
“Imitations?” screeched Peace.
“ Yes, there does not seem to be a genuine stone in the
lot.”
“ It’s a plant,” cried Poace, in a bewildered fashion, after
the three had recovered from the stupor in which this an-
nouncement had plunged them. “He wants to get the
stones cheap.”
“ Cheap?” retorted Chose, ironically. “ I have no wisa
to deprive you of them at any price.” .
And he pushed the lot contemptuously across the table
towards him. _ .
“This is worse than a crime—it is a blunder,' quoted
Anatole to Kelly, across the table. “ You should not try
such tricks on your friends, at any rate.”
“Tricks on my friends?” cried Kelly, glaring round
him like a maddened tiger. “It’s on me the tricks
played. By , and 1 think I see it, too.
And he laughed savagely.
“ What do you mean, Ned?” asked Kit.
“Mean? Why, that this d d white-faced, psalm-
writing, double-faced skunk baa changed the diamonds.”
Ashe spoke, the bushranger turned fiercely on Peace
and seized him by the throat. _ _
Peace vainly strove to free himself from this terrible
clutch.
For a moment he strove desperately to unclasp Neds
hands.
Then one of his own wandered to his pocket, but Ned
saw this movement, and, removing one of his hands from
his victim’s throat, pinioned both the unhappy man s wrists
with His iron fingers.
Peace was getting black in the face and his tongue was
protruding, before the others, who when their first sur
prise was over had started forward, could succeed in free-
ing him from the grasp of his assailant.
For a moment it seemed as though Ned w T aa about to
assail the whole lot indiscriminately.
Peace, who had been laid back in a chair, was slowly re-
covering himself.
He cast a bitter look of malignity at Ned.
“Come, come, Ned,” said Kit, “ you’re too hasty.
There must be some explanation. Can you tell us any-
thing about it ?” he continued to Peace.


Only that I have been a precious fool to break through
■say rule of working single-handed,” said the matter,
gloomily.
“ Bun the diamonds?”
“ The diamonds are just aa I took them out of the
cashbox in Malian’s office,” answered the other. “ 1 hau
not even looked at them till now.
“ This is all very strange,” said Anatole.
44 After the way in which I have just been treated,
tinned Teuco. “I might with justice refuse to speak But
1 want the affair cleared up, as well as you, and 1 think i
c ,n prove that I had nothing to do with changing these
stones In the first place, if I had chosen to bolt wiln
the whole of them the night of the robbery, there was
nothing to hinder me from getting clear off, and never
facing any of you.”
“That’s true.” tit
“In the second place, what opportunity have 1 had
since then of procuring unset, false diamonds to replace
them? And, in the third, if I had changed them, should
I have been fool enough to come here with you and risk
discovery, for no one of us, I suppose, dreamt that these
gentlemen would buy the stones without examination. 1
should have let you go on alone with my share, and quietly
6l °He d looked as if he regretted not having done the trick
of which Ned had accused him.
“T suppose,” said Kit to Chose, “all the stones are
“"ah '” said the Frenchman, who had been carelessly
picking ‘ them up and glancing at them during Peace s
explanation. “Some are paste, some natural crystal.
But there is not a single diamond in the lot, and no one
who has ever handled precious stones would be deceived
for more than a moment. ,
Ned advanced in silence to the table, and gathering up
the glittering bits of mineral, restored them to the bag,
and placed the latter in his pocket.
“You don’t think I’m in this plant? he asfced cf
Anatole. . , , ~ .
“ No.” said the other, who understood him.
“ And I’m blessed if I can quite tell who is, continued
Kellv, in a low tone. . ...
“ Stop a bit,” said Peace. “ I want to know something
more about these stones. You say they are false, but how
do I know, especially after the way m which I have been
treated, whether all this is not a got-up affair, simply to
do me out of my share, after I have had the hardest work,
and all arranged beforehand between you and your
pal the Frenchman?” , ,
This assertion startled the others, and they looked at
Peace in amazement. ~ •,
“ I demand to have the stones tested, he continued.
“ That will not be so difficult,” said Monsieur Chose,
turning to a travelling-bag in one corner of the room.
“ Here is a book in English on precious stones, describ-
ing how to tell a true diamond. Here, too, are the
materials for the various tests it mentions. If the stones
.are good, they will stand them, if false they Mill be de-
8t Nedfpulled out the bag, and the whole party began to
assay the stones, and found Chose was correct
As a further test they sallied out, and Peace and Chose
entering a respectable jeweller’s the latter introduced him-
self as a foreigner in the same line, and requested him o
■examine half-a-dozen of the stones, to decide a wager.
The man unhesitatingly pronounced them “ clutters.
The party separated somewhat downcast.
Chose had lost the chance of a splendid bargain, Ana-
tole his commission, and the other three the fruit of their
labours. , . , . . , ,
But as NcA'-dt Kit, he observed in a low tone of deter-
mination — , .
“ Before I’ve done i’ll find out who hasrung the changes
on us in this fashion, I am certain that little devil has
■jockeyed us somehow.
Mr. Malian was evidently a cute customer and didn’t
even (rust his household. The real diamonds were else-
where. He rather ostentatiously let it be known where
the “ duffers ” reposed.
CHATTER CLXL
. A NIGHT ON THE THAMES.
There is a kind of “ debatable land,” on which the mar-
ket-gardener and the “ferry-builder” contend for supre-
macy, stretching eastward between the Oi l Kent-roadand
the river.
1L is a dreary region, the chief features of which are
flat fields given up to the cultivation of vegetables for the
London market, unfinished streets leading nowhere,
and fringed by houses in every stage of construction, rows
of builders’ “carcases,” immense cinder-heaps, and a net-
work of interesting railway lines, chmfly devoted to the
goods traffic.
At too side of the main thoroughfare, traversing it
towards Ilotherhithe, stands a quaint, old-fashioned road-
side public, bearing the strange title of the Old Galley
Wall.
It is an isolated house surrounded by vegetable-grounds,
looking bare and desolate even in daylight.
Still more bare and desolate looking did they appear to
a tali, powerfully-built man tramping along the road ia
question one evening at dusk, some three days after the
scene described in the last chapter, and making his way
eastward, and it was with a grunt of satisfaction that ho
marked the house and noticed the light shining from be-
hind the old-fashioned red curtain of the bar.
“This must be the place,” he muttered, “and job
enough I have had to find it.”
Crossing over the road he approached the house, and, as
he did scy another man, who despite the lateness of the
hour had been sitting on a bench just outside the door,
rose and greeted him.
“ I had got to wondering whether you were coming ot
not,” he observed.
“ I’m blessed if I could find the crib,” replied the other.
“I got blundering on down streets that ended in fields,
and roads that finished up in market-gardens, till I fairly
lost all bearings. It’s worse than the bush, for there a
track is pretty sure to end somewhere, and you’ve
always got the suitor the stars to travel by, but in this
cursed mulligatawny sky you’ve got nothing, day or night,
to guide you. The beastly place! I’m dead sick of it, I
am.”
“Well, you’re here at last, though a hit late. Weil
have one drink, and I’ll put you up to the business as we
go along.”
The two entered the bar, and, by the light, stood
revealed as Kit and Ned.
After tossing off a glass of spirits and water a-piece,
they set out together in the direction of Ilotherhithe.
On their way Kit explained to Ned the service he
wished him to join in. .
Although the days of Will Watch and his followers
are past and gone for ever, and it is no longer possible
to run a cargo of smuggled goods ashore in the very
teeth of the coastguard, and beat them off with the as-
sistance of the entire countryside, there are still a number
of men who devote a great deal of spare time to what is
known as defrauding her Majesty s Revenue, an ohence
which, some how or other, is practised without compunc-
tion by gentle and simple.
Of course, now-a-days, ingenuity nas replaced force,
and countless are the dodges adopted.
Kit had become acquainted with some men engage a tu
this kind of enterprise, and had joined with tnem in a
venture. , , .
They had brought a quantity of tobacco over in a brig
from Hamburg. , . • . .
The Custom-house officers, however, had got scent of
the scheme, and were on the lookout.
Tim tobacco, previously compressed to the smallest poa-


rtble di m ' by a hydraulic press, was so stowed away
on board as iu ucfy investigation, but the difficulty was to
get it on shore.
“They’re getting more fly to the dodges every day,”
f»aid Kit, as he and Ned strode along the road, “though
there have been some rare good ones played off on them
in this very river.”
“80 I should think,” assented Ned.
“ There’s an old chap in the swim who was telling me
nome of their little tricks the other night. Once be came
across towards Christmas time with a whole lo* of French,
walnuts. Whoppers they were, he said, and several score
of bushel of them. But he said he felt devilish nervous
at their looking so tempting, lest one of the tide waiters
ihcuid fancy cracking a dozen.”
“Why?”
“ Because, baling a sprinkling on the top, all of them
had been carefully emptied and the shells glued together
again, w’fch a small-sized kid glove rolled up inside each
of them. The duty made it worth while then.”
“ Tobacco wouldn’t do that way, it would smell too
strong.”
’* Oh. he’d dona tobacco lots of ways—in reams of print-
yig paper with a square cut out of the middle of the inner
sheets, and in plaster of Paris busts made hollow, only
their breaking so easily made it risky.”
“ Ah ! Anatole was telling me that that was the way
they used to smuggle the pamphlets attacking the Emperor,
into France’”
“ Ay, I’ve heard of that.”
It was indeed in this way that Rochefort’s famous
Lanterne used to be brought across the Belgian frontier,
the busts selected being those of the Emperor himself, as
being less likely to arouse suspicion of such a thing.
“Anatole told me a pretty good yarn about a dodge he
and a pal of his were working in Paris, when he was there
kst,” remarked Ned.
“ Let’s hear it.”
“ Well, it seems that everything eatable or drinkable
going into the city pays a duty, and that they’ve got a
barrier all round, with gates, and custom-house officers at
each.”
“ Yes, I know.”
“ Well, Anatole's «ihum used to live just outside the
barrier, and used to drive in every morning in a light dog-
cart. There was a rage for English turnouts, just then ;
wad he’d got a neat trap and a pretty stepper in the shafts,
and a groom got up English fashion beside him, sitting
holt upright, as stiff as a post with his arms folded, and
looking straight ahead at nothing.”
“ I know the style.”
“ Well, at first the custom-house people overhauled the
turnout once or twice, just for form’s sake, for they saw
he was a respectable man driving up to his place of busi-
ness regular as clockwork every day. But after that they
used just to squint as he drove past, and nothing more,
and in the end he used to go through and they would
saly nod and wish him good day, after their blessed boir*
mg and scraj ing fashion.”
“ Well, ana what came of it?”
“ Wait a bit. Everyone used to njy.vy him hia tumowfc,
especially the groom so awfully w 11-trained, sitting wim
his arms folded and never a smile n bis face,”
“ Was he an Englishman ?”
“ I’ll tell you. Well, one day » st as he was driving in
as usual, a runaway van came I Iting down the street.
He tried to clear it, but the gates were narrow and there
were other traps in the way, and the end was they ran
right into him, took off his wheel, and shot him and the
groom and the trap clean over/’
“Nice that.”
“ They picked up the master first and carried him into
the custom-house, for he was cut about the head.
“ The groom was lying quite still under the trap, for it
had turned over on him, and the horse had fallen with
it.
“ There he lay, with a little pool of something spreading
out round him, which they thought was the poor fellow’s
blood, and which kept growing larger every minute.
“ They thought he must be dead, and that it was his
blood ; but directly they came close, they began to sniff
a very strange smell, and when they laid hands on the car-
case they twigged the dodge at once.”
“ But what was it ?”
“ Why, the groom was a dummy !”
“A dummy?”
“Yes, and filled from hat to boots with spirits. Of
course, for the first week or so there had been a real
groom, but directly the custom-house people got used to
him, and did not stop the trap, the dummy was put up
instead.”
“ What an artful dodge.”
“ Yes, but that wasn’t all. It seems he used to empty
the dummy at a crib inside the barrier, drive out by an-
other gate, and come back again through that one with a
fresh lot. In fact, he used to run three or four cargoes
regularly through the day at different points.”
“ If the engine-rooms of some of the big river-steamers
her.s could speak, they’d pitch some queer yarns,” said
Kit.
“ They are the best hiding-places, for people don’t like
poking their noses too closely into furnaces and boilers
at the risk of getting burnt, or scalded, or bio wed up.”
(To be continued .)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers,
lorn Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea,
Demons of the Sea.
Love and Adventure.
Run away from Home.— A Life of
Adventure.
The Golden Reef, or a Hive for Half-ar
Million.
The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search
of a Big Diamond.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures ol
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Eoad to
Buin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thundejf.




NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
it is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by s senes of crimes wholly mcompa ib.e with
tL dviSati-m of the nineteenth century/ Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, .s as well known at the <umpod«
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
<• It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned 1v85.1t 8
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July. _
“The history of Ned Kellt and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever five m the recollection of .a
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of Ned
and HIS Naq j’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin* is pure fiction. — / ress, July.
CHAPTER CLXII. — Continued ,
“Right you are.”
“ There’s a big passenger-craft running now from
London-bridge regular, that has every weight in her
fcufine room made hollow, and its not pounds, but tons,
of tobacco that she has brought into the countiy during
the years she has been plying.”
Thus talking, the pair had gained Rotherluthe, and
made t heir way to a little public near the church.
They simply entered the bar, had a drink, and went out
again without a word, but a few minutes later a couple
of longshore-men who had been loafing in front of the
bar for half-an-hour at least, over a pot of porter, finished
it up and went out also.
Ned and Kit were loitering at a corner when these two
came up to them.
“ Well,” said Kit, “ how arc things looking?”
VV Cll, OCVIU © o
“ Not too well,” answered one of the men, whose speech
rather belied his diess. “ They are keeping an eye on the
craft, I am certain. There’s a supervision-boat prowling
about up and down in a way that shows there’s something
in the wind,”
“ Is your own craft ready ?”
“Ay, she’s at the stairs close by.”
“Well, then, the sooner we get afloat the better.”
The four picked their way down a narrow turning lead-
ing to the waterside, at the bottom of which several boats
were moored.
Ned and Kit took their places at the stern-sheets of one
of these, and the two others, taking the oars, pushed
quietly off.
Paddling softly along, and keeping as much as possible
under the' shadow cast by the various mills and ware-
houses, they made their way a short distance up the stream.
Then they paused in the shadow.
The night was a tolerably fine one, though a slight haze
hung upon the water, and the moon only occasionally
shone forth from the clouds that veiled the greater part
of the sky overhead.
The tide was running up, and had almost reached its
height.
Bringing themselves alongside a coal-barge and holding
on to it, the four men looked out across the river.
Their attention turned chiefly on a brig moored toward*
the shore next to which they were keeping.
“ Is that her? ” enquired Ned, in a low voioa
“Yes.”
“ Why don’t we run alongside then ? ”
“Because,” said the man who was pulling stroke-oar,
“ there’s that cursed police-boat dodging up and down,
in and out that tier of shipping over there. Look, you
can just make her out/'
“Well, she’s working down stream. We could slip
out and be alongside without her spotting us, if she keeps
on over there.” .
“Yes. But I lay any money there s another hiding
behind something away on this side, and ready to pounce
Like a cat on a mouse all the time. _
A little longer they watched and waited till the tide
ftanrcsl
The first police-boat had got so far clown stream that
they had almost agreed to adopt Nod’s suggestion and
make a dash for the brig.
All at once they noticed another boat creeping up
against the ebb in the direction they had themselves pur-
sued, and evidently striving to keep out of right.
Watching it closely, they noticed it dodging amongst
the tiers of different craft moored in the stream.
At length it ran alongside a vessel, and someone from
it mounted the deck and was followed by another
“ What’s that ?” whispered Ned. “ Police ?”
“ Hush, no. Thieves at work. Be quiet.”
Emboldened apparently by the silence, the plunderers
were seen to descend iuto the cabin of the craft they had
boa'ded.
Suddenly, from behind a tier of barges a few dozen yards
above, the point where Ned and his friends were lying, a
boat shot swiftly out into the stream.
She was manned by three oarsmen pulling randan, and
was unmistakeably a police boat.
She headed straight for the plunderers, and had made
some way before the man left in their boat noticed her
approach which was as stealthy as swift.
Directly he did so, however, he warned his comrades,
and they came bolting up from below and tumbled into
their craft.
Seizing their oars they pulled desperately, with the
police boat in hot pursuit, the latter striving to csit them
off from the Surrey shore, to which they were endeavour-
ing to make their way.
“ Now’s our time,” cried Kit, as pursuers and pursued
were lost for a few moments behind some shipping.
“ Yes,” answered the man who had before spoken, “that
boat was ■watching the Welcome, but now she’s in for a
good chase on the top of the ebb, and the other will pro-
bably help her, so we’ve got a clear field. They’ll be
some time working back."
A few minutes later and they were alongside the brig
they had been watching.
They were evidently expected, for a low bail greeted
them as the bow oar hooked on to her.
Several figures appeared moving on the deck.
“ Are the things ready?” asked Kit.
“ Yes,” was the answer. “ Will you come aboa: d?’
“No ; tumble them in sharp. We’ve just got a chance
of getting clear before that beggar down there has time to
work back again.”
Several bulky packages were lowered in quick succession
over the brig’s side and received into the boat, where they
were quickly stowed at the bottom of the little craft.
All went well till one of the last of them was being
lowerff-d.
Ned was standing in readiness to receive it with his
arms outstretched, when somehow or other the rope by
which it was being let down came loose.
The package struck Kelly full on the chest, knocking
him to the bottom of the boat, rebounded on to the
thwart, almost upsetting the other men by the shock, and
thence rolled into the water with a heavy splash, that
sounded distinct / in the silence of the night


It sank at once. ,
“Curse it all!” fesnd the stroke-oarsman; “ there s a
pretty job. Who the devil hitched the rope round that
lot in such a clumsy fashion ? ’
U Look out; that splash is bound to be heard, whis-
pered a voice from the deck.
<< iSTed,” said Kit, bending over Kelly, who still lay at
the bottom of the boat, “Ned, are you hurt?”
There was no answer.
Kit stooped quite close to the prostrate form of his
brother, and endeavoured to ascertain the extent of his
The moon was still behind the clouds, but as far as he
could make out Kelly had been stunned by his head
coming against one of the seats in his fall.
A couple more packages were lowered.
“ Put off at once,” said Kit.
Ned who was evidently insensible, was placed m the
stern of the boat, and the two oarsmen pulled the boat out
in to the stream. _ _
The haze was clearing, but it was still dark.
All at once the moon broke forth from behind the
clouds and lit up the scene, making it appear almost as
bright as daylight, by the contrast.
Kit stooped down once more in order to get another
look at Ned, who continued insensible, by the improved
°As he did so an exclamation of rage broke from the
stroke-oarsman. ......
The moon had revealed to him a four-oared galley rights
astern of them, and evidently about to attempt to over-
haul them. . „ ,
“ Here’s that infernal supervision-boat astern oi us, he
exclaimed, fiercely. ...
“Does she see ua?” said Kit, who had just dipped his
handkerchief in the stream and was dashing the water
from it over Ned’s face.
“ Yes, and she’s after us.”
A hail from the stranger confirmed this.
“ Pull on like devils, then,” said Kit, who had glanced
round to measure the distance between them, “ we may
dodge her yet along the other shore.
A species of groan escaped Ned at this juncture- and he
opened his eyes.
“ Ned, Ned !” cried Kit.
“ What is it?” he answered, sitting up.
“ Can you take an oar ?”
Making a desperate effort to shake off his giddiness,
Ned answered in the affirmative. . .
He took the stroke-oar’s place, the latter seizing on a
pair of sculls with which the boat was furnished, so that
there were now three to help her along.
But it was evident that the galley was equal it not
superior, in swiftness, despite the desperation with whic i
pursued were pulling.
The dead weight they were carrying told.
The man who had pulled stroke-oar turned a look on Kit.
“They must go over,” he said.
“ I’m afraid so,” was the answer.
Pulling in his sculls, the other stooped, ana, luting ft
couple of packages from the bottom of the boat, tossed
them overboard.
A couple more followed.
“Hold on at that!” suddenly cried Kit, “ and pull
away like mad. I see a chance of doing it, after all.’
The man resumed his sculls, and the boat, thus light-
ened, went considerably faster.
The tide had been running down some time, and several
craft had profited by it to get under way.
Barges and sailing-vessels were slowly drifting down,
and more than one big steamer, lying in mid-stream, had
clipped her mooringa. and was making her way along
UKflei easy steal)-
«,me of these was ctumng along behind them, taking a
course almost parallel with that of their pursuer, but
B*iaxer to the Middlesex shore.
She was going at about the same rate as the police-gal-
ley, and both wore gaining on the fugitives.
“If we keep straight on we are bound to ri?, upon
another police-boat,” said Kit. “ Our only cbaaco is to
double, and I mean to risk it.”
First he began to edge a little towards the Surrey
shore, as though intending to trv to land there.
The police-galley followed his example to cut him off.
Then he steered once more out towards mid-stream,
and straightened the boat’s course.
The galley partly imitated this, and thus stilt kept a
little nearer the Surrey shore than the smugglers craft.
These litde manoeuvres had somewhat delayed the
direct advance of the boats, and the steamer had gained
on them considerably.
She was creeping up towards the port quarter of the
boat steered by Kit, her long, wall-like sides towering hks.
a'castle out of the water.
Kit began to edge a trifle towards her.
The steersman of die police-boat noticed this, and began
to make sure of his prey.
The advance of the steamer would cut the smugglers
off from all chance of gaining the Middlesex shore, except
by going astern of her.
To gain the Surrey side, they must cross his bows.
By putting on a spurt he could, as it were, pin them be-
tween his craft and the steamer, in which case there would
be no room for them to double, and they would be bound
to give in. _ . .
Urging bis men to a spurt, he succeeded in lessening
the distance considerably.
Kit had continued to edge still further to the left.
The bows of the steamer were now some twenty feet
astern of him on that side, and a like distance separated
him from the police-galley, now creeping up on his
right. „
“Now!” he suddenly cried. “Pull every ounce you
can for your lives!” , , .. , . ~ .
And, altering the boat’s course, he headed her straight
across the steamer’s bows for the Middlesex shore.
There was a yell from the look-out man on board the
steamer as the boat rushed, as it were, to certain de-
strnction.
But Kit had judged speed and distance to a nicety
2 here was no time to alter the steamer’s course, and it
was the nearest thing that he managed to clear her.
As it was, her cutwater missed his stern by about a
The look-out man cursed him heartily, after the manner
of his kind, for not getting swamped, as he deserved.
But once across, and with her bulk intervening between
them and the police-galley, there was a chance of
Heading for a tier of vessels moored near the shore, Kit
pulled along behind them.
The galley had no chance of passing as he had done,
but had°to wait and go astern of the steam r.
This caused a delay of some minutes, during which the
chase was hidden from view by the hull of the huge craft
she had so narrowly avoided.
When at length, the galley passed across the steamer s
wake, those on board her could discover no sign of the
fugitives. .
However, they pulled in towards shore, closely scruti-
nising every lurking-place. .
Meanwhile, Kit had steered into tne first stairs that
presented themselves.
The boat was soon alongside.
“This is lucky. I think we can find snelter close by
both for ourselves and the swag,” said the oarsman.
Each man seized upon one of the remaining packages,
hoisted it on his shoulder, and, abandoning the boat .o ita
fate, set off up the lane. . , .
As they approached the summit, the tramp of a heavy
footstep caught their ears, and the next moment the light
of a bull’s-eye lantern flashed upon them.


CHAPTER CLXIIL
DOWN WAPPING WAY.
The position of Ned and his companions was a ticklish
one.
To go back and take to their boat again was to expose
themselves t-< almost certain detection by the police on
the river.
To go forward w** apparently to run right into the
lion’s jaw, for there was evidently a policeman at the end
of the alley in which they found themselves.
Perhaps more than one.
But an uncertain peril is always easier to confront than
a certain one with the majority of mankind.
So, after a momentary hesitation, the party proceeded
onwards up the alley.
Before they had gone many steps the light of a bull's-
eye was flashed upon them, and a voice cried—
“ What’s your game?”
The presence of four men stealing up from th« river,
each with a sack on his shoulder, was in itself suspicious
enough to cause this interrogation.
There was no time to stop and try to give a more or
less plausible explanation.
The pursuers were too c'wse behind.
“All right, bob—bob—by,” hiccupped the rower, who
was leading the way, staggering forward as he spoke with
the voice and gait of a drunken man.
“It ain’t all right. Stand where you are, or——”
The policeman had not time to complete the sentence.
Suddenly dropping his load, the other sprang forward
on him like a panther on a goat
The policeman was a powerful young fellow, and if he
had had to do with this single antagonist he might have
given a good account of him in spite of the sudden sur-
prise caused by this unexpected attack.
Before, however, he could disengage himself, or even
utter a cry for help, Nod, Kit, and their remaining com-
panion had in turn dropped their burdens and joined in
the ferocious and unequal assault.
There was a brief but desperate struggle.
A closely-interlaced group of human figures writhed
and swayed to and fro in the blackness of the alley.
The hurried trampling of their feet, their hoarse breath-
ing, a muttered oath, and a gasping cry for aid, choked
back in the throat of the hapless bobby, who vainly strove
to utter it, were the only sounds that rose out of the inky
darkness
Kit and the second rower had pinioned the policeman’s
arms whilst his first assailant was gripping his throat with
one hand and thrusting a handkerchief into his mouth
with the other.
Meanwhile Ned had possessed himself of the unfortu-
nate fellow’s truncheon, which he had withdrawn from
the case.
Two crashing blows followed.
The thickness of the intended victim’s helmet saved
him, however, from their full effect, and, nerved to des-
peration by the peril in which he found himself, he suc-
ceeded in partly freeing himself from the grip of his as-
sailants by one desperate effort.
“Help! mur ”he shrieked, as they again secured
him.
There were hats, if not “wigs upon the green ” in this
melee , during which Ned kept a hold upon the safety-valve
or throat of his antagonist, whose helmet, his only pro-
tection, now tumbled to the ground.
In the struggle the group had reached the end of the
alloy, and the rays of light from a neighbouring lamp
partially lit up their figures.
These rays seemed to concentrate, as it were, on the
white, horror-struck face of the doomed victim, which was
revealed by them in ail its ghastliness of aspect.
A wild look of despair flitted across his distorted
features, as Ned raised the truncheon.
“Murder!” again broke in half-strangled tones from
the terror-parched lips of the pocT fellow.
Ned saw at once that unless the constable's voice was
silenced, the career of himself and his companions wo,:ld
soon be decided by the tribunals of the country.
Me thereupon struck the poor wretch in his grasp a
heavy blow with the truncheon he had wrested from him.
The man tumbled like a sack, and for a moment the
ruffians paused, as if paralysed by the atrocity tMy had
committed.
The poor bobby was a corpse, although of cnis fact the
crew who were responsible for his death were not quite
certain. Not that Kelly or Kit cared much tor the crime,
still that uncertainty of results which would follow rather
perplexed and somewhat cowed them.
The four ruffians gazed at one another for a few
seconds in silence and with half-furtive looks.
Ned and Kit were unmoved ; both had seen too mud
blood in their time to trouble themselves about a little
more or less spilt on their path through life.
But the other two were not so hardened.
A little smuggling they did not mind, but killing a man
—even a policeman the natural enemy of their class—
was quite another matter.
Ned was the first to speak.
“ Now, then, don’t be chicken-hearted, my lads. It’s
done, and you’re all in it, so let us slide, and be quick
about it, if we mean to slope. Pick up the plunder, and
don’t stand staring like frightened calves.”
The other two were more silent than Kelly liked.
The struggle had carried them to some distance from
tho spot where they had thrown down their loads, and in
the darkness of the alley it was not easy to discern them,
despite their bulk.
The policeman’s bull’s-eye had been extinguished in the
scuffle to wnich he had fallen a victim, so they had to
grope for a few moments in the darkness.
Just as they had managed to lay their hands on the
packages, the sound of a boat running sharply to shore
reached them from the bottom of the alley.
The noise of someone scrambling to land and of a
voice exclaiming, “ I’m certain they ran in here,” also fell
upon their ears with most unpleasant distinctness.
Hastily lifting their packages, they scuttied out of the
alley into the main street.
As they stood for a moment and seemed to hesitate
whether to turn to the right or the left, the noise of foot-
steps approaching from tue latter direction decided them.
They turned sharply to the right.
Flitting cautiously onward as silently as possible past
huge and gloomy warehouses, they made their way in an
easterly direction, with eyes and ears on the alert.
“ We must spread,” suddenly observed the man who
had pulled stroke-oar in the boat, and who answered to
the name of Dick amongst his friends, and to that of
Lomax on police summonses.
“ Why ? ” inquired Kit.
“ We shall get into the livelier streets in a minute or
two in this direction, and four men carrying bundles are
bound to be spotted by somebody or ocher and re-
membered.”
“ Besides,” remarked his companion, “ there is bound
to be a bobby at the swing bridge just ahead, and he is
sure to stop and question us like the other bloke.”
A rapid council of war was held.
As Ned was a perfect stranger to the rendezvous to
which they were all bound, and which was situate in
Wapping, it was absolutely necessary that some one or
other should guide him thither.
Kit was about to suggest that he should do so.
Before, however, he could open his mouth for this pur-
pose, Ned said to him hastily and imperatives—
“ You and Dick Lomax both know you; way to the
meeting-place, and can get there separatel/. Let Bob
here stay with me to show me the right road.”
The others acquiesced, though Bob did njt seem par-
ticularly well pleased at this lit tic arrangeatto.it.
This feeling he strove as best he could to c mceal.


Hi» conduct, o -Wever. only served to confirm a sns-
ricion that d been germinating in Neds mind ever
since the smuggle with the policeman and its terrible
termination
He hah wa’ched the demeanour of his companions
closely since that untoward event.
lie read in Bob’s bewildered, anxious glance a horror
of the deed since it had been accomplished, and a sickening
dread of discove> > aad its appalling consequences.
Ned, though utterly illiterate, was au accomplished
reader of character and human nature.
Like a celebrated historical personage, he could say that
his only books were men and cards.
It was to this faculty that he owed so much of his power
over his associates on all occasions.
He detected that Bob was a man who looked upon
smuggling and murder with very different eyes.
His conscience might be, and indeed was, perfectly cal-
lous about the former, but this was evidently not the case
as regarded the latter crime.
The first excitement of a struggle into which he had
been drawn, as it were despite himself, over, that very
unpleasant feeling known as remorse began to make
itself felt most obtrusively.
Remorse is as a rule, a first step to atonement.
But atonement in such cases as the one under con-
sideration only too often takes the shape of delivering up
one’s fellow-criminals to the anything but tender mercies
of justice, and at the same time making the best possible
bargain for the safety of one’s own precious neck.
This artful little transaction, so eminently characteristic
of our perverse and fallen human nature, is commonly
known as turning Queen’s evidence.
Ned plainly read that, if they were caught, Mr. Bob
would be the first to peach.
Hence he thought it best to keep him under his own
sharp eye, and to be prepared, in case of treachery, to
twist his neck like a chicken’s in an instant.
The faint sounds of pursuit in the rear now reached
them as they sped onwards.
It was evident that the party from the police boat must
have discovered the corpse of the policeman.
This was indeed the case.
As they hail hastened up the alley one of the foremost
had tripped and stumbled over the inanimate body.
Dragging it to the light they at once divined the cause
of what they judged to be death.
The next thing to do was to find in which direction the
murderers, whose identity they divined, had fled.
They had just decided to separate in two portions, to the
right and left, when they too caught the sound of the ap-
proaching steps that had in the first instance led Ned and
his companions to turn in the former direction.
Soon the men from whom the sound of these footsteps
proceeded came in sight.
They were a couple of master lightermen, well known,
as it happened, to the crew of the police boat as men of
perfect honesty and integrity.
Their statement, when questioned, that no one had
passed them coming from the alley was at once accepted
as true
Evidently the murderers had turned to the right.
AU at once the inspector who had steered the boat was
struck with an idea, which he put in practice.
Directing two of his men to hurry on to the right on
the presumed track of the assassins, he stooped for a
moment over the prostrate body.
Taking Gom the p cket of the murdered man his rattle,
and directing two of the remainder to convey the body to
the station, he hurried after his advanced guard, springing
the implement vigorously as he went along.
By this means he counted on alarming the district and
bi'diging the police on duty to bis aid at once without delay.
The probabilities were that, in coming to join him, they,
or some of them at any rate, would encounter the fugitive®,
who were speeding in the opposite direction.
As it happened, this plan had ipute a contrary effect to
what he anticipated as regarded Ned and his inends
They were, as has been said, in a street bordered by
huge and gloomy warehouses and running parallel with
the river.
A short distance ahead it led over a swing-bridge
crossing an inlet to one of the numerous docks of the
locality.
Beyond this bridge there were several turnings leading
from the street, by means of which the party could
separate.
But between the spot in which they were and the bridge
there was no such way of getting clear.
It was absolutely necessary that they should cross the
swing-bridge, now some ninety or a hundred yards ahead.
But it was also pretty equally certain that a policeman
would be found on duty at that very point.
The difficulty was how to avoid him.
Suddenly Ned’s keen ear caught the sound of someone
approaching from the direction in question.
The peculiar heavy clumping step of a man shod with
the regulation police boots was unmistakable.
At the same instant the whir of the rattle sprung by the
inspector sounded far in the rear.
Swift to conceive a plan, Ned dragged his companions
into the dark archway of a warehouse door.
The result answered his expectations.
The policeman, who was the man on duty at the bridge,
had been keeping himself warm by pacing up and down.
But directly he heard the rattle he darted off at full
speed in the direction from whence it proceeded, in order
to render the assistance it called for.
He bolted past the archway beneath which the four
fugitives were lurking without glancing to the right or
to the left, blundering along like a steam fire-engine.
Directly he had passed them they darted out in turn,
and rushed in the opposite direction to that he had taken.
In another minute and a half they were over the bridge,
and soon separated, making their way up the different
streets beyond it.
The rendezvous to which the smuggled goods were to
be conveyed was situate at Wapping.
According to the original plan, which had been inter-
rupted by the appearance of the police boat, they were
to have pulled down the river and landed in close prox-
imity to it.
Now they had to make their way thither on foot.
Kit and Dick departed by different routes.
Bob, upon whom Ned’s guidance now devolved, led the
way in sulky silence, followed by Kelly.
Avoiding the main thoroughfare, he made his way
through a series of streets so dark, narrow, and deserted,
as to excite even Ned’s astonishment.
Lights were few and far between, and several times
Kelly stumbled over a pile of garbage lying in the road-
way, and had a narrow escape of coming to ihe ground.
Ills companion, however, seemed to know every square
inch of the district they were traversing, and never once
made a false step.
Narrower grew the streets, darker the way, and fouler
the stenches they had to encounter the further they ad-
vanced.
They were in a network of filthy little streets bordered
by houses almost in ruins.
Suddenly Ned, for about the twentieth time, stumbled
against a heap of some kind of filth or other, and the next
instant measured his length in the roadway, which was,
fortunately, tolerably clean.
Growling like thunder he rose to his feet, and, after
picking up his burden, looked round for his companion.
Bob had vanished.
There was no sign of him anywhere.
For a moment Ned thought that he too might have fallen
over something.
“ Bob, are you down ?” fee asked softly.
There was no answer.


a j3 o b—Bob ! where the devil are you ?” be cried, in
louder tones.
Still uo reply.
•‘Bob, what’s your little game?” yelled Ned, setting
prudence at defiance.
Then a thought struck him.
There could bo no doubt of it—Bob had bolted from
him on purpose.
He recollected the peculiar look he had noted on his
late companion’s face, and which had led him to insist upon
his company in order to watch him.
Bob had evidently profited by his fall to bolt up one of
the side streets, and knowing the ground, as lie clearly did,
was long since out of reach.
But what had he bolted for ?
Ned guessed only too well.
He stood still a moment to ponder on his next move-
ment. , ....
He knew his pal was off to hand the lot over to justice,
and get the reward—for reward there certainly would be
for the capture of the policeman’s murderer.
He ground his teeth with rage at not having removed
this witness from the face of the earth when he had the
chance he might never have again—no one near, night as
dark as Erebus, the policeman’s truncheon, everything so
handv!
What a tender-hearted fool he was! It was losing
the best chance he would ever have—it was a regular fly-
ing in the face of Providence, it was—at least, so thought
Mr. Edward Kelly.
It was as Ned surmised.
Bob judged that the murder of the policeman was too
serious a matter to be involved in, and had, therefore,
made up his mind to secure immunity for himself by de-
nouncing his comrades, on whom he intended to lay the
lion’s share of the deed at once.
CHAPTER CLXIV.
ORTON AS GUIDE, PHILOSOPHER, AND FRIEND.
Ned’s situation was not a pleasant one.
He was in a neighbourhood with which he was utterly
unacquainted, and which was not the pleasantest in the
world for a stranger to be wandering about at night
in.
He did not know in what direction he ought to proceed,
and, moreover, there was no one to ask.
He knew that he was in a neighbourhood of wild beasts
in the shape of men—that the place was about as safe to
an unarmed man as the woods and wolves of Russia in
winter.
But fear was an element of the human mind unknown
to Kelly.
His courage was ferocious, brutal, and the reckless
pluck of the unreflecting; it was the courage of the
brigand, not of the soldier.
The great pent etre had never yawned before him, and
crime has lost half its atrocity when it has lost all its re-
sponsibility.
He knew that all was fish that came to the net of the
human tigers who infest these quarters, and that, despite
the Scotch proverb that “ hawks will no’ pick out hawks’
een,” they would plunder a bushranger as readily as a
bishop.
With his bundle, too, he had something cf the appear-
ance of the favourite game oi tms district—the newly-
landed sailor.
As to asking a policeman for guidance, if he could
come across one, that would, in his idea, have been rather
risky.
Bob had no doubt by this time lodged all particulars of
the crime and its perpetrators with the police, and it was
certain the hounds were on the scent.
He stumbled along, keeping a sharp look-out as he
went, and carefully avoiding any human figure he saw or
fancied he caught a glimpse of.
At last he found himself in a broader and more respect-
able-lookiug, though equally-deserted, street, and
to breathe more freely.
He looked round about to see if there was anyone
whom he might venture to ask his way.
Suddenly he caught sight of an advancing figure.
Or was it two, walking arm-in-arm ?
For one man could hardly have such a massy back a*
the object be could dimly make out approaching him.
lie looked again.
His first impression had been right.
There was only one pair of legs, and therefore it was
only one body that was advancing towards him.
But on these legs was a body big enough for two, and
resembling that lusns vatnrse , a turtle on castors.
The stranger was muffled up in a huge pea-coat, bur-
toned to the chin.
The lower part of his face was swathed in the folds o!
an immense woollen comforter.
The upper was hidden by a kind of in veiling-cap, with
a projecting peak that was pulled right down over his
eyes.
Notwithstanding this, there was something in the vasv
globular rotundity and rolling movements of the new*
comer, that struck Ned as being strangely familiar to him.
He could have sworn that it was not the first time he
had set eyes on that “ biggest circulation in the world,”
The vast pendulous cheeks, like a couple of well-stuffed
carpet-bags, that he could make out under the shadow of
the cap, he felt certain he had some kind of acquaintance-
ship with.
He stepped up to the moving flesh-mountain and asked
the way to street.
“ Fourth turnin’ to the right and then the first to the
left, and that’ll take you hinto hit,” was the reply.
If Ned had been in doubt as to the figure, the voice at
once undeceived him.
“By the living Jingo !” he exclaimed, “ it’s Castro,
Orton, or whatever you call yourself.”
It was indeed the ex-butcher of Wagga-Wagga, the
cx-horse-stealer of Reedy Creek, who was prowling about,
muffled up to the very eyes, in the streets of Wapping.
“ Hush!” exclaimed the other nervously, “Let’s see
who hare you. Why, hit’s Ned Kelly.”
“ The same. And now just bear a hand, and get ma
out of this blessed forest of houses; blowed if I couldn’t
get out of the Mallee scrub as easy—and there ain’t no
sky to travel by in this cussed country.”
“ You want to go to —— street, eh ?” enquired Orton.
“Yes,” replied Ned.
“Well, Hi think this ’ere ’ll be the nearest way," saif
the fat one, giving a lead down a side-street.
“I say, mate, you seem to know this quarter as well a*
a rabbit does his warren,” remarked Ned, as he stepped
along beside him.
“Well, I dessay you do think it rum for a B. of B. K.
to know ’is way habout ’ere so well.”
“ What the devil’s a B. of B. K?” growled Ned.
“ Why a Barrowknight of the British Kingdom, to be
sure,” was the reply.
“Oh! so you’re a baronet now, are you? What’s your
lay?”
“ Ain’t Hi told you afore ? Ain’t Hi told you as ’ow my
poor dear mother, Lady Felliseet, knowed me the very
minute as she first clapped heyes on me?”
“Well, you are coming it strong, you are!”
“Yes. She was like a maniac with joy. Ah* Hi've
got no hend of swells on my side, now ; and hit won't bo
long afore Hi henter hinto my property, and live like Hi
did when Hi was a horficer.
“ What, a police officer ?”
“No a horficer in the carabineers, a fine regiment,
thousand strong.”
Ned’s knowledge of the ".tvength of a British cavalry
regiment was on a par with that of his companion, and
this statement did not strike him as peculiar.
“Not but what they were rather rough on w) hat


G'ii'iis,” continued Orton, shaking his head. “Hi recol-
lects as ’off they put a blessed moke—Hi mean a donkey
—hiuto my bod, and Hi took hit for the devil.”
Did )jU learn your way about this part so well when
you were in the army V” said the shrewd Kelly, who put
no faith in Orton’s “ blowing.”
“No, the faot his, you see, that my wife, Lady Tich-
borne ”
“Come, drop it! I ain't such a moke as to swallow
that.”
“ My wife, Lady Tichborne, hain’t hat hall a bad sort,
bub she wants a little polishing up. So Hi’ve just come
down ’ere to ’ave a word with a young woman, a perfect
lady—gold watch, silk stockings, and high heels, every-
thing quite regular—as Hi m beknown to, and who ’angs
hout this ’ere quarter.”
“Oh, 1 see,” replied Kelly, laughing, “a real swell
diamond rings and everything to match?”
“ I believe you. One of the haristocracy and no flies.
Why, when we took a day out to Woolwich Gardings last
Saturday, and I said I’d stand a glass o’ ale, she started
up like a fellow caught at the plate-basket, aud said she’d
be if she’d smaller anything under champagne. She
was always accustomed to hact like a lady, and she’d be
if she was going to change now. Oh, she's the real
nugget, and no quartz, I can tell you.”
“ You’re in luck,” said Ned. “ Mum’s the word, I
suppose ?”
“ Of course, her ladyship might be jealous, you know,
at my getting a governess—ha, ha, ha!” laughed the
“suffering noblerauu.” “But you’ll come and have a
shove in the mouth with me some day at the Waterloo, in
Jerrayn-street, where I hang out?”
“ I don’t mind if I do, old chap. I’ll give you a look
up about grub time,” said Kelly.
“ But, I say,” observed Orton, who began to think,
cansidering Kelly’s peculiar habits, that there was plunder
in a good hotel—“ mind, no tricks.”
“What are you driving at?” said Kelly. “Do you
think I’m going on the fake for greatcoats and umbrellas ?
Ugh !” he uttered, in disgust.
“ All right, old pal,” said Orton. “And mind, if you
sees anybody there, you never set eyes on me afore save
onced when you saw me a-carving my hinitchials on a
pipe—R. T. C. Are you down to it?”
“Like a knife. But I say, look here, my bloomer,
what are you going to stand if I recollect all you want
and forget all you wish—eh ?”
“ Oh, you mean business, then ?” ejaculated the weald-
's a Sir Roger.
“ Business afore pleasure, as the cove said when he
ordered his cofiiu afore he swallowed the pison,” laughed
Ned,
“Oh, I don’t mind,” said Blubberhead. There’s plenty
as knows me here and in the colony—swells, all on ’em.
I can get any amount o’ hcvidence.”
“Yes,” said Ned, “at a price.”
“ Well, what’s your price ?”
“I can’t say yet, but I'll send my bill in before long.”
The two had now reached a more brilliantly-lighted
street, in which, despite the lateness of the hour, there
were a fair number of people about.
A man, having the appearance of a foreign seaman, ap-
proached them.
“ Pardon, monsieur, ' said he, addressing Orton,
politely, “ awitz-vons la houte <le me preter da feu ?”
As he spoke he raised his hand in which he held the cigar
for which be had requested a light.
Helloa! what does the beggar want, Ned ? Why can’t
he speak a lingo one can understand?” asked Orton.
r ihe man repeated his request in the same term’, but to
the person addressed it seemed still incomprehensible.
“He wants a light, I think,” said Kelly, proffeting his
weed, which the stranger took, and, after lighting his own
with it, returned to its owner with a polite—
“ Je vous remercie bien, monsieur
Then, raising his hat, he went on his way.
“ Some blooming furriner hor bother,” remarked, Orion,
in a contemptuous tone.
“Frenchman, I think,” said Ned,
“No. Hi should say ’e was a Portugeo now. Hi
should ’ave hunderstood ’im hif Vd a spoke him French,
you know,” was Orton’s reply, “ because I was foaled
there.”
“’Ere’s your street,” he said, indicating a turning a
little way further on ; “but afore you goes down hit you'd
better step hin to tills ’ere crib—Hi mean public-’ouso
and ’ave a drain.”
Before going in, Orton peered into a little snuggery
with the position of which he seemed fully acquainted, in
order to be sure that there was no one there.
Then, pulling his cap still lower over his eyes and liis
comforter still higher up over his mouth, he stepped in,
and, in a voice that Ned could tell was an assumed one,
ordered their drinks.
A middle-aged woman behind the bar stared hard at
him, but said nothing, after serving him.
“ 'Off my helbow hitches,” said Orton, rubbing the por-
tion of his anatomy in question against the bar. “Hit's
a sign, Hi should say, as we was a-goin’ to ’ave rain to-
rn orrer.”
“ How’s the wind ?” asked Ned.
“ Nearly west; that’s the heast that way.”
And, as he spoke, he jerked his head towards one corner
of the little compartment in which they were standing,
whilst Ned speculated on the strangely perfect acquaint-
ance shown by him of all his surroundings, including the
points of the compass.
Orton’s knowledge, in a room at night, of the points
of the compass showed his familiarity with the locality.
No man ever lived who could enter a strange room and
tell what was east or west, north or south.
Orton, being bred up in the locality, knew the four
points of the compass there.
An old fellow, who stepped in that moment from put-
ting up the shutters, took a long look at the fat stranger,
who appeared uneasy at this scrutiny.
As the two men stepped out after drinking their liquor,
be said to the woman behind the bar—
“If that fat chap ain’t Arthur Orton as went out to
Australia with a couple of ponies, I’m a blessed Dutch-
man —hang me if I ain’t!”
“ Right you are, Sam,” said the woman behind the bar.
“ I’ve been puzzling ever since he came in as to who he
was, and now you've been aud hit it.”
Meanwhile Orton had taken leave of Ned, and the latter
proceeding down the street pointed out to him, halted in
front of the number that had been appointed as the place
of meeting by his late companions on the river.
Before knocking, he glanced carefully round to the right
aud left in order to be certain that no lurking spy was ob-
serving his movements.
He gave the peculiar knock at the door as he had been
instructed by Kit.
There was no light in the front of the house.
After watching a few seconds he heard the shuffling ap-
proach of footsteps, and then the withdrawal of sundry
bolts and bars, which had a very suspicious sound, as, from
the appearance of the place, the idea that there was any-
thing to rob would never enter the brain of the merest
tyro in burglary.
The door was cautiously opened on tuo chain, and the
head of an old man was protruded.
With its yellow skin, its skull as bald as a basin save for
a couple of tufts of fluffy white hair above the temples,
its sharp aquiline features and its huge hooked nose, it
resembled rather the head of a baldheaded vulture than
that of a human being.
“ What do you want?” croaked this apparition.
Ned answered by repeating a password which fid
had received from the other companions of his late ex-
pedition.


The old man unfastened the chain, and silently beckoned
with his skinny claw for Kelly to enter.
Carefully reclosing the door behind them, he took up a
flaring, stinking paraffin-lamp, and led the way along a
dirty dilapidated passage to the bend of a pair of stairs.
Down these he proceeded, followed by Ned, whose
weight, increased as it was by the burden he carried,
caused the ricketv steps to creak and groan in an ominous
fashion.
At the bottom *»f the steps was a strong oaken door,
from behind which came the murmur of voices.
The old man threw it open and ushered Ned into a
spacious underground apartment, half cellar, half kit-
chen.
In it about a dozen men were already assembled.
Amongst them were Kit and Dick Lomax.
The cellar was long and tolerably lofty.
The space near the door was taken up by a table, on
which liquors of various kinds were set forth, and by the
benches on which the men were seated.
The further end was encumbered by bales and packages
of different shapes and sizes, piled up in some instances to
the arched roof itself.
CHAPTER CLXY,
TAKING CAKE OF NUMBER ONE,
Kit and Lomax advanced to meet Kelly.
“ Where’s Bob?” enquired the first-named.
“ Blessed if I know,” answered Ned. “ I fetched a
cropper over a pile of muck, and when 1 picked myself up
Bob had clean mizzled.”
“ What’s the meaning of this ?” said Kit, looking a little
scared, and turning to Lomax in an inquiring fashion.
“ I suppose he must have gone on, thinking you were
close behind him. and then, missii g you, turned back, and
somehow or other did not come across you,” said Lomax.
“ Yes, that must be it,” remarked Kit. “ Very likely
he passed you without seeing you, and is hunting about
for you now, near where you parted.”
Ned beckoned Kit to come closer.
“ No, no, that’s not it,” he said in a low voice. ** The
beggar bolted on purpose to peach.”
“To round on us?”
“ Yes ; about the bobby that fell against his truncheon.
I noticed the fellow’s face, and I swear he was in a blue
funk about this job directly it was over. Curse it all,
what a lily-livered set the fellows are in this rotten old
country. Why, the lads I’m used to would think no more
of dropping a cursed copper than of cracking a clay-pipe.”
“ W hat’s best to be done ?” asked Kit.
“ Why, the best thing to be done is to scatter out of
this hole like shot. He is pretty sure to say we were
coming on here, and I don’t care about being pinned up
like a rat in a hole.”
“Don’t fret your kidneys,” said Kit; 11 it’s not so easy
to get in here as you may fancy, and I think I can show
you a way to get out long before any bobby sets foot in
this den.”
“ Can you ? Then out with it.”
“So you may as well have a glass with the rest of us,
and listen to a song. There are one or two chaps hero
that can pipe a stave, and no mistake.”
Ned complied, and after being informally presented to
the company as Kit’s brother, and a cove on the same lay
as themselves, was accommodated with a seat at the table
and a glass of grog.
The company raamly consisted of 'longshoremen and
“lumpers,” by no means particular as to how they picked
up a living, and usually making use of the place in which
they found themselves for the reception of smuggled or
stolen property of various descriptions.
A song or two had been sung, but not in a very loud
voice, and matters were pretty cheerful when a knock was
netutl at the outer door.
C>ne or two pricked their ears for a moment, but on
recognising the usual signal, paid no further attention.
Ned, however, could not help feeling uneasy.
He ho ird the old porter shuffle along the passage to
the door above.
Then the sound of the bolts and bars being withdrawn,
and a pause, during which the password was evidently
demanded.
After which Ned heard the door reclosed.
“ It’s all right,” he thought, “the old boy has let th.
cove, whoever he is, in.”
Still, he fancied he could detect a confused rumbling,
tusselling. scuffling sound in the passage.
A minute or two elapsed, but neither the old man nor
the newcomer made their appearance in the cellar.
The noisy conversation again broke forth, but Ned, who
could not restrain a feeling of uneasiness, felt all but cer-
tain that he heard the front-door softly open again.
He was not left long in suspense, for tne tramp of feet
sounded plainly overhead, and approaching the summit of
the stairs.
Evidently more than those of two persons.
The next moment the turbulent noise of a number of
men hastily descending the crazy staircase was plainly
audible.
The men in the cellar glanced at one another as though
d-’-'Mnding some exp anation. They were as silent as if
suddenly turned into stone. They stared with alarmed
contenances towards the stairs.
The solution was furnished in a somewhat unpleasant
fashion as it turned out.
The door of the cellar, which no one had thought of
securing, was thrown wide open.
The light flashed on the uniforms and accoutrements of
a number of policemen.
And one of these, stepping forward into the cellar,
called upon the whole party to submit quietly.
Ned, with Kit and Dick, at once guessed how this had
happened.
Bob, as Kelly had surmised, had been terrified at the
thought of being arrested as one of the actors in the
murder of the policeman.
On bolting from Ned he had hastened at once to th«
nearest police-station.
There he had given himself up and, as an earnest of hia
sincerity, had volunteered to guide the police at once to
place whe e he assured them his accomplices had taken
refuge, and, at the same time, to reveal the whereabouts
of a large depot for smuggled goods, the existence of
which had long been suspected.
The inspector on duty had at once accepted his offer;
but had refrained from telling him that the policeman was
not dead after all, though severely injured by Ned s blow.
A party of the force were at once despatched under the
guidance of the traitor to the house in Wap ping.
Bob, stepping up to the door alone, had been let in by
the old doorkeeper.
Once inside he had suddenly seized and pinioned the
old ruffian, and re-opening the door admitted the
police.
No sooner had these made their appearance at the door
of the cellar than Ned sprang to his feet.
Drawing a pistol, he sighted, the man who had called o.u
them to surrender, and fired straight at him.
The effect of this shot was twofold.
The police were not accustomed to such a reception.
It was a little before the time of “ the revolver epi-
demic,” as it is styled, which has since set in with such
severity, as far as they are concerned, and they were not
used to “ stand fire” unless in company of some friendly
and amorous cook.
As a rule the dangerous classes, when cornered, would
yield themselves without resistance and not make targets
of their would-be captors.
So when their leader dropped with a bullet in bis
shoulder, for Kelly had sought to disable him, not to kill
him outright, they remained for a minute or two quite
stupefied.


But Kelly’s companions, with the exception of Kit, were
equallv taken aback by his proceedings.
Ineydid not mind “ squashing a copper s head like a
birr ” with a brickbat when the opportunity presented
itself, but firearms were rather out of thoir line at this
Henee the two parties gazed at one another for a
moment in equal amazement.
Kit was the first to recover himself.
Just as Ned was about to throw himself forward and
try and profit by the panic he had created to force nis way
through the police into the street, he laid a hand on his
arm. ..
“ Don’t try that,” he said, “ there s a better way
And at the top of his voice he gave the order that had
long ago been arranged should such an event as the
present intervene.
“ Dowse the glims, my hearties, and lamraus, shouted
Kit, and, in a moment the place was in utter darkness.
The police held the door, but were afraiu to move lest a
way for escape should be leit open.
Kelly knowing his herculean strength was for grasping
the police and forcing his way out.
The thieves were the more numerous, and could cer-
tainly have carried the pass ; but the undefinable some-
thing that surrounds the executors of the law quite cowed
the vagabonds for some seconds.
“ Plowed if I ain’t got it,” whispered Kelly to Kit.
“Let’s knock their blessed heads off. We know where
they are, they don’t know where to find us iu the dark.
Let’s give ’em bricks and smash the lot. Don't give in
without a fight. D it, let’s have a shy at em before
the job’s ended,”
“ No, no, Ned ; I know a better way—follow me, the
other lot know the track they’re to take—they 11 slip off
without being heard or seen —the bobbies will thin
they’re simply funking.”
Meanwhile a brisk movement went on.
Kelly found himself guided by Kit in the direction of
one end of the cellar. .
Passing behind a pile of goods, he felt himself con-
ducted along a narrow passage in utter darkness.
At the end of it his feet struck against the bottom of
a flight of steps. , . ,
Just as he began to ascend them, someone, who had
preceded him, raised a trap at their summit.
It was one of those traps leading on to the pavement,
such as may be seen by hundreds in the streets of London
under shop-fronts, and are generally used for the recep-
tion of heavy goods by tradesmen.
It opened on to a street running parallel with that by
which they had entered the house, and which was appa-
rently quite deserted.
Just as Ned began to ascend the steps, the police, who
had guessed that their prey was escaping them, made a
rush forward through the cellar, guided by the uoise caused
by the retreating ruffians.
They reached the beginning of the passage just as the
rear guard of the gang were entering it.
A brief scuffle took place in the darkness. .
The police laid about them furiously with their
truncheons, hitting about indiscrimately, and moro than
one of their number had reason to bless the stoutness ot
his helmet, which alone saved him from a fractured skull
at the hands of a comrade. . . , , ,
But some of their blows reached their intended destma
tion, and consequently several of the ’longshoremen were
struck down and captured.
The open trap let a little moonlight into the passage,
and by its aid the state of things could be made out some-
what more distinctly . , , , A
The police saw that, by making a rush forward and
gainingW steps, they could prevent the escape of several
of the struggling throng.
But Ned also saw this fact. _ .
He saw, moreover, that if once the police gamed the
steps and thence the street, they would be so closely on
the fugirives’ track that the chance of escape would bo
considerably lessened
He rushed up the steps at the top of his speedy
Several of his companions were close behind him.
But, instead of waiting to allow them to come out, he
deliberately slammed down the two flaps that closed the
opening.
The trap, as is usual in such cases, consisted of two Saps,
one opening to the right and the othier to the left.
In the centre of each was a lar fe » iron ring serving as a
handle to raise it.
Ned took in this at a glance.
Kit, who had preceded him up the steps, and was wait-
ing for him, had oast down a heavy piece of wood with
winch he had covered himself on the arrival of the
police. . ,
It was about four feet long, and as thick as a man a
wrist.
Seizing this, Ned slipped it through the two rinss in
the cellar flaps, rendering it impossible for anyone to open
the trap from within.
A. howl of despair from the men behind him announced
this fact only too pi linly.
Kit was the only one who witnessed this act of treachery,
all of the others who had gained the street having already
scuttled off at the top of their speed.
“ Hang it all, Ned, what are you up to ?” he cried.
“ Look here, capture for those coves means quod for
six months, but for us it means a morning picture in a
white nightcap I don’t care to make—at Newgate. If it
was a fair fight, and with the rope round ail our necks.
I’d have stuck to my pals like wax,” was the reply.
And whilst his unhappy companions, caged liked rats,
were forced to yield to the police, who now had command
of the'only issue from the cellar—namely, the door by
which they had first entered, he and Kit soon placed
themselves in safety.
The trapped men never learnt to whose hand they were
indebted to board and lodging at her Majesty’s expense,
but they had a shrewd suspicion.
CHAPTER CLXVI.
A GAME OF CROSS-PURPOSES.
Of course, the great diamond robbery in Hatton-garden
created a tremendous sensation.
The papers were all full of it.
Innumerable callers, interested in various ways, or
simply moved by curiosity, besieged Mr. Malian’s house.
For some time, however, they were unable to gain
access to the master of the establishment.
The wounds inflicted by Kelly on the worthy diamond
merchant were not fatal.
Though severe and for a short time dangerous, they had
not reached any vital part.
When once the healing process had fairly set in, its
progress, thanks to the wounded man's excellent constitu-
was rapid and unchecked.
At length, the doctor was able to pronounce his patient
in a fair way to recovery, and to withdraw his prohibition
against anyone whatever entering the sick chamber, save
Mrs. Malian and the nurse.
He had given strict orders to Mrs. Malian not to let
his patient hear any news whatever of a nature likely to
excite or distess him.
This order the poor woman had ** tifully obeyed,
though it needed a terrible effort to eria gie her to keep
silent, as regarded the overwhelming loss that had befallen
them in their old age.
At last, with the doctor's permission, she ventured to
speak of it to her husband.
Sue touched first of all on the great danger which he
had undergone from his injuries.
He admitted it. ~
She then enlarged on the joy she felt, and on the grati-
tude he ought to feel that his life had spared, and m


this the peor woman was sincere enough, for she was
deeply attached to her husband.
“ My poor old man,” she said, with the tears in her
eyes, ‘ you cannot how grateful lam to have you still
with me.”
The sufferer pressed her hand without speaking.
“But, oh, John,” she continued sadly, “I have some
very sad news to tell you.”
lie looked at her inquiringly.
“ You know that the villain who stabbed you managed
to get clear off ? ”
“ Did he? ” he asked, for he had been kept in ignor-
ance of this.
“ Yes. lie broke away from you and rushed out of the
house.”
“ Did you—did you notice what he was doing when
you discovered him? ” she asked, hesitatingly.
“ As far as I could make out,” said the invalid, with
some difficulty, “ he was rifling the safe.”
• Yes,” sighed Mrs. Malian, “ he was.”
['here was a pause.
‘He must have been at it some time before you heard
aim,” she said, at length.
“ Very possibly.”
“And he had had time to pack up his plunder,” she
observed with a sigh.
“ What? ”
“Y r es, dear. When we came to examine things, we
found that not only the safe but the cash-box in it had
been forced, and that the diamonds had disappeared
altogether from the place.”
'{'here was a moment’s silence.
Mr. Malian, however, was not so terribly overwhelmed
as she had anticipated by this intelligence. This his affec-
tionate partner attributed to the strength of mind of her
noble-minded husband.
He seemed to be making a strong effort to recover him-
self, and to succeed in doing so.
The police, I suppose, are on tne fellow’s track? Have
they got any clue, do you know ? ”
“ They have been wanting to see you about it for aoim
days past.”
“ Well, I suppose they had better.”
“ There’s a man downstairs now who has something to
do with it, and who wants to see you. Shall I fetch !um
up?”
“ Certainly, my dear, I think I am strong enough for this
interview.”
There was almost a merry twinkle in the eye of the
sufferer, but what it meant sorely puzzled the partner of
his joys and sorrows.
Aiter propping her husband up with pillows, Mrs. Malian
left the room and shortly afterwards returned with a little
brisk man, whose appearance vaguely recalled that of a
ferret, his face peeping out from a forest of hair of the
most fiery red, with whiskers to match.
He was dressed in semi-clerical style, with a black coat
and white choker.
He glanced from Mr. to Mrs. Malian in a most significant
manner.
“ You can leave us, my dear,” said the former, rightly
interpreting his glance.
“ Bray do not excite yourself too much, John,” said the
good woman to her spouse, as she prepared to leave the
room. “ You’ll take care of that, won’t you, sir?” she
continued, appealingly to the visitor.
“Certainly, ma’am, certainly, we will take care not to
bruise the shattered vessel,” was the reply.
No sooner was the door closed on Mrs. Malian, than he
turned briskly towards the sick man.
“ I am a detective.”
w I presumed as much.”
“ Hush ! Don’t talk more than you can help. If you
will just content yourself with answering yes and no to ray
questions it will do. You heard what your good lady
said V”
Mr. Malian smiled.
“ My dear sir,” resumed the little man, “you have, 1
believe, suffered, under Providence, from a severe affliction,
you have been robbed of property representing a value of
from twenty-five to thirty thousand pounds?”
“Yes,” answered Mr Malian, “ that’s it, property,
representing a value of thirty thousand pounds.”
“ Don’t say more than you can help. You would like
to get it back, I suppose ?”
“ Yes,” was the answer, given in a calm tone.
“ Hum !” said the stranger, who seemed to have the
habit of thinking aloud, “ lie does not seem to excite
himself much about it. I think we may as well go into the
business at once. My dear sir, I have mentioned before
that lam a detective. A private detective.”
“ Ah.”
“ Yes, 1 am Mr. Tunstall, of Tunstall and Bigwood,
Private Detective Office, 304, Little Smith-stieet. En-
quirers in divorce, libel, loss, or any private case. Mis-
sing friends traced to any part of the world, important
cases personally conducted by the principals in the
strictest confidence.”
“ But ”
“ Exactly. I was merely repeating our advertisement.
Matter of habit. But to resume. We devote ourselves
especially to the recovery of stolen property.”
“ Indeed.”
*■ Yes ; and, under providence, I am glad to say that the
Lord has usually blessed our labours. We have, 1 make
bohi to say to you—and, considering the loss under which
you are suffering, I feel I can venture to speak openly—
certain sources of information, certain connections which
are, 1 flatter myself, not available to the first comers.’’
A smile passed over Mr. Malian's shrewd features.
“ We have I assure you, before this, been able, by a
merciful dispensation, to recover very valuable property
on its way to the melting-pot. Diamonds are rather diffi
cult things to dispose of in large quantities, and I fee!
certain that if the thieves try to get rid of them wo shall
hear of it.”
“Tlirough your connection?” said the diamond merchant,
somewhat drily.
“Yes, exactly; through the mysterious working of
Providence aud our connection,” was the unabashed
answer; “and 1 have no doubt that, with very little
trouble, the lost property could be placed once more in
your hands.”
Mr. Malian smiled once more, but somewhat ironically,
rather than with the hopeful expression of a man antici-
pating the restoration of a lost treasure.
“ Of course, this will entail trouble, not to say expense,
and in such cases you, I know, will not dispute the fact
that the labourer in the vineyard is worthy of his hire.”
“I suppose so.”
“Then you are prepared to offer a reward for the re-
covery, if it should be so decreed by Providence, of the
lost property.”
“ I believe I must.”
“ My dear sir, let me assure you that there is not the
slightest chance otherwise of getting it back. Not the
slightest, let me assure yon. The world, you know, mj
dear sir, the world is frail,” and he sighed heavily, and
then continued, “ But what sum do you think of offer
ing ?”
“ Well, as you have said, I have been deprived of pro-
perty representing a value of thirty thousand pounds.”
“ Thirty thousand pounds !” repeated the other, rubbing
his hands with anticipation.
“ 1 think the best plan will be to offer a percentage.”
“ A percentage, my dear sir?—a most excellent idea.”
“ And, as you are experienced in sucli matters, I thick
I cannot do better than ask your advice as to the
amount.”
“ Quite so, my dear sir, quite so. Your ideas are ex-
cellent, worthy of a chosen vessel, indeed they are. It is most
singular, I was about to suggest a percentage on the amount


recovered myself, and I have here already drawn up a little
form of agreement, with just the figures left blank,
which 1 trust you will sign. Thirty thousand pounds worth
of diamonds, you say,” he went on, producing the agree-
ment and a pocket inkstand. “ I will fill that amount in.
And now for the percentage—l think we may' say ”
‘ Ten per cent., eh ?”
“On! rny dear sir; tvs 3my-five at least. Consider the
time, the trouble.”
Fifteen per cent, will repay them amply.”
“ Well, twenty—say twenty. There, that is filled in.
And now, my dear sir, your signature here. Stop a minute,
i will call the nurse and your good lady to witness it,” and
as he spoke he rang the bell.
A few minutes later the little man was rushing down
the street with a paper in his coat-tail pocket, by which
.Mr. Malian bound himself to pay twenty per cent, on the
value of the diamonds recovered by his agency.
As he went along lie muttered to himself—
“ Any odds I get on the track of the diamonds at last.
Whoever holds them ought to snap at fifteen per cent, of
their value, and no questions asked, and with the other
five per cent. I put fifteen hundred pounds into my pocket.
There is only one puzzle to clear up, and that is, who has
got them ? Well, whoever it is, they will hardly hesitate at
my terms.”
The private detective had scarcely left the house before
the hell rang, and another visitor made a most pressing
request for an immediate audience with Mr. Malian.
The new-comer offered a striking contrast,
lie was a very tall and powerfully-built man of some-
what portly outline, set off to advantage by a tightly-but-
toned frock-*'oat of dark blue cloth.
His conipl.-R.ion was ruddy, his sleek and close-cropped
hair iron grey, whilst his small side-whiskers, trimmed with
military accuracy, were jet black.
lie gave his name as Superintendent Smith, of the
Metropolitan Police Force.
M-s. Malian was rather anxious at first not to admit
him, fearing the two visits might excite her husband.
But her visitor was not to be checked.
“Madam,” he remarked blandly but firmly, “I am
especially entrusted with this affair by the authorities at
Scolland-yard. lam willing to wait a little time to allow
Mr. Malian to recover himself from the interview you
mention, but it is most necessary I should see hi».”
Mrs. Malian was fain to agree.
The superintendent said that during the interval he
should like to inspect the scene of the burglary.
Be visited the workshop and office under Mrs. Malian’s
guidance, inspected everything, looked awfully wise and
impenetrably mysterious.
The London police are notoriously the most wooden-
headed body of respectable men in the world. When on
enquiries, “from information they have received,” they
appear pompous asses, and rarely, if ever, show any intelli-
gence in detecting criminals.
Bat it must be admitted that for civility they are
unequalled.
On this occasion the detective ejaculated with pomposity
—“ Hum! ” thiee times, and shook his head solemnly four.
He certainly looked very wise.
He then w. nb upstairs, slowly, solemnly, officially.
“ Good-day, sir,” was his greeting on entering the sick-
•oorn. “Glad to see you better, sir. Sad affair this.”
“Yes,” answered Mr. Malian, in confirmation of the
1 sadness."
“ Government tins taken it up.”
“ Indeed ! Then they isust think the affair one of some
atrocity V”
“Oh yes! They offer twenty pounds reward for die
murderous attack upon you. They offered one hundred
pounds last week for the detection of a tax-gatherer who
bolted with one hundred and fifty pounds he had received
for taxes.”
“Oh indeed: Twenty pounds for attempted murder,
five times that amount for stealing money! Truly a
paternal Government that thinks more of property than ot
life.”
“We must respect the law, sir. A man may half or
three-quarters murder his wife, and jump her inside out,
kill her by accident on purpose, and get three months.
But see how equal the law is. A starving child, who steals
a growing turnip, gets the same. Oh, tne law’s uncommon
equal, sir, it is. We’re a humane people, wo are, sir,”
said the detective, with a most reverent appreciation of
that branch of science which has been called the “ per-
fection of reason.”
“ Very considerate to offer any reward.”
“ Just so, sir. But the attack on you was not the only
crime committed here, you see.”
“ How so?”
“ Offence against property as well as against the person.
From information I received, I am given to understand
you have been robbed of thirty thousand pounds worth of
diamonds. Is that so, sir ?”
“ Stones representing a value of thirty thousand pounds
have certainly been carried off.”
“ Exactly. Now, sir, I suppose you would like the
man who almost murdered you brought to justice, and
punished according to his deserts ?”
“ Certainly I should,” answered Mr. Malian energeti-
cally.
“ And your property restored?”
“ Yes,” was the reply, though in not quite such cordial
tones.
“ Well, sir, I think if you wore to offer a decent reward
for it. the men who have charge of the case would be
likely to take a great deal more trouble about the matter
than otherwise. You nan quite understand that, sir?”
and the superintendent la d oae flayer against his nose.
“ Quite so. I am qui ® ready to offer an additional
reward.”
“ Ah, I thought you would, sir,” and the superinten-
dent smiled.
“ Yes. Let me see, the Government offer twenty.”
“ Yes."
“ Well, I don’t mind putting another hundred to get
hold of the ruth ms.”
“ Yes : but as regards the stolen property, sir, I should
suggest ”
“Just so. lam coming to that. For the restoration
of the stolen stones, I don’t mind going as high as ’
and here he paused in mental calculation.
“ Ves, sir, as high as?” said the superintendent in an
eager tone.
“ Well, a hundred more,” remarked Mr. Malian quietly.
“A hundred more!” echoed the superintendent in a
tone of amazement, and with a look at the invalid as it
ho began to entertain serious doubts of his sanity.
“ A hundred more. I have reason to believe it will be
sulficient,” repeated the diamond merchant.
“ Well, sir, you know best,” said the police officer, with
a somewhat disconcerted air, ‘ but, as man to man, 1 may
tell you I don’t think there is much chance of your ever
seeing your diamonds back again.”
“Probably not,” assented Mr. Malian mildly.
“ As regards the man who did the job, though, it may be
another matter, and, with the clue we’ve got, I should not
bo surprised if we laid hold of him.”
“ Ah, what clue is that?”
The superintendent looked as if ho wished he had not
said quite so much.
“ Well, I think his accomplice will say something in the
end, although she does keep precious quiet as yet.”
“ His accomplice ? Whom do you mean r ( 'V
“ Why, the girl.”
“What girl ?”
“ The girl you had here—Sal her name is.”
“ Good heavens! Do you mean to say she is in cns&GQ'f
That explains it. I thought it strange she had not come
into my room to see how I was, since she always professed
such devotion t,r> tne.”


“ Or for your diamonds, sir,”
“ Nonsense, I know the girl too well. So she is in
custody, eh? On what charge?”
Being concerned in the robbery of thirty thousand
pounds’ worth of diamonds”
“Is that all ? No other charge, eh ?”
“No,” replied the superintendent, who was fast
getting somewhat bewildered.
“ And who gave her in charge? ”
“Your good lady, sir, I am told.’*
“ At your instance, eh V”
“Yes; at least, at the instance of the police.”
“ Ring the bell for my wife.”
The superintendent complied.
“My dear,” said Mr. Malian, when his wife entered, “ I
want you to withdraw at once this charge against poor
Sarah, and have her released.”
« Certainly, my dear,” was the answer.
“Well, sir.” said the thoroughly bewildered super-
intendent, “as you withdraw the charge, I don’t see
the good of opening it, and the bench will discharge
the girl when next she comes up on remand, for want
of evidence. But I must say that if you ever think of
getting back the thirty thousand pounds’ worth of
diamonds, either thro gh us officially or in any other way,
you will be very much mistaken.”
“I certainly don’t expect to get them back through
you, or in any other way.”
“Ah,” said the officer, in puzzled surprise.
“And I am really sorry you should have put yourself
to so much trouble and taken such a trifling loss so
seriously to heart,” and Mr, Malian smiled in that pecu-
liar and enigmatical way that had already puzzled thoiie
about him.
CHAPTER CLXVII.
SOME NEEDFUL EXPLANATIONS.
His wife and the superintendent looked at one another.
There could be no doubt about it.
It must be the fever from his wound, rendering him
utterly delirious, that made him talk like this.
Mrs. Malian could not help bursting into tears.
Her husband saw this.
“ Come, Mr Superintendent,” he said, “ let us have
a clear explanation. You and I are playing at cross-
purposes.”
“In what way?”
“You would like to lay your hands on thirty thousand
pounds’ worth of diamonds belonging to me?”
“ Yes,” was the reply, in a very decided tone indeed.
“ Well, if 1 chose I could grant you that pleasure in
about ten minutes. They are all in the house now."
“In the now?” exclaimed the other two simul-
taneously.
(To be continued,}
“Yes, and what’s more, they never went out of it.
Don’t you see now. eh ? ” and Mr. Malian fairly chuckled.
Then, as his wife and Superintendent Smith were too
stupefied to answer, he w r ent on
“It is known that I am a diamond merchant, that I
live he**, awi that 1 keep a large quantity of precious
THE “ANONYMA”
SERIES
Anonyma, or Fair but Fralf.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
Woman.
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly-
OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
The Beautiful Demon
stones on the premises. What more natural than that
some day or other an attempt should be made to rob me.
But I was quite prepared for that attempt. I said to
myself, Where will the robbers, when they do come, look
for the diamonds? Why, naturally in the place where
they are supposed to be kept. Is it not so, eh, Mr.
Superintendent ? ”
The superintendent nodded grimly.
“ And that is my safe. I tell a feV people in the
strictest confidence that I have stones representing a value
of thirty thousand pounds in my safe. Do you see, eh ?”
“ Not quite,” was the somewhat dazed answer.
“ Well, I have there stones which represent, I say, a
value of thirty thousand pounds, but which are in reality
not worth thirty thousand pence.”
The superintendent whistled in amazement, and regarded
the invalid with admiration. He wouldn’t be out of place
in “ the force.”
“ Now do you see ? A thief enters the house. He
looks first of all in the most natural place for valuables,
the safe. He finds what he thinks is thirty thousand
pounds’ worth of diamonds, and he hurries out of the
house without looking any further, eh ?”
“That’s so,”remarked the superintendent, emphatically.
“ If he is a bit cleverer than his fellows, he says to him-
self, ‘ What a fool this diamond merchant must be to
keep all his diamonds down here on the ground floor in a
back office.’ But he does not, even in that case, think of
looking any farther, and, meanwhile, the real diamonds
are hidden away in a place known only to myself—not
even to my wife—and which is so snug that you might
pull the house three-parts down before you came on the
slightest trace of their hiding-place.”
“ The devil you might! ” exclaimed the superintendent
fiercely, starting to his feet. “ Why. if ”
He checked himself.
His almost gigantic figure seemed to dilate as he glanced
round the room, and, as his eye appeared to rest for a
moment upon the fire burning in the grate, it’s pupil
seemed to grow too like a living coal of fire.
A grim smile curled bis lip as he looked from Mr. to
Mrs. Malian, and drew near the latter.
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLY; IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
It is will known that for many years Ned Keliy had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well knovn at the Antipodas
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands,"— Telegraph, 7th July, 1831.
It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Stewards corpse was mainly performid by the assistance of Nev Kkllv's
Bhother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.” — Times, July.
"The history of Ned and his celebrate! black horse, Marco Polo, will ever lire in the recollection of the
Australian public. Ihe deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside tn>se of ‘ N 33
and his Nag in addition to which Ned s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.’’ — Press, July
CHAPTER CLXVTI.— Con 'inued.
At that moment the bell of the front-door rang.
Mrs. Malian stepped to the window and lifted the blind.
“Ah! Mr. Superintendent,” she exclaimed, looking
out, “ there are two of your men down below at the door.
Ah ! and the doctor too.”
“Damn !” ejaculated the superintendent,and spring-
ing to the window by her side he glanced into the street
in turn.
Two policemen in uniform were at the door, and the
doctor’s brougham, from which its owner was alighting,
was drawn up close to the curbstone.
‘‘ Ah! two of my fellows, as you say, Mrs. Malian,”
said the superintendent, recovering his coolness. “ I will
run down and see what they want. They must have come
here after me.”
lie at once left the room, with the parting remark to
Mr. Malian—
“ All right, I’ll see about the girl being released.”
Then swiftly descending the stairs he swept by the
sergeant and constable standing in the hall, whither they
had just been admitted by the nurse who had answered
the boll, opened the door, passed into the street and
walked rapidly away.
The constable and sergeant waited below till the doctor
had seen his patient, whom he found suffering from ex-
citement, consequent upon the two interviews just related,
and for whom he prescribed absolute quiet.
They then sent up a request to see Mr. Malian.
“ Do you think it as well, doctor? ” asked Airs. Malian.
“No, I think you had better not let him see anyone
else to-day. If you like I’ll step down with you myself
and see what they want.”
Accordingly the doctor and Mrs. Malian went down-
stairs.
The two police officers, whom Airs. Alallan recognised,
stated that they were the men specially entrusted with
the case, and that they wanted to know if Air. Alallan had
recovered enough to give any information likely to be of
any service to them.
Airs. Alallan replied that her husband had just had a
long interview with Superintendent Smith.
"Whereupon the two simultaneously asked who was
Superintendent Smith.
They were told the tall man who had just come down
and spoken to them in the hall.
“No one spoke to us,” said the sergeant.
“A tall man! why he bolted past us like a rabbit
without saying a word,” cried the constable.
“Besides, there’s not a Superintendent Smith in the
force,” they continued, simultaneously.
“Good heavens!” cried Airs. Alallan, “it must have
been one of the robbers themselves.”
A lit lie comparing of notes established this theory
beyond all doubt, especially as the doctor had recognised
in the stranger a gentleman who had called on or waylaid
him several times with inquiries as to Air. Alallan’s health.
It was arranged that All’s, Alallan and the doctor, with
the sergeant, should at once proceed to Scotland-yard
&ad explain everything, including the fact of the real
diamonds not being stolen, to the authorities there, whilst
the other policeman should remain on guard in the house
in case of a renewed visit from Superintendent Smith.
T-.is plan was followed.
The Scotland-yard people, like the sham Superintendent
Smith, were staggered when the trick by which the
diamonds had been preserved from the robbers was re
veiled to them.
But they were still more staggered to learn of the im-
personation of the sham superintendent.
Rapidly they ran over the names of some of the most
daring and successful criminals in London.
Not one of them seemed to tally with the description
given by the sergeant and Mrs. Malian.
“There’s only one man, I believe, in the world would
have the pluck and cleverness to play such a trick,” said
an old detective, whose duty had led him at different
times half over the globe, and who had just returned from
an excursion to Australia, “ and it does not seem quite
clear, after all, whether he is in England just now.”
“ Who’s that?” enquired one of the others.
“ Oh, you know nothing about him, never heard of him.
He was in full blaze in Melbourne when I went out there
after a bolter last year. Ho was robbing every bank in the
Colony, openly in broad daylight ”
“Do you mean Kelly? He might be in London, for
aj! we know. Is it like his work?”
“ Yes, it is,” replied the sergeant, “ I saw a notice from
the Australian authorities to the “ Yard ” that- Kelly was
supposed after his last crime to have quitted the colony,
and it was thought for England or America, and we were
to look out, as he would most likely give us a look in on his
way. I’m blessed if it ain’t like his work and himself too.
We have his description, and the sham superintendent ain’t
very unlike him.”
a Well, we shall soon hear of the beggar again if he is
amongst us. We can only keep a sharp lookout until he
turns up.”
Another singular surprise also awaited the doctor and
Airs. Malian in course of the day.
Knowing of the document that Mr. Alallan had signed,
they thought it as well to call on Messrs. Tunstall and
Bigwood at Little Smith-street, to explain to these gentle-
men that is was not worth while for them to trouble them-
selves about the matter any further.
But what was their surprise on learning at the address
indicated that the firm in question had only engaged a
single room as an office the preceding day, paying a week’s
rent in advance, and that it appeared to consist of a
single individual, a very pious old gentleman the landlord
said, who stated that for the first few days he should only
call in and see if there were any letters.
Strange to say he never did call for the expected corre-
spondence.
The explanation of this was simple.
No sooner had Air. Superintendent Smith got out of the
diamond merchant’s, than he darted into Holboru as fast
as his legs could carry him.
He hailed a hansom to drive him to Waterloo Station,
and them took a ticket for Clapham Junction, and got into


A first-class compartment in which there were no other
travellers.
En r rate he effected a number of changes in his personal
appearance.
And this hi. did very simply and expeditiously. Firstly
he pulled a false beard out of his pocket and became a
second Abraham in a minute. He then took off his coat,
which he turned inside out, revealing a white lining and, in
fact, changing the black into a white overcoat. The meta-
morphose of his appearance was complete, and Kelly laughed
to himself as he thought how he was selling what our
Atalantic cousin? would call “ those dried up old cusses
that haint no more life in ’em than the stuffed painter
(panther) in Barnum’s Museum.”
From Ciapham Junction he easily made his way by rail
to Peckham.
Here he was once more Mr. Dawes, alias Ned Kelly.
On reaching his residence he kept a lookout till he
spied his neighbour Smith, alias Peace, in the garden,
pottering about in his usual style and humming a hymn-
tune.
He at once sallied forth, and imperatively signalled to
the other that he wanted to speak to him.
There had been a certain amount of ill-blood between
the pair since t-te affair of the diamond robbery and the
attempted sale of the spoil.
Ned had suspected Peace of having changed the stones
between the night of the burglary and the visit to Ana-
tole’s cotel to dispose of them.
Peace could not resist the impression f at by some
sleight-of-hand the real stones had been replaced by false
ones on that very evening with Ned’s connivance.
Rapidly Ned related to his accomplice the particulars of
his visit to Mr. Malian in the character of a superin-
tendent.
He had profited to do so by the information he had ex-
tracted from the doctor the day before, that Mr. Malian
was well enough to receive visitors, and had easily copied
the bearing and manner cf one of those police officials
with whom he had such an extensive series of dealings.
He remarked, in conclusion, after describing Mr. Mal-
ian’s startling revelations as regarded the diamonds and
their place of concealment—
“ For a moment I was knocked all in a heap.”
“ I should think so,” replied Peace, who himself was
‘airly staggered by Ned’s revelation, the sincerity of which
he felt sure of by the aid of a certain test only known to
himself and unconsciously confirmed by the bushranger’s
story.
“ But I pulled through. And when he said it would
need to half pull the house down before anyone could find
out where the diamonds really were, I thought to myself
that there was a much easier way, which I was going to
put in practice before the old fox was five minutes
older.”
“ What was it?” asked Peace, curiously.
“ Well. I don’t mind telling you, though you are such a
queer pal at times. He talked about pulling the infernal
house down. That was all bosh. If we had not been led
away by that Sal’s yarn about the safe, where should we
have looked for them first—eh? Answer me that, now,
old tub-thumper.”
Peace mused for a moment.
“ In his room, of course,” he said, with a sickly smile.
“Of course, artful old file. It wasn’t a bad plant
agednst having his shiners faked. I knew they were in
his room, and in two minutes I could have bound and
gagged the pair could have done it in a minute. And
after this I should have popped the old man’s feet to the
fire and grilled them there till he owned up where the
stones were lodged. What a jolly lark it would have
been ! Ha, ha, ha !” laughed the ruffian.
“ rie is a tough old boy, even as the nether millstone.
He might, under providence, have still held out.”
;; Don’t you believe it. I‘d another little dodge to open
his -v-.-uth. I’d a-popped his old woman on the fire, and
NED KELLY.
CHAPTER CLXVIII.
I think that would have awoke the pair up pretty
bright! ”
And Ned chuckled at the thought.
“ I'ruly, the only way to defeat the wiles of the artful
man is to assail him with his own weapons,” snuffled Peace,
turning up his eyes.
“Perhaps after all, though, it was lucky,” resumed
Ned, “ that the doctor and the police rang when they did,
aud notteu minutes later, or the blessed nowling of the lot
would have spoilt my little game, and got me into quod.
They’d be sure to give tongue like a yelping pack."
‘•But how about the nurse If” inquired Peace, who, if
pious, was eminently practical.
“Oh, I had thought of her, and meant to tie her up
downstairs as soon as I had collared the other two, ami
before grilling them.”
“What a valuable assistant in the vineyard,” muffled
Peace, clasping hio hands in veritable admiration.
“ I’ll tell you what it is, old pattor-nostcr. I thought
you’d grabbed all the grapes from that vineyard, and left
none of the bunches for me ; but now I see I was on the
wrong track, and that you acted on the square.”
“ Ob, no, friend. ‘ Straight is the path and narrow is the
way.’ Wo should always pursue one path, my friend,”
ejaculated the pious one, exposing the whites of his
eyes.
“ You’re better nor a dozen parsons, you are.”
“ Pl*, try and merit your favourable opinion,” responded
Peace, with a solemn twinkle in his eyes.
lie did not, however, on his part tell Kelly tint he also
had visited Mr. Malian that morning, disguised as a pri-
vate detective, determined, if he could only get an inkling
of the whereabouts of the diamonds, either to betray their
possessors to justice, for the sake of the twenty per cent,
reward, or to make a safe bargain for their restoration.
He did not mention how Mr. Malian’s conduct towards
him, and the remark, “ stones representing a value of
thirty thousand pounds,” confirmed Ned’s statement.
And, above all, he took care never to return to trie
offices he had taken in Smith-street, where a real detective
waited for several days in the hope of an explanatory
interview with him, but waited in vain.
BACK HIM, YOU FOOL.
Count Anatole, as he delighted to style himself, had more
than one string to his bow, and, pending the robbery >f the
mail on which he had set his heart, was gathering together
as much spare cash as he could in various ways.
Chiefly, however, by cards.
Gambling, though not carried on in London to the
which it reaches on the Continent, is pretty well prat
nevertheless.
This has been especially the case ithin the last
years.
Many men who used to risk their money cn horses now
prefer to stake it on a card, and uoo often on “ the correct
card.”
The reason is, that, at cards, a man who chooses good
company to play with is safe from being cheated, which,
on the Turf, has become impossible, since horse-racing has
ceased to be a sport and has become a matter of .serious
business to one and all engaged in it, and 's in nineteen
out of twenty cases, sheer swindling.
So openly is this swindling carried ~~ ...xt it almost
ceases to be regarded as the device of blackleggism. An
owner’s horse is entered, he lays all the money he can
against him, and then, at the last moment, scratches him.
He never intended but to rob the public, and attempts to
palliate his dishonesty by the poor excuse—“ I don’t run
horses for the amusement of ether people.” A man might
as well say, when cheating at cards, I don’t play cards to
amuse other people. With the exception of Lord Portland,
Fred Johnstone, and one or two others, all runners of
horses are blacklegs—pure and simple.
There are a number of clubs now existing in London


which, like the Parisian cercles, are wholly and solely de-
void to gaming, and at which the committee sets no limit,
to the stakes.
Their degree of respectability varies.
The right of admission to some is exceedingly difficult
to obtain, and the character, habit and social position of a
candidate are scrutinised far closely than if he were
an aspirant for holy orders.
At these play is conducted in a style of solemn decorum
that befits the gravity of the stakes, and the eminent re-
spectability of the players.
Yet so far as the amounts wagered are concerned, there
is but little change since the days when a Leader of the
Opposition could lose fifty thousand pounds at a sitting,
And go on playing forty-eight hours at a stretch till it
became necessary for a waiter to stand by the party and
tell each man when it was his turn to deal.
Other clubs are less strict, and willingly throw open
their portals to any stranger who arrives with the reputa-
tion of a beau joutur.
It was by such that Lambri Pasha was so welcomed on
his arrival there.
At one he succeeded in making a tremendous haul.
Of course fair play, it is presumed, prevails, and it is to
be questioned whether the toleration accorded some years
back to Lord de Roos would at present be met with. As
the morality of the present is not an improvement on
that of the past, it is not to be supposed that there is less
cheating at cards than formerly. It is carried to an art
in Paris, and has its professors, its Robert Iludins, here
also.
The nobleman in question, a peer of the realm, was a
notorious gambler
Only after a time people used to notice that he had the
knack of dealing himself a fist-full of trumps at ecarte , and
of turning up a king at critical junctures of the game with
unvarying good fortune.
Consequently some people began to get rather shy of
playing with him.
Till one day a somewhat verdant youth, whose suspicions
had been aroused, went to a mutual friend of maturer
experience, and in the strictest confidence imparted his
belief that Lord de Roos cheated.
“ Very possibly,” was the calm reply.
“ I have watched him ; I am quite certain of it.”
“ I daresay you are right.”
“ But what am I to do ?” gasped the bewildered green-
horn.
“ Do?” repeated his mentor. “ Why, do asl do, bags him,
you fool!”
And probably the greenhorn did so till another green-
horn of less prudent and more impulsive temperament
detected his lordship at his usual tricks.
Whereupon he snatched a fork—they used steel forks
in those days—from the adjoining buffet and pinned his
lordship’s hand to the table with the remark—
“ If you have not got the king under your hand, my
lord, I beg your pardon.”
Only, when the fork was withdrawn, the king was found
under his lordship’s perforated palm, and this time the
scandal was so great that the peccant peer was forced to
retire for the remainder of his days to the Continent.
Besides the clubs, a great deal of private gambling goes
on &t different places.
The suburban villa at which some fascinating siren in-
toxicates youthful dupes with alternate doses of love and
champagne in order that her accomplices may plunder
them, is pretty well played out.
Men play for play’s sake without any need of such allure-
ments, and it is in bachelor chambers that the worship of
the blind goddess is chiefly carried on.
Anatole was aware of this.
He had managed to gain admissiolf to some of the minor
clubs and had done .pretty well, though taking the utmost
care to play fair.
Still, the thought struck him that if he could have good
rooms of his own at which he could get a few men quietly
together, he might do better.
Chance, he argued, might throw into his way one of
those occasions with which she sometimes loves to tantalise
her votaries.
She might dangle a golden prize before him, in which
case, provided the prize was big enough to justify the risk,
he meant to throw chance overboard, and trust to his ability
to hoodwink his adversary.
Having taken a suite of rooms near Piccadilly, and fur
nished them with a combination of English comforts and
French taste that made a pretty large hole in his recent
winnings, he installed himself in them.
A few days later he sent a note to Kelly, requesting him
to call and to be as well dressed as possible.
Kelly lost no time in complying.
His make-up was exactly the one that Anatole desired—
namely, that of a wealthy, ostentatious, and pernaps some-
what vulgar, colonial, who had made his pile and come
over to the Old Country to spend it, but who, if ignorant
of certain points of social conduct, was by no means a fool
to be tricked by the first comer.
His rough but determined way was equally removed
from the polished blandaess of the hawk, and the sim-
plicity of the pigeon.
“ By ! governor, but you’ve got a tidy crib here,”
he said, throwing his huge bulk into a magnificently up-
holstered chair, and glancing x-ound approvingly at the
fittings of the appartment.
“Yes, pretty well,” said Anatole. “ But, look here, I
want to see you on business. I know you play a good
game of cards.”
“ I think I do,” answered Kelly, with truth.
“Very well. I want you to dine with me this evening,
and then take a hand here.”
“ What at? ”
“ Oh, whatever they play—that is the others who may
look in. It may be whist, or baccarat, or dearie, or Nap;
I don’t know.”
“ All right.”
“ Only look here, you must play perfectly fair. You
understand me ? ”
u Yes,” replied Ned. “ But I don’t see what you are
driving at. Can’t you open out a little more ? ”
“ Well then—have you money ? ”
v Plenty for the time being. I have lived very quietly
since I have been over here.”
“ Well, I want to introduce you to some rich men and
good players, as a rich man and good player. Play well,
back your luck when it is in, and don’t make a fool of
yourself when it is out ; and, above all, behave yourself.”
Kelly complied, and that evening was introduced by
Anatole to several rich men as Mr. Dawes, a rich squatter
from Australia.
As he was a good player, a good-tempered loser when
he had any object in view that caused him to keep a curb
over his naturally infernal temper, and a jovial, if very
unpolished companion, he was not unpopular.
For some time this game went on, Kelly neither winning
nor losing much, but without his being any further en-
lightened as to Anatole’s dodge.
One morning he called in, according to arrangement.
A small card-table, flanked by two large aud comfortable
armchairs, stood at one end of the room.
“ Come,” said Anatole, “ take a hand with me for half-
an-hour or so.”
“What are you up to?” enquired Kelly, somewhat
puzzled.
“ Lock the door,” remarked the Frenchman,
This done, the two seated themselves at the table.
“ Comfortable sort of chair this,” su’d Ned, as h
stretched out his legs and leant back.
They settled to play dearie.
The stakes were not very large, but sufficient to give
an interest to the game.
After they had been playing three or four games Kelly


began to suspect there was something wrong, but he
could not tell what.
Three or four more convinced him that Anatole was
cheating him id some way, but in what he could not de-
termine.
He knew himself every dodge with the cards, and yet,
watching his adversary’s fingers with the utmost attention,
he failed to detect any of the tricks.
Anatole neither turned up nor marked the king with
unusual frequency, nor did he deal himself extra good
cards.
Indeed, on the contrary, Ned had nothing to complain
of on that score.
Luck, in fact, seemed to favour him in this respect,
but still the Frenchman got the best of him.
He seemed to divine, as it were instinctively, whether
to give or to refuse him cards.
If he had a bad hand and asked for cards, Anatole was
certain to refuse.
If he had a tolerable one, and the Frenchman was
equally unwilling to grant his petition, it always turned
out that it was because he had a better.
Besides, Anatole seemed to know exactly what he was
going to play.
Suddenly a thought struck Ned, and he held the cards
up to the light, and then carefully scrutinised their backs
to see if they were marked in any way.
When he looked up after this, Anatole was smiling.
“’iou suspect something?” said the Frenchman blandly.
“ Yes, I’m d dif I don’t,” answered Kelly, surlily.
“ Play three games more, and if you can’t spot it I’ll
show you this trick.”
They resumed the game.
Kelly watched him, as a swimming nigger would a
shark.
Once he fancied Anatole glanced over his shoulder at
some object or other.
He sprang to his feet and looked round.
There was no one else in the room.
Neither was there a mirror on the wall behind him.
The three games ended he confessed he was beat.
Anatole must have seen his cards.
“ Look at the panel in the wall behind you,” said Anatole.
Kelly turned round and fixed his eyes as directed. To hia
surprise—for he could not make out “ what was up he
saw the panel slide upwards and disclose a highly-polished
piece of glass or mirror, which was so placed as to reflect
the cards in the hand of any player who was not very
careful to hold his hand on a level with the table.
The back of the chair was purposely made very low so
as not to intercept the reflection, and a gas-light was placed
on each side of the panel.
“ Well, I’am blowed!” said Kelly, using an adjective
of more florid character than it is prudent to reproduce.
“ You have cut your eye-teeth, you have, and no mistake.
The little piece of mechanism which produced this resmt
was a communication between the floor where Anatole sat
and the panel. The Frenchman pressed a button in the
floor and the panel slid from its position, he removed the
pressure and the panel slid back again.
It was by this means that Anatole had managed to get
a sight of Ned’s cards, and it was to frustrate such
manoeuvres that playing-card makers have taken to
marking the value of each card in minute characters at the
extreme corner, so that a player no longer need risk
exposure by sprt.vding his hand out at all.
The mechanism was simple, and removable at pleasure.
CHAPTER CLXIXc
A CLOSE SHAVE.
“ Where did you get that dodge from?” inquired Ned.
“ It’s th« latest Parisian novelty,” answered Anatole,
“and I had it direct from a friend there. What do you
think of it ?”
“It's clever, but risky if a man has his wits about
him.”
“Yet you, with all your suspicious, could not see how
the trick was done. Besides, you are fresh and fasting,
but a man after supper would be less wary, and T only
reserve it for such occasions ”
“ You are up to a thing or two with the pasteboard.”
“Yes; but, although I’m pretty sharp, I don’t like
trying such things except a last resource. I had a very
narrow shave in Paris the other dav which rather took the
conceit out of me.”
Anatole alluded to an adventure which had be f allen him
at a well-known gambling-nouse in the Rue de Holder.
He had been carrying on for some time a pretty suc-
cessful campaign, under the name of the Marquis d’Albano,
representing himself as an Italian nobleman who had
emigrated to America, and returned with a fortune.
He played high, and, when his money ran short, was in
the habit of staking unset precious stones, chiefly sapphires,
a number of which he always carried about him, and which
he said he had acquired during his travels.
Like all true gamblers he claimed to be extremely super-
stitious, and declared that these stones were so many
fetishes for him, and that directly he staked them his luck
would always turn.
This belief in a fetish is very common.
A bit of the rope with which a man has been hanged is
considered on the Continent an infallible talisman in such
cases.
A hunchback, too, is supposed to bring luck, and, if
he wins, those about him will touch his hump in order to
share it.
Whether the stones staked by Anatole were fetishes or
not, it was observable that luck turned on his aide directly
he staked them.
The truth was, that they were simply very good imita-
tions, and whenever he was forced by bis losses to bring
them out he at once began to cheat, since, if they had
once parted into other hands, their worthlessness would
have been discovered.
He had an accomplice in the shape m a little old fellow
of foxy aspect and insinuating manners, who was known
by the nickname of “ Th - Counsellor,”
The so-called Marquis d’Albano used to have recourse
to the usual tricks of the professional card-sharper, packed
cards and the like.
But his accomplice had a rather original dodge, which
went far to help him.
He always had in his hands an immense silver snuffbox,
which he polished till it shone like a mirror.
His habit was to stand behind the individual who was
playing against the marquis, and, by t e way, frequently
changed, of tapping the box and taking snuff, telegraphed
the cards of the marquis’s opponent.
It happened one night that M. Claude, the celebrated
chief of police under the Second Empire, was at the
gambling- house of the Rue de Helder in disguise.
He had gone thither in search of information concerning
apolitical plot, on the track of which he then was, and
some of the men mixed up in wmch were in the habit of
meeting there to play.
Fully versed in all the card-sharping tricks, he became
convinced that the Marquis d’Albano, alias Anatole, was a
cheat, and watched his play a little time.
The adversary of the so-called Marauis was a young
fellow of two or three and twenty.
At first he was favoured by that luck which so often
favours beginners, to their ultimate destruction.
He completely cleared the marquis of his ready-monoy,
amounting to some forty thousand francs.
D’Albano pulled out his sapphires and emeralds an?
asked for his revenge.
The other consented.
From this moment luck turned to the side of the
8 Ir/twenty minutes he had won back his forty thousand
francs. .
I The othor wanted to so on tor higher stake*.


The marquis was perfectly willing, and continued to
win.
A group soon gathered round the tabl® at which the
two were playing, attracted by the importance of the
stakes.
M. Clauae, who was standing in the front rank behind
Anatole, watching every movement, not only detected his
trickery, but also th« manoeuvre of the Counseller with
the snuffbox.
He had only to declare himself and arrest Anatole and
his accomplice, as cheating at cards is an offence in
France, but this was precisely what he did not want to do,
for, by revealing that he was a police-officer, he would
have lost all chance of observing the political con-
spirators.
So, when he noticed Anatole take a card from his sleeve
and substitute it for one in his hand, in order to announce
the king, he simply ejaculated sharply in a feigned voice—
“ Sir, you are a cheat!”
This sudden exclamation breaking on the profound
silence which had been observed during so important a
match, acted like a bombshell.
None knew exactly to whom it was addressed.
The young man started up indignantly.
The marquis, quite taken aback and also at a loss as to
where the accuser’s voice had come from, lost his head.
He also jumped up hastily, leaving two kings of hearts
on the table.
Evidently one of the two players was a sharper.
A cry of indignation broke from the lookers-on.
Claude thought that Anatole would be exposed, but he
reckoned without the cleverness of the Counsellor and
also of the mistress of the house, who was also their
accomplice.
They profited by the confusion that prevailed.
The young man had darted forward and, accusing Ana-
tole of being a cheat, aroused the greatest excitement.
The hostess and the Counsellor threw themselves be-
tween the two as if to prevent any violence, and the latter
managed to withdraw the prepared cards from Anatole’s
sleeve, and to slily slip them into the pocket of the young
fellow he had been victimising.
Anatole, thus relieved, loudly asked that they should
be both searched on the spot.
The young man was equally anxious for this.
Nothing suspicious was found on the marquis; but, to
the horror of the poor dupe, the false cards were drawn
from his pockets.
He was at once kicked out of the place as a sharper.
Claude, who had not seen the manoeuvre of the Coun-
sellor to save his accomplice, only guessed it from this
result; but, as stated, could not interfer^
However, he kept an eye on Anatole; and a few days
later the latter received one of those quiet intimations, to
the effect that a change of air would prove beneficial to
his health, of which the Parisian police are wont to avail
themselves when they want to get rid of anyone without
scandal.
A few nights later Ned found himself at Anatole’s
rooms, in company with about a dozen others.
Everybody had come well furnished with money, and
there was an evident intention on all hands of making a
hot night of it.
Amongst Hie players was a stout, apoplectic-looking
Belgian, who had figured at one or two of their parties of
late, with varying success.
CHAPTER^CLXX.
A DISINTERESTED FRIEND.
His name was Kint, and he was said to be a wealthy iron-
founder. , ,
Anatole had recently made his acquaintance, and he
was known to a slight extent by most of those present.
Play began, and soon grew fast and furious.
Kint’s luck was phenomenal, though there seemed no
doubt but that he was playing fairly.
The company were all keen, hands, and even Anatole
would not have ventured on any tricks amongst t era.
Baccarat was the game, and two or three n ra took,
the bank in succession ; but Kint continued to ”ako n»
money.
His eyes twinkled, and from time to time his face
flushed, but beyond this he remained as cool and itolid as
a Flemish ox; his hands, by which a man's nerves so often
betray themselves, being firm as rorks.
ilis stakes grew higher and higher.
Some slight turns of fortune only seemed to spur him
on to fresh exertions, and from a hundred he got to
putting five hundred on a card.
At last he had won about four thousand pounds.
But even this did not content him.
It might have been better for him at that momen
to have called a cab and departed with his winnings ; but
instead of this, he offered to take the bank.
Ned could not help glancing covetously At the heap of
gold and notes the new banker had put in front of him,
but his look was dull compared with that of Anatole.
The little Frenchman’s eyes glittered like a cat’s, his
nostrils quivered, and his very moustach® bristled with
suppressed excitement.
Everyone now expected that Kint’sluck would turn, and
resolved to do their best to break him.
He proceeded to deal out the cards with the same ox-
like placidity that had already characterised him all through
the evening.
Contrary to expectation, his phenomenal good fortune
continued.
If there was any foul play, no one could detect it.
At last, one by one, the other players gave up
thoroughy cleared out, and the Belgian remained a winner
of about eight thousand pounds.
At length, his success caused him to lose his head a
little, and he swept up his gains in evident triumph, and
stowed them away about him.
No one cared to go on at baccarat.
Anatole, who had been watching Kint with an expression
in his eyes that was not nice to see, suggested an adjourn-
ment for supper, the materials for which were ready laid
on a side table.
The proposition was gladly received, and the gambling
party began to change into something like an orgie.
Anatole had a good cellar, and pressed its contents cn
his friends without stint.
The wine flowed freely, the losers drinking to console
themselves for their losses, and not with impunity.
Ned took his share with the rest, but remained cool
enough to keep an eye on Anatole.
The Frenchman’s solicitude for the winner of the
evening was admirable.
He placed him on his right hand, and took especial care
that his plate was seldom empty, and his glass never.
He did his utmost to enliven the scene with jest and
repartee, and succeeded in prolonging the repast con-
siderably.
The result was that Kint became rapidly inebriated, in
a quiet fashion, and most of the remaining guests did not
remain much behind him in this.
His eyes shone more than ever, he grew more and more
apoplectic-looking as the wine mounted to his head and
his speech thickened considerably _
At last, when he deliberately put the lighted end of his
cigar to his mouth, and tried to pour out wine from a
bottle with the cork in, Anatole thought the time had
come to strike a decisive blow, and poured him oat a
tumbler of brandy—a thing that only Ned noticed.
« What winesh ees dish?” spluttered the Belgian.
“ Old Madeira.” answered Anatole, calmly.
“Aha, ol reet,” answered Kint, draining oft a Urge
gulp of the spirit.
He had a wonderful head, however, and even this faiod
for the moment to knock him over. .
He would not have been able to perform on the t;gHW


rope, but he managed to gain his feet, and cross the room
to the window, which he opened.
This was the worst taing he could have done.
The cold air at once overpowered him, and ho toppled
over senseless into the arms of Anatole, who had followed
him, on charitable thoughts intent.
The rest of the guests by this time had all had quite
enough of both supper and play, and rather too much wine,
and began to take leave of their liout.
Kint, however, was so helpless, that Anatole declared
that it would be quite impossible for him to leave, and
said that ho would c-ive no his bed to him, and sleep on
the sofa. , , , . ,
AVhen, however, the other guests had departed, the
Frenchman found that this had already an occupant in the
person of Ned Kelly.
Ned was very drunk.
The liquor he had taken seemed to have acted upon
him precisely as that swallowed by Kint.
It had bowled him over all at once.
A few minutes before he had been one of the loudest
and jolliest at the supper-table, and now he had collapsed,
and lay as helpless as a log.
Anatole shook him roughly by the arm, and tried to
rouse him, but in vain.
The Frenchman seemed annoyed at this.
But, after uttering two or three wicked words, he ap-
peared to make up his mind to make the best of a bad
job, and left Ned to his slumbers. s
He passed into the inner room, where Kint had been
placed on the bed, taking the light with him, and pulling
to the folding doors behind him.
No sooner had he disappeared, than Ned opened his
eyes.
Then he rose to his feet.
Huge as was his bulk, be could, at a pinch, step as
softly as a cat, and, taking every precaution not to betray
himself, he stole quietly across the room.
On reaching the folding doors, he applied his eye to the
crack between them.
Kint was lying on his back on the bed, breathing ster-
torously. _ .
Auatole was engaged in an operation, the bearing of
which Ned entirely failed to comprehend.
His idea was that the Frenchman would probably ab-
stract the Belgian’s winnings, and bolt with them, and
it w T as with t'-.is view that he had himself feigned drunken-
ness, in order to step in and claim snacks.
This belief was, at first, confirmed by seeing Auatole
thrust his hand into the slumberer’s pocket.
But, instead of pulling out his money, he contented
himself with abstracting his handkerchief.
“ Only faking.” muttered Ned ; “ but what the deuce
does he want with the cove’s fogle?”
Anatole proceeded to pour some water into a basin.
In this he soaked the handkerchief.
“ Blessed if 1 understand this,” thought Ned.
He fancied be had the key of the puzzle the next
moment.
When the handkerchief was thoroughly wet, the
Frenchman took it up and laid it across Kbits face, care-
fully arranging the pleats about the nose and mouth.
A light broke on Ned. ,
Anatole was actually taking care of his friend. Blest if
he could understand it.
And Ned quietly returned to the sofa, debating whether
he should feign recovery from drunkenness, or play ’pos-
sum an hour or two longer, and then profit by the slum-
bers of Kint and Anatole to plunder the former and
depart. £B,OOO was a tempting prize.
He decided on the latter course.
He lay still a couple of hours.
Twice in the interval Anatole came out and looked at
him with a light, remaining each time in intent contem-
plation for a few minutes, and seeming to be debating
Inwardly on some project.
As he tamed to retire tor the second time Ned risked
opening an eye, and noticed that he carried a wet hand*
kerchief in his hand
“Ah,” he thought, “he wants to see if I’m as bad n*
the other chap, but he judges that 1 don’t need doc*
toiing.”
At the expiration of two hours Nod rose again and
returned to his post of observation, otill on robbing
thoughts intent.
Auatole was not asleep, but was quietly seated in a
chair, smoking a cigarette.
Kbit lay in precisely the same attitude, with the hand-
kerchief still over his face.
The sound of his breathing, however, had died away.
lie lay still and silent as a corpse.
As a corpse!
A thought suddenly flashed across Ned’s mind.
If he were one !
And then memory, shaken by the wine he had con-
sumed, returned to him.
“ The trick’s done. Kint is a stiff ’un,” he thought.
He remembered hearing of the manoeuvre which he had
seen practised on the helpless Belgian.
The saturated handkerchief intercepted air, and suffo-
cated as effectually as a feather-bed, and had, bes.des, an
advantage over cliloroform and ether, inasmuch as it leit
no smell to set doctors puzzling over. The features ooi e
the'expression of suffocation, but also of apoplexy.
“ If Kint had been sober he might have thrown it off, ’
thought Ned ; “ but he was drunk, and will never wake
tgoin.”
And, as he recollected how Anatole had approached
him a few minutes before with a handkerchief, he was
glad that his own intoxication was feigned, as it was evi-
dently a toss-up whether the Frenchman “ cooked Ins
goose,” as he did that of the Belgian.
Ned reflected.
“ His sparing me looks as if he meant to stop and brave
it out; for if he had meant to bolt, one more corpse
would not have mattered. But I’ll settle the question. ’
Ned now always went armed.
Drawing his revolver, he pushed open the door of the
room and stepped in.
Anatole looked up in amazement.
Levelling his pistol full at the Frenchman’s head, and
pointing with the forefinger of the other hand to the
corpse, Ned uttered the single word—
“ Snacks?”
The Frenchman saw that his trick was discovered.
Whatever his intention might have been as regarded
Ned, originally, he at once put on his blandest manner.
“All right," my dear friend,” he answered, calmly. “1
mean to divide with you, since you have stayed to take
half the risk.”
The intention with which the last words were uttered
rather cooled Ned’s ardour.
He saw that, as far as he was concerned, his presence in
any investigation that might arise would be awkward.
The prospect of being summoned as a before a
coroner’s jury was not a pleasant one.
Accordingly he fell in with Anatole’s suggestion.
The Frenchman proposed that out of the eight thousanc
pounds in Hint’s possession they should take only seven.
Ned agreed, and, having secured his share, left the
house, without anyone noticing his departure.
The next morning Anatole aroused the household,
stating that he had found his guest dead in his bed.
A doctor was summoned, and, on hearing the story of
the supper and excitement of the night before, and look-
ing at the corpse, did not hesitate to give a certificate of
death from apoplexy, thereby doing away with all need for
an inquest.
The thousand pounds found on the corpse did away
with all idea of robbery, no one, except those playing with
him the night before, haying any idea that he had a large*


This money was transmitted to Kint’s heirs, who were
distant cousins, and who, after sending instructions to
London concerning his funeral, did not trouble themselves
any more about him.
CHAPTER CLXXI.
A NEW FRIEN'D AND A FRESH PLAN.
With the money he had thus acquired Kelly, like all his
class, who are utterly destitute of other resources for con-
suming time, simply indulged in the coarse dissipation that
suited his temperament.
The fact that such men have no settled plan for the
future, and that the excitement of crime is as necessary to
them as drink to the drunkard, leads to their rapid cap-
ture.
Like the gambler who makes a good “coup,” they can-
not be content to even retire from “ active service ” until it
is consumed. They weary from inactivity—they go in for
another “ coup,” and so on, until the end comes.
In company more lively than select, he came across a
certain Captain Montmorency Howard, a good-looking
and well-got-up man, of about six or eight and thirty,
who was the idol of a certain circle.
The captain was one of those men with no apparent
means of livelihood, who con rive, nevertheless, to ruffle
it with the best of the swells an mt town.
He picked up a certain amount at billiards and cards,
and was said to be uncommonly lucky in backing winners
at race-meetings.
After their first meeting, he attached himself wonder-
fully to Ned, who continued to keep up the character of
the wealthy returned Australian.
Howard looked upon him as a vulgar beast—but then,
the calf was a golden one.
Kelly grinned to himself, for he guessed that the fasci-
nating captain was a swell sharper, and meant to get a
good haul out of the man whom he took for an unsophisti-
cated Colonial.
“ Y r ou think, my fine fellow,” thought Ned, “ that you
are going to get some pretty picking off me, but you’ll
find you’ll break your grinders against my bones.”
At length Ned received the invitation he had long been
expecting, to come round to the captain’s rooms and have
a quiet weed.
He was quite prepared to hear his host suggest cards,
and in this he was not disappointed.
He had scarcely lighted the aforesaid weed, when
Howard suggested “the Devil’s books,” as our pious
ancestors called them, “ just to pass half-an-hour or so.”
At first the play was fair, but when Ned began to play
recklessly and double his stakes, he had no difficulty in
guessing that his adversary was cheating.
It was admirably done, however, and, but for his
thorough acquaintance with the trick, he would never have
detected it.
He watched his opportunity, however, and suddenly
sprang on the captain like a cat on a bird and caught him
in the act.
The captain began to bluster.
Ned, however, held him in a grip like a vice, and quietly
demonstrated the dodge of which the other had sought to
make him the victim.
Somewhat to his amazement, the captain seemed re-
lieved by this demonstration
“If you know the dooge no well,” he observed, “it
must be because you have practised it yourself, and,
therefore, I ought to have nothing to fear from you.”
Ned thought there was some reason in that way of put-
ting it.
It happened that a few days—or, rather, nights—before
the pair had got into rather a disreputable row, in which
Kelly’s coolness, pluck, and strength had brought them
clear, in spite of formidable odds.
The captain remembering this, and seeing that Ned was
fly to his game, thought he might prove a valuable recruit,
or rather companion-in-arms.
“ Why, a smart fellow like you ought to make your for-
tune here in no time, if you haven’t made it already. I
suspect you’re not what you seem.”
“Go ahead,” laughed Kelly; “spit it out. What the
devil do you take me for—a greenhorn or a yokel, that you
could pluck as easy as a dead goose ?”
“ No. I take you for as sharp a blade as ever I nearly
cut my fingers with Do you want tc.--wi.ay? I mean a
blazing lump o’ the coin, that will set us both up for the
rest of our lives.”
“Do I want coin! Ha ! ha!” chuckled Kelly. “Do I
want plenty of victuals and wine, and what will keep the
life in my body, and tin in my pocket? What next will
you ask, I wonder ? I want this, and I’ll tell you what
more I want. I want something to do. I feel shrinking
and drying up in this do-nothing life and beastly old coun-
try—l do. I shall have to break somebody’s neck or rob
the Bank of England, if I don’t have something else to
work at; but I can’t go on with the card-sharping lay
That ain’t my game. ’Taint big enough for me.”
“Well, my lad, you’re the fellow for my little game.
You’ve got nerve, and pluck, and strength. All these are
useful in our profession. 1 can show you how to use them
all, and with profit, too.”
“ Is it a big thing?” said Kelly.
“ A thumper, my boy! Make your mouth water.
Worthy of your talents and of mine. Set us up for life.
Think of that, my boy. But before we go any further, I’d
like to be enlightened upon one little point.”
What’s that?” said Kelly.
** Who the deuce are you, and what are you?”
“ Never you mind who or what I am. I’m up to you,
anyways, and H you mean business, out with it, and don’t
bother about me. What the is it to you who I am,
if I’m fit for work? iou re blooming cur-ous—you are.”
“ Don’t be offended, my £rm«d. I think you’re the right
sort. You ain t too squeamish, I hope, when one’s in a.
mess as to the way to get out of it ?”
“If it’s any satisfaction to you to know it, I may just as
well tell you I’d cut you” blessed wizzen or choke it, if
there was no other way of clearing out of a mess.”
“ Much obliged to your candour ! Charming frankness, I
must admit, my friend ; and as I know your ultimatum, I
shall be as particular as ever in keeping the little life-pro-
tector, I always affectionately wear near my heart, in the
best possible condition for the contingency you so graphi-
cally anticipate.”
And the speaker laughingly produced a highly-finished
six-shooter from the breast-pocket of his paletot.
“That popgun wouldn’t serve you much, my lad, for 1
could chuck you and it out of any window in England,
and would do it, too, if I had the least suspicion of foul
play.”
“ I don't much fancy the dramatic tone of our friendly
conversation, Mr. Dawes, and it would be quite as well
under the circumstances of this amicable meeting if we
refrained from discussing the effective methods by which
we could indulge in mutual murder. I’ll take the will
for the deed, if you will be so good as to fail in with my
views upon this head, and talk of something more profit-
able than making cold meat pies of one another.”
“ Oh, I’m agreeable, my tulip,” laughed the other
ruffian. “Now, then, uncover your plant, and let’s see
if it’s worth anything.”
“ Well, the plant 1 have in view is risky—devilish risky
but would bring a pile.”
“If it’s as good as that, put my name down, old man.”
“d’ve been thinking of it a long time, but it needed a
pal with lots of pluck.”
“ To keep you up to the sticking point ?” broke m Ned.
with a coarse laugh.
“Perhaps you’ve hit it,” answered the other coolly.
“ Very well. I’m game for anything from blowing up
Windsor to burning down Westminster Abbey, ’ said Ned
recklessly, and with a string of oaths.
His rnannor impressed the other, who began—


n Do you know anything of bank-notes?
“ I know a good one when I see it.” .
‘ You’re a wit, too, I see,” said the captain, with a
8l) ?ie rcse%nd went to a secretary, which he unlocked.
From it he took out a travelling desk, and unlocked this
& S Then, from a little secret recess in the desk opened by
a spring, he took out a folded piece of paper, and Handed
it to Ned.
“ What do you think of that? he asked.
Ned unfolded it. It was a Bank of England note.
He held it up to the light and examined it carefully
scanning every line on it, and then rustling it between his
“ It's a genuine flimsy, in my mind,” was his comment.
« You think it would do ?”
“ Rather. It looks the real thing.”
<4Do you know what the difficulty has always been m
imitating Bank of England notes?” enquired the captain.
Ned had made the acquaintance on the other side of the
herrin"-pond of several gentleman who had got “into
trouble ” from attempting to infringe upon that monopoly
of production claimed by the Old Lady in Threadncedle-
street as regards the articles in question.
“The water-mark,” he answered, without hesitation.
“ Look at that again.”
Ned did so. , ..
“Well,” he exclaimed, after a lengthy examination,
(i living soul would swear that that is a real quid.
“ Riofit you are. So it is,” answered the other.
Nedlooked at him with anger, and impatiently cried—
“ Do you take me fora child or a fooi, or what the deuce
do vou mean by this humbug?”
“You don’t quite understand,” answered the captain.
“ Understand! All I understand is that you’ve been
making a cursed lot of fun just to see whether I could
tell a real from a flash note when I set eyes on it.
“ Not at all. You said it was genuine Bank paper.
“ Yes ”
“ And so it is. But it was a friend of mine printed it,
and another who engraved the plate.” ~ ,
“ Don't let’s have any more blessed riddles, said A ed.
“We won’t, then. Do you remember some years back
that there was a robbery of paper at the mill at which the
Bank paper is made?” _
“ I’ve heard something about it.”
“The men who robbed the mill were caught, and some
of the paper recovered. Some however, passed into the
hands of friends of mine, and they had a plate engraved
and to print. For a time all went swimmingly, ine
Bank had to pay the notes, for they were so well imitated
that it dared not refuse them, for fear of discrediting its
paper, as they reached it through honest holders. At last
the scent got strong, and in the fright that seized on the
parties, they destroyed the plates and most of the paper,
being pretty well satisfied with the pots they had made.
“I guess one of the first that funked it was van, my
friend,” thought Ned; and added aloud, “Well, whats
the game, then ?” , , ~,
“ Why,” answered the captain, in a low tone, ail uio
paper was not destroyed. » «an lay my hands on a lot,
and if we could only get a 3>ure hand to touch up one
of the plates I have also saved, we could start afresh.
“There’s something in that,” answered Ned.
And, after a little more conversation, he agreed to go
into the scheme.
It happened that a night or two later, as ho was pusti-
ing through the crowd on his way to tne Criterion, Ned
felt a hand softly insinuated into his coat-pocket.
Without apparently notio.ng it, he suddenly passed his
own hand in thpx direction and seized the wrist of the
intruding member.
He gripped it witi» all his force.
A stifled cry of pain sounded in his ear, and a voice
exclaimed, in mournful tones
“ Oh, sir—please, sir, for mercy’s sake, leave go -oh ‘
He <danced round, and found that he was holding the
wrist of a tall, pale, shabby-genteel looking young man of
about five or six and twenty.
i’ne pressure of the crowd was so great, that no (*•■■*
about them noticed their relative positions.
Still retaining his grip, Ned led his captive aside mto a
by-street. , .
‘ Now, then, what’s your little game? he deman-.cd
abruptly. , , t
Oh !’ moaned the other, “ for mercy s sake let me o r
air, I was starving, I assure you. I was driven to it oy
misfortune. I never tried such a thing before.
“So I should think, by your blessed clumsiness, was
Kelly’s grim remark. , , , .
“Indeed, 1 never did. I’m an honest, hardworking
Kelly lifted the hand he had retained his hold of, an
looked at it.
It was wliite and soft.
“That’s not the hand of a hardworking man, he said.
“ Indeed, it is. sir. I’m an engraver.”
“ An engraver ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Where were you working last, and why did yon leave
your place V”
The fellow hung his head.
“I see how it is,” said Kelly. “ I can ham you over
to the police for trying to pick ray pocket, and as you are
pretty web known to them it will go hard with you,
An “engraver” sounded most opportunely m Kellys
ears. He° saw in the pickpocket the instrument he
wanted. , . . , ,
A few minutes later he and his new protege were seated
at a table in one of the numerous cafes of the neighbour-
hood. ~ . . , . .
The only occupant of the next table was a quiet-looking
little man, reading an evening newspaper.
“Now, listen to me,” said Ned; “it’s no good trying
to pitch me any soft-sawdering yarn. I know yoar
breed whenever I set my eyes on them W hat have jou
been up for?”
“ What do you mean, sirV” was the answer.
“ Stow that, ray bird, and tell me haw often you ve
been in quod, and what for; or 111 hand you over at
° U Tiie style in which this question was put, reassured the
other who had b. j en, on h’.v side, observing Ned.
“1 had eighteen stretch,” he replied.
“What for?” . , ,
The fact of Ned’s understanding that eighteen stretch
meant eighteen months, seemed to encourage Ins com-
“They called it robbery with violence; but that was
quite a mistake.”
u Xnd-GGCI ?
“The fact was that I was looking into a shop-window
when all at once—l don't know how it happened-but
ray sleeve-link caught in an old fellow’s watch-chain.
“ Accidentally, of course,” said Kelly, laugh in,' en-
°°course. But before I could offer any explanation
he began to cry out 4 Thieves ! police U ”
“That was very unkind, wasn’t it? ”
“Yes, especially in the street, before a number at
neople. So I thought the best thing 1 could do would oe
to clap my hand over his mouth to keep him from maxing
any more noise till I had explained his mistake.
“ 1 suppose your hand was closed? ”
“ Well, as well as I remember, it was.” And the scamp
smiled. “ Appearances might have been a.mmst me, an.
unfortunately, they were. 1 was laid hold of, and the old
idiot swore that I had hold of Ids watch-chain m 'ny 'iand,
when I was only trying to unfasten it from myslceye-UuX
bS not only did he swear this, but a so, that insteadl of
just putting my hand to his mouth, I had given him


craeK with my fist that sent two of his teeth down his
throat. They must have been false ones, for I hardly
touched him ; but the beak believed it. and ran me in.”
Ned laughed, saying—
“ You’ll do, my chicken. Is it true that you are an
jngraver? ’*
“ Yes. I served my time at one of the best firms of
copperplate-printers in London.”
i“ Why did you leave them ? ”
“All through a bit. of professional vanity. I used to
have some very hard work set me, and, instead of extra
pay, all I got was the praise that I could imitate anything
put before me. I thought that it really must be so, but
resolved to test the matter fairly by the unbiassed judg-
ment of others. But it turned out that it was difficult to
meet with an unbiassed judgment. The thinu I tried to
copy was my master's signature, and liis bankers were so
biassed as to examine it a great deal more closely than
there was any need to. In consideration of my youth and
innocence, I suppose, the governor didn’t prosecute, but
J got the sack.”
“ And what is your name ? ”
“ Samuel Hig^inthorpe.”
“ I suppose your present lay is not up to much ? ”
“ Not very.”
“ Well, if you like, I can put you up to something
handy.”
“ Blest if I didn’t think it,” chuckled the engraver, as
he looked at Kelly. “ Why, jiggered if you ain’t one of
as. Ain’t I in luck, and no mistake! ” and he laughed
again and again with heartfelt satisfaction.
“Shut up your shark’s jaws!” said Kelly, angrily,
“and let’s talk work. If you’re game, I can put you
on a tack that will bring you into harbour with a stunning
cargo. Now listen to me.” And, after a few more
moments’ conversation, the two new friends quitted the
cafe.
The little old fellow who had been sitting at the next
table, sauntered out after them.
A few words of their conversation only had reached
liira.
“ It looks as if Slimy Sam had got hold of a mug,” he
soliloquised. “It won’t be the first he has landed, and 1
think it will be just as well to keep an eye on him. The
big fellow is evidently a yokel, and I should not be at all
surprised if Mr. Sam wasn’t going to land him with the
confidence trick.”
And, fully resolved to protect Ned from any such
attempt, the strange* who was a detective, followed the
pair.
Ned was quite unconscious that, for the first time in
his life, police were playing the part of guardian
angel to him.
CHAPTER CLXXII.
“ I KNOW A BANK.”
Quite unconscious that he was the object of any such
solicitude on the part of those whom he regarded as his
natural enemies, Ned led Air. Samuel Higginthorpe, alias
Slimy Sam, into a neighbouring public, at which he had
appointed to meet the captain.
They installed themselves in a compartment of the bar.
A few minutes later the old fellow of the cafe entered
the adjoining compartment.
By getting close to the dividing partition, he found him-
self able to hear a great deal of what was going on on the
other side of it.
Hardly had he taken up this position than someone
entered the compartment .occupied by Ned and his new
acquaintance.
It was the captain.
Kelly began a kind of speech which was to serve as an
introduction to the two.
As it turned out there was no need of it.
Captain Montmorency Howard and Mr. Samuel Iliggin-
fchorpe were perfectly well acquainted with one another.
In company they had, like the old Scotch wedded pair,
“climbed the hill together” in the form of a peculiarly-
constructed rotating stair, with which some genius had
endowed some of her Majesty’s jails.
Their first meeting was not particularly cordial.
We do not like to meet with living reminders of oui
past misfortunes.
But when Ned had informed the captain of Mr. Higgln-
thorpe’s peculiar talents, that gentleman’s manner percep-
tibly thawed.
In a little time the three were literally as “ thick as
thieves.”
“Mr. Dawes,” sail the captain to Ned, “I know yon
will excuse the question, but have you ever come in con-
tact, unpleasantly that is, with the London police?”
“ No,” answered Kelly, boldly, “ but if I—l shouldn’t
mind if I did. It’s my belief you could square any man
in the force if you’d coin enough.” Recent subsequent
revelations have proved that Ned was not far out —vide
Druscovitch and Company
“Well,” observed the captain, “I think that if this
affair goes on we had better arrange to meet at your
diggings. I think less suspicion would be aromied.”
Ned agreed, and after some further consultation it was
arranged ne should hire a lodging in Soho, at which
the others should meet, aud where the work of planning
out their programme should be gone into.
When he left the place the detective had considerably
altered his opinion with regard to Ned,
“The big fellow seems to be boss of the show,” he
thought. “ Who the deuce can he be, though? I don’t
recollect such a fellow mixed up in any case I’ve had the
handling of. There’s one thing, though. As I don’t know
him it’s pretty sure that he doesn’t know me, and he’ll be
the safest one of the three for me to keep watch on. I
can always find the other two when I want them, they’re
old friends,”
He had heard a great deal of their talk, but had not quite
been able, as he phrased it, to spot their lay; but that
there was something up their eager whisperings and the
reputation of the card-sharping captain and the engraver,
convinced him.
He heard the word “bank” repeatedly used, and racked
his brain to guess what was up. His face assumed that
eager look a dog has when his nose is in a rabbit-hole.
After consulting with his superiors and with the bank
authorities, it was decided for the present merely to keep
as strict a watch as possible over the suspected parties.
The aim of the bank people was twofold.
They wanted to catch the rogues in some overt act that
would ensure them a lengthy sentence.
They also wanted to lay their hands on the rest of the
paper which had been stolen from their mills, and the
actual thieves of which were undergoing their sentences at
the time.
They felt that as long as this paper—a quantity of which
had never been accounted for—was in dangerous hands
they would always be menaced.
The imitation of the watermark and of the peculiar
crisp paper of the bank has always been a stumbling-
block to bank-note forgers, and here it lay all ready to
their hands.
Accordingly, it was resolved to spare no trouble to bring
matters to such a climax as was desired.
But, although a detective was keeping watch and ward
over Ned, he never identified him, either as the famous
bushranger or as one of the men engaged ia the diamond
robbery in Hatton-garden.
Ned was always prompt in action.
On leaving his new friends, he had gone home, and
the following morning, after announcing to his landlord
that he was going to spend a few days in the country, he
packed up a portmanteau aud came to town.
He called on the captain, and the pair sallied forth in
quest of quarters.
They did not notice that they were followed by *5


habby-looking fellow, who had been lounging about the
street in which the captain resided all the morning.
The detective, knowing that he could always lay his
hands on the captain, whose face, as a man always knock-
ing about certa u quarters w r as familiar to him, had
changed his first notion of following Ked on the evening
on which he had discovered the plot-
lie resol red instead to keep a watch over the captain’s
residence, where he divined Kelly would call, and to com-
mence his espionage on the latter from that moment.
He saw Ned arrive, and the two new friends start on
their lodging-hunting expedition, and stole after them.
After several enquiries, Ned found quarters that suited
him very well in Soho.
A few hours later an elderly gentleman applied for
apartments at the same address.
He was a very particular old gentleman.
He made minute enquiries as to what other lodgers were
in the house, and the accommodation it afforded.
Then nothing would suit him but a room with a south
aspect, and the only one vacant was one immediately
adjoining Ned’s sitting room.
it was not very large, but the old fellow declared he
preferred it to any other.
During the next day or two the captain and Mr. Higgin-
thorpe made several calls on Ned.
Ned was not aware he had the old gentleman for a
neighbour, and, indeed, it wmuld not have mattered much
if he had, for the room was separated by a good thick
wall from Kelly, and nothing therefore could be over-
heard.
The little old gentleman was intensely interested in the
arrival of these visitors, and would have given a great deal
to have heard their conversation, but the fates were
against him.
* Several times he stole noiselessly from the room and
applied his ear to the keyhole of Ned’s door, which opened
on to the same landing as his own.
But although his ears were quick enough to catch the
sound of any approaching footstep, the noise of which
made him bolt back into his room like a frightened rabbit,
he was unable to seize on any part of the conversation
carried on within.
After musing a little while he went out and made some
purchases.
Then he descended and had a very long and important
interview with the landlord, at the close of which the
latter was considerably overcome with astonishment.
Well he might be on receiving tin intelligence that one
of his lodgers was a man contriving some fraud, and the
other a detective engaged in preventing it.
The next day the detective entered Ned's room during
his absence.
The first care was to see if there was any paper of a
compromising character lying about.
In this respect ne was doomed to disappointment.
Kelly being unable to write was consequently not in a
position to make compromising memoranda.
To this very fact he owed much of his immunity.
Ho never sent or received letters, and as a natural
result his correspondence never went astray or fell into
the wrong hands.
Baffled in this respect, the detective turned his attentLft
to the general arrangement of the room.
He seemed thoroughly puzzled and somewhat vexc<L at
the absence of all clues.
He cast an almost despairing glance round the apart-
ment. All at once his glance was arrested; h'.n eyes
brightened as lie observed a picture which hung Against
the wall that divided his room from Kelly’s.
By the aid ol a two-foot nils he ascertained -xs, exact
position on the wall.
Then returning to his own room and measuring from
the end wall and the floor, in order to be certain of the
spot, he cut away a hole through the partition immediately
ehind it—taking care to do this work in Kelly’s absence.
Over this, in order to mask it, he shifted one of the
numerous works of art with which his wall was ornamented.
The next time Ned and his friends were in council the
detective unhooked his own picture, revealing the hole
Then he put his ear to it, at the same time pushing the
picture in Ned’s room a trifle away from the wall.
So gently was this done that no one even actually
engaged in closely watching the picture would have ob-
served it.
By this means he was well able to overhear the whole
conversation.
Matters were going on swimmingly.
Ned had hired a house at Hackney, that was to be the
scene of their operations.
Higginthorpe had purchased a press and had it conveyed
there, and had a'so given the requisite touches needed to
complete the plate with which the captain had furnished
him.
The captain had got hold of the bank-paper, which had
been carefully packed up and warehoused under a false
name for so.ue time past.
He had arranged that it should be delivered at Ned's
address at Soho that night, being too nervous to have it
sent to his own quarters, a piece of attention for which
Ned thanked by a look that caused him to feel somewhat
uncomfortable.
It was finally arranged that Higginthorpe should return
to Hackney, that the captain should call in at Ned’s the
first thing in the morning and take the paper on with him,
and that Ned should follow a little later.
The detective had heard quite enough to settle on his
course of action.
He had neither a warrant nor a sufficient force to secure
the three, so he resolved to obtain the requisite authority
without delay to secure the three at Hackney.
The following morning Mr. Higginthorpe being aroused
by a ring at the bell opened the door and was immediately
taken into custody by a couple of policemen in plain
clothes, who were soon joined by several others.
A search of the house revealed the existence of a print
ing-press and plate concerning which this usual fluent in-
dividual was quit* at a loss to give any satisfactory expl i-
nation.
A couple of hours later a cab drove up and a gentleman
of gorgeous exterior stepped out, holding beneath his
arm a parcel which appeared au object of intense solici-
tude to him.
On stepping into the house ani into the arms of a
detective-sergeant he was promptly relieved of it and was
consigned in company with Sam id to a back room to
curse bis luck and lament ever having yielded to the
temptation of engaging iu this once so promising little
“ plant.”
Time began to slip on and there were as yet no signs
of the third party.
The detective, who knew the hour at which the bush-
ranger had arranged to leave Soho, began to grow weary,
?„nd°the prisoners, who possessed a similar knowledge, to
indulge iu anything but pleasant wishes towards the man
who had apparently deserved the late that had befallen
them and resolved to steer clear of it.
The fact was that Ned had reflected that three bache-
lors could not well keep house together without incon-
venience, and without exciting the suspicion of their
neighbours.
It was absolutely necessary that they should have a
woman of some kind to look after their domestic arrange-
ments, though then there was the risk that she might dis-
cover things were wrong oud unconsciously or intention-
ally betray them.
In this dilemma he thought of Jess.
He at once hunted her up, and got her to agree to Keep
house for them.
This, however, toox time.
It was late in the afternoon when a hansom drove up t*
the house in Hackney.


A lad/ and gentleman alighted.
“Run up and let yourself in, Jess,” said the latter,
*• whilst 1 settle with the caotnan. Here’s the key. ’
The girl complied.
She ran uo the steps, opened the house door, and went
in.
The gentleman helped the cabman to get a couple of
boxes from the top of the cab, and then was going to pay
him
Whilst he was feeling in his pocket for some silver, and
the man was carrying the boxes up the steps to the door,
it was suddenly thrown open.
The girl appeared in the doorway.
Opening the door suddenly, she cried—
“ Run, Ned ! The coppers !” and banged to the door,
which she quickly locked, and threw the key through the
glass window into the street. She was soon collared by
the police inside, who had witnessed her proceedings, but
too late to frustrate them.
Ned took in the situation at a glance.
The police had been waiting for him in the house, ready
to pounce on him.
Jess had discovered them, and, despite their efforts to
restrain her, had succeeded in throwing the door open be-
fore they could lay hands on her, and, when in their grip,
had shouted out those words of warning recorded above.
S multaneously the bushranger saw his danger and his
chance of escape.
With the quickness of a harlequin he bounded on to
the driver’s seat of the hansom, seized whip and reins,
and, lashing the horse furiously, tore at full speed down
the road.
The driver, in attempting to stop him, was knocked
down and driven clean over.
The police started in pursuit, but in vain, as on foot
they had no chance, and the locality was one in which
vehicles do not abound, and are not to be had at a
moment’s notice.
Once under way, Ned took two or three turnings in suc-
cession, and, having secured a start, abandoned the cab.
He then made the best of his way to Kit’s lodgings, and
got him to provide the means of changing his appearance.
After which he took a fresh lodging, and, having com-
municated his new address to Anatole, awaited events.
CHAPTER CLXXIII.
now THE CALAIS MAIL WAS ROBBED.
A few days later Ned received no ice from Anatole that
the time had come for carrying out the plan he had so
long been maturing—namely, that of robbing the Calais
mail.
After a s deal of difficulty he had succeeded in get-
ting a guard iu the employ of the French railway to
listen to his propositions.
Accordingly, it was settled that the affair should be
brought off one night when this man, whose name was
Henri Daudet, was on duty.
A few nights later saw Kelly and Anatole comfortably
settled in a first-class compartment of the night mail-train
bound from Charing-cross to Dover.
They were well provided with rugs, travelling-Sasha,
well-filled cigar-cases, and everything else they could
think of to render their trip an agreeable one
Their luggage merely consisted of a couple of largft
Gladstone bigs, stowed away under the sea'’ of the com-
partment they occupied.
“ Is this going to be a very big thing V’’ asked Kelly,
when they were under way.
“It may be a fortune to both, and it may not. You
see the job is, to a certain extent, a lottery It all de-
pends on whether there has been a large, amount of money
sent across to-night or not, and, unfortunately, that is a
thing which there is no means of ascertaining beforehand.
At all events, there’s sure to be money and valuables ol
some amount going. Be sure of that. ”
“Will there be much coin? enquired Ned, whose
notion of a mail robbery was rather Australian than
European.
“ No, there will be no money, but 1 daresay there will
be a fair haul of English and French notes, amongst other
things.”
“ But what will the rest of the swag be ?”
“ Securities, scrip, stock, coupons, and the like.”
“ Well, but what use will they be to us?”
“ Why, there comes in the risky part of the job. What,
we have to do is to negotiate their restoration.”
“On the risk of being nabbed?”
“No,” answered the Frenchman. “ I don't think there’s
much risk.”
Ned remained in meditation for some time.
“ Who’s the fellow on the other side that is to help us?”
he asked, after a pause.
“ Ah, that is a curious thing,” answered Anatole. “He
is a man whose acquaintance I made under rather peculiar
circumstances. The first time 1 set eyes on him I saw a
great deal more of him than o£3 usually sees on a first
acquaintance.”
As he made this remark the Frenchman laughed
heartily.
“ What’s the joke ?”
“ I’ll tell you,” replied Anatole, and he went on to give
the particulars of the circumstances under which he had
first set eyes on Henri Daudet.
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. Dove and Adventure.
The Star of the South,— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“ The Black Angel.’* Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Araerican "War* Alillion.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures In Search
of the “ Black of a Big Diamond.
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. Lord Scatterbrain, or the Kough
Tom Holt’s Dog.— A Tale of the Deep Sea. Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King. _ . .
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Dorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




NED KELLY; IRONCLAD BDSHRANGEE.
It is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had mide himself notorious by a series of crimis wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well knovn at tbs Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess m these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“ it is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly »
Bboxheb, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship. Time*, July.
“The history of Ned Kbllt and his celebrate I black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Beis, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
AS D ms Nao ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July.
CHAPTER CLXXIII. — Continued.
it appeared that Daudet in his younger days had taken
to a species of robbery much practised in hotels.
It consisted in entering a room daring its legitimate
occupants’ absence and walking off with whatever he could
lay his hands on.
It happened on one occasion that in prowling about an
hotel corridor, he noticed a room with the key in the lock
on the outside.
After knocking softly, in order if there was anyone
within to pretend he had called at the wrong room by
mistake, and receiving no reply he turned the key and
entered.
There was no one within.
The tenant had apparently been called away just as he
was about to dress, for a suit of clothes was placed ready
on a chair, and a clean shirt was spread out on the bed.
At the sight of these an idea struck the thief.
Pis own attire was of the shabbiest.
h*- resolved to change his garments from head to foot,
jn order to have the less to carry.
Accordingly he rapidly divested himself of his clothes
till he stood in the condition of Adam before the fall.
But just as he was about to slip on the shirt, lying in
readiness, he heard a hand on the key of the door.
It was evidently the tenant of the room returning.
What was lie to do ?
In desperation he slipped under the bed, trusting that
the now-comer would dress and go out again, and above
all that be would not notice the cast-off garments thrown
down in one corner.
His expectations were realised.
The new-comer was evidently in a hurry
Daudet heard him rummage about the place, open
several drawers, and then make a hasty departure.
When he heard the door close he stole cautiously forth
from his hiding-place.
He glanced towards the place where the suit he had
mentally appropriated had been lying.
It had gone.
So had the shirt, so had the garments he himself had
thrown down,
A brief investigation convinced him that there was
not an article of wearing apparel of any kind in the
room.
The truth flashed across his mind.
The new-comer had been a thief bent on a similar
errand to himself, but one who had set to work at once,
without any hesitation, and stripped the room.
The wretched fellow was at his wit’s end.
It would be impossible for him to leave the room in the
war costume of a South Sea Islander.
Whilst fio was racking his brains for some plan of
getting off, and was speculating as to the possibility of
slipping into some other untenanted room unperceived
and appropriating n suit of clothes, the door suddenly
»pencd.
This time it was really the tenant of the room. _
His amazement at being confronted by a man in a con-
dition better suited for a warm bath than on the Parisian
Boulevards, was such as for rhe moment to render him
speechless.
At first he thought he had to do with a madman.
But noticing how his room had been pillaged, he
shouted for help, and soon the other inhabitants of the
hotel flocked to the spot.
Amongst them was Anatole, who had a wonderful
memory for faces, and the would-be thief had a remark-
able one.
Ugliness had marked him for her own. He had an
enormous nose ; and a red splotch on his right cheek was,
as he used to say, the only mark of affection he had eve/
received from bis parents.
It was these peculiarities that enabled him to recognise,
in the garb of a railway-guard, the man he had see.,
taken off in a cab, by the police, with a blanket wrapped
around him tn cover him, same ten years before.
As Daudet bad really stolen nothing he got off with a
reprimand, and, subsequently, had entered the service of
the railway company.
When Anatole first sounded him he declared his
reluctance to engage in the scheme, but at length his
scruples were overcome by the prorai-c of a large share of
the prospective spoil
The prospect of living as a rentier en retraite, the
heaven of all Frenchmen, was too much for the poor
devil. The temptation was beyond his power of resist-
ance, and he was no more guilty than the bank manager
and chairman (who between them govern their brother-
directors) are, who are bribed by customers to make fabu-
lous advances upon fabulous securities—only that the-
temptation is greater in the latter Case —the thieves for a
livelihood, the others for luxuries.
“So you see,” concluded the Frenchman, in relating
the matter to Ned, “1 was quite rigid in saying I saw a
great deal more of Dim than one usually does on a first
acquaintance.”
The train at length reached Dover.
Kelly and Anatdle watched with interest the mail bags-
being transferred from the carriage in which they had
been conveyed to the boat.
Then they embarked.
The night was a superb one.
The sea was so calm that even Anatole declared he pre-
ferred to remain on deck.
Accordingly he and Ned “ lit up,” and began to yarn
about past accidents by flood and field.
Ned, who had hitherto been silent on the matter, gave
him an account of his recent adventure in the cellar at
Wapping.
The Frenchman listened with interest.
When Ned’s story was done he gave a KHle shrug of
the shoulders.
“I do not like adventures in cellars,” he observed. •* i
had one in my younger days which gave me a shock that 1
was some time before I got over.”
“Let’s have it,” asked Ned, v, o liked a yarn of the
kind in prospect.
“ It is no matter how many years ago ” began Ana tola
“ when I was young—in fact, just beginning life


• i was fresh from the provinces, where 1 had been
brought up in that ignorance which some people hold to
be bliss, and had just entered on a career in Paris.
“ I was, as I said, green, not a bad looking chap, and I
h»d some tin
■‘l was always in love with someone or other—and
always being in love is what I call the true jetinesse dorse.
But you do not know what that means? Nothing like it—
vive Vamour !” shouted the excitable Gaul, to the utter
amazement of Ned, who holloed out—
“ Damn your gibberish! Speak English, man. I don’t
know nothing about your John Dory or t’other fish you
name! ”
The Frenchman laughed at Ned’s ignorance, and the
words “ bete cornrne tin boeuf" escaped his lips.
“ At that time, amongst the flower-girls on the boule-
vards who used to stroll from cafe to cafe with their bas-
kets of posies, was a most charming creature.” continued
Anatole.
“In rags she would have looked beautiful, and in the
coquettish Swiss-peasant kind of costume she had adopted
she was perfectly ravishing.
“ Her face, with its fair hair and blue eyes, was candour
itself, resembling one of those delicious heads that Greuze
had the secret of putting on to canvas—but quo diable,
what do you know about Greuze V ”
“ Don’t you be so blooming conceited. Don’t I know
nothing about crews ? I’ve seen a pretty job lot of them
in my time, and you should just see the crews my brother
Kit has shipped.”
The poor ignoramus had no idea that the Frenchman
was naming the celebrated French painter—Greuze.
Anatole looked at him for a moment, and his sides
shook with suppressed laughter.
Shrugging his shoulders, he proceeded—
“ Her actions, too, did not belie her looks, for she was
modesty itself in her bearing, and used 50 repulse any
customer who ventured to presume at all in the firmest
manner.
“But when I looked at her I thought that she returned
ray glance, and I fancied at once I had made an impres-
sion, ass that I was. I need not detail how we became
acquainted—you know as well as I do how that comes to
pass.
“ We hac. one or two brief interviews out of doors, and
at last she consented to receive me at her residence,
stipulating, however, the strictest secresy.
“ She lived, it seemed in the City, in a street long since
swept away by Hausmann.
“ I dressed myself with unusual care, and put on a
quantity of jewellery, hoping to dazzle her eyes by the
splendour of my appearance as I trusted to bewitch her
ears with the charms of my eloquence.
“ I half drowned myself in eau-de-Cologne, placed a
fairly-filled purse in my pocket so as to be prepared for
all emergencies, and then muffling all my splendour in a
long cloak, for she had warned me not to come too con-
spicuously dressed, stole forth in the most mysterious
manner.
“ You must remember I was only a boy, and going to
my first rendezvous.
“ My heart thumped violently, and I alternately burned
with a doliricus fever and trembled violently like a cul-
prit.
“ Natalie—her name I should have said was Natalie
was punctual at our appointed meeting-place.
“ Begging me not to take her arm, but to follow her at
some distance lest it should excite attention, she led the
way towards her abode.
“ We traversed in this fashion several streets, fouler
than at that time I had any conception streets could be,
though I know more of such matters now.
“ At length my guide halted in front of a low, gloomy-
looking building.
“ With a whisper to me to be silent, she ento -d a kind
«*' alley dosed by a swing-gate, and, greatly marvelling that
30 beautiful a creature should inhabit such a foul -looking
den, I followed her.
“ I thought of all the offers she must have refused
to leave this hole, and that now for my sake she was going
to do so.
“ You see, I was very young.
“ There was no porter, and I groped along after Natalie
in a long, dark passage, till she took a lamp from a shelf,
and lighting it began to descend a short flight of stone
steps.
“ I marvelled at our going down instead of up, bui
followed in silence as she desired.
“ At the end of a second passage she, with a most invit-
ing smile, swung open a ponderous door.
She passed through it. I followed her, and found my-
self in a small vaulted chamber, and in the embraces—not
of my charmer, but of three of the vilest-looking scoundrel*
1 ever set my eyes on.
“ I saw how I had been decoyed in an instant.
“ I was young and strong, but the villains had sprung
upon me before I had time to put myself on my guard,
and Natalie quickly swinging-to the massy door cut off all
hopes of my cries availing met
“ With the rapidity of lightning the fellows stripped me
of watch, purse, pin, rings and studs, aud caused them to
disappear in a manner worthy of a conjuror.
“ Since then I have seen the same business practised on
others often enough, but never, I can assure you, more
neatly.
“ I was cool enough to see the futif ty o c esistance, and
thinking I should receive better tre«:ia° if I remained
passive after my first effort to brea < ' suffered them
to strip me of my wealth without a struggle.
“ But this operation completed, they dragged me toward*
an inner door, which I found, by the light still carried by
Natalie, led to a vault somewhat larger than the first one.
“Two of them held me, and the third stepping forward
opened a trap in the floor.
“ The agony of that moment was intolerable, and I
cannot recall it without a shudder.
“ I could read murder plainly in the eyes of the fiends
who held me, and hear below me the rush of waters which
in a few minutes would be bearing away my corpse.
“ The thought was maddening.
«To die like this, snared like a rat in a trap, with no
chance or hope of being avenged, cut off in the prime of
youth and enjoyment, when all things smiled upon me, in
a vile den with gloating devils around me.
“ I begged and prayed for mercy, 1 promised secresy,
ransom, anything they liked to name, but a given “ It is
safer ” from the devil who had lured me thither, made the
men who held me drag me yet closer to the horrible gulf.
“ I bit and kicked, and tore and howled like a mad-
man, to get loose, but all in vain.
“ The villains held me in a grip of iron.
“ One of them took a comforter from about his neck and
passed it round mine.
“It was their intention to strangle me before throwing
me down the trap.
“ Natalie seized on one end of the comforter and one of
her accomplices the other, and pulled it.
“1 felt the cursed thing grow tighter and tighter, the
blood rushed to my head, there was a singing in my cars,
and sparks began to flash before my eyes.
“ Suddenly there was a rush of moving figures, a scuffle,
the arms that held me relaxed their grip, the cord
slackened.
“Fora moment I lost consciousness, but opening my
eyes found my late assailants in the grip of a squad of
police.
“ The practices of my captors had for some time oeen
suspected, owing to the mysterious disappearances of
several young men, whose bodies turned up at the Morgue,
aud the police having obtained a clue had secretly entered
the house aud concealed themselves in order to catch
ruffians in the act.


“ 1 got off with severe brain fever ; I wonder I was not a
madman for life ; and on my recovery learnt that Natalie
and her accomplices, no murder be ng actually brought
home to them, had been sentenced to a long term of penal
servitude.”
CHAPTER CLXXIV.
HOW THE PARIS MAIL WAS ROBBED.
As Anatole concluded his story, the boat entered Calais
harbour.
The two travellers made their way at once to the station.
Despite the fineness of the night there had been but
few travellers—a fact which helped their plan.
At a station Anatole pointed out to Ned a little dark
fellow in the uniform of a railway guard, whose eyes were
eagerly scanning the passengers who arrived.
“ That is our man,” he remarked.
Ned was about to advance towards him.
‘ ; No, no,” said Anatole; “we must not be seen in
communication with him. He has seen us, and that is
enough.”
The time approached for the travellers to take their
places.
“ Everything favours us,” said the Frenchman.
This remark was called forth by the fact that they were
able to secure a compartment for themselves, usually a
matter of difficulty on French lines, in the arrangements
of which a paucity of accommodation, as regards the
number of passengers carried, is conspicuous.
By a yet greats •••■' ie of good luck, the compartment
was the end on the carriage coupled next to the
guard’s van in which-mails were deposited.
The mails for Paris were placed in a separate locked-up
compartment.
After this had been locked it was further secured by
bands of linen with seals at the ends.
They were, of course, no extra security from actual
violence, but they served for two purposes.
Firstly, to show if the compartment had been tampered
with; and secondly, to render even an unsuccessful at-
tempt to rob the mails a criminal offence, breaking an
official seal constituting one in France.
A few minutes later and the train steamed out of the
station, and just as it started Daudet came to the carriage
to look at their tickets.
“Now,” said Anatole, consulting his watch, “we have
a little under an hour for our job, which must be done
between here and Amiens.”
“ Well, what have we got to do, and how are we to do
it?” said Ned, who was still in the dark.
“You saw our friend come to the window just now?”
“Yes.”
“ You thought it was to look at the tickets?”
“ What else was it for, then ?”
“ Why, to give me this.”
As he spoke the Frenchman held up a key.
“What key is that?” inquired Kelly.
“ The key of the compartment in which the mails are
locked. Now, do you understand?”
“ Tes, I think I do.”
“ You are a heavier man than myself,” observed Ana-
tole ; “but you are as active as a cat, and you are cer-
tainly stronger. I think that, with your permission, the
lion’s share of the work must fall on you.”
“ What is it I am to do ? ”
“ Pass from this carriage to the next, on the further
side, and open the door of the compartment in which there
are the mail-bags.”
Ned whistled.
“ That’s an ugly job,” was his remark.
“ Exactly so. But, consider, success means a fortune.
Allans , mon cher. Come, my dear boy; time, as you English
say, is on the wing.”
After a few instructions from Anatole, Ned was ready ■
to set out on his perilous expedition,
The door on the further side of the compartment was
gently opened, and he stepped out on to the foot-board.
Standing there for a moment, he looked around him.
The train was tearing furiously through the dars. night,
seeming almost to sway from side to side in its velocity.
So swiftly was it moving, that the rush of air against
him seemed to threaten every moment to make him leave
go the rail outside the carriage to which his hands clung.
Anatolc had closed the door, which Kcliy had nulled-fco
after him.
After a little time Ned began to get accustomed oo his
novel position.
The rocking, jerking motion of the train, no longer
threatened at every movement to wrench away his hold
and hurl him down amidst the whirring, clattering wheels
beneath him.
The rush of air became less awkward as he gradually
grew accustomed to it.
The steps of the French railway-carriages are broader
than those in England, it being the practise for the guards
to pass from time to time along the whole length of the
train in order to collect tickets.
To facilitate this, there is also a rail running along
about head high, which the men lay hold of with their
hands.
After a few minutes spent in standing on the steps and
holding on to the rail, Ned grew acclimatised, as it were,
to his novel situation.
He felt that he could have passed from one end of the
train to the other with ease.
But this was not his task. He had but to pass along
his one carriage, and to step from it to the next one
while the train was in motion.
Fie had, firstly, to pass before the compartment holding
the break, which intervened between him and the one
cent lining the mails.
In this break-van was the guard, Henri Daudet.
But Ned was also aware that there was another guard as
well sharing his vigil.
To pass in front of the window in an upright position
was impossible.
He would be certain to be detected.
It was necessary, therefore, to crouch down and advance
along the step in a creeping form.
Before stooping he paused for a moment.
The reflection of the lighted windows of the train was
plainly visible on the side of the line as it flew by.
Kelly could make out the outline of the passengers in
several instances, and could plainly recognise that of
Anatole standing at the window.
There was no shadow cast from the guard’s van.
All at once a shadow blocked the light that a moment
before had been streaming full from the window.
The shadow of a man. From its outline it was evident
that this individual either had his back or his face to the
opening.
In the latter case he was bound to see Ned as the bush-
ranger crept past, and it was useless to risk it.
But, in the former? All at once a thought crossed
Kelly’s mind.
Instinctively he divined the real state of affairs.
The guard Daudet knew that it was during this part of
the journey that the robbery was to take place.
It must be he who was standing by the window in order
to mask it from his colleague.
Stoopmg down, Ned crept cautiously along, helping
himself onwards past the guard’s compartment by the aid
of the handle of the door.
Once past this compartment, he rose and continued his
progress by the aid of the rail.
In a few moments more he had arrived opposite the
door of the van containing the mails.
It was secured by the sealed bands already mentioned.
A few slits with his knife disposed of these.
Then, inserting the key Anatole had given him into the
lock, he opened the door.
He plunged his hand in, and seized on the first bag ha
could lay hold of.


Holding this between his knees, in order to prevent it
from being shaken from the step, he relocked the door and
then commenced the return journey.
This was even more difficult than the former.
He had only one hand to help him, having to drag the
bag along with the other.
The getting past the guards’ van was exceedingly
difficult for him-
But when he reached the end of the steps, further pro-
gress seemed impossible, encumbered as he was.
It had taken him all he knew to get across from one
carriage to the other with his hands free, but the mail bag
was a terrible impediment.
How was he to get it over?
At length an idea struck him.
Taking off his necktie, he managed with the aid of that
and his handkerchief to secure the bag firmly to the end
of the rail that had helped him along.
Then, crossing the gulf, he made his way to the com-
partment where Anatole was waiting.
The Frenchman did not utter a word till Kelly had
entered the compartment again, lest their converse should
be overheard.
“ Where is the bag ?” was his remark.
Kelly explained the difficulty that had arisen.
He then by the aid of the straps that served to fasten
their rugs, improvised a kind of rope.
With this he started again on his expedition.
Again he crossed the space between the carriages after
fastening one end of his rope to the one he quitted.
The other end he attached to the bag.
Then he loosened the fastenings confining the bag to the
rail, stepped back to his own carriage, and by the aid of
his rope hauled the bag after him, and a minute later bad
swung it through the window to Anatole.
“Shall I go for another?” he whispered, with his head
thrust into the carriage so as not to be overheard.
“ Yes, there is time,” was the answer ; “ but try to give
back the key to Daudet.”
“He’s wide awake. I’ll do that like a shot,” said
Ned.
Taking the rope with him this time, he set out again on
his journey.
Practice was making perfect in his case, and he gained
the door of the mail-van with* comparative ease this time.
He noticed the shadow of the guard still blocking the
window.
Securing another bag and relocking the door, he again
commenced his retreat.
Then came the most difficult part of it, the stooping
down and getting past the guards’ compartment, encum-
bered as he was by the bag.
He stooped and began to crawl along.
All at once, just as he was right opposite the door and
was taking every possible precaution not to make the least
noise, he felt something touch him.
It was a hand 1
For a moment the shock was great. Another man
would have lost his balance and rolled, bag and all, beneath
the wheels ; but his nerves of steel served him.
He looked up and could make out that the figure of
someone was leaning with his back against the door, the
glass of which was down.
One of this figure’s hands was dangling into space out-
side the door; and this was the dangling hand that had
touched him.
But instead of the stranger trying to detain him or to
give an alarm, ho retained his position and remained
motionless.
All but the hand, the fingers of which opened and
closed several times in the air as though seeking to clutch
something or othei
Ned all at once guessed the enigma.
Daudefs hand was thrust out for the key.
By a miracle of balancing, Ned managed to maintain
Jhimself and the bag in position, whilst he drew forth the
key from his pocket and placed it in the hand extended ia
anticipation of it.
Then he resumed his journey.
This time he had not so much trouble in completing his
passage.
On arriving at the gap between the carriages, he fa tened
his rope to the bag.
Then he hitched it round the rail in such a fashion,
that a sharp jerk from the loose end would at once
unfix it.
With this loose end in hand, he swung himself across,
jerked the rope, freed the bag and hauled it after him.
Once more he regained his compartment.
During his absence Anatole had not been idle.
The first mail-bag had been ripped open by him, and
the greater part of its contents was strewn about the floor
of the carriage.
Half a dozen large envelopes and packages were, how-
ever, placed on one side.
“ Good,” exclaimed the Frenchman, “ here we are
again, as the clown says, eh? I have pretty well sorted
this lot.”
A few more minutes and he had completed his task.
“ Bundle all these books into the bag,” he continued,
adding two or three more envelopes to the selected lot,
“and I will examine number two.” Ned complied.
“ Can I do anything else to quicken things?” he then
enquired.
“No,” was the answer; “ all I can do is just to read
hurriedly through the lot and spot the packets addressed
to big banking firms. They are bound to contain money.
There may be big remittances to private houses as well,
but they will probably be in bills, and, besides, there ia
not time to look.”
After the second bag had been ransacked like the
first, the useless documents were returned to it.
The packets selected were then hurriedly opened
by Anatole, and their contents subjected to a similar
scrutiny
The securities that appeared negotiable were placed on
one side.
The envelopes and everything of a compromising nature
were returned to the bag.
After which these were quietly dropped out of the
window.
The two travelling bags, with which the pair of rogues
were equipped, were next taken in hand.
They had been expressly prepared for the occasion.
They had false bottoms, in -which the stolen papers
were readily hidden away.
A few minutes later the train reached Boulogne, and
shortly afterwards resumed its journey without the loss
being discovered.
It was not indeed found out till the train had nearly
arrived at Paris, by which time several passengers had
left it.
Hence the authorities were quite at a loss.
Ned and Anatole left the terminus without being
suspected, and a short time afterwards the bushranger was
seated by his accomplice in a cafe on the Boulevards.
They wisely agreed that personal concealment in Paris
would excite suspicion. They therefore frequented the
most prominent cafe.
CHAPTER CLXXY.
HOW THE FRENCHMAN DID KELLY, AND HOW HE WAS
FOUND OUT.
Every cock crows loudest on his own dunghill, but more
especially the Gallic cock.
Anatole, with the asphalted pavement of his beloved
Bouvelards under his boot-soles, was a different being
from tlie Anatole of the Colonies—or even London.
•' In these latter localities the little Frenchman had
looked up to Kelly as one knowing the lay of the land as
well as—if not better than—himself. He ol so had confi-
dence in his courage.


But once in Paris, with, as Madame McGregor ex-
claimed, “ Mjfoot on ray native heath,’’ it was emphatically,
in racing parlance, Anatole first and the rest nowhere.
The Frenchman had taken quarters fo T ' them both in a
quiet, fourth-rate hotel in the JJae d’Amsterdam.
He had chosen it because it was chiefly frequented by
travellers of a class amongst whom anything eccentric in
manner Kelly’s part would not be likely to excite
notice.
The' frequenters of the hotel, which may be readily
identified by some of our readers, consisted almost entirely
of English acrobats, dancers, jugglers, music-hall singers,
cncus-riders, and the like, either engaged in Paris, or
passing through that city.
The manners and customs of some of these “ members
of the profession,” as they delight to style themselves, are
often curious in the extreme, and their ignorance of the
social amenities of life positively dumbfounding.
Hence Anatole felt sure that any awkwardness of Kelly’*
would pass unperceived, or, at any rate, unnoticed, either
by the people of the hotel or by the other guests.
* Another great point was that English was spoken and
English fare provided, for Ned, in common with many of
hislddney, had the firmest conviction that frogs and snails
formed the basis of a EVenchman’s diet, and that every
dish that he did not recognise was composed of one or the
other of these two things disguised in a more or less
artful fashion.
At first Anatole tried to remove these impressions.
He took Ned to dinner at Brebant’s, and devoted aa
much attention to the composition of the menu, or bill of
fare, as ever the House of Commons did to a clause of
the Land Bill.
Bub all in vain.
Kelly expressed an opinion that supreme de volatile a la
marechale was beastly rot, and left his stomach as empty
as if he had been eating an old kid glove served up with
butter sauce. It was a blessed kickshaw, and only fit food
“ for them blessed snakes that swallow their blankets.”
He had evidently heard of the boa constrictor at “ the
Zoo ” who had performed this operation.
He went through the menu from curiosity alone, and
then swore he was more hungry than when he began.
Uumpsteak and onions and a bottle of gin was his idea
of a first-rate cuisine. That was something to lie down on.
E’rench wines! Bah ! disguised poison.
Anatole’s first care on his arrival had been to rush, in
swift succession, to tailors, hatters, boot-makers, shirt-
makers, and hosiers, and to rig himself out from top to
toe in the singular array of the Parisian dandy.
With cuffs reaching down to his knuckles, and shirt-
collar rising above bis ears, it was his delight to be driven
in a victoria in the Bois de Boulogne, to sit sipping
absinthe at some cafe on the Boulevards, and to pass the
evening in one of the minor theatres, the Delassemeuts-
Comiquesorthe Folies-Marigny, where slang and indecency
formed the staple of the entertainment; and the night at
some gaming-table patronised by both sexes.
Ned’s tastes were far too rowdy for this.
He did not care for being driven in a victoria ; the only
method of equine-travelling understood by him, being to
have a good horse between his knees. He could not endure
absinthe ; he could not understand Parisian slang ; and he
did not, as he phrased it, “ see the fun of playing with a
lot of haggish-looking women hanging around you. and
trying to wheedle you out of your winnings or else to
grab ’em before your very eyes.’ 1
So Anatole, after shrugging his shoulders and vowing
that it was impossible to act as bear-leader to “ un tel
Ours," began to leave him pretty much to his own devices.
Especially as a certain young lady rejoicing in the
name of Tata Flandreheche, began to engross a great deal
of his own attention at this juncture.
Ned for some rime sought consolation in loafing about
the streets, lounging of a night at the Folies-Borgcre,
where the members of a pantomime troupe he had struck
up an acquaintance with at the hotel, were playing, or
drinking at Jack Coney's.
But these pursuits began to pall on his active disposi-
tion.
Strange to say, Paris had no charms for the wild, rough
nature of the bushranger.
The excitement of pleasure was to him as nothing com-
pared to the excitement of peril, which was the very
breath of his nostrils. He thought the Lfe fearfully slow,
and sighed for the Bush he had been compelled to
quit. If ever he settled down (unless settled up with a
hempen collar) he resolved to do bo in the Bush. It was
the only place where he felt he could breathe.
Mabille aroused first his curiosity and then his con-
tempt.
His ignorance of the language irritated him.
If a woman laughed wheu she spoke to him, nothing
could get the idea out his head that she was chaffing
him, and he grew “riled” at not being able to answer
her.
As to all the wondrous treasures of art enshrined in the
French capital, all the monuments hallowed by associa-
tion with the mighty dead, all the spots whose names are
household words in history, he neither knew nor cared
“a blessed rap about ’em.”
They and their like were sealed books to him.
Anatole had taken care on their arrival to inscribe their
names after a fashion of his own in the book which every
French hotel-keeper is bound to keep for the information
of the police.
Kelly he had set down as Mr. Tom Smith, cf London,
whdst he had given himself the title of baron, ana me
name of Isidore de Saint Phaar.
He felt certain that unless suspicion fell on them at once
concerning the robbery of the mail, they would be quite
safe, since it would be impossible to track out every one
of the passengers by the train that had been plundered,
and, unless this was done, there would really be no way of
finding out the guilty parties.
Under these circumstances he began to weary of looking
after Kelly, even to the extent he did.
He wished, too, to shift his quarters to a more fashion-
able neighbourhood, though, at the same time, be did not
like to abandon his supervision of the bushranger.
in his heart he was ever afraid Kelly would get into
some clumsy scrape or other with the authorities, or would
manage to let the cat out of the bag, that is to say, the
mail bag, in his cups.
So one afternoon he sounded Kelly as to the latter s
returning to England.
Kelly expressed himself as “ jolly g.ad ” to clear out cf
Paris.
“ I’m infernally sick of this blessed nest of jabbering
monkeys,’’.was his way of putting it,
“Well, my friend, we can, I think, arrange all that,”
said Anatole.
“ The first thing to be fixed, though, is to share the
swag.”
“ Tres hien, very good. We will share it.”
They adjourned at once to the double-bedded room they
occupied.
The door having been carefully locked and a handker-
chief hung over the keyhole, for the mere leaving the key
in the lock was not considered a sulucienb precaution, they
set to work.
The plunder was spread out oa the table.
It was, as has been stated, a very miscellaneous lot,
consisting, for the most part, of those foreign stocks,
shares, and bonds which are payable “ to bearer,” and are
therefore easier to negociate than most of our ewa
securities.
Ned gazed in silence at the heap of papers printed m
black, red, blue, green, and mauve inks, with wonderfully
elaborate headings, and long tails of attached coupons.
He knew an English “flimsy” well e.mugh, and, sins®
his sojourn in Paris, had learned to recognise the notec iM


different values issued by the bank of France, but the
things before him were, one and all, as puzzling as a
Chaldee manuscript would have been.
He stared his hardest, however, at them.
“I think I already have said to you,” began the
Frenchman, “ that this little quantity of values, or, as you
call them, securities, is to bo divided in three.”
“la three?” echoed Ned
“ One for me, the head ; ouo >or you, the hand ; and one
for our good friend Henri Daudet, the eye—an eye which
shut itself up when it is not wanted to see,” and he
grinned like a sick baboon.
“ Quite correct, old fireworks,” said Ned ; “ but drive
along with your palaver, or I shall be as dry as a burnt
gum-tree stump in a hot wind before you’ve done.”
“ Then I think the best plan will be to divide all these
papers into three piles, heaps, is not that so ?”
“ Very good.” v
“ Eh bien , come, let us set ourselves to the work.”
So saying he pounced on a bundle of the securities, and
began to deal them out in three heaps.
Ned looked on.
“ Allows , come, my friend,” said Anatole, “ help me to
divide them.”
“ How am I to divide ’etm when I don’t know a word of
all the blessed scribble-vcrabble/’ was the sullen answer.
“ Of the blessed how do you say?” gasped the puzzled
Frenchman.
“ Of all the oughts and crosses and Lord knows what
else that’s stuck all over ’em,” said Nod, in the same
sulky tones.
“Cannot you read, my friend?” inquired Anatole, in
his softest and oiliest tones.
“I can spell my way through a bit cf honest print,”
said Ned, remembering how he had often managed to
make out the bills offering a reward for his own apprehen-
sion ; “ but pen-writing beats me hollow'. It’s so
different from the hand-bills that used to stick alongside
of Holloway’s Ointment all over the bush offering ever so
many pounds for Ned Kelly, dead or alive. Oh, I could
make that out easy enough, but them confounded snakes’
tails you call writing is out of my course, 1 can tell you.
No, I can’t read these no how. Have you any more
questions to ask ?”
“No,” remarked the Frenchman, meditatively, as he
continued his sorting process in a swift but deliberate
fashion.
His brain was working more quickly than his hands
Kelly’s remark had suggested the germ of a scheme
that a few minutes sufficed to think out in all its details.
“ What do you think of doing with your share ?” he at
length said, carelessly.
“ Well, I don’t quite know. That’s just where I want
a word or two from you. I’m blowed if I quite know the
use of these blessed things now we have got ’em, though
you say they’re worth a lot.”
“I suppose you know that it will take some time and
trouble to get rid of them ?”
“ Hum ! I guessed as much. The same game as over
those blessed diamonds —eh ?”
••No, no! These are genuine. But, yes, in one thing
you have reason. Like the diamonds, it is not everyone
who can take them into the market for sale.”
“ Oh, curse the things!”
“ Stop a bit. I’m up to a dodge here. I should like to
start as a stockjobber on the Bourse, and then I can tell
everybody that makes enquiries that the stuff 1 have on
hand was received from my clients. D’ye see?”
“ Not quite.”
“ I shall say Ia» m a large way of business as an agent
for foreigners. After a time I bring these things into the
market. If any are recognised, 1 say 1 receive them from
my clients—my customers abroad, at Sydney, Bio, Hong
Kong, where you will; and I show my books, all correct,
Xo prove it.”
“ You’re to a thing or two.”
“ Only it will take time, and it will be necessary tf
spend a lot of tin in fixing myself in Paris, if Idoit in
three years I shall be lucky.”
“ Three years!”
“ Three years. Now, lam willing to take your share
and work it off in the same way for -r little commission.”
“ Three years!”
“ Hum, hum !” replied the Frenchman, very slowly, as
though in doubt; “I do not see how it can be managed
otherwise. No; to hurry faster would be to risk the loss
of all.”
There was a minute of silence.
“ Listen to me,” said Anatole at length, “ You are a
brave fellow, un bon enfant , and we have done well to-
gether. You are my friend, and I love to help my friends.
I tell you what I will do. I will buy your share half-
and-half—no, I mean out-and-out—as you say in England,
now, and take all the risk.”
“ Ain’t that a little bit too good to be true ?” answered
Kelly, whose suspicious were aroused by the other's
manner.
“ What do you say?”
“ What’s the worth of the whole lot of the swag?”
asked Ned, doggedly.
“ In English money, as near as I can make it, it is fifteen
thousand pounds.”
“Then my share is what?” asked Kelly, who could not
even divide fifteen by three.
“ Five thousand, naturally,” replied the other, a little
puzzled at such a question.
“Five thousand? Well, what will you give n » for
it?”
“ Well, I will either give you four thousand by degrees
as I dispose of the value of the securities, or I will pay
you now two thousand and take all risk.”
“ Oh, that’s the game, is it?”
“ Take yonr choice—take it or leave it. I don’t care
which.”
Ned mused a bit.
After all, the proposition seemed a fair one.
“ Cash down ?” he said.
“ On the nail, as you say,” was the answer.
“ All right; fork over the tin, then.”
Anatole had still the money stolen from Kint, and some
more he had subsequently won in England.
He handed Ned the amount in French and English
notes.
After some puzzling, Kelly was satisfied that the sum
was right, and stowed it away about him.
“Come and wet down the bargain, Frenchy, won’t
you ?” was his next observation.
“ Not just yet,” answered Anatole, who was restoring
the securities to their hiding-place.
“ All right. In forty-eight hours I slope out of these
diggings,” remarked Ned, as he left the room.
Left alone, Anatole could not conceal the exultation he
had with difficulty suppressed in Kelly’s presence.
“ Ah, tjuel bonheur ! quel coup de mndre! what luck ! Can I
believe my eyes ? Main e'est incroyah/e! Nearly one hun-
dred thousand pounds, and nearly the half of it for two !
Anatole, mon vieux , you are a groat strategist, greater than
the great Napoleon. He crossed the Alps ; so did Hani-
bal, and others before him. He had his luck—his coup ;
he lost it, 1 have had mine ! 1 keep it, to enjoy it where
one lives double the time of life anywhere else, mrtout in
that sad country, that triste pays, they call ‘MerryEng-
land.’ Merry—ha! ha! ha! Vive la France! rive la
Bagatelle ! five Anatole ! Tra, la, la! tra, la, la!” sang the
excitable Gaul, as he danced a pas sent round the room,
his face beaming with delight. “English dolt! ass! fool!
idiot! I have avenged Waterloo !”
He struck a tragic air, and looked at himself in the
glass.
He was almost choked with joy, and laughed at the way
ho had “ done ” Kelly, until the tears ran down bia
cheeks.


** AUons ! let us see,” he resumed. “ I cannot hope for
such luck with Daudet. He will want at least thirty
thousand. That will leave me seventy. I go on the
Bourse with that. In three years I realise, in three more
I double it, in ten I ret're with a magnificent and honour-
ably-earned fortune ”
Visions of a landed cerate and a seat in the Chamber
of Deputies he-, floated across his mind.
“ Stop a moment, Anatole, mon ami," he resumed, as
his thoughts flew back to the present. “You must keep
a close watch on our friend whilst he remains in Paris.
He has the money, and you have the securities, and if he
took it into his thick aead to denounce you that would be,
ma foi , awkward. He may babble, too, in his cups, of his
coin. He is naturally boastful, and suspicions may be
aroused. No, you must not let him out of your sight till
he leaves Paris ; you must stick to him like his coat. He
might even run against Daudet and have an explanation,
which would be awkward.”
Thus musing, he sallied forth in quest of Ned.
He did not find him in the hotel, but, knowing his
haunts, went on to Coney’s.
On the way, however, he fell in with a friend, who
detained him in conversation for some time, and it was
upwards of haK-an hour since he had parted from Ned
before he again set eyes on that worthy.
He found Kelly seated at a little table in Coney s bar,
drinking alone, a thing foreign to his habits.
His face was flushed almost to blackness, his eyes blood-
shot, and bis appearance that of a man labouring under
some violently stifled emotion.
He was like a suppressed volcano.
Anatole set this down to hard drinking, consequent
upon their recent haul.
Ned seemed to make an effort to recover himself at the
sight of the Frenchman.
Anatole, faithful to his plan of not losing sight of Ned,
proposed that they should go to the Alcazar that evening
after dinner.
Ned consented readily, and the programme was carried
out.
Anatole, seated in a fauteuil with the air of a conquer-
ing hero, shared his glances between the occupants of the
stage and the fairer portion of the audience.
Ned, however, was more abstracted than usual, paid
little or no attention to what was going on, and seemed to
divide his attention between watching Anatole, and work-
ing out some mental problem.
After the performance the pair went into Peters’ to sup,
and Anatole found himself in such pleasant company, that
he announced his intention of not coming home that night
at all, a victory of pleasure over prudence that was only
accomplished after a struggle.
Ned returned to the hotel alone.
He sat for a long time on the edge of his bed, evidently
in deep meditation.
“ What an infernal bit of luck,” he growled to himself.
“ I made sure the little beast would have come home, and
then I would have tried a dodge of his own on him. How-
ever, I’ll fix him yet.”
Whereupon he turned in, with the door carefully locked,
and secured furthermore by a chair-back jammed up under
she handle, for Ned was a man of precaution in such
matters.
CHAPTER CLXXVI.
MEET ME BY MOONLIGHT ALONE.
Anatole came round the next morning.
“Look here,” was Ned’s greeting, “ I’ve made up my
mind to clear out of this crib to-morrow.”_
The Frenchman’s look expressed his satisfaction.
“ But I’d like to have a mouthful of fresh air before I
start. Couldn’t we just run out into the country for a few
hours. I’m sick of being penned up here, like a wild
bullock in the stock •yard.”
He was only partially pleased with this proposal. Kelly s
society was not very attractive, and as he had got all
he could out of to© acquaintance, he would have been
glad, as Paddy says, to see “ the full front of his back.”
Nevertheless, it would only ba martyrdom for one day, and
he would have the huge brute under his eye wi'Ue he
remained in France.
“I must not risk leaving him, as I did last night,- waff
his thought. “ I shall only breathe freely when he has left
Paris.”
Accordingly, after breakfasting together, the pair took
their places in a train bound for St. Germain-en-Laye.
Anatole’s proposition was that they should spend the
afternoon in the forest, and dine in the evening the
Pavilion Henri Quatre.
Ned agreed, with every sign of satisfaction.
The Frenchman’s idea of a forest excursion was, now-
ever, very different to Ned’s.
He insisted, on their arrival at St. Germain, on tarring an
open carriage for the purpose.
Ned had to consent, though this had not been his idea
of the excursion, and the pair were driven to all the
various spots of interest, which Kelly neither noticed nor
understood. His thoughts wore far from sylvan delights.
They then returned to the town, and were soon seated
at dinner in the terraced garden of the Pavilion Henri
Quatre, overlooking the Seine.
The evening was a magnificent one.
Ned did ample justice to the champagne, which was
about the only wine he could drink, and after a time began
to get noisy and opinionated.
At length he declared that nothing would suit him but
a pull on the river, which lay like a streak of molten silver
before them.
In vain Anatole argued that it was somewhat late.
“An hour’s pull in the twilight will do us a world of
good,” insisted Ned, till his companion was obliged to
yield.
There was indeed plenty of time, for the last train did
not leave for Paris till half-past eleven.
Accordingly Ned lurched and staggered down to the
riverside, followed by the Frenchman, who was more than
ever apprehensive that some escapade on Kelly's part might
attract the gens d'annes, and then who knew what might
transpire.
There was not a very great choice of boats, and they had
to content themselves with a somewhat cranky but heavy
craft, with the oars working on a single thole-pin by an
iron ring, such as abound on French rivers.
Anatole knew that Kelly was thoroughly at home in a
boat, and too much of a waterman to play any foolish
tricks, despite his apparent intoxication.
The result justified his impression.
Kelly took the oars, and. after a little growling at the
way in which they were adjusted, began to urge the boat
along with powerful strokes.
The mere action of taking them seemed to have sobered
him.
He pulled up-stream in the direction of Bourgival.
His manner was glum and abstracted, though from time
to time he glanced at the banks or across the surface of
the river in an observant fashion.
The night had come on.
The air was heavy, and there seemed every prospect of
a storm before morning.
Heavy isolated clouds were floating across the surface
of the sky.
From time to time one of them would pass over the
surface of the moon, which, round, full, and luminous,
shone with a light almost rivalling that of day.
Then an interval of darkness, all the more intense by
comparison, would occur. #
All was profoundly silent save for the splash of NoOs
oar-blades and the ripple of the waters against the side of
the boat, which left astern of it that phosphorescent iracK
observable on a hot night.
A short distance above St. Germain the Seme is m ud*cl


hsto two branches by a series of long islands which have
been joined artificially.
The right- hand arm of the river is a kind of watery no-
thoroughfare, all progress after a certain distance being
hindered by a dam stretching right across it, over which
the stream flows in a miniature cataract.
Up this arm Ned went.
The sense of solitude and silence increased every mo-
ment.
On cue side was the island fringed to the water’s edge
by a dense growth of alders and willows.
On the other side the main bank of the river, which
here flowed past a stretch of cultivated fields, now quite
solitary and deserted.
The spot was a terribly lonely one.
“ Eh, my friend ?” said Anatole, who, after one or two
attempts to engage Ned in conversation, had given it up,
and had leant back lazily in the stern of the boat, yielding
himself to that pleasurable sense of half-drowsy enjoy-
ment that is apt to steal over a man under such circum-
stances. “It is getting late. Is it not time to return?”
Ned pulled half a dozen more strokes, and then rested
on his oars in silence.
In the still hush of the summer night the only sound
that fell on their ears was the faint roar of the cataract,
mellowed by distance.
The boat gradually lost the way that was on her, came
to a stop, and then began to drift slowly back in the
direction in which they had come, for the current was a
strong one.
“Come, come,” repeated Anatole; “it is getting late.”
Ned raised his head and looked the other full in the
face.
His own countenance showed white and set in the
moonlight, and all traces of the intoxication, real or
feigned, under which he had laboured, seemed to have
disappeared.
“ You needn’t be in such an infernal hurry,” was his
reply. “You’ve a longer journey before you than you
think for.”
“ What do you mean ? ”
Where does this river go to ? ” asked Ned.
“ To Havre,” was the somewhat bewildered answer.
“ How far is that ? ”
4 ‘l cannot say exactly, some hundred miles. Allans''
continued Anatole, who fancied Ned’s questions were
merely the freaks of a drunken imagination; “ puU b~ck
quickly, or we shall never get to Paris.”
“ But you’re not going to Paris,” answered Ned, and,
instead of turning the boat, he gave a stroke or two so as
to keep her bead up stream.
“ What the devil do you mean, Men? ” said Anatole, in
an irritated tone.
“ I mean you are going to Havre.”
“To Havre! Are you off your head? How? ”
“ By water,” answered Kelly.
“In this boat, monsieur? Come, pull back, and let us
get the train,” said the Frenchman, who began to feel be-
wildered.
“No, not in this boat; but by water all the same.”
“Come, come, enough of this, monsieur. Explain
yourself. What do you mean?” said Anatole, getting
rather uneasy.
“I mean, you blasted viper!” yelled Kelly, in quite
another tone, “ that in two minutes I shall have wrung
your neck and pitched you overboard.”
Anatole was thunderstruck.
Then the idea suddenly occurred to him that Kelly must
have lost his senses.
He knew that the bushranger had been of late leading
a much more sedentary life than that which he was accus-
tomed to in Australia, and had also been drinking hard,
and he thought he must be in for an attack of d. t.
Half frightened, he resolved to try and humour him a
bit.
“ Come, Kelly, my boy,” he said soothingly, “ this is
some mistake. What has crabbed you like this? \Wre
old friends, you know.”
“ A pretty friend you are, you sneaking thief.”
“Me ? What’s up ? What are you driving at? n
“ What’s up, indeed ! Will you explain how it is that
if the papers we bagged from the train were only worth
fifteen thousand pounds, a reward of twenty thousand
comes to be offered for the recovery ot ’em?”
Frenchy began to feel rather uneasy. He would rather
be out of that boat just then. He looked, as he really
was, frightened to death.
“You’re a blooming deep ’un,” growled Kelly; “but
this stretch you ain’t a-going to h ve things quite your
own way, as the hedgehog said to the snake when he tried
to bolt him whole ; not you, my bloomer.”
The Frenchman stammered out with an effort, “ I
really do not understand.”
“ Stow that. You want to understand, do you. "Well,
you shall, and a good deal more before we part, you
robbing hound. When I left you, feeling that you were
not a bad sort to stump up the ready as you did, yesterday
afternoon, I went straight round to Coney’s. There were
some chaps there talking about the railway robbery.
‘ Those chaps must have got a pretty good haul,’ said one.
‘ Tidyish,’ I thinks to myself. ‘ Over a hundred
thousand,’ says another. I pricks my ears at this. ‘la
that true ?’ I says to him. ‘ See for yourself,’ he says ;
‘ here’s the advertisement in the paper. Bonds to the
value of a hundred and eight thousand pounds stolen,
and twenty thousand reward for their recovery.’ I felt for
a moment knocked silly, just as if someone had landed me
on the nut with a neddy, and I thought I was going to
drop down in a fit.”
“Aye, but consider,” began Anatole, “ the risk ”
“ Risk be blowed! There was no risk,” cried Ned
“I got the fellow to read me the whole boilin’. They
offered twenty thousand for the papers, and no questions
asked. That, I worked out, would make my share about
seven thousand. And you, you mean, pitiful, frog-eating,
soup-swilling, kangaroo-rat, tried to fob me off with two
thousand. 1 swore I’d pay you out, and 1 mean to. It
was a blessed lucky thing for you that you did not come
home last night, or I should have served you the same way
you did that foreign cove in London.”
Kelly’s tone and manner were so unmistakably ruffianly
(more so than can be here that Anatole felt his
last hour was come. Trembling in every limb, he abjectly
implored Kelly to hear him.
“ I’ll give you the whole of the swag if you’ll only give
me a chance to show you what a mistake you’ve made,”
and he clasped his would-be executioner’s knees.
“ Hold off, you snivelling varmint. Do you think I’m
going to give you another chance against Ned Kelly?
Not for Joe, if I know it. A lot you’d fork up if you got
safe ashore, wouldn’t you? No,” said Kelly, with brutal
calmness, “ I’m just going to send you to , where
they’re waiting for you, and hounds like you. Dead men
tell no tales,” and pulling out a pistol he levelled it at the
Frenchman, who, in his frightened movements to escape
the contents intended for him, nearly overbalanced the
boat, which caused the bullet to fly wide of its mark.
Like a flash of lightning the Frenchman sprung over the
side of the boat into the water, and dived like a duck,
completely escaping from Kelly’s view.
The report of the pistol was so loud, that even in his
rage Kelly recognised the tolly of waking the echoes of
the night and alarming the police.
CHAPTER CLX XVII
A NOVEL SWIMMING MATCH.
The imminence of the peril, however, nerved him to
immediate action.
“ Well, I’m sold after all,” cried Ned. “ i opened my
jaw a little too soon. I ought to have put my claws on
him before giving him a bit of my mind. Can ww swma
swim, I wonder V”


He was no'; long without an answer to this question.
Ten pacia or so from the boat downs ream, the glitter-
ing expanse of the water was suddenly broken by a dark
object rising to the surface.
It was the head of Anatole, who was swimming vigour-
ously towards the shore in the moonlight.
Many Parisians are good swimmers, and he had acquired
quite a good reputation as a crack practitioner amongst
the frequenters of the large floating-baths of the French
capital.
Aided by the current, he was making his way famously
towards the shore of the island which was the nearest.
* Confound it! he swims like a shark after a nigger,”
said Ned; “but he’s not clear yet.”
A couple of powerful strokes shot the boat in the detec-
tion of the swimmer.
Just as it reached him Ned sprung up again, and,
raising one of the oars, aimed a blow at his enemy’s head.
The blow merely fell on the water, which flew up in a
shower of glittering pearls.
Anatole had dived again as it descended.
The boat, with the impulse of Ned’s strokes still on her,
shot past the spot to some distance.
A minute elapsed before Ned could check her way, and
bring her round to ascend the stream.
With eager eye he again scanned the surface of the
water.
“If the moon goes in,” he growled, “it’s odds that
the varmint gets off after all. It’s that feeding on frogs, I
shouldn’t wonder now, that makes him so precious clever
in the water.”
The moon, however, continued to shine, though an
approaching cloud threatened shortly to veil her glittering
disc.
The surface of the stream was again broken about a
dozen yards up stream, and Anatole reappeared.
He was striving to gain the yet distant shore, and, at
the same time, to make headway against the current which
threatened to carry him down towards the boat.
“ This time, my bloomer,” said Kelly, “ I’ve got you as
safe as a tree’d ’possum.”
He began once more to urge the boat in the direction
of the fugitive.
Anatole was getting spent.
He had managed to kick off his shoes, but he was
heavily handicapped by his wet clothes, which were
dragging him down, and the two long dives had told on
him.
Again the boat cam® up with him, and Ned raised his
oar.
Again he made a desperate effort and dived.
Ned uttered a tremendous oath.
“ There’s only one way of getting hold of this slippery
eel,” he muttered.
He felt that if the Frenchm an escaped he was done for,
as the police would be at once put on his track.
He kicked off his shoes, tore off his coat and waistcoat,
and, opening his knife, thrust it in readiness in the waist-
band of his trousers.
His eye ranged over the expanse of water.
In a few seconds Anatole again emerged from the
depths, this time half-suffocated, and breathing heavily.
He was not ten feet off.
Ned plunged into the stream in his turn.
Anatole made another attempt to dive, but before he
could do so, Kelly’s hand was on his collar.
But the Frenchman clung to Kelly, and dragged him
under water; being the better swimmer, he got over
Kelly, who was obliged to lon“e his hold to get to the
surface to recover his breath
Anatole, released for the moment, struck out for dear
life Kelly lost sight of him for r, minute or two, but
swiftly struck out for him whou he discovered his where-
abouts The Frenchman, who was carried along by the
current, threw himself on his back, and somewhat re-
covered from his exhausted and breathless conditio-
Kelly rapidly approached him, and just had his grasp
upon him when the agile foreigner allowed himself to
sink under Kelly, whose feet he grasped, and thus pulled
the monster under water, as an Indian would a dues..
The boat had drifted down with the combatants, and
when the Frenchman, loosing his hold of his enemy’s
feet, rose to the surface, he found himself alongside of
the boat. He clutched the gunwale and held on, but
kept his head only level with the stream, and was thus
effectually shielded from the observation of Kelly, who
was on the port side.
Kelly, on coming up, looked around m vain tor his in-
tended victim, and, as certain people’s children have a
certain person’s luck, just then the moon was obscured by
a passing cloud, and, thrusting himself with a vigorous
effort from the drifting boat, Anatole made for the shore.
Kelly looked round him in vain. He couldn’t discern
any object within two feet of him, so dark was the atmo-
sphere at that moment. At this crisis the moon re-
appeared, and Kelly scanned the waters for his opponent,
but saw no signs of the ruffian. With a muttered impre-
cation he caught the boat, which was drifting his way,
and, grasping the tiller, allowed himself to be towed to
shore.
“ He’s sunk to the bottom, and the weeds are settling
his hash and saving me the trouble,” thought Kelly, as he
landed.
After resting on dry land for a few minutes he got into
the craft again, and pulled back to look at the scene of
the struggle, and for almost a quarter of an hour continued
to scan the surface of the river.
There was no trace discernible of his adversaij.
At length, fully convinced that Anatole was food for
the fishes, he once more headed the boat down stream
and began to pull for St. Germain.
After going a certain distance, however, he rested on
his oars and began to reflect.
It would never do for him to take the boat back to the
place where he had hired it.
His wet nether garments and the absence of his com-
panion, were circumstances that would require to be
explained.
His first idea was to pull on shore just above the town
and make his way to the railway station, but on second
thoughts, he reflected that although his coat and waist-
coat had been preserved from the wet, his saturated
trousers and the dilapidated condition of his shirt-front,
which had suffered in his struggle with Anatole, could
not fail to attract attention.
“Confound their lingo,” he growled; “if it was
England I could easily hash up a yarn to stall ’em off.”
Another plan presented itself to his mind, which seemed
more appropriate to the situation.
Like many men accustomed to find their way about a
scantily settled country, he was a naturally trained topo-
grapher.
As if by instinct, he could divine the bearings of one
spot in relation to another.
He had marked the direction of the main road to Paris,
and resolved to gain this and make his way back to the
capital on foot.
In this way all awkward enquiries would be avoided.
Accordingly he resumed his work at the oars and ran
the boat ashore on a deserted spot on the further bank,
some distance above the town.
After landing, he pushed the little craft cut into the
stream as far as he could.
A few minutes later't.e struck the main road, and head-
ing in the direction of Paris, set off at a round pace
towards the capital.
CHAPTER CLXXVHI.
ALMOST CAUGHT —A RESURRECTION.
ALTHOUGH the night was young when Ned left St. Ger-
main, and he had only some sixteen miles to cover, the
morning was pretty far advanced before he reached the
Rue d’Amsterdam.


He bad taken ins time pretty leisurely over the journey
for one thing, and had halted near the fortifications, at a
tavern open for carters and market people.
But the delay had been chiefly caused by the fact that
though it was very easy for him to find Paris, it was a
very°different matter for him tr make his way to the
street of which he was in quest.
Several people to whom he addressed himself could not
understand him, and he on his part was equally at a loss
as regarded the instructions given him in French.
Hence he wandered about at haphazard for some hours,
till he recognised certain landmarks with which he was
familiar, and by their aid made his way to the hotel.
He was not over pleased at this delay, as his idea had
been to pack up and leave at once with the whole of the
stolen bonds before any news of Anatole s “ misfortunes
arrived.
He felt under the circumstances that a cautious approach
might be advisable. _
just as he was nearing the door he noticed an official-
looking person in plain clothes, accompanied by a couple
of police in uniform, approaching at a brisk rate in the
opposite direction.
He at once faced round towards the nearest shop-front,
and became intensely interested in a very elaborate display
of marvellously embroidered baby-vinen in its window?^
A woman behind the counter, who caught sight of him,
took him for a newly-married man, intent upon the pur-
chase of a layette , or a benevolent godfather in quest of
a christening-robe, and smiled towards him in the blandest
fashion.
But whilst pretending to admire the embroidery, Ned
was watching the policemen out of the corners of his eyes,
and waiting for them to pass by.
He was, however, disagreeably startled to see the official-
ooking individual enter his hotel, and the two gurdiens
take their stand at the door.
At the same moment two Englishmen were coming out
of the hotel, laughing heartily at the enquiry they had
heard made, by the official before named, for “ Monsieur
Tome Smid, of London.”
The words acted like an electric shock upon their
auditor, who immediately made tracks for the bt. Lazare
Railway, as he thought the enquiry boded him not much
good.
He never thought of his traps in the hotel, and, as he
always carried his capital on his person, he was prepared
for a start from the post. This said capital he had in-
vested in his own bank, as he styled the leathern waist-
belt.
The Gare St. Lazare, the terminus of the Western
Railway line, was close at hand.
Entering an outfitter’s close by the station, where the
announcement, “ English spoken,” denoted that travellers
of that nation could hear their language murdered, on
condition of paying about forty per cent, more than a
Frenchman would have to pay, Ned bought a travelling
rug, a comforter, and a few other necessaries.
He then made bis way to the station.
In previous conversations with Anatole, the latter had
once explained why be had, when bolting from I aris,
chosen the Havre line. It was a less suspected route than
the direct one to England via Boulogne. Kelly subse-
quently studied this line, should his visit to the gay
capital be suddenly abridged. He had a first rate memory
—especially where if ”7as likely to be of importance to his
future movements.
He did not feel at all easy in his mind. The police
could ouly have wanted him upon one plea, and that plea
could only be advanced by Anatole ; and yet Anatole
dared say nothing, as he might be caught in the same net.
What the deuce they wanted with him, puzzled him
sorely. He little suspected that Scotland-yard was in
communication with the Paris police, and that his real
ana assumed names were well known within the last
twelve hours
The police had been hunting every hotel in succession
for Tom Smith, and had found several Indeed, the lists
of arrivals are always in the hands of the police shortly
after the appearance of the newcomers. The police found
plenty of Tom Smiths, and underwent many delays in
following up the track of such of our countrymen of that
name as bore no resemblance to the personal description
in their bands of the real culprit. Thus Kelly only
escaped by the skin of his teeth.
Amongst the visitors to the hotel at which he had been
staying, was a gentleman whose goings and comings Tvere
at one time a matter of considerable interest 'o the
British police.
This was Stephens, the eminent Fenian head-centre,
who might sometimes be seen consuming a modest cutiet
like any other ordinary mortal, in the little salle a manger
He ceemed to be in clover, was well dressed, and gene-
rally had two or three “patriots” in his wake. These
gentlemen were very outspoken, and the sanguinavy Siixou
was denounced with an affluence of adjectives more forcible
than elegant.
Kelly was sitting rather moodily and anxiously in their
vicinity, and happened to ask “ whin the staymer started ? ”
with a brogue that instantly recommended him to his
listeners.
The violent denunciations continued to pour from the
Fenians’ lips like lava, and nearly as hot, as from \ esuvius.
Warmed with the few goes of brandy he, like the rest,
had imbibed, he exclaimed
“ Why the divil don’t you give ’em an ounce of lead ? ”
It was an instantaneous letter of introduction —he was
warmly snakes oy the hand—all round.
The whole party retired to the head-centre’s room, more
glasses were drunk to the good cause, and, before five
o'clock in the morning, Kelly was in possession of the
Fenian “ pass ” for Irefend, and was duly sworn in.
But the scoundrel entered the confederacy for two
reasonsfirstly, he would be out of danger from detec-
tives ; and secondly, if big enough reward was offered
why, he’d think about it. He should like to make another
haul before he returned to the bush, which he felt was
his natural home.
But to return to Anatole,
After striking out from the boat, as before-mentioned,
he managed, half-drowned and wholly exhausted, to reach
the shore. Keeping Kelly well in sight, he watched his
catching the boat and pulling himself up out ol the water,
to take another survey of the surface in search of his
slipperv friend.
Under the shadow of the neighbouring trees, which
threw a dark shade over the spot he had reached, he kept
perfectly quiet, and at last had the satisfaction of seeing
Kelly drift; on behind the craft to land. He observed that
lie again entered the boat and pulled off.
Anatole congratulated himself upon his “narrow squeak,”
but made up his mind for a due revenge, even if he left
Europe and wrote an anonymous letter to the authorities,
o-iviuf particulars of Ned’s hand in the mail robbery, and
other items, that would be sure to lead to his appre-
hension. „ „ . , .
But he was not quite sure that Kelly might not con-
trive to have him arrested with part of the stolen bonds in
his possession, this thought made him pause. If he went
back to Paris Ned might find him out, and in his hate and
desire for vengeance smash, him wheie and whenever he
set eyes on him.
He knew the man’s savage and reckless character, and
trembled when he contemplated their meeting. Would it
not be well to go to the police and give information at
once against him ? He would be handed over, in pursuance
of the "Extradition Treaty, to the English authorities, and
this would not only remove a pressing danger, out give
him time to get rid of the bonds, and mature his plans for
the future. . . ,
Kelly and he could not exist in the s„.<re hemisphere.
However, his next move was to return to Pans ; but wu»


must be done cautiously, and he must reach his quarters
to Kelly.
He knew his whereabouts perfectly, and felt that before
ha could walk to Paris, his clothes would bo dry. But
then, the walk just at that moment was more than his
exhausted powers could accomplish.
He consequently entered a fifth rate cabaret, a lew drinking
shop, boldly said he bad swam across the river for a wager,
and offered the garg m two francs to enable him to dry his
clothes, and provide him with a chambre h coucher while
that operation was performing.
The wet vestments were soon baked dry on the stove,
and in an hour Anatoie started off for the Poissy railway,
en route to Paris.
As he reached it Kelly’s train was rolling in an opposite
direction slowly through the same station.
A number of passengers were waiting on the platform
for the up train to Paris.
Ned was looking out of the window.
He suddenly started to his feet with a very unpar-
liamentary exclamation.
Was it possible ? or was it his ghost? No, it could not
be. He would never show until hi* body rose, swollen
and distorted, to the surface.
Nevertheless, Anatoie it was.
He, at all events, little guessed b« had been recognised.
He imagined Kelly would think of him as food for the fishes.
Meanwhile Ned was speeding onwards to Havre, and
the police were patiently awaiting him at his hotel
When they got tired of this, they began to suspect he
had bolted, and made enquiries at the railway station.
They thought it most probable that he would have gone
by Calais and Boulogne, or, at any rate, Dieppe, and
hardly thought of Havre.
The arrival in Paris of Anatoie, who walked blindly into
their clutches, helped to draw off their attention.
Consequently Ned reached that port safely, and, to his
great satisfaction, primed by his recent “patriot” friends,
*ook the Southampton steamer.
On arriving there, he found he could go direct to Ireland
by sea, and a few hours later was on board the Shamrock,
commanded by that most genial of navigators, Captain
Murphy, bound for the city of Cork.
Kelly now felt tolerably secure, and smiled as he thought
hew the gendarmes were “ sold.”
They were, no doubt, still waiting at the hotel for the
return of M. Smid, and would, no doubt, be doing tlfcsr
duty there until they got sick of it
CHAPTER CLXXIX.
IN IRELAND—THE WARNING.
t, vatoh ot wild heath, dotted with furze and thora
bushes, and here and there a pool of black peat water.
All around stretched a bleak and desolate expanse of
bog and moorland, bounded by ranges of black hills.
The sun had set.
Daylight was fast fading from the sky, and earth and
heaven wore the same grey tint of desolation, whilst the
wind came sweeping fiercely down the hillsides, and
'whistling through the skeleton thorn bushes, fnli in tb<t>
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES
PICTURE BOARDS.
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail,
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
Passion.
(To be conlhtHed.y
Woman.
The Beautiful Demon
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
teeth of the small party of men making their way in the
direction of the hills.
They were four in number.
“ Sure, an’ it’s a mighty fine night for the little matt her
we have in hand,” said one of the foremost, as strapping
a young fellow as ever handled a bit of blackthorn, named
Micky Linahan,
“ Troth, an’ it is entirely, Mick,” replied one of his
comrades ; “the laste taste of live coal under the thatch
in a wind like this, and the blaze will be illigant.”
“ Under the thatch, Andy, ye gander ? Is it thatch now
that the colonel, bad cess to him, has covered his roof
with?” broke in a third, with conscious superiority of
knowledge.
“ Aisy now, aisy, Larry, avick,” was the answer;
“ slate or thatch it’ll be all one whin a light’s put to it.”
“Ah ! yondther was the blaze that must have warmed
the boys’ hearts to see,” said Mick, pointing to the
crumbling walls of a ruined dwelling on the spur of the
hill, towards which they were directing their course.
“ ’Deed, an’it was so,” acquiesced Larry O'Shane.
“When was that?” asked the fourth member of the
party, who had not yet spoken.
“ Ah, captain, it’s forgettin’ we are ye’re a stranger in
these parts. ’Twas the house of the colonel’s uncle, and
a black and bloody tyrant he was, like all his kin,” said
Andy Mulvany.
“And who burnt it?” enquired the man addressed as
captain, who was no other than Ned Kelly.
“ ’Twas the Whiteboys, in ’98,” was the reply. “ Many
a time I’ve heard my father tell how they broke down the
great door with sledges and axes, and how the wicked
colonel—for he was in the army, like his nephew—stood
and fought for his life at the head of the stairs. He stood
there all alone—for not one of his people would lift a
finger to help him—in his scarlet coat, with his swoord in
his hand, and his long white hair floating behind him.
Four of the boys he struck down, and it seemed as if
neither steel nor lead could reach him, till his own foster-
brother drove a pike into him, and then he fell, and tl ey
cut and hacked him till the blood ran from his black heart
down into the hall below. An’ then Ike boys
place, and it became what you see.”
OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life ot a Beautiful
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
it is Well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed. Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipole
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kells’ s
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated tala' k horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ' Ned
A.SD ms Nao in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July.
CHAPTER CLXXX.-Cfl«<in«^.
About twenty minutes more brisk walking brought
them to the scene of the tragedy just narrated.
Half a score of men were already assembled in the ruins.
Amongst them was a sullen looking fellow with fiery
red hair, who stood somewhat apart from the rest, leaning
his back against the crumbling wall, and scowling on the
new comers.
** What is it ails Martin Freeny now ?” inquired Lina-
han of one of the men, who had advanced to meet him.
“ Whist! it's just out of all consate with himself, ho is.
Sure, an’ he thought he was goin’ to play first fiddle in this
matther o’ the colonel’s, and now here’s Captain Kelly
sent by the Head Centher to put his purty nose out of
joint intirely, the red-headed nagur !”
“ The saints be praised 1 He’s been tryin’ to crow over
the whole bilin’ of us for a long time, and his heart’s every
bit as black as a kitchen chimley that hasn’t been swept
since the Battle o’ the Boyne.”
Kelly advanced into the centre of the ruins, and the
men, with the exception of Freeny, gathered round Mm.
“ Are the arms all ready ?” he asked.
“Yes, captain, jewel,” was the answer.
And in a few minutes a number of weapons, produced
from a hiding-place in the wall, were distributed amongst
the party.
“ And now, who amongst you knows the way to the
colonel’s hut?” inquired the bushranger.
A loud and sneering laugh broke from Freeny at this
remark.
“ What are you sniggering at?” asked Ned, fiercely, for
he guessed that he had, in some way, provoked the other’s
mirth.
“ Och, sure now, and mayn’t a man laugh when he
likes?” was the sneering reply, at which several of the
other men grinned.
“ None of your chaff to me, you Murphy-faced moke,
or I’ll welt that ugly mug of yours until it’s as flat as a
new shilling,” said Kelly, with a ferocity of tone and
manner that clearly showed very little would make him
put his threat into execution.
Mr. Freeny looked at the powerful frame of the spokes-
man, and felt it would be more prudent to sing small.
“ Come,” said Ned, “ if the job’s to be done, let’s do
it.”
“ Maybe ye know the way, and don’t want my ‘ chaff
to show you. I suppose, if you’re the captain, you’ll
lade the way?” sneered Freeny.
“Shut up you pot-faced, moth-eaten looking sneak!”
“ Howki your whist, Freeny, sure it’s the captain you’re
bothering entirely ”
“ Och, thin, it’s a pity they didn’t send someone that
knew more about the work he’s got in hand. It’s a quaie
thing, now, that the captain shouldn’t know his way to
the scene of action, when there’s not another boy amongst
us who could not find his road there blindfolded.”
Ere his words had died away, he was lying sprawling on
Ms back from the effect of a heavy “ planter ” from
Kelly on his jaw.
“ Pick him up, or' kick him up, some of you,” said Ned \
“ and lot me tell you I’m not going to stand any of that
sort of game. How long will it take us to get to the
colonel’s ?”
“ A good half-hour,” replied one of the men.
“ Very well,” said Ned, consulting his watch ; “ a friend,
you know, has promised to meet us there half au hour after
midnight. It’s only half-past ten, so we’ve got nearly an
hour and a half to wait. We may as well settle down and
have a drop of whisky.”
Accordingly the men made themselves comfortable.
“It’s an illigaat fist the captain has,” observed O’Shane
to Mulvany.
“ Indeed, an’ it is, and the saints presarve my face from
being better acquainted with it,” was the reply.
Colonel Towusheud, to whom Ned and his friends pur-
posed to pay an uninvited visit that night, was a wealthy
landed proprietor of the district.
He was a man of about fifty, slightly severe in manner, but
frank, open, and entirely unprejudiced, save as regarded
his dealing with his tenants.
The terrible fate of his uncle had had an effect upon
him, which nothing could remove.
He had grown to regard his Irish tenants as a set of
bloodthirsty and vindictive savages, whom it was no earthly
use in striving to conciliate.
For eleven months or so out of the year he was an ab-
sentee, and during this period they were delivered over to
the tender mercies of his agent, a rasping, blue-nosed
Presbyterian from the “Black North,” named M‘Guiro.
The tender mercies of the wicked are, we .know, cruel,
but it is to be doubted, after all, if they are not prefer-
able to the tender mercies of one of the “unco’ guid,” and
such wasM‘Guire, who, as one of the “ elect,” seemed tc
hold it his bounden duty to make earth as much like a hell
as possible for all he was brought into contact with.
His argument was, thit as nine thousand nine hundred
and ninety men out of ten thousand are doomed by pre-
destination to perdition, such a course of action is a posi
tive kindness to them, as it prepares them for their futur®
state, and, as it were, serves to let them down by degrees.
Between him and the colonel, who put perfect trust in
him, the tenants had rather a hard time of it, and compared
their situation to that of the man between the devil and
the deep sea.
At first they had tried shooting M‘Guire, but three suc-
cessive attempts had only resulted in putting a bullet
through his hat, blowing off one of his sandy side-whiskers,
and killing his horse.
And, as the three men who had made the successive
attempts had all been caught, they began to think that,
after all, the providence he was so fond of canting
about must really watch over him, or that he had sold
himself to the devil for a charm to render his carcase
bullet-proof.
In the secret council presided over by “ Rory of the
Hills,” or “ Captain Moonlight,” or “Molly Maguire,” or
whoever else presided over the Agrarian Inquisition, the
colonel had been tried, and sentenced as a bad landlord;
and “justice to Ireland” was to be propitiaied by 1m
death. Lots had been drawn, and the party now on th#


wav to his house, were the assassins chosen, and bound,
under pain of assassination themselves, to carry out the
murderous decree.
The colonel, however, only came to his Irish estate to
shoot for a month or so every year.
He had always refused to rebuild the manor house which
had been burnt on the night of his uncle’s murder, and
contented himself with a small stone building, which he
had furnished as a shooting-box, and which stood at some
little distance from the ruins of the former dwelling.
He was sitting in the parlour in company with his
nephew and son-in-law, about an hour after Ned’s arrival
at the ruins, and just thinking of going to bed, when his
nephew's valet entered the room, and announced that a
man wanted to see him on very important business.
“ What is it, Simmons ? ” he asked.
“He wont say, sir,” was the reply; “except that he
must see you at onct.”
“Go and ask him what he wants. It is just like these
Irish fellows to come pestering one at this time of night,
with some cock-aud- bull story of a grievance against
M'Guire,” he continued.
After a few minutes’ absence the valet returned.
“ He won’t say what he wants, sir; all I can get from
him is that he must see you yourself, sir, and that it's a
matter of life and death.”
“ Perhaps you’d better see him,” suggested the colonel s
son-in-law, Mr. Blamire; “it may be something to do
with the Fenian business we hear so much of.”
“ Hum -yes ; well, show him in, Simmons.”
“He won’t come inside the house, sir; he’s standing
outside the door, and says he’ll speak to you if you 11 come
down to him.”
“Confound his impudence’, let him go to the deyu,
then!” cried the exasperated colonel; “does he thmk
I’m at his beck and call ? ”
“ I’ll go and see what he wants,” said Harold Townsheud,
the colonel’s nephew.
The colonel gave a gruff assent, and the young man
went to the front door, his uncle calling after him as ne
went along the passage—
“ Look out you don’t get shot, Harold ! ”
Harold started when he saw the strange guest who was
standing about four paces from the door.
His hat was pulled down over his brows, and a handker-
chief tied about the lower part of his face, so as to entirely
hide his features.
“ What is it you want ? ” asked Harold, keeping a wary
eye cn the fello.v, lest he should draw a weapon.
“Are ye the colonel?” was the reply, in a voice evi-
dent]' feigned. . .
“i .ii his nephew; but I represent him. vv hat is your
errand ? ” .
“ My errand is, to warn you and yours that in about
half an hour’s time those will be here who *ull serve him
and all who are of his kin, as his uncle was served.”
“Thanks for the warning,” replied the young man, who
half suspected some hoax; ‘ but we have strong bolts and
bars, and plenty of powder, and your friends may reckon
on a warm reception.”
“ Look well to both, for there’s bitther treachery
amongst ye,” was the reply, and, as he spoke, the stranger
turned to go.
u Treachery, how
“ That ye must find out for yourself. You’ve had the
teaming, so you can t complain.”
“ But, who are you ? Why do you warn us ? _
“ No friend of yours, but au enemy of your enemies,
and, turning abruptly, the stranger strode off without
further parley, and was soon lost sight of in the daikness.
On Harold returning to his uncle, and communicating
this intelligence to him, the colonel was at first inclined to
treat the matter as a joke, a mere attempt to scare him.
“The fellows could not, however, have chosen a better
night,” observed Mr. Blamire, “ since most of the servants
o ’ i n
we away at the fair.
“ Yes.”
You are right; there maybe something in th«t,” re-
plied Harold.
In fact, all the servants employed about the place in-
doors—namely, the butler who acted as the general’s valet,
the cook and two girls, together with Mr. Blamire’s man
and the grooms, had started off at nightfall, by permission,
to a fair and a dance held in the neighbourhood
Simmons and a scullion were the only attendants left in
the house.
“If you’ll just give an eye to the fastenings, Harold,’
said Blamire, “ I will have a look at the fire-arms.”
The house was of stone, and very solidly built.
The lower windows, in addition to thick shutters, were
protected by iron bars of immense strength, and the upper
ones were also grated.
The front door, which was plated inside with sheet iron,
was almost as strong as that of a jail.
That in the rear of the house, however, though of massy
construction, was not quite so impenetrable.
After making an inspection of the upper story, Harold
descended to the lower part of the dwelling.
The windows were all secured, as was the front door.
To his astonishment, however, he found that, although
the back door was locked, the bolts were not shot, neither
was the key in the lock.
He asked the scullery maid the meaning of this.
“Sure,” said the girl, who was almost half-witted, “Mr.
Rooney tuck it wid him to the dance to let himself in wid
the rest of ’em when they came back.”
The answer was satisfactory enough, but after sending
the girl to bed at the top of the house, and locking her in
her room, Harold took care to shoot the bolts of the back
door.
“When Rooney and the rest come back they must
knock,” he observed. “ I wish he had not gone,
though.”
Rooney the butler was an old servant, greatly trusted
and esteemed by the colonel.
When Harold returned from his tour of inspection to
the sitting-room, he found his uncle and Blamire looking
far more serious than when he had left them.
“Have you any cartridges in your room, Harold?
asked the latter, somewhat anxiously.
“ Will you go and get them?”
“ Are there not plenty in the gun-room with the guns?”
said Harold, rather astonished.
“ Go and see about yours, there’s a good fellow.”
Harold was absent some time on this errand, and they
heard him call Simmons.
At length he returned to the sitting-room.
“ I can’t make it out,” he said. “1 had a lot of cart-
ridges in my drawers, both for my gun and revolver, and
I can’t find one of them. Simmons declares he saw then?
in the drawer only this morning.”
The colonel and Blamire exchanged glances.
“ This is a nastier affair than I thought for, Harold,”
said the former, gravely.
“What is the matter?”
“ We have no ammunition in the house!”
“ What ?”
‘ ‘ Every cartridge in the gun-room and in Blamire’s room,
has disappeared!”
“ But there is a lot of powder. Can’t we make up some
at once?”
' “ There’s not an ounce of it fit for use. Some treacher-
ous devil has wetted the lot.”
Harold stood quite appalled at this statement.
“The fellow was risht about treachery; but who the
devil can it be ? Simmons is an Englishman and tnere is
no one else in the house, excepted that half-witted girl.
Aileen.
“ It must be one of the others.”
“ But who ? Blamire’s man is English, and Rooney I
would trust with my life ten times over. He is one of
those old family retainers who continue the tradition of


Caleb Balderstoue and who look upon the head of the
house as a kind of deity.”
“ Yes,” assented the colonel, “he is a regular servant of
the old school.”
“It must be o~e of the womenfolk,” said Blaraire,
“ who has been talked over by a Fenian sweetheart.”
“ But is there not a bit of ammunition fit for use in the
place?” cried Harold.
“Not a charge,” replied his uncle, gravely ; “ even the
guns in the gun-room have all been unloaded.”
“ Good heavens! ” gasped Blamire, “ are we to be
butchered here like rats in a trap ? Can’t we get away ?”
“ Impossible ! They would track us, and shoot us down
like rabbits.”
“ There is only one thing,” said the colonel, “to die as
my uncle died -firm to the last amongst these treacherous
devils. We must trust to cold steel, not to save, but to
avenge us ere we fall, on some of the scoundrels at
least.”
At that moment Simmons entered the room.
“I fancied, as I was putting away your things, sir,” he
said, with the bland manner of a well-trained domestic,
and as though quite oblivions of the peril in which they
one and all stood, “ that I felt some loose cartridges in the
pocket of your grey jacket.”
As be spoke, he placed half a dozen oblong rolls on the
table.
“ Bravo !” exclaimed the colonel, with a flash of youth-
ful energy; “ six shots are six men’s lives. There’s a
chance of beating them off, after all. Out with the lights,
and let us hold ourselves in readiness. Hark! I think I
hear the tramp of footsteps ! ”
CHAPTER CLXXXI.
THE NIGHT ATTACK —THE TRAITOR’S FATE.
Shortly before midnight Ned gave the signal to his fol-
lowers to assemble.
“ It’s about time to start,” he remarked; “but before
we are moving, I may as well see if we are all to tne fore.
Helloa ! where’s Martin Freeny?” repeated Ned. “Have
any of you seen Martin Freeny ? ”
The men glanced at one another,
“ Faith ! the last time I set eyes on him,” said Linahan,
* he was sitting just beyant the bit o’ wall there, with his
jaw in his hand, cursing to himself, and looking just as
black as a crow on a coffin.”
“ Martin Freeny ! ” shouted Ned again.
“Well, here I am,” said that individual, stepping from
behind a wall into the centre of the group.
“ Why didn't you answer? ”
“ Answer! it’s no aisy matter to answer at all, whin me
jaw works as stiffly as a gun-spring that’s been lying buried
in a bog for a twelvemon h. Butl had just stepped down
to the little brook beyond to dip my handaercher in
water, and tie round it to ease the swellin’ that’s mur-
derin’ me intirelv.”
Freeny’s handkerchief was, in fact, tied round the lower
part of his face, so as to conceal it.
“ Well, are we all ready now? ” asked Ned.
“ Yes —all.”
“ It’s too easy work for me,” said Ned; “ it’s like
knocking down a bullock tied up in a stockyard. Well,
no matter; it will soon be over, as the arms have been
made snug. Push along, and finish it! ”
Bent on their murderous errand, the little troop swiftly
and silently made their way onwards along the hillside, to
the home of Colonel Townshend.
Tl iey approached it from the rear, moving across the
ground as noiselessly as ghosts.
A short distance from the house a figure rose suddenly
from the earth, and advanced to meet them.
‘ Is that you, Darby? ” said Mulvany, who was acting
as guide to the pany.
“Yes, Andy; is the captain wid you?” was the
reply.
“ Here I am,” said Ned; “is it all right ? ”
“ I think we’d better wait a little bit, captain ; sure they
have not long gone to bed. I have been watchin’ and
waitin’ here the last half-hour. I could not get away from
the dance before, and the lights have only just been put
out in the house.”
“ Did you notice anything at all? ”
“ Well, when I first got here, the lights seemed to bo
moving about upstairs and downstairs as if they were a
bit uneasy. We’d better give ’em time to get fast asleep.”
After waiting the time indicated, the party resumed
thoir advance towards the house, which was all dark and
silent.
Like shadows they glided softly up to the back door.
“You’ve got the key?” whispered Ned, to the .nan
who had met them.
“ Yes,” answered Darby, “ and the lock is greased like
Micky Oulaghan’s head on Sunday.”
As he spoke he inserted the key in the lock.
The well-oiled wards obeyed its pressure, and yielded
without resistance, and the bolt of the lock shot back with
only the faintest possible click.
Darby pushed the door gently.
It was Immovable.
He pushed harder, with the same result.
“Oh! murther!” he muttered, in amazement.
“ What is it?” whispered Ned.
“ Sure, some murtherin’ fool—it must be that pryin
idiot of a Simmons—has been and shot the doorbolts.”
Kelly looked simply disgusted.
“ What’s to be done?” asked Linahan.
“ Let us burst the door in,” suggested O’Shane.
“ And rouse ’em up, that they may be pepperin’ at us
all the time out of the window,” protested Mulvany.
“No fear of that at all,” chuckled Darby ; “ the devil
an ounce of powther have they to pepper with. I took
care of that.”
“ Sure and you’re a born giniral, Darby,” was the reply
whispered at this encouraging announcement
“ There’s a quieter wav than that,” said Ned, and as h«
spoke he produced an implement from his pocket. “ Look
here, here is a centre-bit that will go through oak as a
knife goes through a pat of butter.”
And he held up one of the finest implements of the
kind that the virtuous town of Birmingham ever supplied
a burglar with.
“ Is the door lined with iron?” he asked Darby.
“ No, glory be to God !”
“ Where are the bolts ?”
“ One at the top and the other at the bottom.”
“ Then I’ll cut two holes, and you can slip your hand
through and draw them back.”
Ned set to work to cut the lower hole, whilst the others
stood round in silent admiration at the device which
was new to them.
The instrument made very little noise while biting its
way into the wood.
It was a considerable time before the hole near the
bottom, whic was the first selected, was completed.
Those inside, in perfect darkness, divined what was
going on, and were fully prepared to frustrate it. They
at first feared fire, but that was not an easy weapon to
employ upon stone walls and oak doors The working of
the drill was perfectly audible. The sound could not be
mistaken. The colonel’s nephew quickly withdrew and
returned with a lantern covered with a cloth to conceal
the light He had also a slip-knot rope. With terrible
anxiety they lis eued to the progress that was made and
the suppressed whisperings outside.
At last it was done.
“Put your hand through and pull the bolt,” said Ned
to Darby, “ you know be-t where to feel for it.”
He put his hand carefully through the hole, and began
to grope for the bolt.
The light from the lantern was turned close on the
opening. And there was a hand wobbling about in search
of the bolt. While thus engaged, the slip-knot, which


was greased to make it run easily, was quietly and quickly
thrown over and pulled tightly with a sudden jerk, round
the intruding wrist. A loud cry of pain and alarm fol-
lowed, with frantic efforts to pull the hand away from the
hole. So furious and reckless were those attempts that
the flesh was a'most cut to the bone. Tight hold was
maintained by the rope-holder, who even pressed his foot
upon the knot to keep it from slacking in the least.
“ Holy Vargin J” he gasped, in low, horror-stricken tones*
“ what’s this now ?”
“ What is it?” said Ned.
“My hand’s caught,” replied Darby, forcing the words
with an effort through his white and quivering lips.
“ Well, pull it out, you omadhaun.”
“ But I can’t, they’ve got it in a slip-knot. Och, I’m
murdhered intirely, that’s what I am. Och, masther,
jewel, colonel, agrah! Sure it’s Darby Rooney that’s
being forced into this by the blackguards, yur honer.
Sure you’ll let me go an’ loose the rope. Don’t I know
the family since you were a gossoon, and it’s not Darby
that would harm one of them.”
“ You infernal scoundrel,” echoed the voice of the
enraged colonel, “ I wouldn’t remove it if it was round
your neck, and I’ll take good care you shall feel it there
yet.”
“Arrah, don’t be hard on a poor boy, colonel. Sure
they pushed my hand through the hole, bad luck to them.
Oh, wirrasthrue 1 wirra&thrue, and the masther, too, I’d die
for,” whimpered and whined the frightened villain.
“ Let him go, colonel,” cried a strange but steady voice
outside, “and we will leave you at once. You’ve fairly
won the game, and I’m if I don’t like one who’s
real grit.”
“ You vagabond,” was the answer, “ we’ve got a witness
against you and your gang, and intend to keep him dead
or alive.”
“ He can’t be much of a witness, I’m thinking,” replied
one of the gansr, “if we stop here much longer,”
There was a significant threat in this remark that made
Darby’s knees knock together.
“ Tell him you’ll burn the stables and farm-buildings, if
he won’t act like a Christian, and let me go,” whispered
Darby in agonised tones to Ned.
Ned cried out, “ He’s not worth the cost of the outbuild-
ings, colonel. I’ll fire then, if he’s not free in five
minutes.”
“ Fire and be ,” shouted the colonel, “ the blaze
will be a beacon to the police; I wish to heavens you
would. I’d sacrifice every brick in the place to see you
devils with the handcuffs on.”
“ Arrah, don’t be so like a haythen, masther, dear,”
groaned Darby. “ Let me go for the love o’ God, and I pray
for you every night an’ mornin’.”
“Come, come,” said Kell', impatiently, “we’ve had
enough of this. One way or the other, we must finish this
little job.”
“Oh, thin,” cried another, “I’m afeered Darby’s
prayers are like the judge’s, when he puts on the black
cap—they won’t do any poor boy much good.”
The Irish would enjoy a joke in the jaws of death.
At this moment a shot rang out from an upper window
and one of the Fenians dropped with a low groan.
Ned and his followers opened a scattering and random
fire in reply, but without the least effect, while Rooney
shivered and shook, and moaned as he cowered down
by the back door, his hand as fast as if in Milo’s oak.
Another shot from the house hit its mark, the victim
this time being Freeny, who thus paid dearly for the
warning he had given ILc'old.
Freeny would not have been present, but he feared the
penalty of absence.
Doubly unnerved by this reception, after the assurance
they had had that there was no powder whatever in the
house, the panic-stricken assailants broke, and the
majority retreated, carrying their wounded, and sought
shelter behind some outbuildings from further shots.
Ned, however, remained close to the door, where, owing
to the projection of the porch, it was impossible for a shot
to reach him from the windows.
He had caught hold of the arms of Linahan and
Mulvany, and obliged them to remain with him.
“ Look here,” he said, hurriedly, “ there’s no chance of
this job being done to-night; but there’s one thing we
must do—we must take care of our necks, and to do so
we can't leave a witness behind us, and especially this one,
who’d sell us like pigs to the butcher.” ,
“What d’ye mane?” said Mulvany, with a frightened,
awe-struck air. “is it murdher you’d be afther doing
upon a poor innocent boy ? Howly mother ! have yis no
conscience ?”
“ I’ve a neck which is a blooming sight to me more than
anybody’s conscience, and, if you don’t care for your
carcase swinging in the morning air, 1 do, that’s all.”
Mulvany seemed struck with the force of Ned s logic.
He scratched his head in his perplexity, and quietly said
to Rooney—
“ Darby, jewel, ac yis can’t have a priest, maybe ye
reme aber a bit of a prayer that’s handy to ye.”
Oh ! praying to the colonel, is it? You might as well
pray to the rock o’ Cashel, an’ you'd move it just as
soon.”
“ Haven't you ne’er a patrynoster convanient ?”
“What for?”
“ Because, you see, Darby avick, your present position
is neither convanient for you nor for us, and we’ll relave
you of it as soon as you’re ready and willin’,” said Mui-
vany, in tones intended to be soothing and tender.
“ Then be quick about it, Jimmy Mulvany, for the hand
is nearly cut off me, and I’m dying with pain. Oh! don’t
leave me here behind.”
“ ’Deed an’ we won’t, Darby, no fear. We won t leav\
you behind—alive.”
“ Mother o’ Mercy ! what d’ye mane?” was the fright-
ened reply r gasped out with difficulty.
“In the name of ail the saints in the calendar, Darby,
try the laste taste of a bit of a prayer.”
“ Let me out, ye brute bastes! ” roared Rooney, now
guessing the dreadful intention of his associates. “If you
don’t take me wid ye I shout out all your names, this
blessed minute, to the colonel! ” roared the frightened
wretch.
Ned and the others now clearly saw there was no time
to be lost.
He looked at Mulvany and nodded.
“ What’s that ye’re saying?” said Darby, whose ears,
sharpened by terror, had caught some of their words.
“ Whist! whist! never mind!” said Mulvany, and he
added to Kelly, “ Must it be done ?”
“ Of course ; there’s no other way.”
“ I suppose not; poor craythur.”
“ What are you whispering about ?” said Darby ; “ why
don’t you cut another hole in the door and sec me free ?”
“ Faix, Darby darlin’, I’m afeard that same’s impossible,’
said Linahan, gravely.
“But you’re not going to leave me here?” said the
prisoner, “ to be caught by the murtherin’ colonel ?”
“ Oh ! have no fear, you'll not be caught alive.”
Darby made a desperate effort to free himself, but had
to leave off, moaning with pain.
“ The rope has cut to the bone,” he groane i.
“ Are ye sure ye can’t get loose at all?” said Linahan,
“ make another try for it.”
“Darby, ye know the oath you swore when you joined
us, that you'd give yourself up body and sowl to the
cause ?”
“ Yes, but not be caught like a hare tn a trap.”
“Well, you are caught, and it won’t do for your own
sowl’s sake, let alone for our necks, to risk breaking that
oath. You might be tempted to do it if the colonel
talked to you to-morrow; and where wad your sowl go to
then ?”
“ The devil a word they’d over get out of me, if j-ou 11


just be off and let the colonel take me inside. Say the
word, Mulvany, or I’ll give your names out now.”
“Settled the job?” growled Kelly. “Do you think
I’m going to trust my neck to that hound ?”
“ Captain, jewel,” almost screamed the unfortunate
villain, making a last effort for his life, his eyes starting
from their sockets, his hair on end, and perspiration burst-
ing from every pore, “ for the sake of the mother that
bore ye, spare me, and I’ll kiss the Book and swear that
the devil a word they’ll ever get from the lips of Darby
Rooney, but a blessing upon you, captain, dear.”
“ You’d better make your pace up there,” said Mul-
vany, with that strange perversion of thought which be-
longs alike to the Irish and Italian lower classes. An
Italian brigand robs and murders with an image of the
Virgin in his hat, and often a crucifix on his breast
“ It’s no use,” said Kelly. “Go to work, or I will.’’
Seeing the hopelessness of the situation, and thinking
as a last chance to scare the marauders from the scene,
Darby roared out the names of the gang.
His cries rang through the silent night.
“ Help, help! Save me, colonel, darlint! They’re
goin’ to murdhcr me out o’ the world entirely ! For pity’s
sake, for mercy’s sake !—Andy,avick ! Micky, jewel! Spare
me —spare me! Bad luck to the word I’ll even breathe!
Oh. you won’t, ye murdhering villyans!”
And he repeated the names of the gang for the in-
formation of the besieged,
lie sealed his fate at once.
Still his screams rang out with fearful distinctness in
the night, scaring the night-birds on the hill, and causing
the blood of the little garrison inside the house to run cold
in their veins with horror.
To sally forth, however, in order to attempt to rescue
the poor wretch from his fate would have only been fatal
to themselves, as they would have had an overwhelming
torce, with only four shots left amongst them.
One shrill cry, more wild and despairing than the rest,
pealed forth and pierced their ears.
There was a loud report from a pistol, which was fired
■by the bushranger, then the sound of retreating foot-
steps.
A faint, dripping sound, like the plash of falling water
on the stone door-sill without, followed.
After being fully satisfied of the retreat of the gang,
the door was opened, and lying stone dead, weltering in
his blood, with his brains scattered over the doorsteps, and
trickling down them, lay the corpse of the trusted butler,
Darby Rooney.
CHAPTER CLXXXIL
THE MIDNIGHT STRUGGLE.
IT was past midnight, and most of the streets of the little
town of Clanturk was wrapped in silence and darkness.
The sky was starless and threatening, the air heavy and
oppressive as if laden with a coming storm.
The majority of the inhabitants had long since retired to
rest, and were probably dreaming of some happy future
-when potatoes should grow spontaneously and rent be a
thing unknowm.
A light, however, streamed through the open door of a
little public house, situate near the outskirts of the town,
and fell upon a small group of people gathered in the
roadway around the prostrate figure of a man.
“ It’s his change he has, sure,” observed one of the by-
standers, scrutinising the fallen man, w r ho was apparently
insensible, with an enquiring look.
“ Faix, an’ he has that same,” said a second. “ It’syer-
self that has basted him finely, Rory,” he continued,
addressing a powerful young fellow, who was putting to
rights such of his clothes as had been disarranged in the
struggle that had evidently just taken place between
himself and the overthrown champion.
“ If he hasn’t enough, I can just stretch a point and
oblige him with a little taste more,” answered Rory,
.grimly.
A young girl who was standing beside him, said in a
somewhat compassionate tone—
‘■Sure, ye’re not goin’ to let the poor crathnre lie mere
now, are ye ?”
“Oh ! make yerself aisy,” replied Rory : “• divi) a bit o’
harm will he come to, by slapin' our o‘ door? in this hot
weather. It’s mighty fine for ye to be consarnin’ yerself
with his comfort, when it’s thanks to yer airs that he’s got
the dressin' he has.”
' But. Rory, darlin,’ sure
“ Sure, an 1 if I hadn’t had my eyes on ye all the time.
It it hadn’t been for yer deluderin’ ways, 1 misdoubt me
if this had ever happened this night. But come away
home at wunst, Ally, I’m not goiu' to sthand coolin’ my
heels here till some murtherin’ peeler lays me by them.
Good night to all of ye.”
Sc saying, he took the girl by the arm and hastened off,
whilst the others raising the fallen man carried him in-
doors and strove to restore him to his senses.
Rory and Ally O’Hara were brother and sister, and
occupied a small holding some distance from the town.
The injured man, Terence Reardon, was a neighbour
of theirs iu a somewhat better position.
For some time past an ill feeling had been growing up
between the two men, originating out of an act of
trespass committed by Reardon’s cattle, and since fostered
by various trifles.
On the present occasion they had met at a quiet bit of
merrymaking given by the landlord of the public, and had
remained with a few other guests somewhat late.
Terence had taken upon himself to pay a little attention
tc Ally, which the girl, from sheer coquetry, had rather
encouraged than otherwise, and the result had been a
furious quarrel between the two men, and a struggle in
which he had got the worst of it.
Hardly had Rory and Ally moved away than Reardon
recovered himself and opened his eyes.
“ The black-hearted thraitor, where is he ?” was his
first remark, as he glanced around him fiercely.
“Aisy, Terry, aisy now,” exclaimed old Peter Driscoll,
the landlord ; “ sure an’ he’s gone long since.”
“ Gone, gone, the coward, after strikin’ me down
before I had time to be on my guard. Give me a sup of
whisky, Peter, and I’ll be after him, the mane thafe, in a
twinkliu.’
“ It’s mad ye must be, Terry, to think o’ runnin’ after
him with a rap on the head like that he gave ye, and a
storm cornin’ on every minute.”
As he spoke, a bright flash of lightning leaped from the
sky, and was followed by a peal of thunder.
“ Devil a bit will a storm stay me. Quick, a taste o’
the crather now,” and, hastily draining the glass offered
him, Reardon darted out ot the house, and was soon lost
iu the darkness that enwrapped everything.
Meanwhile Rory and Ally had proceeded some distance
on their way home.
They had left the town and had advanced some distance
along the road leading towards their dwelling.
They were approaching a bridge crossing a broad, deep,
and rapid stream.
Suddenly Rory halted and listened.
“ Who can it be runnin’ along after us ?” he said, and
turning round he peered into the darkness.
At that moment the storm that had been threatening
suddenly burst upon them, and the rain began to come
down in torrents.
“Come along, Rory, come along now,” cried Ally,
“it’s drenched to the skin we’ll be, an’ ye sthandin’ there
like a fool in the middle o’ the road.”
“ Hold yer tongue now,” cried Rory, as a sudden flash
of lightning revealed a figure rapidly approaching in the
direction from which they had come.
Rory advanced a few steps towards it, and, when sem®
ten paces separated them, cried out:
“ Who are ye, and what is it ye want ?”
“ I want to end the little matther ye began at Pethcr


Driscoll's, ye villain,'’ was the answer, in a voice hoarse
from rage and exertion.
Terry!” cried Kory Ally, simultaneously, and the
former added in a threatening tone—
“So it’s a bit more ye want, do ye? So much the
worse for ye, my jewil.”
As he spoke he gave his stick a scientific twirl.
“Ye’re a black-hearted coward, Rory O’Hara,” said
Reardon, slowly, as he paused to recover himself before
advancing to attack his foe, “ and sthruck me down un-
fair. It’s payin’ ye out I mane this time.”
“ If ye come within reach o’ my stick, I’ll settle ye
entirely, and now ye’re warned,” replied Rory.
“ We’ll see that same. I give ye lave to break iverv
bone in me skin if ye can, for I’m not goin’ to spare
yours.”
' Come on, and don’t sthand pratin’ thin.”
The two men rushed upon each other.
The rain was coining down in a perfect deluge, and
save for the flashes of lightning, which lit up the scene at
rare intervals, the darkness was Egyptian.
From out this darkness came the sounds of the bitter
struggle, the sharp clatter of the blackthorns as they met
one another in a parry, the duller sound of wood alighting
on flesh and bone that marked when a blow bad gone
home, and an occasional exclamation of pain, or rage, or
triumph from one of the combatants.
Both men were expert stick players, but the darkness
rendered their skill of little use, and it was by chance
that each got home from time to time.
Ally, standing at a little distance, in vain strove to
make out which of the two was getting the best of it in
this strange encounter.
“ Holy mother, look down on us,” she murmured.
All at once the sticks met in full swing with such
violence that Rory’s was sent flying from his hand some
yards away into the darkness.
Before Reardon, however, could profit by this to deal
a finishing blow, his foe sprang upon him and clutched
him fiercely by the throat.
He gripped it with all the energy of desperation.
In a few seconds Reardon was half choked, but, by a
violent effort, he shook off his adversary, as a bull shakos
off a dog, and drew back a step or two to recover the
breath that had been squeezed ont of him by the other's
fingers.
O’Hara had almost lost his footing from the jerk with
which his opponent had freed himself from his clutch, but,
recovering himself, glanced round in search of his stick
or some similar weapon, but in vain.
Ally suddenly seized him by the arm.
“Run for it, Rory, darlint!” she exclaimed, pulling
him towards the bridge. “ It’s attlier murtberin’ ye he is,
the gaudther-faced desaver! Run for it !•”
O’Hara followed her advice.
“Come on, ye dirty spalpeen,” shouted Reardon, who,
in the darkness, did not at first notice the other s retreat,
covered as it was by the roar of the tempest.
Rory and Ally had gained the beginning of the bridge,
a long and narrow wooden structure, protected only by
a handrail.
“ Come on.” cried Ally ; “ he is close behind,”
“Ah! ye’re runnin’, are ye, ye coward?” cried Terry,
who now perceived their flight. “Just wait till I come
dp with ye ; that’s all.”
And, bounding after the fugitives, he overtook them
on the centre of the bridge.
Pushing Ally behind hirm OTiara awaited his attack,
since it was impossible for him to avoid it.
Dashing furiously onward in the darkness, with upraised
hand, Terry rather overshot the mark.
Before he could well recover himself, Rory had seized
him sharply by the arm, and had torn his stick from his
grasp by a sudden wrench.
Ere he could himself make use of it, however, he was
gripped in turn by Reardcn, and another struggle ensued.
Each man strove his very utmost to gain possession of
the weighty blackthorn.
The rain continued to pour down, and it was wivh
difficulty that they could keep their footing on the wet
planks of the bridge.
“ I’ll smash ye to smithereens before Eve done with ye,
ye black-avized murtherer!” cried Terry.
“ Plaze God, I’ll fit ye for yer coffin first.” was the
defiant reply of O’Hara.
Reardon made a tremendous jerk at the stick, and tore
it from his adversary’s grasp, the shock at the same time
causing Rory to fall forward on his knees.
Clutching O’Hara by the collar and holding him in that
position with one hand, and raising the weapon with the
other, Terry cried, in triumphant tones—
" By the powers 1 it’s a pity the night’s so black, for it’s
the colour of yer blood I’m goin’ to find out now.”
For a moment Rory thought himself lost.
All at once an idea struck him, and he threw his arms
round 'ferry’s knees with a vigorous jerk.
Taken by surprise, Reardon lost his balance, released
Rory's collar, and fell heavily backwards across the parapet
of the bridge, which he seized with one hand, and strove
to raise himself
O’Hara felt that his life depended upon the events of
the next moment.
Assembling all his strength in one mighty effort, he
succeeded in hoisting his opponent clean over the parapet
of the bridge
J ‘ Mother of Heaven, have mercy ! ” gasped Reardon, as
be swung above the roaring torrent of the river, clutching
the parapet with his hands, from which the stick had
fallen into the water.
The parapet consisted of a top rail about waist high,
supported by a row of uprights some six feet apart,
between each of which two other beams were placed
diagonally, so as to cross each other in the form of i
letter X.
It was one of these crosses that Reardon had nanaged
to lay hold of.
His hands could hardly retain their hold on the wet and
slippery wood, and he strove in vain to dig his aaiis into
it as the wind seized his body and swung him, like the
corpse of a hanged man, over the dreadful gulf below
He was strong, however, and the danger in which he
found himself gave him additional strengtn.
After a terrible effort, he succeeded in clasping both his
hands round one of the diagonal beams, and in joining
them in a firm grasp.
Grasping the beam like a vice be strove to hoist himself
up again.
O’Hara, exhausted by the struggle. leant for a minute
or two in a breathless state against the parapet over which
he had cast his adversary.
The reaction was so great that for a short time he almost
lost consciousness.
Suddenly Ally's voice falling on his ear aroused him
from his serai-stupor.
“The saints in heaven be praised I Y e ’re safe, Rory.
Come home at once, dariiu 1 ! For mercy’s sake, come
home 1”
CHAPTER CLX X X 111.
A MOST WELCOME VISITOR.
In the darkness of the night neither Rory nor his sister
saw that Reardon was still clinging desperately to the
parapet of the bridge just below them.
Amidst the wild tumult reared by the wind and nun
they thought that he had faj leu headlong into the stream
Rory uttered a sigh, half of relief and half of horror, and
was about to move away.
All at once he staggered.
Reardon had been able to make out that his foe had not
changed his position.
Summoning all his energies, and nerved to exertion by
a wild hope of revenge, he hung for a moment by one hand.


and, thrusting the other through the interstices of the
parapet, gripped Rory by the leg, round which he suc-
ceeded in throwing his arm.
Thus assailed, Rory clutched the hand-rail firmly with
one of his hands, and struck at his enemy to make him
leave go with the other.
“ Ye’ll either have to pull me up or go down with me,”
gasped Reardon, tightening his grip.
The frightful struggle recommenced with all its terrible
accompaniments.
The rain descending in hissing showers drove into the
faces of the combatants with such force as almost to blind
them ; the wind threatened at times to tear them both from
the bridge and plunge them into the stream, and the flashes
of lightning from time to time shewed the situation in all
its horrors.
Reardon still clung despairingly to Rory’s leg, which,
jammed as it was by his weight hanging to it against the
cross-beams, was in danger of snapping like a pipe stem at
any moment.
Maddened by this peril and by the pain he suffered,
O’Hara leaned over the parapet as far as he dared and kept
striking at the top of his adversary’s head in order to make
him relinquish his grasp
Reardon’s scull, however, was a thick one, and had
undergone a preity good training for such a state of things
in the shape of a long series of raps with a stick in many a
faction fight, and Rory began by experience to learn the
truth of that axiom, known to every old ring-goer, that
“ the hand is softer than the head.”
Moreover, jammed as he was against the parapet, O’Hara
could not lean over far enough to make his blows tell with
good effect.
Ally was roused to action by her brother’s peril.
She had taken part in more than one fight and did not
shi’ink now.
Kneeling down on the bridge, she struck fiercely at the
hand with which Terry gripped the cross-beam with the
heel of one of her heavy brogues, which she had taken off
for the purpose.
A groan of mingled pain and horror escaped the poo?
wretch at this fresh assault.
The sight revealed by the flashes of lightning was a
horrible one.
Rory’s face was white with passion, save where it was
stained with the blood that his exertions had caused to
flow from his nose, and his collar was rent away, and dis-
played his bare chest similarly stained, despite the torrent
of rain with which he was inundated, as he continued to
lean over the parapet and strike at his foe.
Ally, on her knees by his side, her hair unbound, and
hanging in tresses like wet serpents about her face, her
eyes aglow, and her teeth gleaming between her parted
lips, hammered away at Reardon’s hand with her shoe.
On the other side of the parapet Reardon hung, his
saturated clothes giving him the aspect of a drowned
corpse, suspended some fifteen feet above the inky waters
that rushed furiously beneath the bridge.
As he felt his grasp failing under Ally’s blows, and
realised that in a few more seconds he would be forced to
leave go his hold, his eyes began to start from their sockets,
his hair to bristle on end with horror, and already he
seemed to feel the rush of the waters, which were so soon to
engulf him, sweeping over his head.
Instinctively he clutched Rory’s leg harder than ever.
“Ally!” groaned O’Hara, in tones of agony; “the
murtherin’ thief is breakin’ my leg! Oh! ”
Drawn tight up to the parapet as he was, by Reardon’s
weight, he could not himself stoop down in order to
remove the other's grasp.
The girl, abandoning her attack on the hand that clutched
the beam, strove to force asunder the grip on her brother's
leg.
“ I’ll break his fingers but I’ll make him lave go ! ” she
said savagely; “ havo ye yer knife, Rory. I niver thought
of it before.”
Reardon’s agony at this remark was fearful. All seemed
lost.
“Mercy! for the love of heaven—mercy!” he gasped.
“ Spare me, for yer sovvl’s sake ! ”
“ Whisht, ye scoundrel!” cried Rory; “it’s no use
yer pratin’, divil mend it, but I’ve lost my knife in the
scrimmage, anyhow,” he added, after a rapid search in hie
pockets. “ Feel on the ground for it, Ally, machree,
it must be lyin’close handy, and we’ll settle this spalpeen.
No, niver mind the knife; go back to the road, and bring
a big sthone, and we’ll fix him with that.”
These words, which Reardon could plainly hear, uttered
as they were during a lull in the storm, fell on his ears
like a sentence of death.
He heard the girl depart on her murderous quest.
“ Help! murther! help ! ” he yelled, despairingly,
though help at that hour there could be none.
“ Screech away, screech away, ye nagur!” answered
Rory, ironically. “ It’s little more breath ye’ll ever need
to cool your porridge with.”
“ Help, help !” cried Reardon.
And his shrieks rang out even above the noise of the
storm, which had again burst forth upon them in all its
fury.
He succeeded in shifting his hand a little higher along
the cross-p ece, and, still retaining his clutch on Rory,
made an attempt to hoist himsdf up, so as t<> yet a hold
for his feet, being nerved by the fact that, unless he c uld
manage to do so before the girl’s return, he was indeed
lost.
But he only brought his face by so doing within better
reach of O’Hara’s fist, and sank back again, half blinded
by the shower of blows rained down upon it by his
ferecious enemy.
“ Help—help—help !” his ®ry again rang out.
And then he listened in the vain hope of an answer to
this appeal.
His strained ea r s caught the hurried sound of footsteps
on the bridge again.
It must be Ally returning with the stone.
In a few minutes it would be all over.
He closed his eyes and began to repeat a prayer.
“ What in the devil’s name are you up to here?” sud-
denly thundered a rough voice immediately over ms head,
in stentorian tones.
It was the voice of a stranger.
A ray of hope sprang once more in Terry’s breast.
“Help! murther! help!—save me!—for the love of
heaven, save me!” he cried.
“What’s up? Curse you, can’t you answer?” cried
the voice.
And at the same moment a sharp cry of pain broke from
O’Hara, and Reardon felt the leg he held on to almost
jerked from his grip. v
“ Och! lave go, lave go, and I’ll tell ye,” cried
Rory. “ Sure, if ye shake me like that, with this divil
below here hanging on to my leg, it’ll snap like a twig
anyway. Och, aisy, for mercy’s sake !”
A sudden flash of lightning revealed to Terry a stranger
whose face appeared almost gigantic, standing close by
Rory, with his hand on the latter’s collar.
The same flash also enabled the stranger to gauge the
state of affairs.
He was evidently a man of quick decision.
“ Can you hoist yourself up, mate, if I keep this beggar
quiet, eh ?” he said to Reardon.
“I’ll try,” answered the latter, whom the chance of
escape had given fresh strength to.
Shifting his grip from Rory’s leg to the cross-piece, he
succeeded, after one or two attempts, in swinging one
foot up and hooking on with it, and then in getting his
knee on to the edge of the bridge.
He then hoisted himself up a bit.
Suddenly he felt himself seized by the collar, and hauled
upwards with a force that seemed gigantic by tha
stranger.


The next moment he was standing on the bridge, faint
and dizzy from the reaction, which, as was only natural,
had set in after the awful peril which he had just under-
gone-
The stranger who had thus unceremoniously hoisted
him up on to the bridge, had continued to maintain his
hold all the time on Rory.
Ally now approached the group.
“ Who are ye ?” demanded Rory, “are ye one o’ the
polis?”
The stranger laughed.
“ Not quite, though I’m pretty well up to the dodge
they have of clapping their claws on a chap,” and as he
spoke he gave Rory’s collar a most scientific twist.
“ Who are ye, thin ? Lave go my collar, or ’twill be
the worse for ye,” said OHara, fiercely.
“ It seem-* to me, now, that if I hadn’t clapped my hand
on your neck when I did, the next person who would
have had a chance of fingering it would have been the
hangman. Don’t you think you ought to feel kind of
thankful, mate, that I stopped you just in time from
running the risk of having to dance a jig on nothing for
the murder you were up to ?”
“ Murder !” repeated Rory indignantly ; “it was a fair
fight, sure now. Ask the spalpeen there ; bad luck to
him if it wasn’t thin. Ask him.”
“ Well, if that’s your style of fair fighting, I should like
just to have a squint at the other kind out of curiosity, as
the pig said when he poked his nose into the sausage
machine,” said the stranger, releasing him as he spoke.
“ ’Twas no fair fight, Rory O'Hara, as well ye know,”
said Reardon, “but, plaze God, I’ll meet ye in a day or
two in the light o’ day, and then we’ll just see which of
us is best man.”
“ Save ye till thin. Come, Ally,” and as he spoke
O’Hara began to move off.
“Stop a bit,” cried the stranger, “ I’ve gone a bit astray,
I reckon, in this cursed storm. Is this the right road to
Clonturk.”
“ Yes,” answered the two men, simultaniously.
“Well, where will I find a place hereabouts called
Teernabeg ?”
“Sure an’ it’s close at hand,” ejaculated Ally, “an'
the ”
“ Whist!” cried her brother, impatiently, cutting her
short, whilst Reardon said in somewhat distrustful
tones—
“ An’ might I be so bowld as to ask ye what ye want at
Teernabeg now?”
“I want a man named Terence Reardon.”
There was a moment’s pause.
O’Hai-a was Reardon’s bitter enemy, and a moment
before had done his very best to murder him.
But with the rooted aversion of all his class to lend the
slightest aid to anyone they think in authority, he would
have bitten his tongue out before mentioning Reardon’s
identity in presence of one whom he still suspected of
being a policeman.
Terry at length spoke.
“Ye saved my life anyway,” he said to the stranger;
“ an’ it’s not for the likes of one who’s done me such a
good turn to be after hiding myself. I’m Terry
Reardon.”
“The devil you are,” replied the other, “ then I’ve
killed two birds with one stone. I’ve saved you from
feeding the fish in that stream down there and pitched on
the very man I wanted.”
Then pulling Terry on one side he whispered in his
ear—
Rory,” he cried to his late adversary, who had stood ready
to waive their private quarrel, and to join him in any
onslaught that might be found necessary or advisable in
case the stranger had turned out to be an emissary of the
law.
Then as Rory and his sister disappeared the dark-
ness, he turned to the stranger and asked him to follow
him.
The storm had lulled considerably, and after they had
been walking some twenty minutes, it ceased.
By this time they had arrived opposite a fairly comfort
able looking farm-house.
Crossing the strip of ground dividing it from the road,
they approached the door.
As they did so a dog began to bay furiously.
“ Quiet, you cur, quiet! Don’t ye know your friends?’
said Reardon. “ Faix,” he added, reflectively, “ but if
I'd have had ye with me this blessed night, it’s very littl
chance Rory O’Hara would have had of getting off with
whole skin,”
“ Is your dog such a devil then? ” asked the stranger.
“ Wait till ye see him.”
At the sound of Terry’s voice, the animal had relapsed
into silence.
But on his master’s opening the door, he appeared on
the threshold, like a sentry.
He was an enormously powerful brute, a cross between
a bull-dog and a mastiff, with deep-set, fiery eyes, a broad
wrinkled forehead, and a pendulous jowl, which revealed
a formidable array of teeth.
“Aisy, Jowler, boy; sure, it’s a friend,” said Reardon.
And at his voice the animal fell back, and suffered the
pair to advance across the threshold.
They found themselves in a large, and rather comfort-
able kitchen, with a peat fire smouldering on the hearth.
“ An’ so ye’re the new captain?” said Reardon. “Sure,
an’ I’ve heard of your doins’ up beyant there; an’ it’s
welcome ye are to this roof.”
“ Thank you. And now just see if you can’t fish out a
drop of whiskey. I’m as wet as if I’d been lying under a
pump-hole for the last six hours.”
As he spoke, the stranger threw aside his saturated hat,
and revealed the features of Ned Kelly.
CHAPTER CLXXXIY.
TEETH INSERTED GRATIS.
On the following evening, a number of men assembled
in an upper room of a large house in the town.
They were the members of the Fenian local council.
The majority were the frieze-coated farmers and peasants
of the district, mixed with whom were a sprinkling of the
townspeople.
There were, however, several exceptions.
There was a tall, slender, excitable-looking man, with
long hair brushed back from his forehead, and very pro-
minent light blue eyes, who at that time sat on the bench
of the British House of Commons as member for an
Irish borough, but who has since found it necessary to
cross the broad Atlantic, with little hope of returning.
There was a little dark, natty man, with an upright
figure, and small black moustache.
He was known by the name of Colonel A.*, and was
nominally one of the European correspondents of a lead-
ing New York Journal, which at that time had its tempo-
rary offices in London, at the Queen's Hotel, St. Martin-
le-grand.
But to this function he united that of a leading
organiser of the Fenian conspiracy.
On one occasion, he left London to pass a week in
Paris, leaving an English journalist as his locum tenens.
To the latter’s great surprise, Colonel A. turned up
within twenty-four hours of his departure, looking tewi’oly
agitated.
He did not explain the reason of his sudden return, out
“Do you know Andy Mulvany?”
“ Faix an’ I don’t say I don’t.”
“Well, he’s-tent me to you to say,” and the stranger
rapidly uttered a sentence serving as a pass word.
Terry replied in a similar fashion, and then sundry
signs were exchanged between the two men.
“So that’s it, it now? He’s a friend sure enough,
• Correspondent of the New York Herald-


after a little conversation, asked his substitute whether,
during his absence, he had had occasion to open a certain
drawer in the room.
The other answered that he had not.
Colonel A,, with a sigh of relief, took a key from his
pocket and locked the drawer.
He had recollected on his arrival in Paris that he had
left it unlocked, and without losing a moment, had caught
the first train back to London to repair this oversight on
his part.
It was not till many years after, when the two men
renewed acquaintance in America, that the Englishman
learnt that the drawer in question had held papers for
which the British Government would have given almost
any sum, containing, as they did, the secrets of the entire
conspiracy.
The majority of the meeting had taken their seats when
some new comers were heard coming upstairs.
Their progress was accompanied by a bumping, scuffling
sound, and by something that ominously resembled the
rattling of a chain.
Several of those present started to their feet, and more
than one turned pale.
Visions of the police, dragging along some unwilling
guide and jingling handcuffs prepared for all of them,
flashed across their minds.
They heard, however, a short but quiet parley with the
sentry stationed on the landing outside.
This parley reassured them.
Then the door opened, and the new comers entered.
The first head that thrust across the door-sill was that
of Terence Reardon’s bull-dog, Jowler.
He was tugging hard at a huge chain, the other end of
which was in the hands of his master.
Behind the latter appeared the massive bulk of Ned Kelly.
The laugh that had escaped several present on discover-
ing the real cause of their alarm in the person of Jowler
died away and was replaced by a look of enquiry and sus-
picion as their eyes rested on Ned.
He was, with one exception, quite unknown to anj of
those present, save his introducer.
The exception was a cadaverous-looking fellow, of
about fifty, named O’Reilly, who had come back from
“ foreign parts,” a year or two previously, and had estab-
lished himself in a. small way in the town.
The precise locality of the “foreign parts " in which
Mr. O’Reilly had passed the last few years was a matter
of some mystery, for he was a man of cantankerous dis-
position and could not bear being questioned on the
subject.
Spiteful people said they were a penal settlement.
Even he was not quite certain that he knew Ned,
though, at the same time having a very strong impression
that he had seen the bushranger’s face before.
“I shall remember where, presently,” he thought.
“Who is this with you, Reardon?” asked the M.P.,
severely.
“ Sure, yer honour, it’s just one of ourselves, God save
us,” answered Reardon; whilst Jowler, still tugging at the
chain, stretched out Ins nose and sniffed at the calves of
several of those in his immediate neighbourhood in a way
that caused them to retire as far as possible.
“He's quite right,” said Ned, “I’m one of you, and if
the boss of the show will just step this way, I think I can
show him I’m one of the right sort.”
The M.P. and the American advanced, and in a few
words Ned convinced them of his being a member of
their brotherhood, and showed certain credentials.
“An’ what is it made ye bring that baste of a dog along
with ye, Terry?” enquired a farmer, named Martin Flynn,
of Reardon.
“Yes,” broke in another, “what in the name of all the
saints, Terry, makes ye drag tbit devil after ye here?”
“Faix an’ its draggin’ me after him, he is, rather,” re-
plied Reardon, with a grin.
“ But why, sure ?”
“ Oh,” returned Terry, in dolorous tones, it's sickenin’
that the poor crathur is, I’m afeard.”
“ Sickenin’ ?”
“ Yes. It’s not himself that he is at all at all, so 1
just brought him along into the town, that ould Con
Duffy, the cow docthor, might have a look at him.”
“ And what did he say, now ?”
“ Sure, and he says he’s feared entirely that the baste
is just sickenin’ with some disase that has a ”
“And what was itV” enquired a man, named Mat
McGrath.
“ Well, it puzzled me so that it’s clane gone out of my
mind, but he says for sartin sure that if the baste won t
dhrink wather, he’s got it.”
“ Bad luck to ye, Terry,” cried Flynn, but it’s the
hydriphobee the dog has got.”
“ The hydriphoby, that s it, sure enough."
“ Devil mend yer manners, but don’t ye know that if
he wunst bites one o’ us we shall all be taken raving mad
and run away from wather,” cried Mat McGrath.
“ Och, murder, and is it so !” exclaimed a third, whoso
rubicond nose and moist eye indicated a toper.
“ Faix, an’ if it’s the dread of wather that means madness,
Mickey, there must be as mad as a March hare —for the
devil a drop of anything wayker than whisky I ever heard
of his taking.”
A laugh followed this, and Reardon proceeded to drag
the dog, who seemed perfectly passive, to the farther end
of the room, where he secured him by his chain to the leg
of a table.
The others clustered together and began to relate
experiences, each more horrible than the preceding one,
of deaths by dydrophobia, and to enlarge on the awful
sufferings of victims stifled between feather beds by their
friends, or cut in a vein and left to bleed slowly to death,
as was for a long time the practice in the rural districts of
Ireland.
The conversation between Ned, the M.P., and the
American, had been of a more satisfactory character.
The two leaders recognised that they had before them a
ruffian capable of any act of atrocity, but at the same time
cool, collected, and with presence of mind to extricate
himself and those with him out of any scrape.
To them he made no secret of his identity, and though
they did not feel exactly flattered at having to associate
with a man who was avowedly a robber, they could not
help feeling that he was a capital instrument for the
cause.
The cause to them meant a handsome annual income
from the pockets of others.
“ It’s just as well not to let these fellows know exactly
who you are,” observed the M.P., in a low tone. “ You
see they’ve got certain prejudices that it’s as well not to
rub the wrong way, as matters stand at present.”
“ What d’ye mean V” asked Ned.
“Why, do you see, my friend,” said the American,
“ there are prejudices, as our v/orthy senator here says, in
this rotten, measly old country which must be respected. In
other w’ords, any one of these gentlemen about us would
think no more of shooting a landlord or a process-server
than a treed coon ; but, at the same time, w r ould no more
dream of rifling his pocket afterwards than a New York
hackman would of giving change, or a Chinaman of cutting
off his pigtail.”
“In other words,” said the M.P., “it's just as well for
you not to drop a word about your colonial adventures.
My friends here don’t mind paying their rent from the
barrel of a gun, but robbery or any other form they have
a prejudice against—at present.”
Kelly sneeringly replied, “They’re mighty honest, no
doubt, when there is nothing to take.”
Soon the whole of the ministers of the secret council
met and the proceedings commenced. As usual, it was to
consult about the assassination of an unpopular landlord
living in a distant county—for it was always arranged that
the avenger in such a case should ba drawn from a region


remote trom the scene oi crime—was put upon his trial
behind his back, as it were.
He was accused of certain offences, which were stated
by the president, and which evidence was brought forward
to establish with the grim and ghastly mockery of a court
of justice.
The impromptu jury were called upon for their verdict.
Of course it was “guilty,” and the sentence —death.
That had already been fixed beforehand.
It was the same in all such cases—death.
Despite the proverbially excitable nature of the Irish,
these proceedings had been conducted in a stolid, business-
like fashion that would have gladdened the heart of a
British tradesman.
This gathering might very well, indeed, have passed
for a vestry meeting.
There was little speechifying on the part of the
majority
The only attempts at eloquence were displayed by the
American and the M.P., who felt bound, perhaps, to show
off a little, and by a young fellow named Mahoney, who
indulged in a little rhapsody about “ 98.”
There was, besides, no outward display such as is
usually associated with a conspiracy.
Neither flags, masks, daggers, or any other of the sym-
bols and paraphernalia popularly associated with such pro-
ceedings as those in progress, were displayed.
Nothing was recorded in writing, though the American
nonrnally filled the post of secretary.
Mahony, who wanted to display his business-like
talents, proposed that the “minutes” of the meeting
should be made, and expressed his surprise to the Yankee
colonel at the absence of such “ matayrials.”
“My friend,” was the reply, “if language was given to
man to conceal his thoughts, writing was invented to en-
able him to find out other people’s. Pen and ink are
dangerous tilings to meddle with unless you have all your
wits about you, as a friend of mine found out in New
Y r ork the other day.”
“ How was that?” asked the M.P.
“ Well, he had been lunching pretty heavily down town,
and, perhaps, he could not walk in straight along the side-
walk as he ought. Anyway, he ran right into the arms
of a perfect stranger to him.”
“ Who boned his watch, I suppose, under the pretence
of helping him along? I know the dodge,”
“Not a bit of it. The stranger was a perfect good
Samaritan. He was a young man from the Far West—
the home of rural simplicity—and a model of temperance.
He took my friend into a temperance hotel, and told him,
in the most feeling manner, how sad he felt at the sight
of a respectable man in his condition ; and he set to work
to sober him, and read him such an eloquent and touching
lesson on the evils of drink, and so worked on his feel-
ings, that he then and there put his name across the tem-
perance pledge offered to him. It turned up, that pledge
did, a month later in the shape of his acceptance for a
th-.-isand dollars. As he didn’t like to face the music of
exposure, he paid the bill, but he warned one or two
friends on the quiet of that virtuous young Western
man.”
“ By gorrah ! look now—there’s a power in education,
ye see.”
After this little digression, business was proceeded
with.
It was that of selecting the men upon whom was to
devolve the execution of the court’s decree.
This was settled by lot.
The number of chances corresponded with that of the
men present, with the exception of the president and
secretary.
It was a rule that the assassin should always be selected
from a district lying at a distance from the spot where the
murder was to be committed.
The reason was that they would be personally unknown
*o their intended victim, and that, if he survived his
inj'uries, he would have greater difficulty in describing os
identifying his assailants.
The lots fell on Kelly and on a young excitable looking
fellow, with a slender frame, pallid face, and flashing eyes,
named Brian Mahony, who had already spoken at some
length on the matter.
He was one of the most ardently patriotic of the
assembly, and was rather a favourite with most of his
companions, from his evident sincerity and “ spouting ”
propensities. He talked a fearful amount of fluent rub-
bish ever in praise of everything Irish, especially of the
“foinest pisanthry in the wurrld,” and of the “nation
rising in its might,” whatever that might mean, and was
eloquent about the time when “ Malachi wore a chain ol
gold,” (which, by-the-bye, would not have been very safe
wearing when the quotation was made), so that he was
“a big spaker entirely,” and looked upon as another
Meagher of the Sword.
It is curious to note the resemblance in this respect
between the Irish and the French.
Tallyrand said of the latter, “ fh sont ton jours sous-
VEmpire de la phrase ! ” —they are always under the influ-
ence of happy phraseology. The Irish are likewise as-
malleable as wax in the hands of mob or other orators.
Old O’Reilly had been watching Ned very closely for
some time past, and had at last made up his mind as to his
identity.
No sooner had the lot fallen on Kelly and Mahony,
than he turned to the latter, next to whom he was seated,,
and whispered something in his ear.
“You’re draimin’, man! ” exclaimed Mahony, with a look
of indignation at his neighbour.
“Divil a lie in it,” was the reply.
“ Ask him yerself, if ye doubt me; but I’ll swear to
him anywhere.”
“If it is, thin,” cried the other, in indignant tones,
“I’ll do the job single-handed before I’ll collogue with
the likes of him.”
“What is it, Mahoney?” said the M.P., noticing the-
young man’s excitement.
“Are we thaves and rapparees, yer honour ; or are we-
pathriots, inspired by the glorious memories of ’9B V"
was the answer.
“ Patriots, I trust.”
“Is it right then that a murtherer and a horse-stealer
should come sneaking into our midst and be evened with
honest men ?” cried Mahoney, with the ah if a sucking
Emmett.
“ What do you mean ?”
“ Mane. Why, I want to knew it it’s true, as O'Reilly
here says, that Misther Kelly there is neither more or less-
than a horse-stealer, thafe, and robber from Australey.”
A dead silence followed this announcement for a
moment.
These men, who would not have shrunk at murder, had a
horror of theft.
Ned looked astounded at this revelation of bis career.
He had no reason to fear this biographical sketch of his
Antipodean life, and he avowedly wished he was safe in
the scrub at that moment. However, there was only one
thing to do. Face the foe boldly as he had often don&
before. He, however, was furious, and we know he was
revengeful. He knew that unless he cleared out of that
his danger would commence, so he simply launched a
bottle of whisky at tbe head of his accuser, striking him
full in the face, which was intently covered with blood.
It was the only reply he could make. Drawing his
revolver, he stood in his defence, as the favourite’s friends
rushed towards him with threats of lynching the “ spy.”
“Are you mad, you fools; do you want to be jail-birds,
all of you ?” cried the M.P., in an agitated tone.
“Dry up, there,” said the American, “ hold hard.”
“ Pitch him out o’ the window.”
“Murther him,” and similar outcries were heard on
every side, for the nord spy acted on one and all like »
red rag on a bull.


In vain the American and the M.P. strove to restore
order; their voices were drowned in the general uproar.
As is always the case, under such circumstances, the
more peaceably disposed of the party added to the din by
their loud appeals for silence.
Amidst the confusion, the door of the room suddenly
opened, and the face of the sentry, which wore an expres-
sion of a'arm, was thrust inside.
This incident attracted their notice, and stilled the
uproar.
“ Whisht, boys! ” he ejaculated ; “ the rucktion ye’re
makin’ will be heard all over the town, and the polis will
be here in no time.”
There was a temporary lull at these words.
Kelly, backing to the wall, stood in a defiant attitude,
revolve r in hand, facing his opponents.
Excited bv the tumult around him, the dog Jowler had
begun to tug furiously at his chain, and he now uttered a
most fearful howl.
Another and another followed.
“ To hell with the spy ! ” cried Flynn all at once ; and a
rush towards Kelly took place.
Kelly met the rush with a force and quickness that
astonished his assailant. He floored the foremost attackers
like bowling over ninepins.
They were no match for his Herculean power. Like
Perry, the celebrated b ack pugilist (transported by the
backers of Spring, who placed a flash £5 note in his pocket
the day before the fight), he could kill a man with a blow,
or smash his jaw like glass—and he knew it. The
conspirators drew back in amazement.
“He’s the devil entirely, boys; by gorrah, he’s
charmed ! ”
All this time the dog howled furiously, and under the
pretext of soothing him, Reardon stepped up to him.
He muttered as he did so.
“ Spy I’ll niver belave he is! and thafe or no thafe, he
saved my life last night, and by dad I’ll pay the debt I*’’
As he finished the sentence he placed his hand on
Jowler’s collar.
Meanwhile, with the wolfish glare of murder in their
eyes, the maddened throng pressed round Kelly, who had
drawn his revolver.
He would himself have probably been shot down ere
this, had it not been for the fear of the sound of firearms
attracting the police, situate, as the house was, in the
centre of the town.
His foes were evidently nerving themselves for one over-
whelming rush, in which he would be borne down, and in
all likelihood torn limb from limb.
In vain the M.P and the American strove to obtain a
hearing on his behalf.
“ Sure, we may as well betray ourselves as be sold by
the horse-stealing, murdering spy! ”
“ It’s a spy he is, and we’ll have the heart’s blood of
him! ” was the reply of those they addressed, and who, in
their blind rage, had quite forgotten the real cause of
quarrel
The idea of a spy once started, nothing could shake it.
“ Down with him, boys! ” cried M’Grath; and, with
faces aglow with fiendish passion, the others prepared to
throw themselves on their victim.
Suddenly a yell broke from Reardon.
“The dog’s loose—the hydriphobee!” he screeched at
the top of his voice, in tones of panic clearly heard above
the tumult.
The words struck terror to the hearts of the boldest of
those present.
Men who were about to rush boldly on Ned’s levelled
revolver, shrank from this peril.
The frightful stories they had been telling about hydro-
phobia flashed across their minds.
And as Jowler, with eyes ablaze, and hair bristling down
the whole length of his back, bounded towards them, hit
open mouth displaying his array of white and glistening
fangs, the effect was magical.
One and all turned to flee, the fallen men springing from
the floor like acrobats.
It was literally a case of the devil—for as such they re-
garded him—take the hindmost.
Cursing, swearing, scrambling, fighting, they made their
way in frantic confusion towards the door of the room.
Excited almost to madness on his part, the dog made his
teeth meet in the calves of several of the hindmost as they
were jammed in the door.
Maddened with pain and fear, they kicked and struggled
till the whole mass roiled down the stairs I? 1 "' a torrent
and never paused till they had gained the street.
In less than a minute none were left in the room but
Ned, the M.P., and Reardon, who was joyously waving the
dog-chain in exultation at the success of his stratagem.
Thus the meeting was dissolved.
CHAPTER CLXXXY.
OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE.
The three men gazed at one another for a few moments
after the room had been thus unceremoniously cleared.
Then the American and the M.P. broke into a tit of
laughter in which Kelly joined.
“ Well, I reckon there ain’t been such a skedaddle since
Bull’s Run,” observed the first. “It was a caution to
snakes to see the way those fellows slid.”
(To he continued ,)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. Love and Adventure.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“ The Black Angel.’’ Adventure. _ ..
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
Araerican War. Million.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.—Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Diamond. _
Dove’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Tom Holt’s Log".— A Tale of the Deep Sea. Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures ol
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorvimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunde*."




NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
It it well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed. Marco Polo, is as well known at the Auoipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands,”— Telegraph , 7th July, 1881.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Keelt’s
Bkother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“ The history of Ned and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds on Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of 4 Ned
and his Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July.
CHAPTER CLXXXVl.— Continued.
44 Yes,” remarked the M.P., “it was a clear case of devil
f»ke the hindmost. It was a deuced lucky thing too.
Keardon, that your dog got loose just when he did. Ton
my word, I believe our friend here would have been a dead
man in another minute but for that.”
Reardon grinned.
“ Yes,” said the American, 44 I don’t think anything else
could have saved him. How was it the brute got loose ?”
“Faix, an’ I’m not quite sartin how ’twas, yer honour.
Sure, I was just tryin’ to quiet him, the crathur, and I had
my hand on his collar just to see if it might be chokin’ of
him, and thin, mebbe, my fingers slipped,” said Reardon,
with that sly, comical affectation of innocence assumed by
Pat when launching a “ thumper.”
“ And the collar came undone, eh?” said the M.P., who
perfectly understood the meaning of this rigmarole.
“ Sure, your honour’s a witch! ” was the answer.
44 Well, Kelly, it strikes me that if it had not been for
the cuteness of our friend here, you’d have been down
among the dead men, as the saying is, long ago.”
“There would have been more down with me. I
wouldn’t have gone under alone, no fear,” rejoined Ned,
with a grim emphasis; “ but all the same, I thank you,
mate, for the dodge.”
As he spoke, he held out his hapd to Reardon.
“ Faix, and is it more than payin’ back my debts that
I’ve been doin’ ? When I was bangin’ like a ripe pear on
Father Flaherty’s garden wall, over the black waters, with
that divil hammerin’ at my hands, who was it but you
that pulled me up again, and saved me ?” answered Terry,
with some emotion.
44 Oh! you two have a little private account between you,
eh?” said the JM.P. 44 But now to the main business.
After your squabble with Mahoney, Kelly, I’m afraid it’s
impossible for you to work together.”
44 So am I,” replied Ned.
44 Well, what’s to be done ? The only thing that I can
see is for the lots to be drawn afresh ; and, meanwhile,
we must get it out of these fellows’ thick heads that
you’re a spy, though, till this is done, perhaps you’d better
keep out of all chance of meeting them anywhere.”
44 Devil a bit will I keep out of their way,” replied Ned.
44 I’m not a chicken-hearted chap of that sort. And,
what’s more, if that sneaking hound 1 bashed over the mug
thinks himself too fine to work along with me, I’m blest if
I won’t show him the stuff I’m made of.”
44 What do you mean?” enquired the M.P.
44 1 mean I’ll do the job single-handed,”
44 Bravo !” exclaimed the American. 44 You’re the right
sort, true grit, a regular ring-tailed screamer, I reckon.”
44 Do you mean it?” asked the M.P.
44 1 always mean what I say. Just ten me straight the
particulars, and I’ll go to work at once.”
44 Then hurry up,” chimed in the American, 44 or we
shall have those fellows who were hoppin’ around just
now like so many boh-tailed bulls in fly-time, come sneak-
ing back to see how the land lies.”
As he spoke, there was a scuffling, bumping noise on the
•tours, followed by a scratching at the door.
“ There they are!” exclaimed the M.P.
“ No, sure,” answered Reardon, stepping towards the
door; “ it’s just Jo wler, the baste. I know the noise of
him. He’d be equal to any Christian—if he liked a
drop! ”
As he spoke, he opened the door and admitted the dog.
Jowler limped a little with one leg, and sundry marks
on his body showed that he had not come off quite scot-
free, though he had sustained no material damage in his
recent encounter.
Reardon called to him gently to advance, but on his
doing so, both the American and the M.P. showed signs
of mental perturbation and alarm.
The former retreated at once to the further end of the
room, and the latter hopped up on to a table with all the
agility of a professed acrobat.
Ned quietly fingered his revolver and kept a wary eye
upon the formidable brute.
The dog at first seemed a little reluctant to join his mas-
ter, but at last did so.
Reardon began to examine whether the animal had
been much hurt in the fray, though Jowler did not seem
to particularly desire such handling.
“For heaven’s sake, look out, man,” exclaimed the
M.P., “consider if he should bite you.”
“He knows me too well, yer honour, he won’t harm rag
at all, at all,” was the reply.
“ But you can’t be certain, there’s no trusting the««
brutes, and especially in a case of rabies.”
4 * A case of what, your honour?”
44 Of rabies, madness, hydrophobia.”
‘ 4 Hydrophoby, is it; hydrophoby ! Ob, sure now?”
And the fellow broke into a roar of laughter.
44 What do you mean. Hasn't he got it?”
44 The devil a bit, that I know of.”
44 But didn’t you say he had?”
44 Sorrah a word. I just mentioned that the cow-docthor
had towld me that if the baste refused to drink wather, it
was a sign of hydriphobee, but up till now I'll go bail
that he’s not shewn the laste avarsion to it.”
“ Well, I never saw a mad dog, if yours isn’t a trifle
off his head, for he charged those coons like a runaway
engine.”
44 By Gorrah, if he hadn’t charged the vagabones, I’d
a thought him mad enough—but that proved the sinse o’
the crathur.”
Then he looked up with a droll twinkle in bis eye.
44 Sure the poor baste had his rasins. Whin my hand
happened to slip on his collar, I just whispered to him to
go for them into one ear, and somehow I managed just to
drop the red-hot ashes from my pipe into the other.”
This quite accounted for Jowler’s frenzy.
After a little more conversation, during which Kelly
who convinced the others of his determination to carry
out the job single-handed, received full instructions as to
the best way in which to set about it, the parley separated.
It had been arranged that Ned should remain for the
night at Reardon’s, and start on his expedition early tht
following morning.
Accordingly he set forth, bent from mere reckleaa


tewado, on the slaughter of a man he had never even
route had been carefully mapped out for him, and
various stopping places at which he might halt in safety
had been also indicated.
It nevertheless happened that the first day he got
rather out of hia road, and, just before sunset, was sur-
prised in a heavy storm of wind and rain.
After pushing on through this for some miles—for his
path lay through a lonely and desolate district —with a
keen and cutting wind blowing full in his teeth, and with-
out a trace of human habitation to take shelter in from
the stinging shafts of the shower, he struck the high road
be had been in search of, and, proceeding a little distance
along it, came in sight of an inn.
It was not a very pretentious place, but signs of com-
fort were not lacking, and, drenched as he was, it was a
sight more than welcome.
The walla, it is true, were of mud, and those serving to
partition off the apartments into which it was divided only
reached the spring of the roof, so that warmth and air,
not to mention the cackling of fowls, the grunting of
pigs, and other domestic sounds, were equally diffused
throughout the tenement. _
But there was an ample chimney, on each side of which
was a stone bench.
In the centre of the hearth a large fire of turf and bog
wood was burning briskly, and over it, by a chain, swung
& huge iron pot, from which ascended a by no means un-
savoury odour.
Ned entered, and greeted the host and hostess, who
told him diat supper would be ready in half an hour or
so. ,
After draining a stiff dose of whiskey and water, he
seated himself on one side of the fireplace, and, stretch-
ing out his legs to the fire, leant back against the wall and
inhaled the fragrant steam from the pot, which contained
a, stew intended for supper.
The soothing murmur of the bubbling pot, the com-
fortable seat, the warmth of the fire acting with double
effect on him in his chilled and wet condition, his fatigue,
and it may be the extra dose of the “rale thing ” he had
just swallowed, had their effect on him, as might be ex-
pected.
The host and hostess were busy with their domestic
affairs, and there was no one to talk to him and distract
liis attention at all.
So gradually his eyes closed, his breathing grew more
and more even, and his head sank on one shorilder as he
dozed off.
At length, after one or two spasmodic grunts, he sank
down sideways on the bench, and was soon as soimci asleep
as a top.
No sooner was he asleep than two new comers entered
the inn with the usual greeting,
They were both strapping young fellows, in the neat
uniform of the Irish Constabulary.
“ A nasty storm, Pat,” observed one to the host, after
he and his companion had been supplied with
drink, as they seated themselves on the bench opposite
Ned. . .
“ Indade, an’ it is,” was the reply. “ I nmr seed it
come down so sharp. The gintleman by the fire there,
was just like a drowndthed rat whin he came.” _
“ Not many travellers about on a day like this? ’
Arrah, no; sure he’s the only one that has crossed the
door this blissed day.”
“ Where’s he bound to? ” enquired the other constable,
In a low voice.
“Sure an’ it’s not myself that can answer that
gnyway. Divil a word has he said since he came in.
was a lull in the conversation, during which
Ned’s snores were plainly audible above the bubbling of
ISh® pot. . ~
The bushranger was, as a rule, a light sleeper, like all
accustomed to peril; but on the present occasion the
warmth and the whiskey had exerted a marked soporific
effect upon him, which, singular enough, the of
the two constables, and their conversation, hat\ quite failed
to dissipate in any degree.
He continued to sleep the sleep of the just, &c.o. to
snore with the force and regularity of a blacksmith’s
bellows in full play. ,
“ Good lungs that chap’s got anyway, Daly, aaici one
of the constables to his companion.
“Yes, if his lungs are in his nose, he has. J
“ Maybe it would be as well to take a squint at nun be-
fore he wakes. Ho might think it a liberty if one stared
too hard at him when awake, ’ said the first constable,
whose name was Purcell.
“ It might be as well,” replied the other.
Rising sjpom his seat, he stepped noiselessly round to
the side of the fireplace where Ned was stretched at ease
upon his bench.
He stared hard at Kelly’s features.
If he had been an Australian bobby, he would have had
tv* difficulty in identifying the man before him as the
tron-clad bushranger. .
Ned’s description had been bo extensively circulated
througout the colony, that there was not a member o. the
force there, down to the latest joined recruit, that did
not know it by heart a deuced sight better than ever he
knew his catechism.
But as Kelly’s presence was unsuspected m Ireland, no
particulars of his personal appearance had as yet been
supplied by the authorities. .
The constable scanned his face, and even glanced at the
scar on his hand, but failed to identify him witu anyone
who might be “ wanted ” to his knowledge.
He was just about to return to his comrade, when ail
at once he started. , ..
Ned had unbuttoned his coat, and m his slumbers it
had fallen aside. . ,
Peering out from the breast of his waistcoat, where ha
nad thrust it as the dryest place at his command during
the storm, was the butt of his revolver.
The constable began to smell a rat.
Moreover, it was his duty in any case to matte an en-
quiry into the matter, the carrying of firearms of any kind
in Ireland being strictly prohibited, unless a license had
first been specially obtained. , . .
Daly beckoned to his comrade, who joined him in Ins
contemplation of Ned’s slumbers, and to whom be pointed
out the weapon.
He took in the situation at a glance.
Ned was not a bad-looking fellow, and if the police
who were now looking at him had met him in goo
company, in broad daylight, and well-dressed, very likely
they would have been the first to swear that he was a*
respectable a looking fellow, if a little unpolished in
aspect, as they would meet with on the longest summer
a ßut lying there, unkempt and storm-beaten, in tht
coarse garments he had assumed for his errand, and with
a pistol peeping from his breast, he at once, in their eves,
assumed the appearance of a most desperate-looking
ruffian, ready for any deed.
The two policemen arrived at this conclusion with tuat
wonderful unanimity which distinguishes the force m all
things, especially in hard swearing.
The slumbering stranger was evidently a very ugly cus-
tomer. c TT 1
With a quiet dexterity that the cleverest *agan s
pickpocket pupils (who were trained to_ pick a Handker-
chief from a lay figure hung with bells) might have env >ed,
Daly clasped his fingers round tho butt of Ned s revo.rer
and drew it from its hiding-plateo with a gentleness taat
would not have scared a fly. . , >
So artistically was this little feat done that tee
ranger never felt it in the least. ~. ..
The two then withdrew to their ow start ol toe Riv vo
await events.


CHAPTER CLXXXVIL
KFILYS PATENT DYNAMITE.
Supper being cooked, the landlady hastened to dish it up,
and the bustle of this operation and the clattering of the
platters effectually aroused Ned.
He yawned, uncoiled his lengthy herculean proportions,
and sat up on the bench.
At the sight of the constables he could not repress a
slight start, which did not escape their watchful eyes,
though they affected not to perceive it.
It confirmed their suspicion that he was a dangerous
customer, and they resolved to act accordingly.
They did not, however, quite see their way to lay hands
on him and arrest him at once without further enquiry,
and began to reflect that by depriving him of his weapon
they had perhaps put it out of their power to find a
legitimate pretext for securing him.
Nevertheless, they made up their minds to subject him
to due enquiry after supper.
“A wet evening,” said Daly, as they sat down at
table.
“How did you find that out? The cursed country’s
nothing but a bog,” growled Kelly. ,
“ Have you come far through the rain ? I see you’ve
got pretty well sprinkled,” went on the other in a genial
tone, for he did not at first want to rouse Kelly’s sus-
picions by his questioning.
“ Yes, a pretty fair step,” answered Ned.
“From Ballyturin, maybe?”
“No.”
“ Ah, from the south, then ?”
Ned did not answer.
“And how does the country look down your way?”
went on the constable, with an amiable air.
“ Looks pretty much the same, I suppose, as it always
does—dull, dirty, and dismal.”
“ What part, now, might you hail from ?” put in the
other constable, insidiously, not minding Kelly’s growl.
“ Oh, I’m a stranger in Ireland,” returned Ned, who
saw it was no use trying to hoodwink them with any
story of his being a native. “1 have not been in the
country long, and have had no time to look about me.”
“ And what do you think of it?”
“I think some people are a blooming sight more in-
quisitive than they had any need to be,” was the answer.
Daly laughed.
“ Mayhap it’s our duty to be so. There’s such a lot of
queer customers about just now, you see. You’re not a
native of Ireland, you say, now. You come from
America, I suppose V” he went on, as he scanned Ned
keenly.
“ Yes,” answered Kelly, recklessly; for he wished, at
any rate, to keep his interlocutors off the scent as to who
he really was, and thought this a good dodge.
“ I thought as much.”
And as he spoke Daly exchanged a significant glance
with Purcell.
They at once set Ned down as a Fenian emissary from
the United States.
The repast proceeded and at its close Purcell at length
remarked—
“If it’s all the same to you, I think you’d better come
a step or two on the road to our barracks, and have a
word or two with the inspector.”
“What for?” said Ned fiercely.
“ Why I don’t think your answers quite satisfactory,
and in fact you must consider yourself in custody.”
Ned sprang to his feet, and glared at his interrogators
as a wounded tiger at a “ Shekarry.”
“ You say you’ve only been a little time in the country,”
said Purcell.
“ What’s your game ? I’ve a right to come here, ain’t
I?”
“Well, perhaps you may be ignorant of the laws. Per-
haps you don’t know that there’s one against the carrying
of arm*. ’
Ned thrust his hand into the pocket in which He usually
kept his revolver.
It was missing.
He recollected placing it in his waistcoat pocket, and.
simultaneously with that recollection, realised the fact of
its absence from its hiding place.
“Was this what you were feeling for?” said Purcell
holding out Ned’s revolver as he spuke with a grin.
The bushranger understood the situation at once.
Like a general surveying the country over which an
engagement is to be fought, he glanced round the place to
calculate its chances of aiding him in either flight or re-
sistance, as might prove most advisable.
The huge fireplace occupied one end of the room, and
was faced at the other by a rude dresser.
In the centre of the wall on the right hand was the door
leading on to the road.
It was open, though the shutters securing the two
windows flanking it had been fastened.
On the opposite wall was another door, also ajar, ap-
parently leading into the back premises, and thence through
the yard to the waste Lnd extending in rear of the house.
If Ned understood the situation, the police were equally
on the alert.
Daly rose and placed himself before the open door witl
his rifle, which he had kept during the meal in hi#
hand.
Purcell held Ned’s revolver, with the muzzle pointed in
an unpleasantly straight fashion towards its legitimate
owner’s figure.
Knowing to an ounce the lightness of pull of the
trigger of his favourite weapon, Kelly felt somewhat un
comfortable at the little circumstance.
“ Come, we don’t want to have any unpleasantness,”
said Purcell, “ but it’s our duty to take you before a
magistrate as a suspicious character carrying arms in a
proclaimed district. If you can explain matters, so much
the better for you ; but it’s not for us to decide the ques-
tion—so come along quietly.”
Ned glared at him for a moment like a trapped wolf.
Then he retreated a step towards the fireplace, whilst
the landlady simultaneously retired in alarm to the further
end of the room.
Again Ned glanced around him, this time all but despair-
ingly, in quest of either a means of escape or a weapon.
There was nothing.
“Look here, what the devil d’ye want to nab me
for?*’ he began. “ What do you take me for?”
“ A Fenian, if you must know.”
“ A Fenian?”
“ Yes, so you had better cave in quietly.”
Ned had made up his mind not to be taken alive.
A desperate resolution suddenly lit up his face.
He was close to the fireplace.
Thrusting his hand into his pocket he drew out a largish
square packet.
It was done up in white paper.
He stretched forth his hand, and held the packet over
the fire.
“A Fenian, you say? Then since it is so, I’ll show
you a Fenian trick before I’ve done with you.”
“Do you think you’re going to quod me for nothing ?
Just come two steps towards me. and I’ll Fenian you
both. Do you see this?’’roared Ned, hoarse with rage.
It’s your death-warrant, and mine too, for the matter of
that; but no jail shall hold me, and none of your bloom-
ing beaks stop my gallop. Do you see this, I say, you
Irish blood-suckers ? ”
The two constables gazed with surprise at the roaring
ruffian, but had no idea of what he mean*- Purcell
replied—
“ Come, my man, draw it mild ; you don’t tumk you’ve
got a couple of babies to deal with, do you ? What hava
you got in your fist there ? ”
“Dynamite enough to make this house and all in it
jump into ”


“Dynamite!” exclaimed the now alarmed officers of the
law.
“Yes. I guess you’ve heard of it ? There’s enough
here to blow every stock and stone of this infernal caboose
into smithereens; and by , I’ll do it before one of you
lays hands on me.”
At this epoch the first dynamite scare was in full force
through the United Kingdom.
The Clerkenwell explosion was fresh in the minds of all.
The landlord turned white as a ghost, and fell back
against the dresser, too paralysed by terror to try to flee.
His wife dropped on her knees, and throwing her apron
over her head, began to pray aloud to all the saints in
paradise to lend her their aid.
Even the two policemen were daunted.
W ith his giant form standing beside the fire, its smoke
curling around him, his face, with its grim expression of
set determination lit up by the lurid glow of the smoulder-
ing peat, over which he held the fatal packet, there was
something in Ned’s aspect to appal the stoutest heart.
In that red glare he resembled a fiend newly risen from
the pit of Tophet.
“ Now, my blooming swaddies,” he cried, with a laugh
that was appalling to hearken to, “another step, and by
l’ll blow every soul of you to ; and there won’t
be a bit of your carcasses left big enough to feed a flea.
Move a hand towards me, am.’ I’ll give you a journey
quicker and further than you’ve h d yet.”
“ Och murther! ” gasped the landlord.
“ The saints presarve us all! ” ejaculated his wife.
Purcell made an effort to recover himself.
“ Drop that packet, or I’ll fire,” he said, levelling the
revolver at Ned.
“ Drop it? ” echoed the bushranger, sneeringly. “If I
do, you’ll find yourself the other side of the moon. Alive
or dead, you shall come with me; for even if you pull
trigger, it falls into the fire.”
The policemen realised that even if they shot Ned down,
the explosion would avenge him by shattering the place
to pieces, as it fell from his dying grasp into the fire.
Setting aside the risk, they did not quite feel justi-
fied, even under the circumstances, in shooting a man
down like a rabbit. Besides which, they knew they had
no power to kill the man, or even wound him.
Coroner’s juries in Ireland are apt to take a very dif-
ferent view when a man is shot by the police, to that
which they entertain when his death has been compassed
by a private individual, and the verdict, in case there were
sufficient fragments of Ned left to hold an inquest on, was
certain to be “ Wilful Murder.”
Ned saw they were shaken, but he saw more than this.
He saw by a sign the landlord made to him, that he was a
Fenian, which considerably eased Ned’s apprehensions
from that quarter.
“ Will you or won’t you clear out ? ” roared Ned to the
police. “If you don’t before I count five, I’ll clear you
out pretty sharply, with the contents of this,” showing the
Kcket. The men hesitated, but there was that in Ned's
je that confirmed this belief in his recklessness.
“ Arrah, boys,” said the landlord to the police, “is he
worth all our lives, if he was the biggest Rapparee that
ever shot a priest? Sure you know he’ll murther us all,
an’ what profit will we get out o’ that? ”
Ned shouted, “ One, two! ” but ere “ three ” sounded,
the police had left the premises.
“Now then, avick !” said the landlord, when the officers
had withdrawn; “ the blackguards have taken your revolver
with them; but sure I’ve got one of the same family, that
ye can have in the mane time. It’s as dark as the bottom
of the Devil’s Punchbowl at Mangerton, and nearly as
cold. The Peelers won’t be able to see three yards beyant
their noses, and you can’t slip out off to the hills.”
Kelly here indulged in, to him, the rare amusement of a
hearty laugh, lie said something to the landlord which
sent him off too. Indeed, he seemed highly tickled for
some time after Ned's departure.
Kelly darted through the back premises, and was soon
scoring away in the darkness, feeling quite safe as regarded
the police, as they could hardly see an inch before them.
Ere he started, he returned to his pocket the half-pound
packet of “Limerick twist,” which he had purchased that
morning to smoke on his journey, and which bad enabled
him to play his little comedy in so successful a fashion.
Kelly’s dynamite was tobacco.
CHAPTER CLXXXVIIL
HOW TO DEAL WITH A LANDLORD.
On leaving the little inn, Kelly made the best of his way
up the hillside at a good round pace.
He had little fear of the policemen overhauling him ;
but at the same time he judged it prudent to increase
as much as possible the distance between himself and
them.
As he stumbled along over the rough and broken ground,
he anathematised it with a fluency of language and a fer-
tility of epithet that few could have equalled who have n(
learned the art in a British colony. The vocabulary of aw
Australian bullock driver is sui generis. Oaths of every
form and grotesque awfulness come rushing from his lips,
like bullets from a mitrailleuse, in showers of profanity
of the nature of which it is to be hoped he is ignorant.
De Quincey has spoken of murder as a fine art, the Austra-
lian bullock driver has done the same for swearing.
The rain had ceased, but the air was damp and misty, a
circumstance which, however much it might serve to favour
his departure unobserved, by no means conduced to hia
comfort.
Vigorously he censured —to use a very mild phrase—the
wretched climate of the Emerald Isle, the “ melancholy
island ”of DTsraeli, the wet sponge of creation. After
the gorgeous atmosphere of Australia, he could not but
detest the land of perpetual downpour, which to him was
misery, but to the inhabitants only “ soft weather.”
“I can’t stand this any longer,” he growled; “ it’a
always raining in this beastly bog-hole of a country, that’s
only fit for wild duck and mud turtle. I wonder how the
devil anyone better than a frog, and with any coin at all,
can live in it; no wonder the swells clear out! ”
Two more steps, and he suddenly plumped up to hia
knees in a hole full of water.
After having gone a certain distance from the inn he
halted, in order to reconnoitre the position.
It was not a very enchanting one.
He was alone on a bleak hillside, with, as far as he
knew, not another shelter save the one he had so
quitted, within miles of him.
The darkness and mist not only rendered his progress
difficult and dangerous, but threatened to hinder all
success in his attempts to find a shelter.
After a little deliberation, he decided to push on, as far
as he could judge, in the direction in which he had origi-
nally been making his way.
Even if the police were still lurking about, there
but scant chance of his running against them.
Accustomed to steer through the bush at all hours of
the day and night, Ned headed almost by instinct to the
quarter to which he was bound, resolved, if necessary, to
tramp on steadily through the night.
Fortune saved him this task.
He had not been tramping more than half-an-hour
when he caught sight of a light glimmering from what he
took at first to be a mere mound of earth, but which, on a
closer approach, he made out to be a mud cabin.
He saw through the chinks in what was figuratively
called a door. He knocked loudly.
With the natural hospitality of the people, the knock
was answered with an invitation to “come in, in the name
of God.”
Kelly pushed in the two or three planks slightly nailed
together, doing duty for a door, and found himself in a
dwelling-place scarcely a shade superior to the cave of ea
ancient Briton, and certainly not so dry.


The cabin consisted of a single room measuring some
eight feet by ten.
The walls were /i.ud and so was the floor, in which
puddles of water had formed in different places.
The furniture comprised a ricketty table and a broken
bench, bedstead and bedding being alike conspicuous by
their absence.
A sickle hung from a beam in the roof, and a spade stood
In one comer; the remaining household utensils consisting
uf two or three tea-cups, a couple of cracked plates, a
jfag, with a broken spout and without a handle ; a griddle
and a kettle swung by a chain over a scrap of turf-fire
that might have been put into a pint pot.
Two ghastly scarecrows in tatters and rags were crouch-
ing on either side of the fire, the glow from which had
caught Ned’s eye through the hole serving as a window
and the slits in the door.
After some difficulty, owing to the dimness of the light,
he made out that they were a man and woman.
Ned had not had much experience of what is termed
high life, and had been no stranger to poverty, but, accus-
tomed as he was to the rude plenty of the colonies, the
ghastly squalor of the scene before him forcibly astounded
him.
For a moment he hesitated about revelling his real
position, lest his hosts should be tempted to betray him.
On second thoughts he decided otherwise, and boldly
stated that the police were after him.
This was enough to ensure him the warmest welcome.
“ It isn’t a mighty power o’ food we’ve got to offer you,
but before the mayzles tuk the praties we had plenty of
them anyway and a welcome to give, but now what we
have you’re as welcome to as the flowers o’ May, though
male isn’t much to keep the little spark of life that’s left
burnin’. If it wasn’t for a drop o’ comfort we git from a
friend, the exciseman—bad luck to him!—hasn't yet found
out, we’d all be as dead as Cromwell.”
Ned thanked them in his rough way, and said that a
taste of whiskey to dry up the wet was all he wanted.
This was soon produced, and then, on the reiterated
assurance of his host that there was no chance of the
police coming in quest of him there, he stretched himself,
in his clothes, on a little straw that had been spread for
him on the dryest spot of the floor.
The master of the house and his wife took up their
quarters for the night in similar fashion, whilst a donkey,
who formed the rest of the family, was also accommodated
in a like manner close to the door, serving, as was explained,
as a kind of living barricade to prevent its being blown
down in windy weather.
If there had been a pig he would probably have shared
the general couch; but that indispensable adjunct to an
Irish cotter’s existence, had just been parted with in
order to pay the rent, for at that time the Land League
was in embryo, and rent was still paid—when found con-
venient.
The next morning at daybreak, Ned resumed his journey,
after rewarding his host with the greater part of the
tobacco that had enabled him so successfully to scare the
policemen in the little inn.
The scene of action to which he was bound, was in the
county Mayo.
His destined victim was a gentleman named Mount-
clare, who resided in a house situate on the slope of one
of the hills overlooking the beautiful expanse of Lough
Corrib and its multitude of picturesque islands.
Mr. Mountclare was a gentleman of ancient family, but
impoverished estate.
His rent-roll numbered under a score of tenants, and
these mostly of small holdings; his whole income from
the land he owned in Mayo not reaching £4OO a year.
He had been considered a kind and indulgent landlord,
especially when contrasted with some of his neighbours,
by whom whole districts had been depopulated, as on the
the estate of the Marquis of Sligo, in the neighbourhood
of Westport, where hillside after hillside may be passed
on which not a head of cattle or a single sheep can bo
seen to-day, though ten years ago cottages might be
counted by the hundred.
But for all this, Mr. Mountclare had incurred the enmit*
of the Fenians, and so sentence of death had been pr«
nounced by them against him.
The way in which the sentence had been notified, was,
so to say, grimly ludicrous.
He had received a letter one morning, calling his atten-
tion to a certain spot on his estate.
On proceeding there he found a grave had been dug, at
the heap of which was a notice placed in a cleft stick, to
the effect that he had better make the best of the time
left to him to prepare for its occupation.
Such a warning was not to be neglected, and Mr.
Mountclare applied to the government for a police escort.
The Marquis of Sligo’s agent never stirs without a
couple of armed policemen, who follow him like shadows.
This number is sometimes exceeded, as in the case of
Mr. Nicholson, of Balrath, in Meath.
After an attempt made to shoot this gentleman at Kells, a
post of police was established in his home, and in such a
state of terror did he live, that he rarely ventured outside
his own park, about which he promenaded around with a
loaded rifle, and escorted by no less than four constables
with their carbines at full cock.
Policemen guarded the approaches and entrance to the
mansion; there were constables on the gravel walks, in
the shrubberies, on the lawn and in the stable-yard, and
no strangers were admitted into Mr. Nicholson's presence,
or even inside the house, which was barricaded and
guarded more like a fortress than a country gentleman’s
mansion.
When visiting the Marquis of Headfort, whose seat was
only a short distance off, he thought it safer to go on foot
than in a vehicle, the procession, which recalled that of
the Lord Mayor’s Show, consisting of an armed constable
acting as a scout, then a couple of others abreast, then
two more with Mr. Nicholson and his son, all parties
armed to the teeth between them, and finally, another
posse of police in a car, with a ladder slung at the side of it
to enable them to scale any wall from behind which an
assassin might fire.
Mr. Mountclare was duly furnished with an escort of
constables, two being detached to accompany him every-
where.
After a time, however, be began to feel more secure,
and contented himself with one of these guardian angels
in uniform.
Of this fancied security his enemies had resolved to
avail themselves.
Accordingly Ned and the young fellow who had so
bitterly objected at being associated with him, had been
told off to carry out the sentence.
On the evening of the day following his adventure at
the inn, Ncd arrived at the little hamlet of Clonbur.
He at once proceeded to the house of a roan named
Brennan, who had been indicated by those from whom
he had received his instructions.
At first Brennan was inclined to look at him with
suspicion, all strangers in the district being set down by
the police as Fenian agents, and by the peasantry as
detectives in disguise ; but on matters being explained to
him, he placed himself at Kelly’s orders.
The bushranger was speedily made aware of the habits
of his intended victim.
He learned that the following day Mr. Mountoiare
would be certain to drive into Clonbur to attend a magis •
trates' meeting, and that he would be pretty certain no<
to leave the hamlet before nightfall.
“ Could one drop him on the road home?” askea Ned.
“ Faix, yes ; the road runs mighty convanient for that
same,” answered Brennan ; “ only there’ll be one if not
two of them murtherin’ polls along with him in the car.' 1
“ Will there be a driver?”
“ No, here he droives himscdf.”


“ Well, if there is only one bobby, it won’t make any
difference to me. I don’t funk any brace of men ever
whelped. Only I want something better than I’ve got to
do the job as it ought to be done.”
“ What d’ye mean now?”
“ I mean that though this revolver of mine is a very
good one, it’s not quite the right sort of tool for a snap-
shot at a man driving by on a car.”
“ What is’t ye want thin ? ”
“A double gun with a good load of swan shot in each
barrel.”
Brennan chuckled.
“Oh, make yerself aisy then,” was his reply. “Sure
an’ it’s the beauty of the world that I have close at hand
now. Just wait a bit.”
Stepping out of his cabin, Brennan glanced round to
make sure that no prying eyes were following his
movements.
Satisfied on this score, he stepped up to a huge pile of
turf in the rear of his dwelling.
Thrusting his hand into this, he pulled out a long
object swathed in hay bands, with which he returned to
the cabin where Ned was awaiting him, and closed the
door.
On the hay bands being removed, there stood revealed
a short but heavy double-barrel gun.
“ Sure and there’s a beauty now,’’ was Brennan’s
remark as he displayed the weapon.
Ned $ -tched out his hand for it
“Be eyeful, captain, darlin’,” ejaculated Brennan;
“ sure an’ she’s loaded.”
“ Loaded!” cried Ned, “ then the best thing will be to
fire her off and re-load her. I always mistrust an old
charge, and the damp may have got to it lying in that old
peat stack.”
“ Divil a bit of it. Just look at all the hay bands.
Besides, itfll nivir do to fire her off here, or them nagurs
the polis will be bearin’ it.”
“ That’s true, but still I always like to load a gun that
I’ve got to handle.”
“ Och, m£ke yer mind aisy. I loaded her myself, and
there’s two baccy pipe fulls ol shot Avell rammed down in
each barrel.”
Ned had to accept this assurance.
The following forenoon, at an early hour, armed Avith
the gun, and accompanied by Brennan, he started off to
inspect the road, witness the passage of his intended
victim to the toAvn, in order to be able to identify him,
and to select the exact spot for the scene of the crime.
Not that he had any particular fancy for this sort of
profitless Avork.
It would bring him nothing, and might cut short his
jareer, but he knew the consequences of refusal, and
file dangerous secrets he Avas in possession of ; also that
he was watched, and that the least suspicion of treachery
would be his death -warrant.
But he resolved to “ cut it,” and profitably too, at the
first opportunity.
He carried the stock of the gun in one of the pockets of
a long frieze coat, like that worn by most of the peasants,
and the barrel. Avhich had been purposely shortened some
six inches or so, in the other.
His coat, together with a hat to correspond, caused him
to resemble a small tenant farmer.
As he left the outskirts of Clonbur, in company with
Brennan, a car was rapidly approaching the little hamlet.
“ Whist, this is him !” ejaculated his guide : “I can see
the glint of the sun on the peeler’s gun. Take a good
look at him as he g 'es by, the black-hearted thafe of the
world, bad luck to him.”
The car Avas driven by a firm yet mild-looking elderly
man, in the dress of a country gentleman.
An armed policeman accompanied him.
As the vehicle passed them Brennan saluted the driver,
who acknowledged it graciously.
*' Ah, ye murtherin’ ould villin!” muttered Brennan, is
a bitter tone, as soon as the car and its occupants were
out of earshot, “ the curse of Cromwell be on ye. Plazo
God, it’ll be a cowld bed ye’ll be slapin’ in this night.”
“ Have you got any spite against the old buffer,” asked
Ned, somewhat surprised at his companion's vehemence,
“ for any ill turn he has done you?”
“Divil a ha’porth,” was the frank answer, “ out isn't he
one of the bloodsuckers of the country? Isn’t he a
hathen protestant ? Isn’t he a Saxon tyrant that’s thramp-
lin’ the very life of his poor tinantry ?” was the reply, in a
tone Avhich plainly implied that the speaker was deeply
surprised that anyone could be ignorant of the tacts for a
single moment.
To tell the truth, Mr. Mountclare was a man of old
Irish family, and one of the mildest landlords in the dis-
trict.
If Brennan had taken the trouble to reason out the
state of affairs, he would possibly have come to this con-
clusion, but he preferred to accept the dictum of the
Fenian emissaries, who denounced the poor gentleman as
a Saxon tyrant, to taxing his own brain on the subject.
The road they were travelling along was bounded on
either side by uneven stone Avails, and ran betAA'een low
hills and broken rocky ground, affording more than one
convenient lurking-place.
At an eminence about a mile from the hamlet, Ned
halted and looked round.
He felt very sick of the job. His heart was not in it.
He didn’t care a pinch of salt Avhether all the peasantry
in Ireland were starving or not; still he must hoav go on.
A range of hills rose about a quarter of a mile from the
road on the one hand, Avhilst on the other a stretch of
rocky, undulating ground SAvept down to the shores of
Lough Corrib.
Ned scanned the surroundings approvingly.
“ There’s a boat down yondther, by that bit of rock ye
see sticking up beyant,” said Brennan, “so that if a man
Avanted to get off by wather he could do it aisy ”
“ Yes,” assented Ned, as he continued to look round,
“ it’s a handy place. There’s firstrate cover behind the
Avail, and he must slacken pace a bit up the rise of the
hill. Why, it Avill be as easy to bring him doAvn as a tamo
goose. Hang it, it’s almost mean to pot a poor devil like
that. But, hilloa! Ave’li be spotted here—look at that
crib, there,” pointing to a comfortable-looking thatched
cabin, about two hundred yards distant
“Arrah, Avhat matther, sure they are all for tho
‘ cause.’ ”
“ Qh, your cause, if my neck's to pay for it. Sup-
pose they split ?”
Brennan stared.
“What is it ye mane noAV?” he asked, in wondering
tones.
“ Why the people there will be sure to tAvig the. job and
spot me,” replied Ned ; “I mean they’ll be bound to see
Avhat I’m about.” .
“ Do you think they’re dirty protestants and Avould risk
their sowls by breaking the oath they’ve sworn by ail the
Saints’ to keep ?” and Brennan crossed himself devoutly.
“And if they do, sure ” was the answer.
“ Well, for all that, if a reward Avas offered, they might
blow the gaff.”
“ An’ what’s that now?”
“ Why to peach, to let on to the police.”
“ Divil a Avord, ye may rest yer soavl on it. Not *1
finger Avill anyone hereaAvay be after lifting to hindther yer,
and sorra a Avorrud will the blood-thirsty palers be abla tt>
git out o’ them.”
“ That’s good ucavs, anyway,” said Ned.
After a brief consultation the plan of action wftf;
arranged.
It Avas settled that Ned should make his way to a clump
of Avoodland, lying on the hillside, at a short distance,,
and pass the rest of the day there ; Brennan undertaking
to bring or send some food, and to arrange means of fiigut
when the deed had been done.


CHAPTER CLXXXIX.
KELLT AS A PRACTICAL LAND LAW REFORMER.
This programme was carried out.
Ned retreated to the wood, and throwing himself on the
ground, began to smoke his pipe.
If he had been a lover of nature, bent upon a morning
of tranquil enjoyment, instead of a cold-blooded murderer
awaiting the hour of crime, he could not have taken things
more coolly.
But he was body and soul a man of iron.
Not a spark of pity for his intended victim stirred in his
adamantine breast.
He had not long been lying perdu, when he noticed a
girl coming across the ‘ bit o’ plough,” lying between the
road and the wood.
She carried a basket in her hand and was evidently
making her way towards the wood.
Ned showed himself for a moment, and she came straight
up to him.
She handed him the basket and said—
“ Misther Brennan bid me tell ye, sir, that there will
be a man waitin’ for ye in the boat he pointed out, and
that he thinks that the safest way for ye.”
So saying, she left; leaving Ned in a state of comical
wonderment, at the cool and open manner in which the
details of a murder were planned in Ireland.
After feeding off the contents of the basket and smoking
several mere pipes, Ned thought it time to make the final
preparations.
He had been warned by Brennan, that Mr. Mountclare
would hardly leave Clonbur before dusk ; he thought it as
well to be a little in advance.
The road was bordered on either side by walls, com-
posed of stones roughly piled together.
The height of these walls varied according to the hold-
ings th§y enclosed, in some instances being only a couple
of feet high and in others four or five.
Other walls, serving to separate the different fields, ran
off at right angles to those bordering the road.
At the point which Ned had selected, just at the top of
a rise in the road, some two hundred yards beyond the
cabin, already mentioned, the wall bordering the road was
nearly six feet in height.
Ned took up his position in the angle where one of the
walls dividing the fields started.
He began to pull down two or three stones, in order
to form a convenient loophole through which to fire.
Whilst so engaged a couple of men passed along the
road.
He was so closely occupied that he did not notice them
till they were close abreast of him.
Designedly or unintentionally, however, they did not
speak to him, neither did they pay the least attention to
the somewhat singular task on which he was at that mo-
ment engaged.
They passed on, and he saw them enter the cabin.
“I don’t much like that,” he thought, “ but I suppose
it’s some of the same pack.”
Glancing around him, he could make out that there was
more than one labourer at work on the hillside.
From the studied indifference to his work exhibited by
the people about, he knew they were sympathisers, and
that he was as safe as the Pope of Rome.
Still, the work had nothing in it to attract or stimulate
him.
If it was to protect himself, all right; but “ the cause ”
and all the tenantry and Fenians in Ireland might go to
the bottomless pit for what he cared. In fact, he wished
them ad there at this moment.
E®r some time longer he remained at his post, watchful
and observant, his eye “ skinned ” and his ear alert for
the slightest sound.
He "had completed his loophole, and had now sank
down behind the wall completely out of sight, so far as
anyone passing along the road, either on foot or on a car,
was concerned.
He had arranged the loophole so that through it h«
could command a pretty fair extent of road, and now he
sat on a stone close to the wall, with his eye glancing
through the aperture in question.
A few peasants had passed along the road, and once no
had pricked his ears at the sound of wheels, but only to
find that they were those of a turf-cart.
Dusk was fast coming on, and the road, as far as he
could see, was utterly deserted.
At length his strained ears caught the sound of some
vehicle approaching from Clonbur at a sound pace.
He glanced in that direction.
At first he could only make out a dark object rapidly
advancing from the hamlet.
In a few moments more he could discern that it was a
car conveying two people.
He had no doubt that it was the one he was awaiting,
and, indeed, he was soon certain of this fact.
The colour of the horse and the uniform of the police-
man were easily recognised.
A momentary hesitation crossed his mind.
It was not whether he should abandon his attack, foi
such an idea as that never entered his head.
What he was in doubt was, which he should fire at
first, Mr. Mountclare or the policeman.
The former was the most important to dispose of, but
the latter was the most dangerous, besides which his very
calling made Kelly feel inclined to give him the prefer,
ence.
He hated a policeman with the furious antipathy of a
London rough.
He evidently had his gun in readiness, and was no doubt
a fair shot and a formidable antagonist.
Ned s mind was one of those which are soon made up
in an emergency like the one now presenting itself.
“I’ll down the bobby first,” was his decision. “It
won’t take much trouble to pick off the other old cove
before be can get away.”
Withdrawing his head from the loophole, through which
he had been observing the approach of the car, he replaced
it by the barrel of his gun, taking care, however, not to
thrust it too far forward, least it should be observed from
the road.
Then dropping on one knee, and glancing along the
weapon, he prepared for his right and left shot.
As he had anticipated, the horse was compelled to
slacken speed a little in breasting the rise, but neverthe-
less he came up at a fair pace.
For all this Ned felt confident of his aim.
In a few seconds more the car was almost abreast of
his loophole, and he had a fair view of it.
With the speed of thought he sighted the unfortunate
policeman, and pulled the trigger of the right hand barrel.
A bright flash seemed to leap from out the stone wall,
there was a loud report echoed back by the hills, and the
hapless policeman, toppling forward from his seat, pitched
headlong from the car into the roadway.
He was stone dead.
The muzzle of the gun had been scarcely six feet from
him when Ned pulled the trigger, and the swanshot had
acted like a bullet, and knocked a regular hole in him.
Before the report had died away, Ned shifted his aim,
and, levelling at Mr. Mountclare, pulled the second
trigger.
But, instead of toppling him over in turn as he antici-
pated, he found quite a different result.
No flash burst from the barrel, no shot whizzed forth
on his death-dealing errand.
The ruffian had been right, and Mr. Brennan wrong, as
to the propriety of stowing away a loaded gun in a peat
stock.
The charge in the left-hand barrel had somehow o.
other got damp, and the result was that the cap snapped,
but that no explosion followed.
Mr. Mountclare realised the position direcuv the tints
shot was fired.


He had been living in hourly anticipation of such an
occurrence for the past three months, and when it thus
came it did not find him unprepared.
He realised simultaneously the death of the policeman
and his own peril.
For aught he knew half-a-dozen assassins might be
lurking behind the wall from which the shot had been
fired with such fatal effect as regarded his companion.
Flight was the best and only thing.
Hastily ramming down powder and slugs into the dis-
charged gun, Kelly deliberately took aim at the unfortu-
nate gentleman, and lodged a douple of slugs in his right
arm, which, when struck, was in the act of gently applying
the whip to the mare to increase her pace at this ugly
corner of the road.
Immediately on hearing the report of the gun, and
frightened by the flash, the animal sprung i-v'vard, but
not before the driver leaped from his seat, witn a pistol
in his left hand (having instantly seized a revolver which
lay handy on the seat beside him), and, being a powerful
and very active man, rushed for Kelly.
He felt his right arm was done for and helpless, and the
blood oozing rather rapidly from the wound. He was
perfectly collected, and was soon within a few yards of
the would-be assassin, who, afraid of nothing on the earth
or out of it, awaited, in the consciousness of his great
strength what he thought would be a very feeble attack.
But when he saw Mr. Mountclare clear at a bound the
epace that separated them, pistol in hand, and felt the
whiz past his ear of the bullet that was discharged at his
head, he made tracks to enable him to get another shot
at his pursuer.
He soon put a respectable distance between himself and
his enemy, at the same time succeeding in reloading his
piece (which was not a breechloader) hastily, and without
being able to ram down the charge.
Having, as he now judged, sufficient power to kill, or
at least disable, Mr. Mountclare, he calmly awaited the
approach of his panting pursuer, into whose body he
poured charge No. 2, but only inflicted flesh-wounds.
Astounded at the apparent unwounded condition of his
enemy, and aware that he had a foe not easily shaken off,
he clubbed his gun, and, striking the unfortunate man a
powerful blow on the right ankle, brought him to the
ground.
Before he was struck he unfortunately exclaimed—
“ I’d swear to you, you scoundrel, amongst a million! ”
Down came the sweeping blow, and no sooner was
he prostrate than the barrel, wielded by the ruffian’s
powerful arms, crashed through the skull of Fenian ven-
geance.
So exhausted was Kelly with the chase and the excite-
ment ,that he deliberately sat down upon a large stone
near him, none of the people looking on taking the least
notice of the fray, and inwardly sympathising with this
mode of petitioning for “ Justice to Ireland.”
Fearing his victim might still survive, Kelly quietly re-
loaded his gun.
“ Be quick wid your b'essed work, agrah !” suggested a
bystander, who guessed what the assassin was about.
“ Sure the music o’ them shots may invite the peelers to
the dance, and, maybe, they’d choose you for a partner,
and be so tuk wid you that they wouldn't give up your
company for a bit. The poor craythur’s best out of his
misery, and a bit of lead, more or less, when he’s got so
much of it, may be convainient for yiz both.”
Kelly never opened his lips, but he followed the advice,
and effectually prevented the probability of Mr. Mount-
dare’s ever swearing to him amongst a million. His corpse
was some distance from that of the policeman, for accord-
ing to the Tones he had jumped two ditches, and with
his broken bleeding arm, ran one hundred and fourteen
yards I
His body lay exposed, where it fell, for some two
hours.
The home, wSteh had been frightened by the report of
the firearms, and suddenly finding itself loose from the
usual curb of the reins, bolted, and, with the instinct ot
its kind, made straight home at a rattling pace to ita
stables. Hearing the rapid approach of the horse and ca*
—the pace being greatly in excess of the ordinary one— the
inmates rushed out to see w>iat was the cause of this un-
usual speed, when the vehicle was observed to be empty
and the condition of the animal obviously unusual.
The worst fears were immediately entertained, and a
neighbouring gentleman, accompanied by police, proceeded
along the road taken by the unhappy victim.
They soon were at the fatal spot. Horror was stamped
on the countenances of the party. They reverently lifted
the body and made for the snug neighbouringcabin, whose
contiguity had first of all discouraged Kelly. It was
tenanted by a man named Flanagan.
The body was at once taken there, but Flanagan obstin-
ately refused it admission under the plea that if it was ad-
mitted nothing belonging to him would be alive that day
twelvemonths.
He even refused to allow it to be taken into an out-
house, and nothing could be done but to place it on a oar
and convey it back to Clonbur, though before this was
accomplished the doctor was satisfied that life was totally
extinct.
And here the police, or rather, the masters, showed
their usual folly. Why not have forcibly used the fellow's
premises? They manage these little affairs better in
France. The idea of perilling a man’s life out of deference
to fantastic “ rights ” is not only foolish but illogical,
A policeman can call upon a passer-by to assist him in a
capture, but he can call upon a householder to receive in
his outhouse a half-murdered man, whose removal might
produce death. This is the abuse, not the use, of the law.
The police, employed in the exercise of these onerous
duties, are openly refused the use of vehicles for transport.
In any other country in the globe they could be taken. A
man’s property is tak>m when such an act is for the public
good; but a licensed car is sacred though needful to those
employed in suppressing rebellion, and the fire, blood, and
misery that accompanies it.
Well might Madame Roland exclaim when under the
guillotine—“ Oh, liberty, what deeds are done in thy
name.”
The liberty acceded in this instance by the authorities
to the sympathisers with anarchy and rebellion is opposed
to common-sense, and only possible under a timid and
vacillating government.
As to evidence, Flanagan and his family at the inquest
swore they had not heard any shots, and, neither he, nor
the friend who had seen Ned making his loophole, dreamed
of mentioning that fact.
The peasants working on the hill-side, who must have
actually witnessed the struggle, one and all declared they
had seen nothing, nothing whatever.
As in the Critic , “ their unanimity was wonderful."
Neither threats, bribes, or snares on the part of the
police were of the slightest use towards obtaining testi-
mony, and the Government reward was equally fruitless.
The bills offering it were pasted up in all directions,
and were spelled over by the peasantry, but there thek
effect began and ended, since not a soul troubled himselt,
or herself, about earning the sum promised for the
revelation of the name of Mr. Mountclare’s murderer.
CHAPTER CXC.
NED INTERVIEWS A HIGH OFFICIAL.
Owing to the excellent organisation under which the busi-
ness of assassination is carried on in Ireland Ned’s escape
was an easy one to accomplish.
A man was waiting for him with a boat at the spot in-
dicated to carry him some distance down the lake to a
point where a guide was stationed to direct him on his way.
He soon found the nearest railway for Dublin, receiv-
ing the Fenian sign en. route, from half of the railway sub-
ordinate employes on the line


But in course of this journey he began to realise a very
unpleasant fact.
He was no longer his own master.
He was nothing more nor less than the bond slave of
the Fenian Brotherhood, since he had to halt where they
decided and to journey as they wished.
To a man accustomed as he was to the widest possible
personal liberty, the mere suspicion of a chain was irri-
tating in the extreme.
This circumstance and the climate combined to render
him extremely savage and discontented.
“I’ve had about enough of this beastly country,” he
soliloquised. “ It’s nothing but like living in a marsh.
The confounded drizzle, drizzle, all day long is enough to
turn a man’s blood to water. The sun, when it does
shine, is like a tallow-tap in a scooped-out turnip. Blowed
if I wouldn’t do six months on the mill than stop here for
half that time. I’ll hook it. I’m not going to be shunted
about all over the country like a bag of wool. If these
Vlokes think they’re going to have me as tame as a bull-
pup to their call, they’ll find out their mistake before
long.”
But he found that to get clear of the toils into which
he had thrust himself was no easy matter.
He soon realised that every movement he made was
watched, and he was furthermore told that he must hold
himself in readiness to do his duty to the cause at any
moment’s notice and without hesitation.
He was also given to understand that he was under sur-
veillance like the rest, and that the slightest °uspicion of
his loyalty would be followed by deadly vengeance. This
turned his blood to gall; and he resolved, not only to put
the ocean between himself and the brotherhood, hut to
sell the lot, if he could make anything out of the sale.
Arrived in Dublin, he fell in with a Yankee Fenian,
with whom he “liquored up” to a fearful extent, and
whom he agreed to accompany to America.
The two villians soon understood one another upon one
point, and that was to sell their party, or any one of them,
to the authorities, provided the price was tempting and
silence could be secured.
Having concluded this compact, Kelly, in one of the
subsequent drinking bouts, let out his possession of a con-
siderable sum of money, and at the same time slapping his
waistband, said that was his blooming bank.
It was enough for his friend. At the next bout, he
simply hocussed Kelly, and while the latter was insensible,
plundered him of his ill-gotten gains. On coming to him-
self, he discovered his loss and knew the thief.
The reader can imagine the fury, and, at the same time,
the consternation, the stranded rascal felt.
He guessed at once the bird had flown, and that he was
powerless But he was a man of action. Money he must
have, and only one way remained open to him to accomp-
lish that end.
He quickly made up his mind.
One fine morning he presented himself at the Castle
and demanded an interview with the secretary.
After half-a-dozen understrappers had tried, firstly to
choke him off altogether, secondly to snub him into im-
becility, and thirdly to learn all about the business that
brought him there, he was at length admitted to the
presence of the official he desired to see.
As soon as ho had broached the subject of his visit,
the secretary put on the bland official smile in use in
such cases.
“My good fellow,” he began, in a patronising manner,
“ I can assure you that you are rather late in the day.
We have already been placed in possession of full details
of the Fenian agitation.”
Ned saw through his game.
“Oh! you have, have you?” he replied. “ Then why
don’t you go and cop the blessed lot?”
“There"are reasons of State which it is quite impos-
sible t/ n discuss here,” said the secretary, with a dignified
wave or bis nano.
“ What are you offering those rewards for. then tf you
know all about it? Perhaps you know, too, that you are
spotted, and that your gov’uor is marked down too said
Kelly, with cool audacity.
The official looked somewhat scared, as he *.new the
brotherhood would hesitate very little to carry out such a
purpose if practicable.
Having already, from other sources, the thread of the
conspiracy in his hands, he was able, by adroit questions,
to discover that Kelly was behind the scenes, he listened to
the tempter with more interest.
“ Look here,” said Ned, “ you say you know all about
the Fenian business. Well, I daresay you’ve had al it of
peddling little sneaks come to you and offer to t-T yot
this, that, and the other for a price.”
The other smiled and nodded assent.
“ But did any one of ’em name the day next week
that’s been fixed for cutting your throat and that of every
other man Jack in this old building?” retorted Ned, with
an earnestness that went far to convince the other of his
sincerity.
“ Perhaps you had better explain yourself a little more
fully,” observed the secretary.
“ Very well, iu the first place there's a plot to seize on
this place.”
“ We know that already—that’s no news.”
“ But you don’t know when or how it is to come off, or
who are to take part iu it. Now let us come to the point.
For a hundred pounds cash down and a free passage to the
colonies I’ll put you in the way to bag the whole lot—say
the word.”
“ Really, the suddenness of the offer renders it quite im-
possible for me to accept it. I will consult the home
authorities, and, if, after due consideration, we find—
“Oh, stow all that—it won’t wash! You’ve got the
power to settle the job and plank down the coin. I’m
not a fellow to shilly-shally, and I tell you straight, that if
once I walk out of this old caboose of yours, you’ll be sorry
for it.”
“ But suppose, mind I only say suppose,” said the
secretary, with a smile, “ that we do not care to part with
a gentleman possessed of such very valuable information
as you claim to be ?”
“You mean you’ll clap me iu quod, eh? unless I’ll
speak out; is that it?” cried Ned.
“ Precisely.”
“ Well, then, you’d have to keep me here rill I rotted,
before you’d get a word out of me.”
'Die secretary saw that such was the case; he also knew
that if he carried his threat into execution, he would effec-
tually stop all future sources of information from the class
to which his informant belonged—and thus stop up all
sources of information from the best quarters—and to
which the Government was already indebted for many
important particulars of the plot they desired to unravel.
“Well, sir,” he remarked with his most official air,
“it may be as well, after all, to entertain your applica-
tion.
“ You say you are in possession of certain information of
great importance, which you are willing to impart for a
consideration, namely, the sum of one hundred pounds.”
“In gold, mind,” broke in Ned. “ None of your cheques.
I’ve seen that dodge played more than once, and none of
your flimsies either. Gold is my price, take it or leave it,
as the coster said to the old woman when she told him that
his fish stank.”
“ I think if you will show me you are in a position to
give the information you promise, that I can recommend
the payment of the sum you wish,” said the secretary.
The fact was that the authorities were perfectly aware
that a plot was hatching at that time for the seizure of
the castle, hut were utterly at a loss as to its details, and
for some weeks had been living in hourly fear of an out-
break.
Hence, after a little more discussion, the secretary
agreed to the terms.


The money having been handed over, for Kelly refused
to open his lips till that had been done, Ned proceeded to
unfold the plot then in progress for the seizure of the
castle.
Of the fact of sn*h a plot having been formed, most
people are aware, though the exact circumstances under
which it was revealed to Government have hitherto been
kept a secret.
At that time the political situation rendered it necessary,
before all things, that matters should be kept as quiet as
possible in Ireland.
It was a knowledge of this kind of forbearance that en-
couraged the Fenians to go as far as they did.
It was only at their direst extremity that anything like
decisive measures were taken againt them.
Hence, even when in possession of the information given
by Kelly they hesitated about making full use of it.
Political trials of any kind are unpopular.
They contented themselves, therefore, with taking
measures to secure the castle from attack, and even went
so far as to warn the intending rebels a few days later,
that their plot was found out.
There was little need of this latter step, however.
The excitement prevailing amongst the officials, the
coming and going of messengers, the doubling of sentries,
and the hasty convocation of the authorities, were suffi-
cient warning to the Fenian leaders that something
was up.
-By means of their spies they learnt, that without a
doubt, they had been betrayed, though by whom was at
£rst a profound mystery.
At length the fact of Ned’s visit to the castle became
known to them. The fact was, that one of the castle ser-
vants, a red-hot,Fenian, had seen Kelly call several times
at the Chief Secretary’s office, and communicated that fact
to the conspirators.
They at once resolved to take summary vengeance upon
him for his treachery.
The task of putting him quietly out of the way was
at once delegated to a member of the brotherhood.
But when he proceeded to the quarters occupied by
Kelly in order to learn the most feasible way of setting
about the task, he found the bird had flown.
Ned had seen quite enough of the Fenians to know
tne danger to which he was exposing himself by betraying
them.
He resolved, therefore, to clear out from Dublin directly
he had completed his revelations.
On quitting the castle with his blood- ? oney, he had
returned to his lodgings
After stowing away the cash in a belt which he had
bought on the way, he buckled this round him, packed up
his traps, and that same evening went on board the Lady
Clive, bound for London, there being no chance just
then of a direct passage from Dublin to the colonies.
It did not take long for the Fenians to find this out,
and the boat that left the following night for Holyhead,
bore with it a dwarfish-looking, red-headed fellow,
answering to the name of Mike Hefferman, to whom the
task of avenging them on Kelly had been entrusted.
CHAPTER CXCI.
DONE ON BOTH SIDES.
The reasons that prompted Ned to take the boat to Lon-
don, instead of proceeding thither by way of that con-
glomeration of public-house, and dissenting-chapels,
known as the town of Holyhead, were two in number.
He judged that if any of his late friends wished to make
enquiries as to his destination, they would be less likely to
suspect his departure by this route, and, consequently,
that there was a chance of them losing the scent.
Although he had a hundred pounds, Ned judged that if
a dance of doing a little bit of business on the way, in
order just to cover his travelling expenses, did arise he
would certainly not neglect it.”
fcoaid lie boat, and occupying one of the berths in
the same cabin as himself, was a highly respectable-look-
ing, elderly gentleman.
Amongst his goods and chattels, was a fair-sized blnce
travelling-bag, concerning the safety of which he seemed
more than usually anxious.
It was placed in his berth, though it did not seem to
contain any travelling requisites, and was never opened by
him.
He profited by the old fellow’s absence from the cr,‘>m,
to lift it. and was at once struck by its weight.
He tried to get in conversation with the owner, but did
not succeed very well, for the stranger was, to Ned’s idea,
a “ dry old stick,” and was not inclined to chum with such
a rough and ready style of customer as the bushranger.
In course of the day, he heard the stranger mentioning,
in the course of conversation, that he always insured his
luggage, which struck Ned as somewhat singular, unless
there was something more than mere wearing-apparel t>>
insure. It increased his suspicions that the black bag was
valuable. He resolved that he and that bag should be
better acquainted, but the question was how to manage it.
The old man evidently kept a close watch over his pro-
perty, and had even gone so far as to ask the steward to
have any eye to it.
It was locked too, though Ned judged that it would be
easy enough to cut it open with a knife, provided he could
arrange to decamp unobserved with its contents.
He puzzled in his mind as to whether there was any
chance of slipping ashore with it at any of the places at
which the boat stopped on her way to London, but he
could not hit upon one.
Especially as he noticed that the old fellow was on the
alert, and that there would be little prospect of quitting
the boat with the bag unnoticed.
They had touched at Falmouth and were nearing Ply-
mouth when he hit upon the germ of a plan.
He went down into the main cabin, and then passed
into the smaller one in which was his berth, leaving the
door open on purpose, so that if the steward chose to look
in he would see that he was not up to any tricks.
Then he sat down, and for about ten minutes stared hia
hardest at the bag.
It was as though he desired to imprint a mental photo-
graph of it on his mind, and such was his object.
When he felt certain that the shape and size were
stamped upon his memory, he rose and left the cabin,
On reaching Plymouth, where a stay of several bours-
was made, he went on shore and visited several outfitting
shops in succession.
It was some time before he could get what he wanted,
but at last he became the owner of a bag in ail respects
like the one on board.
But this did not satisfy him.
He seemed to have a decided fancy for bags, for at an-
other establishment he purchased the largest carpet bag
he could find.
In this he placed the first one he had bought, together
with several articles of ironmongery, small but weighty,
of which he had also become the proprietor.
He then returned on board, and slipping down into the
cabin again, proceeded to rub and discolour the new bag
until it was an exact copy of the one belonging to the
stranger.
He then placed the articles of ironmongery in it, and
stuffed it over with old newspapers and odd articles of
wearing apparel, till it was a tolerably exact reproduction
of the other, as regarded size and weight.
Then he replaced it in the huge carpet-bag, and waited
till the fitting time arrived to carry out his plan.
“ This, I fancy, will be a pretty neat job,” he thought;
“ the old fellow would not be so precious anxious about it
unless it was something jolly well worth laying hands on.
Rum old cubby he is. Blessed if I can make out his lingo
He was jabbering away about ‘ talks ’ and ‘ sacks,’ I’m
sure I caught something about bracelets and necklaces,
too.”


The next halting-place was Southampton, but this did
not quite suit Ned’s plans.
Portsmouth, at which they would also stop, was close at
hand, and if he discovered his loss, the old man could land
there
But on leaving Portsmouth the boat did not stop again
till she reached London, so Ned resolved to carry out his
plan at the seaport immortalised by Marryat
He told the steward that he should be delighted to go
on shore at Portsmouth, instead of proceeding to London.
When they got into harbour he stepped down to get
his traps together.
In a moment he had opened the carpet-bag, pulled out
the dummy, placed it in the old man’s berth, and thrust
the coveted prize in its place.
No sooner was the transfer effected, than the steward
sauntered in in a careless way.
He leant against the berth, and in a half unconscious
way lifted the bag Ned had just placed there.
“By Gosh!” thought the latter; “it was a lucky
thing I thought of making the weight all right! ”
It was evident that the steward was keeping a watch
over the old man’s property.
“ Rum old cock ; the chap that has thatberlh, steward,”
said Ned.
“Yes, sir,” answered the steward, with great civility,
for he could not help respecting a customer like Ned, who
had drunk about three times as much as any other man on
board, and had tipped him with colonial liberality. “ Very
respectable old gent, sir, though, and as rich as the Bank
of England. Isn’t he ? ”
“ Don’t know, I’m sure, sir; but he travels by our
boat two or three times a year regular, and is always liberal
to us, sir.”
“ I’m right,” thought Kelly. “That’s what he is—the
partner in a jewellery firm.”
After biding the steward good day, Ned made his way
to shore, having taken car* to delay doing so till just be-
fore the ship resumed her journey.
His luggage only consisted of a small portmanteau in
addition to the carpet-bag.
He consigned the former to a porter to carry, but re-
tained the latter in his hand.
The custom-house people merely asked him if he had
anything liable to pay duty, but did not trouble to ex-
amine his luggage.
Having engaged a fly, he was driven to the station, and
found that a train was on the point of starting for Lon-
don, and that, to his great satisfaction, it was an express.
He tipped the guard, and, with his precious bag, was
soon seated in a first-class compartment, and flying to-
wards the metropolis at full speed.
By this time he felt sure that the Lady Olive was well
on her way, and that even if the old fellow he had plun-
dered discovered his loss, he would have great difficulty
in getting on shore.
Ned felt in a great good humour.
In his own opinion, he had done the little trick very
neatly and cleverly, and he rather began to look on the
bag in the light of the reward of merit.
THE “ANONY
PICTURE
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
Ned was dumbfounded.
(To he continue i.)
MA ” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS
BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
“Now,” bemused, “I’ll just overhaul this little col-
lection, whatever it is.”
There was no prospect of the train stopping for at least
three-quarters of an hour, so he had plenty of time for
his delightful task.
He opened the carpet bag, and drew forth the other
with due deliberation.
He poised it for a moment in his hand.
“ It’s jolly heavy,” he muttered, approvingly. “ Ever
if they’re only gold fakements inside, they ought to be
worth a good lot. They must be, or the old buffer would
never half looked after them so sharp. How his bloom-
ing old chops will fall when he goes to open the bag I left
him, and finds all his swag changed into flatirons and
trivits.”
And Ned broke into a roar of laughter at the picture
he thus conjured up.
The bag was locked, but this offered no impediment.
Pulling out his knife, he opened it, and cut a gash right
along the side of his prize.
Into this he thrust his hand and pulled out an object
carefully enveloped in soft white tissue paper.
It was evidently of metal.
Carefully he undid it.
To his amazement, instead of some article wrought in
gold or silver, what to him appeared a shapeless lump of
dingy metal, eaten away by corrosion, made its
appearance.
In swift succession he pulled out half-a-dozen packages
of different sizes, and undid them.
The result was in every case the same.
The objects revealed were of different shapes and sizes,
and in various stages of dilapidation, but one and all ap-
peared to be composed of the same dingy corroded metal.
The bulk of them were to him mere shapeless lumps,
but in one or two he fancied he could trace a faint resem-
blance to such ornaments as some of the savages he had
met in his wanderings had worn.
Rapidly he emptied the bag in the hope of perhaps find-
ing a grain of wheat in all this chaff, Sut in this he was
disappointed.
Kate Hamilton. I Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
Agnes Will oughby. ( Woman.
The Soiled Dove. ! -ru D .... , _
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of The Beaut,ful Demon.
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp. The Lady with the Camelias.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion. Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLI: IRONCLAD BDSHEAN6ER.
It is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had m s,de himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated stead, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipode
as Dick Turpin’s Slack Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1831.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr, Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly's
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“ The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Nan
and his Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction,”— Press, July.
CHAPTER CXClL— Continued.
Then he relieved his feelings by swearing a string of
oaths, that almost splintered the window-panes.
“ By , I was chuckling just now at the thought of
the old fellow’s face when lie set eyes on my flat-irons.
The laugh would be on his side if he could only spot my
being sold over his filthy, rotten verdigris.”
Ned, however, was quite wrong in this conjecture.
The gentleman in question was a very earnest and very
w c al tb.y anti quarian.
He took a great interest in what is known as the Bronze
Periods, and his collection of -weapons, utensils, and orna-
ments belonging to that epoch was one of the most exten-
sive in the United Kingdom.
Hearing that an extensive “ find ” had lately been made
in Ireland, he bad hastened to secure it at great expense,
and had supplemented it with several other purchases.
In addition to the sceax and torques, that to Ned had
sounded as “ sacks and talks,” there were celts axe and
spear heads, sword blades, armlets, necklaces, brooches,
shield-bosses, and numerous similar objects which it re-
quired all the enthusiastic zeal and wonderfully credulous
perception of an antiquary to identify.
No doubt there were a few bits of modern copper tea-
kettles and the like mixed up with the lot.
Nevertheless the entire collection was one which an
appreciator of such things would almost go down on his
knees and -worship.
Only Ned was not at all an appreciator of such things,
which to him were simply dirty bits of metal.
Gathering the lot together, he hurled them by handfuls
-cut of the window.
The train at that moment was passing a range of
disused gravel pits, into which most of the relics pitched.
Here the bulk of them were discovered scattered some
months afterwards, and formed the staple for several
papers read at archeological societies, meetings in which
it was conclusively established that an extensive settle-
ment must have existed on the spot during the bronze
period.
The bag was also thrown out, and was appropriated by
-a thrifty farm-labourer, who got his wife to sew up the
hole in it.
This accomplished, Ned relieved his feelings by another
burst of highly seasoned adjectives. When he had done
«o he lit his pipe and smoked doggedly till he arrived at
Waterloo Station.
chapter exem.
AN AVENGER ON THE TRAIL.
Ned took up -ois quarters in a respectable private hotel in
a street off the Strand.
He resolved to “ play possum ” a bit.
The recollection of his late exploits in London, was, he
guessed, pretty fresh in the recollection of the police, and
he resolved to avoid appearing in any of his former
haunts.
Kit had gone to sea again, and Jess, who had been
released after Ned’s escape from capture in the matter of
the intended banknote forgeries, in consequence of there
feeing no case against her, returned to the colonies.
As to Peace, Ned did not care about renewing his con-
nection with that sanctimonious scoundrel, and he judged
it prudent not to hunt up any of the gambling set into
which he had been introduced by Anatole.
Time therefore hung a little heavy on his hands in the
evenings.
He did not like to sail by the P. c% O. boats, but made
enquiries as to when a sailing ship would leave for
Australia,
He found that none would clear out of dock for at
least four or five days, and that the first to sail was bound
for the little frequented port of Perth, on the Swan river
in Western Australia.
He was quite ignorant of this district, but thought he
should have no difficulty in getting on to Adelaide or
Sydney from there, so took his passage on board her.
He was pretty busy for the next day or so in buying a
small outfit for the voyage, but his evenings were dull.
He had a little touch of dulness on him which led him
to feel somewhat inclined for company.
All company was, in his mind, pretty much alike, pro-
vided there was a certain amount of noise, fun, and liquor;
so he took to visiting the minor music halls and to drink-
ing at a public till closing time.
Although his chief anxiety was to keep out of the ken
of the police, he was equally desirous of evading any con-
tact with his recent acquaintances, the Fenians.
Hence he shunned those establishments where the Irish
clement was likely to muster to the fore.
On the morning before that fixed for his departure, the
servant mentioned to him that, during his absence the
evening before, a gentleman, who had declined to leave
any name, had called to see him.
He did not like this, bub the morning passed without
anything suspicious happening.
Towards noon he sallied forth, having taken it into his
head to visit the Crystal Palace, where a popular f?j.e was
to take place, and where, if “ wanted,” the police would
scarcely look for him.
As he passed up his street into the Strand, he noticed a
little, cross-built, ugly-lookiug fellow with red hair, loung-
ing on the other side of the way, but paid no further at-
tention to him.
On reaching the Strand, he hailed a hansom to take him
to Ludgate Station.
If he had thought of looking round he would have seen
the stranger get into another and follow him.
The train was very full, and ha had some difficulty in
getting a place.
At the Palace, too, not only did he pass the day in the
thick of the crowd, but happened to run against some men
whose acquaintance he had made when in London before,
and to whom he stuck throughout the day, standing drinks
with a freedom that charmed them.
Once or twice he was seized with the impression that
someone was watching him, and, glancing round, caught
sight of a pair of eyes glaring at him from behind a pillar.
However, he soon succeeded in shaking off this impres-
sion.
ills friends, as evening drew on, closed round him like


a body-guard, and it was decided that they should all re-
turn to town and finish the evening together.
Here again, Ned could not help fancying that someone
was observing all his movements, nor was he mistaken.
The man Heffernan, to whom bad been entrusted the
mission of avenging Ned’s betrayal o* the Fenian plot,
was indeed on his track.
It was an emissary of Lis who had called the night be-
fore at Ned’s residence, which the Fenians had only Just
succeeded in discovering; for his dodge of leaving the
boat at Portsmouth, had for tho time thrown the Fenian
police quite off his track.
Indeed, had he not been accidentally spotted in the
streets of London by a Fenian acquainted with his person,
who tracked him home, and told Heffernan of his where-
abouts, he would have probably got out of the country
unknown to any of them.
Heffernan’s agent had learnt from the people at Kelly’s
hotel that he was preparing to leave immediately, and,
therefore, there was no time to be lost.
Accordingly, he set himself to follow Ned like Lis
shadow.
But the entire day had passed away without his being
able to get the chance he sought.
Ned was either surrounded by people, or mixed up in a
crowd.
As thv time sped on, Heffernan grew more and more
desperate as to the feasahility of his attempt.
He was one of those reckless fanatics, who when worked
up to a certain pitch, count life as nothing compared to
the accomplishment of the object on which their souls are
set.
He had sworn to slay Ned, and he had made up his
mind to do this, even if his own life paid the forfeit.
Escape was a secondary consideration.
Ned had gone to the Hoxton theatre, and taken hie
place in the back of tho pit, to escape as much as possible,
general observation. Heffernan was uot far off.
His hand thrust into his breast, gripped the hilt of a
long, double-edged knife, ground to the sharpness of a
razor, with which he had armed himself in preference to
firearms, as being likely to do the job without making a
noise.
He left the theatre shortly before the fall of the curtain,
and took up his position in the passage amongst the
crowd who were pouring out from the pit.
The crowd was a dense one, and being a little man he
had great difficulty in trying to work his way through it
towards Ned.
Just too, as he was getting near him, a man who had
been indulging in several drinks between the acts, pitched
forward and completely cut off his approach from his
victim.
Kelly noticed him, however, and as he left the theatre
the recollection of having seen the same face in the morn-
ing crossed his mind.
Heffernan resolved to follow and do his work without
& witness.
Kelly strode along at a brisk pace with his enemy fol-
lowing stealthily in his roar.
CHAPTER CXCIV.
Jed settles the fenian emissary.
Their route at first, however, lay along a thoroughfare so
lively and well-lighted, that Heffernan resolved to defer
striking his blow till a somewhat fairer opportunity pre-
sented itself.
He did not want to be checked in his work by the
interference of some officious bystander.
Suddenly Ned turned into a huge gin-palace, the
lavishly decorated bar of which was blazing with light.
Heffernan followed him.
A very motley lot of individuals were collected in front
cf the long pewter counter, behind which half a dozen
sturdy, white-shirt-sleeved barmen were hard at work
attending to the wants of their numerous customers.
These chiefly consisted of costermongers, labourers,
small traders and the like, with a sprinkling of thieves
and cadgers
Ned shouldered his way to the bar and called for a
drink.
His appearance being rather better than that of many
present, drew some attention from the cadging portion
of the assembly.
A cripple, all tongue and wooden log, like the sign Of
the Magpie and Stump, began badgering him in a hissing,
husky voice, sounding like chronic-catarrh, but in reality
due to the “ blue ruin,” to “ buy er box o’ lights.”
Another old wretch whose scalp, save for three or four
long grey hairs on the top of it. was as smooth as a ucw-bora
baby’s, and whose skeleton frame was so wrapped in an old
brown overcoat which looked as if at some former period
it had seen hard service on a scarecrow in a cornfield, re-
quested to be refreshed at his expense.
Ned, being in a reckless, generous humour, complied
with this modest request, and extended his hospitality to
several others of the company, who gathered round him
in a way which prevented Heffernan from getting near him
He only bided his time, however.
Ned liked to be the king of the company, and, when
“ half-cock,” was apt at times to 41 blow ” somewhat.
He took it into his head to extol the beauties of colonial
life, and sketched Australia as a land overflowing, if not
with milk and honey, at least with rum and mutton.
His hearers listened with some attention, for there
are no people sharper to guage a man than the lower
classes in London, and they could see that, though gener-
ously inclined, he was not a 44 mug.”
44 Are the wages good there?” enquired a respectable
mechanic.
• flood! I believe you. A chap like you could get a
pound a day easily.”
44 What’s the use of giving a man a pound a day if be
von’t work for it?” said a one-eyed cadger, with a grin,
a remark which caused the other to toy with a peculiar
and meaning playfulness with the heavy pewter measure
on the counter before him.
44 Shut hup. boss-heye!” growled a hulking coster-
monger, in a blue jersey, with a species of white bolster
swathed around his bull neck.
44 Who are yer a -callin’ 4 boss-eye ’?" retorted the other.
44 Some coves with one eye can see a eight better than
them as has two.”
44 Just so,” remarked another of the company ; 44 we all
know as how you can spot a likely-lookin’ old lady or
gentleman with half an eye, and keep the other half for
the copper as is a watching on yer.”
From Australia Ned turned his attention to Ireland
the climate and the loss of his money combined having
given him a deep grudge against that country, despite his
descent.
He wound up a scathing denunciation of it by calling
it—
44 A filthy bog-hole full of squabbling swine living ia
styes, and only fit to be dug in the ground to -manure their
own potato patches with.”
This gave a chance, for which Heffernan was wading,
44 That’s a loie, sor I ” he exclaimed in aloud voice,
which at once attracted Kelly’s notice.
44 Hiiloa! ” cried Ned. 4 - Here’s one of the swine. VTlio
are you, you pig-faced bog-trotter ?”
44 Only an Oirishman, sor, who’s not going to say Lis
down-throdden counthree abused by the loikes of yeseif,”
said Heffernan, pushing his way forward towards Ned, his
eyes gleaming with fury and revenge,
Heffernan had gained a position in front of Ned, and
gave a wave of Ms arms to keep the rest of those around
from crowding in on him.
44 It’s a loiar, sor, that ye are ! ” he continued, with the
evident intention of provoking Ned to some commence-
ment of violence, in order to find an excuse for uv :g Ms
knife.


“ Stand back, you monkey-faced hound ! ” said Ned, as
he all at once recognised the man who had been dogging
his footsteps all day, and whose face he had caught a
glimpse of.
The thought that the stranger might be a police-spy
crossed his mind.
“Never mind, old pal," putin a bystander, “it’s not
worth rowing over.”
“ Will ye come outside and setthle the mattlier?” cried
Heffernan, wishing to lure Ned into some by-street.
“ D’ye think I'd strangle a shrimp like you, you hump-
backed crab?”
A laugh followed these words.
“ Order there!” cried one of the barmen, sharply.
“ Ye’re a murtherin’ loiar and a big blackguard of a
coward!” yelled Heffernan, striving to provoke him. “Ye
daren’t fight me!”
“ No fighting here,” cried the barman.
“Shut up, you blathering fool!” said Ned to Heffernan,
“ I could wring your neck if I’d a mind to in a jiffey.
Here, have a drink and end this shindy.”
This was exactly what Heffernan did not want.
“ Be easy, now, dear,” observed a lady, whose own face
and bonnet bore evidence that she had engaged in
personal conflict in course of the evening, “or you’ll get
chucked.”
Heffernan glared at Kelly with his red, ferret-like eyes.
Finding that he could not provoke Ned to an attack,
and seeing that if he persisted in kicking up a noise ho
would get himself turned out of the house, ho resolved to
end the matter at all risks.
He had sworn to have Kelly’s life.
He thrust his hand into his bosom, whilst a look of
fiendish hatred distorted his naturally hideous features.
Ned was standing with his elbow on the counter, at a
distance of about four feet or so from him.
The contrast between the two men as they thus stood
facing one another—the tall, bulky bushranger, with his
reckless air and dark, coarsely handsome features, and his
dwarfish enemy, whose cocoauut-shaped scull was thatched
with a thick felt of red hair, and whose thickly freckled
face was of a type to be met with in the highest develop-
ment in the monkey-house at the Zoological Gardens
was most marked.
Suddenly clearing the intervening space at a bound, and
rimultaneously unsheathing his knife, Heffernan threw
himself on Kelly.
Twice the bright blade flashed in the air, and twice to
all seeming was buried in Ned’s body, the latter astounded
at the suddeness of the onslaught had time neither to escape
or to defend himself.
So swift had been the attack that the bystanders had
i.ad no chance to interfere.
They gave Kelly up for lost.
Heffernan had aimed his blows with deadly intent at the
lower pari of the bushranger’s body.
Ned s hand tightened round the handle of a quart pot
from which he was drinking.
He threw his mighty arm high above his head.
The next instant lie brought it down with a swing, like
that of a trip-hammer, full on his assailant’s scull
Heffernan dropped to the ground as though smitten bj
lightening itself.
His scull was fractured.
A convulsive quiver ran through his limbs, he drew up
bia knees and crossed his arms over his stomach.
“The knifing coward.”
“ The scoundrel."
“ That’s right, mate.”
\nd a chorus of similar cries broke forth.
The crowd hid all an Englishman’s love of fair play.
In a fight between Ned and Heffernan, their sympathies
would have been all on the side of the latter, as the
smaller man, but this dastardly attempt at assassination
fead thoroughly disgusted them.
Th® knife they held in abhorrence.
One of them bent over Heffernan.
He then rose and stepped quietly up to Ned.
“Mate, I’m afeered you’ve killed him,” ho said, ia, a
low tone. “ Are you hurt, ‘ yourself V’ ”
“ That’s so,” added a companion. “ You’d better bolt,
or the coppers ’ll nail you.”
“ Oh ! we can all swear he put a knife into you first,”
said the first.
“ Hook it at once,” cried a third, “if you are able. It’s
the best way.”
The advice was too good not to be taken, and Ned
moved swiftly towards the door, no one making the
slightest attempt to check or detain him.
The whole affair, indeed, had taken place so quickly that
many had hardly had time to realise the event, and others
had not yet recovered from the stupor into which it had
plunged them.
“ Hi, there, stop that man!” cried one of the barmen,
recovering from his confusion just as Ned reached the
door.
But no one paid the least attention, and before he could
get over the counter Ned had passed out through the
swing doors.
By the time the barman had managed to get there, the
bushranger had vanished.
The police were sent for, and Heffernan was conveyed
to the nearest hospital, where the house surgeon pro-
nounced life extinct
The greatest puzzle to those who had witnessed the
matter was the ease with which Kelly had been able to
kill his assailant, and then walk off after the fearful stabs
he had received.
They could not make it out.
The solution of the mystery was a very simple one.
Ned had placed the hundred sovereigns received from
the Government in a broad belt buckled round the lower
part of his body, and divided into a number of little com-
partments, each filled with coin.
Each time the knife had struck against this novel
armour, which it had failed to penetrate.
It was a strange irony that the very money that had
been paid to him for betraying the Fenians should hare
saved his life from the knife of the man deputed by them
as their avenger.
CHAPTER CXCY.
NEB IN LONDON HAS THE LUCK OF LEFROY At BRIGHTON
WITH THE POLICE.
Ned thought that the sooner he cleared out of London
after this little incident the better.
However, the adventures of the night were not yet
over for him, and he was destined to undergo a peril as
dangerous as the oas from which he had so luckily es-
caped.
On quitting the public-house he had walked sharply
along a little way, and turned down the nearest side
street.
Then, after making a detour, he had regained a main
thoroughfare, and made his way homewards.
By this time the public-houses were just closing, and a
number of drunken people, disgorged from them, were
beginning to reel about the streets, as is customary.
Ned could not help turning into one of them again to
obtain a final glass.
He seemed predestined to get into rows that night.
A strong-built, bandy-legged, bull-necked fellow, in
sportingly-cut tweed suit, with a pot-hat on his head, a
silk scarf, fastened by a huge horse-shoe pin, round his
neck, and a big cigar in bis mouth, was standing in the
bar.
He was one of that peculiar class who earn their living
by “ travelling the meetings,” or, in other words, attend-
ing races throughout the country.
He was, ostensibly, a bookmaker, but really picked u|>
a livelihood by welshing, “ lumbering,” “ brief snatching,
and the like pursuits.


Like all his kidney, he could use his hands a bit, and
was always ready to “take it out” of any “mug” who
might cut up rough after being “ gone through.”
He happened to bo in a very bad temper on the even-
ing on which Ned for the first time set eyes on him.
A very promising little “ plant,” in which he was es-
pecially interested, had gone wrong.
He was just in that state of mind in which a man is
ready to quarrel with his own shadow for following him
about.
He hardly noticed Ned’s entry into the little compart-
ment labelled “ private bar,” of which he was the sole
occupant, and seemed lost in bitter meditation.
Ned stepped up to the counter and demanded a brandy
and soda.
In taking it up, his arm accidentally touched that of the
stranger.
“What are you shoving for?" exclaimed the latter,
jerking his arm in such a fashion that his elbow struck
Ned’s so sharply as to cause him to spill a considerable por-
tion of the liquor he was conveying to his mouth on to the
floor.
“ Just look out what you’re up to !” replied Ned.
And he showed his half-empty glass.
“ Oh, rot! What’s the good of cackling about a drop
of spilt liquor? ”
“ Well, you’re blooming civil any way, you are.”
“ Civil be blowed,” returned the other. “If you don't
like it you can do the other thing.”
This was more than Ned’s temper could stand.
“If you don’t want me to drink it, you shall ”
And raising his glass as he spoke, he sent the rest of
its contents slap into the other's face.
The fellow burst into a white rage.
As soon as he had wiped the liquor from bis eyes with
his sleeve, he drew back and prepared to attack Ned.
The latter, in anticipation of this, had already got his
hands up.
The bookmaker, for the first time, realised the formid-
able customer he was about to tackle ; but he had perfect
confidence in his abilities.
He jumped in boldly at his man.
Ned met him with a straight left-hander, shot out with
force enough to fell an ox.
But, quick as his hand had shot out, the other's duck
had been quicker, and the blow, instead of alighting be-
tween his eyes, slipped over his head like a pat of butter
across a hot frying-pan.
Simultaneously Ned felt the bookmaker’s fist in the
neighbourhood of his ribs like the kick of a horse.
The belt here again proved of service, for the blow
alighted on it, and hurt the striker's knuckles far more
than it did Ned.
The bookmaker broke ground, feinted, and succeeded
in putting in a small clip on Ned’s jowl, without any re-
turn, and in landing another body blow.
At out-fighting he had clearly the best of it, and, had
they been in a ring, would perhaps have come off con-
queror.
But Ned succeeded in working him into a corner of
the bar, and plunged iu on him lif e an avalanche.
The other hit out, but failed to stall off the bush-
ranger’s rush, and, once at close quarters, Ned’s weight
and strength completely demolished his adversary's pre-
conceived notions of artistic in-fighting.
A flash hit on the forehead sent him all abroad, and
before he could recover anotbir on the jaw knocked him
completely out of time.
The whole affair had not taken a minute.
Bat there had been time for the landlord, who had wit-
nessed the scrimmage, to take certain measures.
The potman had closed and fastened the door by which
Ned had entered directly he had passed its threshold, it
being close on half-past twelve.
The only way out of the compartment of the bar was
by pasaing through a couple of other divisions.
But when Ned turned to make his exit he was most di»
agreeably surprised.
A sergeant of police and a couple of constables were
just making their appearance at the door leading into hhe
next of these divisions.
They had looked in presumably to see that ths„ bouse
was being cleared, but in reality to have a sly dt-.u just
before closing time.
The landlord would probably have preferred no scanctal
at all, but, seeing he was in for it, played a virtuous
part.
The bookmaker was a constant and a very good cus-
tomer, whilst Ned was a stranger.
Consequently, he felt bound to take the former’s part
in the ditficuly, since he was for the moment quite unable
to take it himself, being stretched as limp as a damp rag
amongst the sawdust on the floor.
The landlord charged Ned with creating a disturbance
in his house, and asked the police to reraov o him.
Of course they never took the trouble to enquire as to
who had begun the row.
For a moment Ned calculated the chances of trying to
force his way through them and gain the street.
He felt inclined to risk it, and it certainly was not fear
of the struggle that checked him.
It was a kind of superstition resembling inspiration.
He had got off once that evening, and, somehow, the
proverb of the pitcher going to the tvell occurred to him.
Then an idea, based on a tolerably intimate acquaintance
with the police, occurred to him.
In a few hours the particulars of the fatal affray in
which he had been engaged would be circulated amongst
the police, accompanied probably by a rough description
of himself.
They would be on the look-out for him.
But of all places in the world the least likely to harbour
him would be one of their own station-houses.
Accordingly he quietly submitted to be taken into
custody.
His appearance, which was respectable, was in his favour,
and also the fact that the bookmaker, on being picked up,
was found to have sustained no material damage.
If Ned had seen a good chance of making a bolt of it,
as he was conducted through the streets, he would have
tried this, but, as it turned out, the station-house was
only a few doors from the public in which the row had
occurred.
He was searched in the usual preparatory way, just to
see whether he had a knife, and congratulated himself
that, by the merest accident, he had left his revolver
at his lodgings that morning, packed up with some traps.
The man who searched him just put his hands into his
pockets, and never noticed the cuts in his waistcoat made
by Heffernan’s knife, or the money-belt around his body.
He did not show any extraordinary want of common
sense observation in this when compared with the run of
his comrades.
Tho detective of the London and Brighton railway, who
lately displayed such a singular lack ot the commonest
inductive power in his dealings with Lefroy had previously
graduated in the Metropolitan Police, and was reckoned
a smartish hand.
The Turf Frauds amongst other things would seem to
establish the theory that when a detective is honest he is
a fool, and when he is clever he is a rogue, were it not
that, more recent evelations go to prove that somo
manage to be both rogues and fools at the same time.
Ned after being searched and asked his name, which he
gave as Donelly, was consigned to a cell.
He did not feel downcast as to the result.
Shortly after he had been incarcerated, he heard a bit
of conversation extremely interesting to him.
“ Case of murder up at the Red lion, Street,”
said a constable, entering the corridor into which the cell®
opened.
“ What is it?” replied one of those os duty fiiere.


14 Man had hi? head smashed with a quart pot.*’
“ Alx! Any particulars ?”
“ Seems the other feliow had been abusing Ireland, and
that he stuck a knife into him, and got a lick over the
head, that smashed his scull in for his trouble.”
“Anything known about the fellow who did it?”
“ As far as can be made out, he was a big man, with a
beard, rather well-dressed.”
“ An Irish landlord, riled because he can’t get any rent,”
said the other, with a laugh.
“ Perhaps. Bat the beggar's pretty well sure to be
spotted, for the Paddy almost ripped him up before he
settled him.”
“Ah ! then we're pretty sure to nail him. What time
did it happen?”
“ A little before closing time.”
“ Why, we’ve got something of the same kind, only not
so hot, in there,” said the other, indicating the cell occu-
pied by Nod. “ Ids another Irishman whose been scrap-
ping in a pub close handy, and has bashed up a cross
cove.”
“mo?”
“ Jerry George, the welsher; so for once he’s found the
boot on the other leg The sergeant knew him, and I
don’t think he’d have collared the chap that gave him the
doing once, if it hadn’t been that old' Groskey, the land-
lord, charged him.”
This news was pleasant in the extreme to Ned.
It was evident, as he had thought, that the last place in
the world where the police would dream of looking for
lleffernau’s murderer, was their own cells.
It was almost, if not quite, as good as an alibi.
He also felt perfectly safe in the results of bis appear-
ance before the magistrate in the morning.
As to any one having the least suspicion of his identity
with Ned Kelly, the bushranger, he was quite at ease on
that score.
The next morning Ned was allowed to send out for
some breakfast, after partaking of which he was removed
to the police-court, with the remainder of the night-
charges.
u Don’t see your man amongst this lot, eh, liackett?”
observed one of the police to a somewhat stupid-looking
member of the force who was waiting to be called.
“ No,” answered liackett, somewhat sulkily, whilst a
grin spread over the face of several of his comrades.
liackett, as Ned subsequently learnt, had had a bit
of experience, of which he was not fond of talking about,
«.nd did not care to be reminded of.
The preceding winter he had been on duty in Oxford-
street, and was passing a furrier’s, when he noticed a light
through the chinks in the shatters.
Thinking it not quite right he rapped.
“ Is that you. policeman ? ” said a voice within.
“ Yes,” answered liackett.
“ All right, it’s only me. Cold outside, isn’t it?”
“Th light so. I’m trying to get the fire to light.
Good-night.”
liackett said good-night, and passed on.
On his next round he noticed the light still burning.
It did not seem right, and he banged at the door a<ain.
“ Hullo, is it you, policeman?” said the voice within.
“ Yes.”
“All right. Will you step inside a minute and warm
yourself. It must be a bitter night outside.”
The door was opened, and liackett stepped into the
shop, the only inmate of which was a very respectable-
looking man with a long apron on.
“ Come up to the fire. Excuse me a minute.”
’And, leaving the shop, he stepped into the back room,
from which he returned with a shovel of coals.
“ Chilly, isn't it?” he went on ; “ cold outside and dull
in. I've got a pretty job on ; here’s a lot of winter stock
just come io, and it must be looked through and sorted
over at once, for it looks as if the moth had got into some
of the packages. Will you have a drain?”
And he procured a bottle and glass.
liackett had a drain, and having wiped his lips and
given his hands a rub before the fire, resumed his beat,
satisfied that all was right at the furrier’s.
Morning, however, altered his opinion.
On the shop boy coming the next morning to take down
the shutters, it was found that the place had been pillaged
of upwards of a thousand pounds’ worth of goods, and
though liackett had carried away an impression on his
mind of the clever rascal who had done him, he had never
set eyes on him in the flesh since.
As he said, “It was the beggar’s joplncss in fiddling
over the fire that put me off my guard.”
The night charges were disposed of in quick succession,
and on Ned being placed before the magistrate the result
proved to be as he had anticipated. •
The landlord did not appear in support of the
charge, and Mr. Jerry George took care not to show
his nose in court.
Consequently, after the magistrate had heard the state-
ment of the police, he read Ned, whose name of Donnelly
had stamped him in his opinion as a native of the Emerald
Isle, one of those lectures that all police-magistrates seem
to think it their duty to deliver.
In set terms he gravely assured Ned that he was in some
degree inclined to make allowance for him as a stranger,
coming from a portion of the Queen’s dominions only too
unhappily known from the frequent recurrence of broils.
Ned had not the slightest notion what he meant, but had
the good sense to hold his tongue.
“ It is only too apparent,” continued his worship, “ that
you, despite your respectable appearance, are imbued
from your associations doubtless with that anarchical and
turbulent spirit that has wrought such havoc on the other
side of St. George’s Channel. Doubtless such conduct
of yours would be held as venial there. Bat in London
such brawling cannot be for a moment tolerated, and to
mark my opinion of it, and taking into consideration that,
from your apparent station in life, you seem a person well
able to pay a fine, I Lei bound to indict upon you no
less a penalty ”
Here he made a little artful pause.
“ By all that’s blue,” thought Ned. “he could not pile
it on hotter if he was going to put on the black cap !
What an old scorcher! It looks as if l*e’s going to quod
me after all.”
“Than that of fining you twenty shillings,” continued
his worship blandly.
“ Next case,” said the clerk, and Ned, after parting with
a sovereign, was again a free man.
He walked a short distance from the court, jumped
into a cab, drove to his lodgings, collected his traps, paid
his bill, and then proceeded to the docks.
He was in ample time, since the ship he had taken his
passage in did not clear out till the afternoon.
Once on board he was quite safe ; and as the vessel
dropped down the river indulged in a grim chuckle at the
police, who, having actually had Ned Kelly red-hande 1 in
their custody, had suffered him to slip through their
fingers, as their Brighton confreres did Lefroy.
CHAPTER CXCVL
HOW TO CUKE SCANT) A [.-MONGERS.
In embarking on board the Atalanta for Perth, Ned had
been moved by two reasons.
One was that she was the first ship leaving for the
Australian colonies—and the other, that her port of destin-
ation was one at which there was little chance of his being
recognised on landing.
Like many royal personages, Ned had a fancy for travel-
ling incognito.
He had gone so far as to book his passage under the
prosaic name of Brown.
He had also resolved to behave properly on board, so as
to land at Perth with a good character from those who had
sailed with him.


As bis language was apt, when he got a little excited, to
ha more vigorous than elegant, he made up his mind to
hold his tongue as much as possible, and acquired the re-
putation with those on board, of a decent, but rather taci-
turn. sort of fellow.
Indeed, one or two of them began to speculate as to
who and what ho was, and Ned, when they had been about
a fortnight out, heard a gentleman named Cathcavt—who
was himself returning to the colony—observe to a com-
panion—
“l am almost certain I have eeen our friend Brown
before, but I can’t for the life of me say where.”
<l Perhaps you are deceived by soasa likeness,” answered
his friend, whose name was Evans.
“No,” insisted the other, “lam certain I hare seen
him. Like the royal family, I have a capital memory for
faces. I can’t quite make out when or where it was, but
I’m certain that directly I get the clue I spot him in a
moment.”
“ I don’t think the affair is worth troubling your head
over,” was the reply. “ The best thing would be to ask
Brown if he ever remembers meeting you, or whether there
was any place he has visited at which you were likely to
come across each other.”
“No, no,” replied Cathcart; “ I don’t think he’s the man
who would stand much questioning. I have only got to
wait a bit, I am sure one day a chance word will give me
the clue I want.
“ Do you,” thought Ned to himself, &s the pair strolled
away from the spot where he bad been an unseen listener
to their conversation. “Well thou, I’il take jolly good
cave that you don’t hear that word from me.”
From this time forward his guard on his tongue increased,
and lie was careful to abstain from drink to any great ex-
tent, lest under its influence he should be tempted to talk
too freely.
He began to realise the German proverb, that “ Speech
is silvern, but silence is golden.”
When places that he knew, were mentioned before him,
lie was careful not to betray any acquaintance with them;
and, whilst acknowledging he had been a bit of a traveller,
studiously avoided mentioning he had been in the colonies.
One day, when they were about six weeks out, a little
celebration took place in the cabin in honour of some
anniversary at which a wager of a case of champagne was
laid.
The bet being decided, the wine was at once put on the
table, and under its influence conversation grew brisk and
Ned forgot his reserve.
He had become interested in a dispute between two of
his neighbours as to the situation of a certain hotel in
Sydney, and suddenly blurted out—
“ Why, any fool knows it is on the right hand side of
the street as you come up from the wharf.”
On hearing this remark, Cathcart nudged his friend
Evans.
“ Our silent friend,” he said, in a low tone, “ has been
in the colony. I guess if he only lets on a little more, I
shall recollect where I have seen him.”
“All right.” said Evans, “I'll draw the badger.”
After letting a certain time pass, so to excite sus-
picion, Evans purposely appealed to Ned ou some other
question connected with Sydney.
Ned saw that his former remark was an acknowledge-
ment that he knew something of the place, and that it
was too late to plead ignorance of it.
He therefore made the best of the job, ssd csswcred as
briefly as he could with decency.
But Evans, not to be choked off, began to chat with
him on all kinds of colonial matters, and at last drew him
out a little more, with the help of a glass or two.
Ned came out of his shell, and told a tale or two.
The conversation turned on horses, and the usual lot of
lies as to wonderful distances coursed, and leaps made by
favourite steeds, were told.
“ Well,” said Ned, after one of the party had given the
particulars of a jump, ho was pleased to consider misas*-
lous, “I recollect taking the creek at Tarramea, and thsV<s
a good throe-and-twenty feet.”
No sooner had the words escaped his month, than
Evans felt Cathcarfc, who was sitting beside biro, start, aad
softly murmur—
“ Tarramea! ”
“Aye,” went on Ned, slightly excited from having
more drink aboard than usual; “and there was only oua
beggar that followed me."
“ What was it,” inquired one ef the company,
steeplechase ?”
“ Yes,” answered Ned, who had now lost his
and was indulging in that reckless way of talking tha;
had more than once brought him into trouble ; “a match
between me and a chap named Conquest.”
The name slipped out.
Just as he had spoken these words he happened to cast
a look towards Cathcart.
A sudden gleam of recognition, which the latter could
not conceal, lit up his countenance, which became flushed
and anxious.
Ned felt that he had let out too much for prudence.
Cathcart had, as it happened, been one of those preset
on the occasion on which Ned had cleared the creek
Tarramea, after riding up to the station, disguised as e
mounted policeman, and shooting M‘Pherson.
Ned’s words had supplied the missing link in big
memory, and he now felt certain of his identity with the
bushranger, for whose reward such a large sum had been
offered by the authorites.
He was in such a state of excitement, that ha ooukl
scarcely contain himself.
A fortune was in view.
Cathcart was a greedy man, and his thoughts at once
turned to this reward, and to the chances of securing it ah
to himself.
Here was independence in his grasp.
The thought set his heart beating with anticipated joy.
It might have been better for him if be had quietly
imparted his suspicions, or rather his convictions as to
Ned’s identity to Captain Dunn, the commander of the
Atalanta.
But a twofold reason restrained him.
He was not only greedy, but suspicion?
In the first case Captain Dunn, he thought, might
refuse to believe him, and even go so far as to acquaint
Kelly with his accusation, in which case he felt sure the
bushranger would find so in® mean* of avenging hiiaael?
before the voyage was over.
Kelly instinctively felt that the man wcogniaed v
at all events had suspicions which might prove dangeroua
In the vessel he might either at once arrest Ned on his
own authority, clap him in irons and hand him over to
the authorities, or profit by his position not to allow any-
body to go on shore before himself, and on landing go
straight to them, and, announcing that Kelly was ou
board, claim the reward for this information.
Cathcart resolved, therefore, to pretend ignorance of
Ned.
When, in course of the evening, Evans said to him—
“ I felt you nudge me ; have you spotted the fellow ?”
He answered in the negative, and added—
“ I’m afraid it’s no use puzaling my head about him any
longer. He’s not the man I thought, after all.”
Kelly, for his part, felt sure that Cathcart had spotted
him, and was folly alive to his peril.
From this time forward a curious game began between
the two men.
The bushranger was rather anxious to pass a quiet
quarter-of-an-hour alone with the other—and a very
mauvais quart d'heure it would have turned out for hia
friend.
But this was exactly what Cathcart was particularly
careful to avoid giving him a chance of.
He religiously avoided leaning over the ship’s side, or


standing near an open hatchway, when Kelly was any-
where about.
He met Kelly’s glance rather too often to make him feel
easy.
Accidents do happen so easily on ship-board, and he had
no fancy for becoming food for the fishes, or breaking his
neck from a tumble down a hatchway—accidentally, of
course.
Ned felt his fate hung on the life of this man.
They were approaching their destination, and Ned felt
that every hour the peril was more imminent.
We have already shown that such a villain did not value
human life beyond that of a sheep, if its sacrifice served
his purpose. He had no more compunction in this respect
than one of the aboriginal blacks, or, in fact, any of the
savages of the creation.
Poets talk of—
“ When wild in woods
The nolle savage ran,"
but if any of our readers happened to roam unprotected
amongst the noble savages of Australia, or of Solomon, or
Tonga Islands, they would form a more prosaic idea of the
poet’s description.
No bushranger ever yet spared human life if there was
the least advantage in taking it, and very often they mur-
dered out of sheer wantonness.
The writer once saw a bushranger named Fogarty de-
liberately potting a (West Indian) shepherd, who was all
the time begging for his life. .
Kelly began to rack his brain as to the possibility of
getting on shore unobserved, and to realise the truth of
that well-If,a own definition which sets down a ship as a
prison in which a man has a chance of being drowned.
“If I could only get clear of this infernal craft, he
thought, “1 would soon show them a clean pair of
heels.” .
And he continued to watch for a chance of putting
Cathcart out of the way, and to run over in his mind all
the stories of undetected murders he had heard in the
course of his career from the lips of his extensive ciiminal
acquaintance _ ...
It happened one evening in the cabin that the conver-
sation turned on such topics. .
One of the passengers mentioned the way in which the
convicts at Toulon used to get rid of an obnoxious warder,
namely, by striking him across the back of the neck with
an eelskin filled with sand, which left no mark.
Ned sighed at the thought of how far they were at that
moment from sandy shores and eel-ponds.
Another told the old story of the widow of Lambeth,
who got rid of six husbands by pouring a little molten
lead in their ears whilst they slept.
Ned pricked his own ears at this.
For some time he sat in thought, as though trying to
solve a mental problem.
At length a gleam of satisfaction flitted across his face.
In course of the following afternoon he strolled forward
to where the sail-maker was engaged in repairing some of
the lighter sails. .. , ,
He was pretty well liked by the crew, with whom he
often exchanged a word or two, and to whom he stood a
drink sometimes, despite all regulations to the contrary.
He made up his mind to remove all he felt was a spy
on his actions. If he did not, he himself would be re-
moved : and this armed him with determination.
He passed the time of day with the sailmaker, who was
seated at his work with his implements around him, and
after a time went aft again.
Though Cathcart avoided being in Kellys company
when no one else was about on deck, he did not scruple at
finding himself alone with him below.
He knew that if any murderous attack was made on him
there he could easily summon assistance, and guessed that
Kelly would not risk such a step. . ,
Hie was in the habit of lying down of an afternoon m the
•abin, and generally managed to doze off.
The heat was intense ; 114 degrees in the cabin, and «
dead calm.
Three days after the conversation noted he went down
below and threw himself on a couch.
After a time he was left the sole inmate of the cabin,
and his breathing announced that he was fast asleep.
A short interval elapsed, and the door of Ned’s room
was opened stealthily.
The bushranger, who had slipped into it just after dinner,
stole cautiously forth in his stocking feet.
An opportunity for which he had been on the alert fov
three days past had presented itself.
As carefully as though stepping on egg-shells, he crossed
the cabin floor, and approached the sleeper.
He glanced all round to make sure that there was no one
about, and was satisfied on this point.
He could hear the steward busy in his pantry, but felt
safe from interruption from that quarter.
Stooping over the prostrate form of Cathcart, he drew
from his pocket a small implement, which he held partly
concealed.
His left hand was ready to fall on the sleeper’s mouth, in
case necessity arose.
A sharp movement on his part followed.
A faint sound, between a sob and a moan escaped from
the lips of Cathcart.
He moved slightly in a convulsive fashion, and a spasm
of some kind shot across his features.
Then they resumed their former immobility.
He lay perfectly still.
Ned swiftly retreated to his state room, from which he
again emerged, but this time with his boots on.
He passed through the cabin and gained the deck.
By-and-by one or two of the passengers descended, ftffid
the steward began to make preparations for tea.
The noise failed to arouse Cathcart.
Tea was got ready, but neither the noisy summons of
the gong announcing it, or the influx of those who floated
in in response, awakened him,
“Hullo, Cathcart,” cried one of his friends.
“Hi! rouse up, man,” said Evans, advancing to give
him a shake.
No sooner had bo laid his hand on the deeper s ana
than his face changed. . ,
A look of bewilderment stole across it, as though he
doubted the evidence of his own senses._
He shook the sleeper’s arm a second time, but in a ner-
vously hesitating fashion.
Then the look of astonishment changed to one of down-
right positive horror. , , ~ , T
“ Good heavens !” he gasped, “the man s dead ! How
sudden ! It must be apoplexy.”
A panic followed these words. .
Some of the passengers shrank back
several ladies fainted, and the rest fled from the cabin ;
whilst a few of the bolder spirits, amongst whom was the
captain, approached the sofa on which Cathcart s figure
The captain in turn placed his hand on the motionless
figure before him. „
“ It’s true,” he exclaimed. “ He’s dead, sure enough.
The Atalanta was not an emigrant ship, and had not
more than six or eight passengers on board in all, and did
not carry a surgeon.
The captain, as is usual in such cases, acted as doctor,
and in this case was possessed of a little more medical
knowledge than the skipper, who went to sea with a medi-
cine chest and a book of instructions, and who, finding
that one of his crew developed symptoms, for which two
spoonfuls from bottle No. 15 were prescribed, and being
out of that picture, gave him one of No. 7 and one of
No. 8, which he urged must amount to the same thing,
and killed him as dead as a door-nail.
One of the passengers, too. had a smattering of surgery,
and he at once confirmed the captain’s assertion as re-
garded Cathcart.


Th» cabin was at once cleared, and the captain and the
chief officer, aided by the passenger, proceeded to make an
examination of the corpse.
The cause of death was a perfect mystery.
The features wore hardly convulsed, and there was not
the slightest external sign to excite suspicion that death
had been other than natural.
Such a suspicion, however, did not occur to anyone.
A kind of inquest was held, but nothing was elucidated
—save the fact that Lath cart had lain down on the sofa
some hours before, and that nothing had occurred to
disturb him in his supposed slumbers.
The steward and some of the passengers had noticed
him lying there, but had thought he was asleep.
Kelly was amongst these witnesses, and stated that he
had retired for a short time to his room, and that he had
seen Cathcart on the sofa, when passing through the
cabin on his way to the deck.
The conclusion arrived at was that the unfortunate
fellow must have succumbed to heart-disease or apoplexy.
As it was impossible to preserve his body till they
made their port—even if the sailors would have consented
to such an arrangement—it was launched into the deep.
With it went all hopes of the grim mystery ever being
elucidated satisfactorily, for the instrument of death had
preceded it, and was already lying at the bottom of the
ocean.
Ned had cast it overboard, within a few minutes of the
perpretration of his crime.
It consisted of a needle which he had stolen, unobserved
and unsuspected, from the sailrnaker.
He had mounted it in a wooden handle, and plunged it
in the ear of the sleeping man, and so into his brain.
Thera was no sign of violence, and nothing but a post-
mortem examination of the head would have revealed the
cause of death.
CHAPTER CXCVII,
AT HOME AGAIN.
A FEW days later the Atalanta cast anchor at Freemouth,
a pif.ee at the mouth of the Swan river, serving as the
port of the town of Perth, the capital of the colony, which
is built some miles higher up the stream in question.
Ned was one of the first to hurry on shore.
His idea was to get a horse and strike across country
to the Murrumbridge, whither he had despatched Marco
Polo, under the care of Zeph and Salmon Roe.
Once in possession of his matchless steed, his plan was
to get together a band, and start afresh on his career of
plundering.
“I guess I’ll wake the country up again a bit, and
make some of those police see snakes,” was his reflection.
He thought he had better go on to Perch, in order to
learn the best way of getting to the Murrumbridge.
Although profoundly ignorant of geography, he was a
splendid bushman, and felt sure, that if once he had his
bearings j>iven, he could steer by sun, stars and compass,
to the point he wished to reach.
He was not likely to make the blunder of a shepherd,
who got lost on the Stony Rises; a singular desert tract,
bounded on one side by the ocean, and on all others by
the most fertile portions of Adelaide; on which it
encroaches to the extent of some hundred of square
miles.
As its name implies, it is a mass of stone ; the surface
being broken and irregular, and strewn with boulders.
From the crevices of these, and the scanty soil formed
by their decomposition, grows a forest of small trees of
sombre and dreary aspect, gnarled and stunted by the arid
nature of the rocky region in which they have taken root;
and displaying a depressing monotony in their brown
trunks, metallic-looking fodage, and rigid uniformity of
outline.
The shepherd had come to his station, which extended
for many miles along; the border of the stony rises, straight
from the ship that brought him to the colonies ; but had
never been in them, his flock being stationed out on th«
plains in another direction.
_ For some reason or other he resolved to leave the ser-
vice of the squatter; and, after settling with him and re-
ceiving his wages, determined to go on to tlie ranges to
see if he could discover any trace of a horse belonging to
him, which had strayed some weeks before.
Unluckily for himself he communicated his intention to
no one, which led to his neither being missed nor sought
for, it being supposed he had gone on to get some other
berth.
He entered the stony district, taking his gun andaccom ■
panied by a dog, and wandered about without, any thought
but that of finding the missing animal, till late in the
afternoon, when, on glancing round on a landscape of un-
varying sameness, the thought that he was lost occurred
to him.
lie concluded that by walking straight on in one direc-
tion he would get out of the labyrinth ; and, after eating
some provisions he carried, pushed on therefore till dark-
ness came on ; -when he lay down, suffering greatly from
thirst—for it was summer—and no rain had fallen for
weeks.
The second day was passed in a like manner in incessant
walking, and night found him in a state of great suffer-
ing-
The third day he resolved, in his own words, to “ steer
by the sun.”
A storm of rain came on, and he drank out of the pools
it made, and this awakening bis hunger, lie shot his dog,
and roasted part of him.
All that day he steered by the sun, and the fourth and
fifth days also, by which time the heat had dtied up all
the pools, and his sufferings from thirst became dread-
ful.
Several times he was tempted to put an end to himself
with the gun ; but on the afternoon of the seventh day he
shot a parrot, and moistened his mouth with its blood.
On the eighth and ninth days he was delirious, and late
on the afternoon on the latter, was seen by one of a gang
of splitters, engaged in procuring timber from a belt of
trees growing on a plain bordering the rise, who had
strolled a short distance into the arid desert.
The shepherd at first took his rescuer for one of the
visions that had haunted him in his fever ; and could not
believe that he was flesh and blood, till he laid hold of
him.
“ But,” said his rescuer, when lie had taken him to the
hut tenanted by his companions, what do you mean by
saying that you steered by the sun? If you had done so,
you would not have been more than nine hours, instead
of nine days on the rises.”
“Indeed,” he replied, “from the third day I always
went by the sun.”
“ But how? ”
“ Sure I followed it. I heard the boss at the station
say that he always followed the sun as a guide, and I
thought I had better do the same.”
Incredible as it may appear, the man, not knowing the
compass, had interpreted “steering by the sun” to mean
“ following it;” and facing it in the morning when it rose,
had kept it always before him till it sank in the west.
He had thus wandered in a circle, and in all probability
was never more than a few miles from the edge of the
rises, that so nearly proved his burial place.
Kelly was not one of this sort, but in some respects he
was equally at sea as regarded conformation of the
Australian continent.
His idea was, that a good horse would take him any-
where.
But when he entered a public-house. at Perth, and be-
gan to ask the landlord as to the best means of getting an
animal to carry him to the Murrumbridge, he was sur-
prised to see a look of blank amazement on the man’i
face, and on those of three or four others who wcr« or.tid-
ing in the bar.


One of them even laughed right out, and the landlord's
repression of astonishment changed to one of indignation
as he said, with due gravity—
“ Look here, mate, I’m quite ready to serve a drink
or to answer a civil question ; but you’ve come to the
wrong shop for trying on any of that kind of chaff.”
“ What’s your lay ? ” answered Ned, quite in a fog as
to what the man was driving at “I didn’t ask you to
help me to steal a horse, but to tell me where 1 can best
buy one.”
“I reckon you’re a new chum in these parts? ” observed
ens of the company. “Fresh from the Old Country,
perhaps ? ”
“You’re about right,” answered Ned. “But before I
went there I spent a few years Sydney side, and I can pick
my way through the bush as well as a bandicoot.”
“ And you really think of riding from here to the
Murrambridge ?”
“ Why not ?”
“Bravo! you seem a good plucked ’en; but do you
know what you’ve got to get through, to find your way
from here to Sydney ?”
“ No.”
“ Why, the Mai lee Scrub.”
“ The Mallee Scrub?”
“ Yes. Don’t you know there’s a belt of it a couple of
hundred miles broad, run right across, and that no single
man, however well-mounted, could struggle through it?
There’s neither grub for man nor horse, and no water.”
“ I’ll tell you what there is, though,” broke in another of
the company, “ there a lot of warrigal blacks, who’ll have
your kidney’s out to grease their hair with, before you
could say knife.”
This was true.
The Mallee is a small species of Eucalyptus, from ten
to fifteen feet high, growing together so closely as to just
allow a horseman to make his way through it; and cover-
ing a district of several hundreds of miles, almost cutting
off Western from Eastern Australia.
The dense scrub is, however, relieved by openings,
which only serve to lure men who have once entered the
labrynitb to destruction.
The sensation produced by being pent up in this dense
scrub, able only to see the sky overhead, with no air cir-
culating, and nothing visible but the same monstrous
brown items that the traveller keeps pacing through hour
after hour, is so intolerable, that the first glimpse of light
showing an opening promising deliverance is hailedwith joy.
It requires resolution few men possess, to resist the
temptation and keep in due east, which if adhered to will
at last bring the traveller out of the scrub, provided he
only sticks to it long enough.
If a man turns inside to the south, and enters the plain
which may be miles in circumference, or perhaps the front
of a series of similar openings, he is safe to be tempted
further and further on into the heart of the wilderness ;
and, in this case, if his knowledge of the country is only
local, his doom is sealed.
Again he enters the scrub, and again is tempted from it
by the same fatal snare.
“ That scrub’s a caution and no mistake,” said one of
the party to Ned. “ 1 once helped to look for a man lost
in a patch, not more than fifteen miles in length by ten in
breadth; and we found his body after the blacks had
tracked him for scores of weary miles, not more than
a mile and a half from the hut he had left ten days before,
and from which he had never, at any time, been more than
A few miles away,”
Nor w r as the statement about the blacks exaggerated.
Amongst their customs there is none more deeply
rooted than that of cutting out the kidneys of anyone
they slaughter, and of using it instead of Rowland’s Ma-
cassar,
Ned began to realise the responsibility of his projected
attempt, and to cast about as to whether there was not
another method of getting to his destination.
He soon found there was a chance of getting a passage
in a small coaster to Adelaide, and of that he resolved to
avail himself, and make his way from the capital of South
Australia to the Murrumbridgee.
Before quitting Perth he purchased some garments of a
style more suited to the character he intended to assume,
which was that of a shearer.
This done, he embarked on board the coaster, and
reached his destination without anything of moment hap-
pening during the voyage.
CHAPTER CXCViH.
NED PUTS THE SADDLE ON THE KIQIIT HORSE.
Marco Polo had been left in the charge of a Scotch
squatter named M‘Yittie, whose station was on the Mur-
rumbridge, at a place called Garoona.
He was a man who had started as a shepherd on the
very station which now belonged to him.
His first master had been a careless, thoughtless, happy-
go-lucky chap, named Willoughby, who, after a somewhat
dissipated career in England, had realised the remnants of
a once large fortune, and had come out in the hope of re-
trieving his affairs.
At first he had done pretty well.
Ha got a good run, and his sheep increased and multi-
plied in a very encouraging fashion, whilst the healthy
open-air life he was leading made him feel ten years
younger.
But after a time its monotony began to pall on bim.
He took to running down to Melbourne, or up to Syd-
ney, whenever there was a race-meeting or any other kind
of excitement on, and to dropping his money over bets or
cards.
Gradually he became a confirmed gambler and sot.
His affairs became more and more involved, and their
control drifted from his hands into those of M'Vittie,
who had gradually risen from the position of shepherd to
that of superintendent ©f the station.
Mr. Willoughby had several attacks of delirium tremens,
during which he was nursed by M‘Vittie.
At last, after a hard bout of drinking at Melbourne, in
course of which he squandered and gambled away a large
sum, he returned to his station—but only to die.
M ; Vittie and an old hut-keeper named Wilson were the
only persons present at his death-bed.
After his death the former produced a number of docu-
ments, going to prove that for a long time past he had
been, though nominally Mr. Willoughby’s superintendent,
in reality his partner, having, he alleged, began by ad-
vancing him a sum of ready-money at a time when the
deceased was in great need of it.
He also produced a will leaving him everything.
There was some astonishment expressed at this, but, as
Mr. Willoughby had no relations in the colony whose
claims might have been put forward, and, as all his out-
standing debts were settled out of the estate, it blew
over.
Ned, however, knew a little more of the transaction
than did the general public.
The man Wilson, who had been a convict, was an old
acquaintance of his, and one day let out to him in confi-
dence that he and M‘Vittie had made the will in question,
and had got Willoughby to sign it and the other papers
when in a state of intoxication and quite oblivious of his
action. He also complained that M’Vittie had not acted on
the square, that he got nothing, M’Vittie everything.
While the latter was rich, he was as poor as a wild dog.
A few weeks after he had made this revelation Wilson
was found drowned in a water-hole.
How he got there there was no evidence to show, but-
Ned had a shrewd suspicion that he had been put out of
the way by the bigger villain, who was his partner ia
crime.
He kept, however, this suspicion to himself, tnd merely
hinted toM'Vittie that he knew some facts, the disdomu*
of which might prove very awkward to him.


It was this knowledge that had made the squatter will-
ingly agree to take charge of Marco Polo in Kelly’s
absence.
MWittie was a ta'l, lean Scotchman, of about sixty,
with a gaunt, angular figure, a freckled face, and hair, the
original sandy colour of which was now changing to that
grizzly tint, styled a dandy grey russet.
He set up, like Peace, for being one of the “ unco
guid.”
if there had been a kirk near at hand no doubt he would
have been an elder; but, for lack of this, he contented
himself with inflicting long prayers on all with whom he
came in contact, especially his household.
lie professed an intense veneration for the “Saabbath,”
and devoted all his spare time on that day to what he
styled “guidly meditation,” but what was in reality quiet
scheming as to the best way of getting the advantage of
his neighbours in business.
Ned had resolved to make his way towards the Murrain -
bridge, by taking the river steamers up the Murray, and
then scobble a strange horse until within reach of his
destination, after which he could turn the animal loose,
and no one be a bit the wiser. A bit of a rope often in
the hands of tramps, does duty upon a quiet horse for a
bridle, and his jacket taken off and made to do duty for
a saddle, enables the rider to get along for many a long
journey. The horse, when done with, is turned out in the
bush, and in nine out of ten cases, finds his way back to
the station he was breed in. W r orking bullocks have
been known, when lost in the road, to find thir way home
» distance of 600 miles.
He knew something of the place, and he made his way
in the first instance to an outlying shepherd's hut situate
near the boundaries of the run which he reached shortly
before mid-day.
On tramping up to the door he found the hut was un-
tenanted.
The door, however, was open, and he stepped inside and
sat down to rest himself a bit—for he had started before
daybreak from the spot where he had passed the night;
and the day was a hot one, even for the colony, and the
hundred sovereigns he carried were no light weight.
He knew the free and easy habits of the district too
well to dream of being called to account, for wbat in
England would be looked upon as a liberty.
He went so far as to help himself to some cold mutton
and damper, and then mix himself a panakin of grog out
of the flask he carried—for there were no spirits in the hut
—filled his pipe, for a quiet smoke.
As he sat with his back against the wall of the hut and
his pipe between his teeth, placidly smoking and digesting,
his eye fell on some tiny object glittering in a ray of sun-
light, streaming in through the half-closed door.
The object in question lay on the floor about three
yards off, and he could not at first make out what it was.
He glanced at it several times without caring to take
the trouble to get up to examine it.
At last when he had finished his pipe, his curiosity pre-
vailed over laziness, and he rose, and approaching the little
object, stooped down and picked it up.
It was not a nugget as he had half fancied, bub simply a
metal button.
He was about to send it spinning away out of the door,
when he suddenly paused and examined it closely.
It was a uniform button, and this fact at once set him
thinking, for like all men accustomed to bunt and be
minted, he had learned to attach importance to the merest
trifles.
It was evidently from the uniform of one of the mounted
police.
From its very position it had evidently only fallen a
little time previously, or it would have got tramped into
the floor or kicked on one side.
Hence it was evident that a mounted policeman had
tailed at that hut a few hours before.
could not help fancying that such a visit might possibly
have some reference to matters interesting himself.
He went so far as to regard it as a warning,
“ lb proves those traps are loafing around in this quarter,
and I must keep my eyes open in order not to tumble
onto some of ’em,” was his reflection.
He made up his mind, after a little consideration, to
set out m search of the shepherd inhabiting the hut, and
to try and learn from him what the police were hunting
for in the neighbourhood, if it were possible.
He started forth on this errand, and in a little time came
across the shepherd who was sitting under a tree.
Ned pushed up to him and bid him good-day.
After a little chat he sat down beside him, the shepherd
being very glad of the cnance of a gossip, leading the lonely
life that he did.
“ Things pretty quiet just now about here ?” Ned asked.
“ Yes,” was the answer.
“ No chance ox a chap getting stuck up, I suppose ?”
“ No, you’re all right *here’s no one playing that game
in this part of the country.”
“ Well, I’m precious glad to hear it. I’ve had to work
blessed hard for my pile and I shouldn’t like to have to
hand it over, though it ain’t much.”
“ What’s your lay?” inquired the shepherd.
“ I’m on a shearing job.”
“ Oh ! I thought you shearers were such blooming swells
that you never went about on shank’s mare, but always on
a bit of horseflesh."
An idea occurred to Ned.
Since he had seen the button in the hut he had come to
the conclusion that it was necessary for him to get a horse
at all costs as soon as possible, in case the police ehouiu
come across him and oblige him to fly for his life.
He put on a half-sheepish air.
“ Well, to tell the truth, I started with one, but, like a
blessed fool, I got drunk at the last township, and matched
him against a grey yelding. a fellow was bragging about
We agreed to go three miles across country, owners up,
the horses being stakes. I’d have won easily, though I
rode two stone heavier than he did, if I’d been sooer; but
somehow I blundered at a bit of fallen timber, and the
beast fell under me and broke his back.”
“ Well, if you lost the other fellow didn’t gain much,”
said the shepherd, with a grin.
“ No ; but he insisted on having the hide and the saddle.”
“ That was smart.”
“ Yea ; but I’m on tbe look-out for a horse. Have you
got one to spare ? I thought I saw one grazing as I came
along ?”
“Aye, that’s the boss’s mare. But she’s dead lame.”
“ How’s that?”
“ Why, he rode out to the hut yesterday to meet one of
the police, and the mare fell dead lame just as he reached
it. So he had to tramp all the way back again, and a
pretty growling be made over the job, I can tell you.”
“ Yes, I daresay. It must have sweated him a bit to
hump his saddle along this weather,”
“ Oh, he didn’t trouble himself to do that. He left it
in my hut, to be fetched back by the store cart that comes
over next week.”
“ Oh,” thought Ned, “it’ll come in handy if I lay hands
on it.”
And then he continued aloud—
“ But what did he want to meet the police for ?”
“ Why,” answered the shepherd, “ that’s quEo a
yarn.”
“ Fire away with it, then.”
“ Well, you know, you asked me if there was any chance
of your getting stuck up in this Quarter.”
“Yes.”
“There ain’t just now, as 1 said, but one g 2 these days
we expect a visit from a regular out-and-outer in the hail-
ing-up line.”
“Who is it?”
Sow there was nothing very unusual in this, but Kelly
“ Just guess.”


Ned ran through the names of half-a-dozen well-known
bushrangers.
“ No,” said the shepherd, “ it ain’t one of them, but a
chap as'll give anyone of them a stone and a beating over
any course they like to name.”
“ Who is it ?” said Ned.
* Why, that villain, Ned Kelly, the Ironclad, as they
call him, to bs sure!”
Kelly was not prepared for this.
He was electrified.
How was it that just at this moment his whereabouts
should spring to the point?
He had not given anyone but the dead man a clue to
his movements.
It appeared, however, that the scent was discovered in a
most singular way.
Cathcait had some days before his death written a
letter addressed to a friend in Melbourne disclosing his
suspicions as to Kelly, and giving his personal description
most minutely, and also expressing hig determination to
hunt him down and bag the reward.
Aa tins letter was found amongst his effect# it was for-
warded to its destination by post, and, ®n the amval of
the particulars ©f Gath cart s death, his friend communi-
cated his letter to the police.
Kelly, of course, knew nothing of this.
MWittie, bow a magistrate, had received a communica-
tion with the county authorities of the expected reappear-
ance of the Kelly plagne, and resolved to rid himself as
quickly (Si possible of a man who knew too much.
“Oh!’’replied Ned, “but what the devil makes you
think he’ll turn up here?”
“ Why, I’ll tell you. I suppose you’ve heard of his
horse, Marco Polo, eh ?”
** He’« a regular clipper. Well, he was left in the
guv’nor’g care some time back, and it stands to reason that
his master will come for him some day.”
“ 1 shouldn’t wonder if he did,” answered Ned, with a
grin,
“ The guv’nor gave me a hint of this a fortnight ago.
He knows all about Kelly, I’m thinking. He’s as sharp as
Old Nick, himself, has been in communication with the
police, and has arranged that directly Kelly shows his
nose about the place, he shall be smartly nabbed.”
“ Oh ! that’s it, is it ?”
“ That’s just it, my bloomer ! ”
The expression of Kelly’s face was not very amiable.
His compressed lips, and the savage gleam of his eyes,
spoke a little volcanic commotion withia
His determination, whatever it was, seemed taken, and
he strode off in the direction of M‘Yittie’s home station.
To go straight on there was not, however, his intention.
As soon as he got out of sight of the shepherd, he
turned and doubled back in the direction of the but.
Making a circuit, he succeeded in reaching it unseen.
It was deserted, as when he had visited it some hours
before.
Entering it, he glanced round in quasi of ths ti
which the shepherd had spoken.
At first he could not discover it.
At last he found it, with the bridle, stowed away in a
corner of the hut.
The shepherd would not bo back until sundown, and
then be too tired to notice whether the saddle and bridle
were missing or not.
Putting it on his head, and the bridle in his pocket, he
started off for the main station at Garoona.
He could not hope to reach there that evening, and had
to take up his quarters at another hut.
Here he represented himself as a shearer on his way to
a job, and pitched the same yarn of the death of his horse.
He did not say anything about buying another, how-
ever, as he thought he was near enough to Marco Polo
now not to bother himself about any other animal.
He started off the next morning, and arrived in sight
of Garoona early in the afternoon.
Instead of going straight up to the station, he concealed
himself in a belt of timber, and waited for the approach
of nightfall.
He noticed MWittie ride up, and remarked with disgust
that the old fellow was mounted on no less a steed taan
Marco Polo himself.
“ Jee-rusalem!” mentally ejaculated Kelly. “You’ll
never cross such a piece of stuff as Marco again, my
bloomer. You’ll sell Ned Kelly, will you? I’ll teach
you a lesson that will last you longer than a plate of por-
ridge for your breakfast, you Scotch hound ! Wait till
I’m on your track, Mr. MWittie.”
Evening gradually came on, the men on the home sta-
tion came in, the horses were turned into the paddock,
and preparations for supper made.
Ned had brought some provisions with him, so this
last operation did not tantalise him as it might otherwise
have done.
At last, as darkness came on, all signs of human life
about the station began to disappear.
The men had withdrawn into their huts, which were
close to the main dwelling inhabited by MWittie.
People who have to be out by sunrise are not usually
given to sit up late, and in a very short time the gleams ol
light that had shown through the cracks in the elosed
shutters faded away.
(To be continued.')
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
+-1-+
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American
Civil War.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to
“ The Black Angel.’’
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great
American War.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise
of the “ Black Angel.”
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea.
Demons of the Sea. Wild and Wonderful.
Love and Adventure. Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures ol
Run away from Home.— A Life of a Scapegrace.
Adventure. The Cloud King.
The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Haif a- Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Million. Kuin.
The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures In Search One in a Thousand.
of a Big Diamond. Andrew Lorrimer.
Lord Scatterbrain, or the Bough Robert the Rover.
Diamond Polished. The Mutiny of the “Thundes,"




NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
L it is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly iscompatible witb
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881,
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly's
Buotheb, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.’’— Times, July.
“The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
and his Naq ;’ in addition to which Ned's history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction,” — Press, July
“The stirring story of Ned Kelly, the Australian Bushranger (“Illustrated Loudon Novelette’’Office, 280, Strand),
pursues its way with unabated vigour. Full of incident, it should suit those who like their literature as they do their
cigars—full-flavoured. It is published in weekly numbers.” —South London Press, November.
CHAPTER CXCVIII. -Continued.
Still Ned resolved to be cautious.
He knew that the soundest slumber is that which comes
fitter midnight, and had made up his mind not to approach
the station till that hour.
He, therefore, sat patiently under a tree speculating as
what means he could employ to get M‘Yittie into his
power, and running over all the various punishments his
ingenuity could devise as best fitted for that venerable
hypocrite.
Mentally he vowed that the first task ho would set
about would be vengeance on the Scotchman.
Night bad fallen calm and placid, and the sky was
gemmed with a multitude of stars, conspicuous amongst
which the Lutheran Cross shone in all its refulgent mag-
nificence.
“I think it’s safe to make a move cow,” thought Ned:
It must be past midnight,”
Rising, he took up the saddle, and stealthily approached
the station.
“If there are any dogs prowling around there may be a
bit of a muss,” be meditated; and, with a view of meeting
this emergency, he looked to his knife.
A few minutes brought him to the paddock. Here he
paused for a short time to reconnoitre.
A strong temptation stole over him to knock at
M’Vittie’s hut, and shoot the old ruffian as he appeared at
the door.
It was necessary, however, to secure Marco Polo first
in order to carry out this scheme.
Accordingly he proceeded to the paddock.
The night was a clear and brilliant one, and he bad no
lifliculty in making out his horse amongst the others.
The next question was how to catch him.
He could not expect that the animal would ccmc to his
call any more than a bird would wait to have salt put on
its tail.
A seive full of oats might have proved haudy though.
However, the task proved an easier one than he had
anticipated when he slipped the bar and entered the
paddock.
Marco Polo was evidently in the habit of being ridden,
and had been turned out with a trail rope attached to him,
to facilitate catching.
Ned profited by this to effect his capture.
“ Steady, old man, steady,” he whispered, as he laid his
hand on Marco’s mane.
With rapid dexterity he saddled and bridled the
animal.
“By Jove!” he exclaimed, as he noted certain marks
on the horse’s withers, “so that herring-gutted old
skeleton of split-shingle couldn’t ride you without getting
you saddle-galled, whilst I, big and heavy as I am, never
scraped an inch off your skin, my beauty. Never mind,
old man, it’s the last tjme any one will throw a leg over
you but Ned Kelly.’’
As he spoke, Ned mvi the horse out of the paddock, the
Hip-bar of which he purposely omitted to replace after he
had done s<?, i
“If the old devil’s beasts have strayed away a few
miles by morning, why so much the better,” was
reflection, as he hoisted himself into the saddle and
marked with satisfaction that, owing to the exercise to
which he had been put. Marco was iu capital condition.
Again he debated whether he should ride up to the old
fellow’s door, and try to lure him forth so as to shoot him
down.
No, that would be letting lam off too easy.
“I’ll make him remember Ned Kelly, if I don’t, I ”
What he was we need not mention, but the adjective
he used is historically given as the birthright of every
Englishman to use.
Upon reflection, he thought better of assuaging his
vengeance at this moment, and resolved to be off to more
agreeable and safer regions in the neighbourhood of the
Murrumbridgee River, make a good pile, and then quit
the colony for ever.
He had heard a good deal about South America, its free
and easy style of morality, and there he resolved to
“pull up,” but to do so comfortably, he would have to
replenish his purse, and pretty heavily too.
His ideas upon this subject were rather vague, and he
never calmly considered what a “ competence ” meant
CHAPTER CXCIX.
MR. VITTIE STARTS ON A WILD GOOSE CHASE.
Mr. M’Yiitie's slumbers were not destined to be pro-
longed to a very late out that night.
Just after daybreak h„ was aroused by hearing someone
pounding away at the door of his dwelling.
“ Ech, wha’s there ?” was his response.
“ Get up, gov’nor ; there’s a blessed fine go,” was the
answer, in the voice M bis overseer.
“Andrew, my mon,” was his reply, “how often must
I tel! ye to lay aside the profane and uuguidly habit o’
blasphemin which is a sair abomination baith in the sight
o’ the Lord and in the lugs o’ a decent douce mon like
mysel.’ ”
“ Confound it all, it’s enough to make an angel swear.
Some fool or other left the slip panel open and everyone
of the horses are out of the paddock.
“ I) ” began M’Vittie ; but he checked himself just
in time, with a gulp that almost made him bite his tongue
off.
“ Ech now,” be ejaculated, as soon as ho had got his
breath, “but this is sair tidings, sair tidings, it’s eneuch
to drive a decent body clean daft to have to deal wi’ sic
a pack o’ blaitherin boobies as I hae aroun me. Let’s see
wha’s the gowk that has done this.”
Hurrying on his garments he sallied forth, and soon a
general muster of the men took place.
On being interrogated each and ail stoutly declares
that the slip rail had been in its place when they had last
set eyes on it.
Further cross-examination showed that three of the
hands who had been the last to leave the paddock had
done so in company, and that, according to their united
testimony, the rail had been carefully replaced by one (A
them.
“Ye must one and all start awa’ at aince in search o’


the beasties,” exclaimed M’Vittie ; and the men at once
bestirred themselves to carry out this order.
“ Hadn’t vve better send down to the black camp by
the river for a fellow or i-J o to help to track them,” sug-
gested Andrew.
“That’s no bad notion,” said M’Vittie; “aye ye can
just going and tell them that they shall hae the carcass o’
the sheep that deed yestreen for the job.”
Andrew hastened away and in a short time returned
with a couple of black fellows.
After carefully examining the paddock and its surround-
ings, and jabbering away amongst themselves, they turned
to Andrew, who had explained to them the state of things.
On hearing their report he at once hastened to his
master.
“ The blackfellows say that whoever left the slip rail
down rode off on one of the horses,” he said.
“ What mon ?” exclaimed M’Vittie.
Andrew repeated his remark, and in confirmation the
blacks pointed out the tracks and signs which, to their
eyes, revealed that a horse had been led out of the pad-
dock and mounted, including its trail rope left on the
ground.
They declared that the animal had been halted just in
front of M'Vittie’s house, and had then been galloped off
in a straight line, its trail widely differing from that of the
other animals.
“ Wha would hae dreamt o’ sic a thing?” wailed
M‘Vittic. “ ’Tis some hellicate reiver o’ a house thief
that has done this trick. To think that sic things should
be dune aneath the vary nebs o' a pack of feckless loons
that hae na mair thocht o’ their maister’s gear than o’ their
ain salvation.”
“I wonder which horse the fellow boned?” said
Andrew.
“ The best, the vara best, ye may be certain,” answered
his employer. “My mind sair misgives me but it’s the
beastie left here a few months sinsyne. Ye ken the one 1
mean ?”
“What, Marco Polo?” said Andrew, who knew to
whom the animal really belonged. “ Well, that's all the
better, since it was not ono of your own, and the real
owner is never likely to turn up and claim it, or, if he
does, can’t well kick up a row about it.”
M‘Vittie pulled a long face.
He had not informed Andrew that he had long since
began to look upon Marco Polo as his own, and that he
isad determined to secure Ned whenever he put foot on
the station to claim the animal from him.
And now all his hopes of the ten thousand pounds
offered for the capture of the bushranger had galloped
off on Marco’s four legs.
For if once Ned learnt that the horse had been stolen,
it was not very likely that he would take into his head to
pay M‘Vittie a visit.
“ By my saul, but it’s enuch to drive a mon distracted,”
groaned the squatter, when later in the day the men re-
turned with all the rest of the horses, thereby conclu-
sively proving that Marco Polo had been carried off;
“ there goes the growden opportunity o’ putting ten
thousand p’unds o’ sili’er in my pouch, and riddin’ the
country-side at the same time o’ as great as rogue as ever
supped prison-porridge. My certie, but I wad gi’e some-
thin’ for the chance o’ settin’ my e’en on the mon that
stole you’ horse, the de’il tak’ him for a greedy gled.”
This wish came from the MWittie’s heart, though he
hardly imagined how soon it was to be realised.
For on reflection, the idea ocaured to him of starting at
once, endeavouring to trace the stolen horse, with the
view, if no other means of repossessing himself of it
arose, of ransoming it from its present possessor, or of
shooting him down.
It was a decided wild-goose chase; but the old fellow
had been brooding so long on the delightful prospect of
luring Ned to his station and their ensnaring him, that it
really seemed to him that the disappearance of Marco Polo
meant nothing less than a loss of the ten thousand offered
for the capture of the bushranger, ana on which he had
counted with certainty.
He was not only a determined, but, when roused by
avarice, a truly desperate man, and he resolved to set out
in pursuit.
If the horse had been sold by the thief, he would claim
it, and to facilitate matters would go so far, he thought, ns
to recoup the purchaser in the sum he gave tor it, since
ten thousand pounds would be worth such a sacrifice.
Accordingly he started well-mounted and armed.
The route selected by Ned had led him into the steep
and ragged district in which the Murrambridgeo rises
Deep and precipitous ravines, and stupendous charms,
enclosed between walls of rock, mark this region, which is
seldom visited owing to its sterility, though bordering on
a rich range of pasture land.
The M’Vittie was a capital bushman and tracker, and, as
Ned had taken no trouble to conceal his trail, he was able
to follow it with ease, for as luck would have it, the
ground was like the weather, soft, and the track so far
lay distinct.
He was rather astonished, however, to find it leading
towards the desolate region in question, instead of to some
settlement.
Nevertheless, the thought of getting the representation
of £6,000 into his hands again nerved his efforts.
He pushed on, though after a time he began to ex-
perience great difficulty in tracking the horse, owing to
the stony nature of the soil.
Ou the second afternoon a r tcr quitting the station he
found himself in a narrow valley or ravine, paved with
broken fragments.of stone.
To the right and left rose two ridges of brown and
splintered rock, from the crevices in which sprung a fesr
stunted trees.
A short distance ahead the ravine apparently took an
abrupt turn to the right.
As he had tracked Marco Polo to the entrance of the
gorge in which he found himself, and as there was no
means of a horse getting away either to the right or to
the left without wings, he did not trouble himself to look
for hoof-marks, but pushed steadily forward.
Suddenly the report of a pistol rang out from behind a
rock, standing a little in advance of th« angle he was ap-
proaching, and abreast of which he was about to pass.
The aim of the unseen marksman was a good one, to
judge by the result.
Struck by the bullet, M‘Vittie’s horse staggered and
dropped in its tracks as dead as a doornail, pitching its
rider, who had not time to recover himself, clean over its
head on to his own.
The shock with which his skull came into contact with
the ground was so sharp a one, that he lost all conscious
ness for some time.
When he recovered, it was several minutes before he
could exactly realise the state of things.
At length he began to do so.
lie was lying on his back with his head, which seemed
to him to have swollen to double its usual size, supported
by a stone.
It was aching intolerably, and after just opening his
eyes he closed them again, and almost relapsed into in-
sensibility.
On reopening them, he recognised that he was still he
the same place.
Drawing a long breath he made an effort to rise.
To his astonishment he found he could not do so.
His limbs refused all movement.
For a moment he fancied that they had been temporarily
paralysed by the shock.
He waited a little and then made another effort, but
with same result.
Things, however, were growing clearer to him.
The reason of his inability to move became apparent.
He was securely fastened, hand and foot.


The sense of peri! arising from this discovery com-
pletely aroused him from his state of semi-stupor.
He raised himself after some exertion into a sitting
position, and looked first at his bonds and then at the
spot in which he found himself.
As regarded the former, he was secured like a trussed
fowl.
His hands nad been tied together, and his elbows
fastened to his sides, whilst a stout lashing had been passed
round his ankles.
As to his wherabouts, he was lying a pace or two from
the spot on which he had originally fallen, beside the dead
body of bis horse.
But who the deuce, he thought, could have secured
him in such a fashion, so different to the customary style
of the Australian bushranger, who generally covers his
victim, and then summons him to bail up ?
For some moments he fancied himself alone. But then
these bonds. Who pinioned him? What did it all mean ?
Turning his eyes to the left he saw a form sitting quietly
smoking on a block of stone, that sent all the blood in
Ins body into his head and back again. lie was almost
choked with surprise and alarm.
CHAPTER CC,
A COMPANION FOR JOSS.
The bushranger glared down on the prostrate figure of the
squatter, who had sank back in mingled terror and amaze-
ment at his appearance, with a look of ferocious joy.
“ Well, Mr. M‘Vittie,” he repeated, “how do you find
yourself?”
Fora moment M‘Yittie’s senses seemed on the point of
leaving him from mingled fear and astonishment.
Hq managed, however, to pull himself together again,
“ What, Ned Kelly !” he ejaculated. “ Ech, mon, but
this is a strange meetin’. Sakes alive, what garred ye
shoot the pair beastie and lap mo in bonds like to a suck-
lin’ babe in its swaddlin’ claithes ?”
“ Can’t you guess? ” said Ned.
“De’iia bit, mon; de’il a bit, unless ye tuik me for
anither. But joost loosen these tows ye have cast aboot
me if it’s a bit crack j e’re wushin’ for.”
“ Y"ou didn’t think to meet me hereabouts, eh? ”
“ Na, I didna, I didna even ken that ye were bock agin
in the colony, and it’s little I thocht to foregather wi’ ye
in sic a fashion.”
Ned looked at him for a little time in silence.
“What brought you here, MYittie?”
“ ’Deed, it was joost a wee bit service I was doin’ yer
animel, Ned. Ye ken the browny beastie, it’s Marco Polo
ye ca’ed him, that ye left in my care sinsyue ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Weel, some hellicate loon has stolen him fra’ the
station, and I was trackin’ the villian. Sae if ye’ll undo
the bonds we’ll just set out after him together. But I mis-
doubt me. Surely if ye have been lurkin’ here ye must
have seen him pass, the reevin rogue.”
“I’ve only seen one rogue to-day,” said Ned with a
grim earnestness; “and he’s about as black-hearted a
traitor as ever broke bread or swallowed porridge.”
“ What dy’e mean ?” asked M‘Vittie, who, for all his
coolness, began to grow terribly uneasy.
At that moment the neigh of a horse sounded from be-
hind the angle of the ravine.
“ Why, 'tis the neigh o’ the beastie himself,” said
M'Vittie, somewhat reasured. “ Ah, I’d ken it amangst
a thousand. I see how it is. Ye came across the reiver,
who was walkin’ off wi’ him.”
“No,” shouted Ned, throwing off all disguise, “but I
have come across the scoundrel who was going to use him
as bait to draw me into the bands of the traps, and by
I’m not going to leave go of bun in a burry, now I’ve got
him. You didn’t expect to drop on an old friend so soon
again did you? you blood-thirsty Scotch whelp! ain’t
you glad ? You look it,”
And Kelly burst into a loud laugh.
The terror of his quondam associate would have bees
ludicrous if it. had not been despairing.
“ Out with it, old man. Why have you taken s«cJ« a
fancy to Ned Kelly that you must track him like a spy?
Yes, like a spy! D'ye hear - a spy? And you know,
Mac, how Ned pays spies!—ch? You re mistaken
Kelly.”
“ Fac or neath, I thocht it was some reeving thief that
had lifted your bonnie boast, my lad; and 1 was
just ”
“Yes, I know, you were just seeing if you could see
whether Kelly was handy to fill a cellar or jail 1 know
ye, Andy. I’m fly to it all, and your little game too. But
you havn't won the trick yet, my laddie. No, you've got
a little performance to go through before them cards turn
up trumps. Just get up and follow me ”
“ What do you want me to get up for—l may as well
be where I am when I’ve no horse.”
“ Why, you don’t think I’d be so cruel as to let yon lie
here until the crows picked your liver out?” laughed
Kelly. “ Oh, dear, no, Mac, I mean to provide a lodging
for you for life .”
“ What the diel are ye at mon ?” said M'Vittie, look-
ing rather anxiously at Kelly, but still ignorant that his
enemy was aware of his treacherous intentions
“Up you sneaking hound—you shall never lap my blood.
Dy’e think I’m not fly to your police jabberings ; do you
think I don’t know your game for the Reward? You’ve
come for it, and my government oath, you’ll have some-
thing that will show such vermin as you are what it is to
meddle with Ned Kelly.
“ I know your little game. I know how you plotted to
keep the horse till 1 came for it, so as to hand me over to
the traps. 1 know all about your meeting the police at
the out-station. The man who stole the horse you talk
of! Why, the man who stole the horse was me, and as 1
stood by your blooming shanty 1 felt a devilish mind to
put a light to the roof, and to shoot you down as you came
out, like the dog you arc.”
He paused for a moment, half choked with fury.
Then he resumed in more solemn tones—
“ Only I’m very glad I didn’t, for then I should have
lost the chance of teaching you the very pretty little lesson
of how Ned Kelly repays treachery, which I mean to do
before you’re an hour older.”
“But, Ned ” began M‘Vittie, feebly.
“ Stow it!” thundered the bushranger. “ Don’t try any
of your gibberish with me. I ain’t been very particular
in my line about knocking a fellow on the head if he stood
in my way, or when the Californey was to be turned up ;
but if I did a trifle more, I never put a pal’s life in my
pocket and drunk out his heart’s blood in the nearest pub.
No ; Ned Kelly never sold a pal or sneaked a swag. He
always went straight at his work, whether it was a man
or a bank. No ; he’d stand or fall like a man, not like a
cur that would bite you in your sleep, and sell your wisen
to the rope as he would a bale of wool or a cask of
tallow.”
Thoroughly alarmed, Andrew tremulously cried—
“l dinua ken what ye are bletherin' aboot me betrayin
ye; it’s a’together a mistake on your pairt. I’m yer
freeud. and I can prove it. Let me gang, and I’ll gie ye
any sum in reason ye could name.”
“There’s only one thing 1 mean to take from you,”
replied Ned.
“ And what’s that ?”
“ Every drop of blood in your body, and every ounce
of meat on your bones.”
As be spoke, Ned stooped over the prostrate figure of
squatter, and hoisted it to its feet.
Then throwing it on to his shoulder, he carried it to
the spot beyond the angle where Marco Polo was tethered.
The Scotchman roared loud and long, hoping, but in
vain, to attract succour.
A few minutes later, and M‘Vittie was balancing like a
sick, across the saddle of the gallant animal, which Ned


took by the bridle. Andrew threw himself off the animal,
and fell on his face, and lay there howling and imploring
for mercy, and asking wildly what Kelly was going to do ?
“If you don’t lie quiet in the saddle, I’m hanged if I
don t drag you by this tether-rope to the lodging I’m
going to give you for the night, at all events.”
Groan upon groan flowed from M‘Yittie’s throat. He
realised his prospects, and he knew his man ; he also
knew his man knew him. White despair enshrouded his
face, the features of which were working with dread. He
ceased to plead, for hope had fled. Kelly threw him
again across the saddle, face downwards, like a sack,
saying—
“Tumble again, and you’ll know more of the stones than
you ever yet felt.”
After travelling for half-an-hour, they arrived at the
foot of a small, isolated peak, on the flat summit of which
was a solitary tree, forming a conspicuous landmark.
Here Ned halted, and laughed and chuckled, while his
his eyes gleamed revenge.
He removed M‘Vittie—whose sufferings, mental and
physical, had reduced him to almost a state of imbecility
—from the back of Marco Polo.
Placing him on his own shoulder, he commenced the
ascent of the peak, which was not high, merely prominent.
The ground led very gradually up to it, and Marco Polo
had carried the burden up to the foot of the rock.
At length they reached the summit of the peak, which
formed a small plateau.
Ned threw himself down, utterly exhausted by the side
of MYittie, whom bruises and terror had by this time
reduced to a condition of almost imbecility.
The plateau was about eight or ten feet square, and horn
its summit an extensive view could be obtained.
The tree rooted in it was a small but strong one.
As soon as he had recovered himself, Ned rose and lifted
MYittie to his feet.
He placed the squatter against the tree, and lashed him
to it securely,
A look of frozen terror spread over the squatter’s face.
He turned his eyes to Ned, his blue lips parted and in a
husky whisper he gasped—
“ What is it ye mean to do wi’ me ?”
Without vouchsafing him any reply, Ned drew his knife.
“ For mercy’s sake, for pity’s sake, spare me, I’m no fit
to dee. I’m a miserable sinner,’’ screamed M’Vittie.
Still in silence Ned raised his knife, but instead of plung-
ing it into MYittie’s breast as he had anticipated, he
deliberately set to work to cut away every shred of cloth-
ing the unhappy man wore, taking care at the same time
not to sever his bonds.
When this was completed, and MYittie stood as naked
as Adam before the fall, Ned returned his knife to its
sheath, and said—
“l told you I meant to have every drop of blood from
your body, and every ounce of flesh from your bones. I
give the first to the insects and the last to the birds.”
“For God’s sake,”yelled MYittie, who began to realise
the awful fate awaiting him, “ put your knife into me.”
“No,” answered Ned,” my knife for a man who fights
me, and not for a sneak, who wanted to earn my blood-
money, like you.”
“Help, mercy, mercy, help, murder,” yelled the squatter,
almost mad with fear.
“It’s no use howling MYittie, there’s not a living
soul within fifty miles of us.”
The squatter made a desperate effort to free himself.
He tugged at his bonds till they buried themselves in
his flesh, and then heedless of the agony he inflicted on
himself he endeavoured to snap them by a series of
jerks.
At length *,e paused exhausted and bleeding from a
iozen places where they had cut through his skin.
‘ You won’t get loose, those fastenings would hold a
ouple of working bullocks.”
‘ Ye coward, ye fause-hearted coward, I spit at ye, ye
dare na snub me, ye dare na,” howled M’Vittie, in tha
hope of taunting Ned into using his knife.
“ That cove won't fight,” replied Kelly calmly.
“ Kill me in mercy, mon, it’s the only thing 1 ask o’ ye,
if ye’ve got a human heart in ye kill me.”
With his eyes protruding from his head, and his hair
standing on end, M‘Yitie forced this frantic appeal from
between his lips, from which blood and froth were running
down to his chest, that panted and heaved with his
recent exertions and his present terror.
“ No,” answered Ned. “Goodbye, I moan to leave
you as a warning to others not to play tricks on Ned
Kelly.”
With these words he turned away and began to descend
the peak heedless of the wild string of prayers, blas-
phemies, curses, and entreaties that pealed forth from the
lips of the doomed wretch at its summit.
As he descended the sounds grew fainter and fainter.
On reaching the bottom he looked up.
The figure of M’Yittie lashed to the tree trunk was
plainly visible against the sky, across which clouds that
indicated a storm were floating.
Ned fancied he could discern it struggling to get
loose.
After gazing at it for some time he remounted Marco
Polo and rode onward.
As he did so one last wild despairing yell reached his
ears.
Before nightfall a terrible storm of wind and rain broke
over the mountains.
This weather lasted for several days and its effects ex-
tended over a large area.
When, after waiting a week without hearing anything
of M‘Vittie, his overseer made an attempt to track him,
the faintest hope of doing so had vanished.
It was not till months afterwards that a shepherd who
had strayed into the mountainous district was attracted
by the singular object he observed on the summit of one
of the peaks.
On reaching this he found himself in the presence of
skeleton securely fastened to a tree trunk.
The birds of prey had long since stripped it of every
particle of flesh, and nothing remained to identify this
victim of Ned Kelly’s vengeance.
CHAPTER CCI.
NED ENTERS THE GOVERNMENT SERVICE.
After disposing of the treacherous squatter in the fashion
described, Ned had to look ahead.
From what he had gathered on his journey up country,
it was evident that, thanks to the information given by the
Scotchman, the police were on the alert for his return.
The presence of Marco Polo at Garoona had evidently
converted that station into a kind of honey-pot, round
which they had been continually buzzing like so many
flies.
Ned argued that with Marco Polo away, however, they
would no longer think that there was any certainty of the
horse’s owner making his appearance in the district, and
would therefore gradually relax their vigilance.
“They’ll hear the horse has been boned,” ho thought;
“ but they’ll never dream of such a thing as a fellow steal-
ing his own horse, when he’d only got to go straight up
to the station and ask for it.”
He determined therefore to remain quiet for a few
months longer, until the police Ha* given up all hopes of
his putting in an appearance in quarter, and left him
a clear field for future action.
There would, no doubt, be some fuss made over the
Scotchman’s disappearance ; but Ned judged tkat it would,
after a time, be set down to one of the countless accidents
of the bush.
The body might not be found for months, or oven
years; and, even then, its identification would probably
be a matter of difficulty.
At any rate there would be no evidence to connect him


with it, since he had nob been recognised since his return
to the colony.
“That’s the dodge;- he said to himself. “I'll put
Marco Polo in sure hands this time, lie up a bit longer,
and then, when they least expect it, I’ll just wake snakes
amongst some of those police buffers. Just when they’ve
given up all chance of seeing me, and fancy I’m lying
somewhere with my toes turned up to the roots of the
daisies, I’ll just streak slick across the colony like a bush
fire, and warm ’em up all round.”
In pursuance of this plan he travelled for some days,
till he reached a spot where he thought his horse would
be safe.
After journeying for a week, he came upon the outsta-
tion of a cattle run, the owner of which was in England,
and the station, as is often the case, in charge of a work-
ing overseer.
As the stock is all branded with the owner’s initials,
and no sales are to take place except through the master’s
Melbourne agents’ cattle brokei’s, there is little or no
chance of robbery by those in charge.
Of course, the overseer’s small herd of cattle, allowed
to depsaturein the run, increases in a miraculous manner.
Every cow belonging to him has two calves, and none
of them ever die.
Here Kelly soon agreed with the overseer to take
Marco Polo in, and let him run with the mob of horses
in the station.
He was to be hobbled for the first month, to get him
accustomed to the locality and his new associates, from
which he would not stray.
Having left him there, he worked his way down to the
Murray, and obtained a passage on a fiat boat conveying
wool to Adelaide.
Here he learnt that an expedition was on the point of
starting with a view of surveying a line of country for
the railway proposed to run right across the Australian
continent from south to north, a distance of 1,200 miles,
ia a straight line.
There is no country in the world better suited for the
laying out of railway lines than Australia.
It seems as if nature, anticipating the appliances of
steam, had prepared the land for the locomotive. It is
almost a dead level throughout the vast continent, and
engineering difficulties are consequently minimised.
A company is now in formation to lay the rail from
Adelaide to the North Coast. The land is as level as a
billiard board.
The expedition was organised by the Government, and
the idea occurred to Ned that the very last place of all
others in which he would be likely to be sought would be
in the Government service.
Accordingly he joined the expedition, and very glad the
leader was to obtain “a hand” of' such splendid
physique.
Of course he did not give his real name, and selected
that of Tom Smith, as one easily remembered and not
uncommon.
The expedition started, and for some weeks no event
of importance took ply.ee till they had entered the Northern
part cf the Continent,
One day, however, one of the blacks attached to it in
the capacity of tracker declared that amongst the trail left
by a party of blacks the}' had come across, was the unmis-
takable print of a white woman’s foot.
This created some astonishment, not unmixed with un-
belief.
Mr, Jackson, the lea<l/r m the party, closely questioned
the black, whose name was Tiger, but the fellow persisted
that the tracks were unmistakably those of a “white
Mary,” as he «lysed her.
There had been several rumours in the colony of white
women carried off by the blacks and kept as captives, and
khis discovery led to their being discussed again.
It was determined to come up Uie blacks and
Eescue the ‘ white women.”
One strong argument against this lay, however, in tha
fact of the somewhat crippled condition in which the
explorers found themselves, owing to t''eh» provisions
running short.
For several days past they had been making thei: \my
over low stony ridges, with peaks rising here and there,
and tracts of bare red sandy soil dotted with patcW of
prickly trio-dia.
They had run out of meat, and the chief occupations of
the day were stalking parrots, catching kangaroo rats,
and digging for water in the sandy beds of dry creeks.
The parrots, which fed on the blossoms of the blood-
wood trees, were pretty plentiful, but after a time they
palled on the appetite. They fell in with kangaroo, and
were soon so far in clover.
It was known that there were several stations lying in
a north-westeruly direction, and Mr. Jackson resolved to
dispatch a man in that direction with a view of obtaining
provisions. What they chiefly missed was bread.
“ We are pretty lucky as regards water,” he observed,
“ though in a few more days we shall find it without
having the trouble of digging for it.”
“ Time we did,” observed the second ; “ for if this sort
of thing goes on much longer, we shall have the horses
taking a shovel and going down to the creek to dig for
themselves. It’s very rum the way in which they hang
about for a water-hole to be opened for them, they know
as well as we do what the digging is for.”
“ Yes, it may be laughable to see that, but I question if
the diggers think it is, especially when they have to go
down so deep that every drop for the horses has to be
bailed out into an artificial water-hole made by a water-
proof spread on the sand.' That is why I want to push on
out of this region into the grass country, and why I do
not like turning aside to follow the track of the blacks.”
“ Right you are.”
“ I intend to send that fellow, Tom Smith, with Tiger,
on ahead towards the north-west, in order to get one of
the squatters up there to send some beef and mutton
walking down to us.”
The party had indeed got over the worst part of their
journey, and were approaching the grassy plains met with
in approaching the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Here boundless plains, richly grassed, stretched away
to the horizon, and were intersected by magnificent
lagoons, promising a never-failing supply of water.
It was arranged that Ned and the black should start
off at dawn the next morning, and push on as far as they
could.
When morning arrived, however, the black was missing
No one could give the slightest clue to his whereabouts,
but it was supposed that with the carelessness of his race,
he had forgotten all about the mission he had been
informed of, and had started off on a hunt of some kind
on his own account.
Seeing that Mr. Jackson was seriously annoyed at the
delay, Ned volunteered to push ou alone.
“Give me my bearings,” he said, “and I’ll steer as
straight as a bee line to the station.”
During the journey, Mr. Jackson had had ample oppor-
tunities of testing Kelly’s skill as a bushman, and was in
no apprehension on that score.
Indeed, it was on account of these very qualities that
he had selected him for the mission.
“ It’s not so much that,” he answered, “ that I am in
doubt about, but on account of the blacks.”
“ The blacks ?” echoed Ned.
“Yes. They are very fierce and dangerous up here. I
know that they are continually spearing sheep and cattle
on the runs, especially during the rainy season, and that
the squatters have all their work cut out to keep them
under."
“ Oh ! that’s it, is it ?”
“Yes, and the main reason I wanted to go with you,
was in order to keep a look-out. Yon know what cun-
ning devils they are at hiding, and you might have half-a


dozen spears through you before you sighted the tip of an
ear, 1 ’
“Oh ! never fear for that. I'll keep a sharp enough
look-out.” said Ned, “the spear ain't sharpened that's to
drill a hole in my hide, I feel certain.”
As he spoke he could not help thinking how handy his
armour would be under the circumstances, for the northern
blacks are a fierce race, and their spears are thrown with a
force and precision that sends them through a man's body
like a skewer through a fowl.
After repeated warnings and instructions, Kelly can-
tered off with the understanding that if Tiger turned up in
time he should be despatched on his trail.
As Kelly rode along, the warnings respecting the
blacks were uppermost in his mind, but armed as he was with
rifle and revolver, he felt equal to facing a score of them.
By noon he had got to the edge of the barren region,
and halted to give his horse a rest, and eat some mutton
and damper with which he had been furnished. Nor was
the comfort of a pipe denied him.
Remounting he continued his journey at a swinging can-
ter across the level plain now stretching before him. He
was mounted on a Government horse, and didn't spur
him more than was necessary. But like a good bushman
he pulled up more than once to give his animal a spell and
a bite of grass, while he loitered on the greensward, and
tranquilly blew a cloud. We say tranquilly—for he began
to appreciate the feeling of security and rest which he ex-
perienced from the utter absence of any kind of apprehen-
sion. He felt that he was acquiring capital for future
adventures.
Mile after mile did they speed along with nothing in view
to break the monotonous expanse of verdure.
Thirty miles were at length covered, and the shades of
evening began to settle on the landscape, which was now
varied by belts of small timber and low shrubs.
The sun set, and darkness came rapidly on.
Ned was just about to select a soft spot for the night,
when a single spark of fire glittering through the darkness
drew his attention to a dense scrub some three or four
hundred yards from where he stood.
At first he thought he might have been deceived by
fancy or by a falling star low down on the horizon.
Whilst still in doubt, and hesitating whether to ride for-
ward or wait, a second spark, for such it evidently was,
floated out from the same spot.
That there was a fire in the scrub was beyond question,
and that it must be either an abandoned fire or one made
by natives, was at once apparent to Ned, who was well
versed in the ways of the aborigines.
He had no doubt that it was one made by natives for
the simple reason that no smoke or glare was visible over
head
Had it been an encampment of white men there would
have been a roaring fire and the tops of the surrounding
trees would have been lit up by the blaze.
Kelly determined to ascertain the number of those
assembled, and to find out if it were merely an ordinary
camp, or whether the myalls or male blacks were out on
some essentially warlike errand.
In the former case they would be accompanied by their
gunsorwives orpiccanennies, but in thelatter like the North
Amei’ican Indians on the war path, they would be alone.
Having decided on his course of action Ned dismounted,
and leading his borer as near to the camp of the blacks as
prudence admitted, he hitched the bridle over a broken
branch.
Patting the animal gently as an admonition to remain
quiet till he was wanted, he moved noiselessly onwards to-
wards a spot whence he could obtain a view of the fire and
ita makers.
The chief danger os' discovery lay in the fact of the
natives being always accompanied by a pack of curs, whose
yelping serves to give notice of the approach of any stranger
to the camp.
By the exercise of the utmost caution Kelly managed to
crawl near enough through the scrub to obtain a view
of the occupants.
CHAPTER CCIL.
THE NATIVE CAMP AND THE PIDAAGED DRAYS.
These he speedily discovered to consist merely of old
men, useless as warriors, women and children, who were
sheltered by the usual “ miamis,” composed of sheets of
bark placed on end and overlapping each other, forming
merely sloping screens between the wind and the fires.
The adult males were evidently absent on some pre-
datory expedition.
Satisfied with his survey, Ned retreated as quietly as he
had come to the spot where had left his horse.
Mounting him he made for another patch of scrub at
some half-a-mile distance from the natives.
Here he unsaddled, hobbled his horse, and lay down for
a few hours 1 sleep.
He rose at daybreak and rode forward for some hours,
when it occurred to him that he had started without
breakfasting, and that it might be as well to repair that
omission.
He was just on me point of alighting in order to do
so, when he heard the peculiar jingle-jangle so familiar to
the bushraan's ear—the sound of the bullock yoke—he
pricked up his ears, knowing now that a white man was
close at hand. He followed the sound, and came upon a
pair of working bullocks feeding in their yokes. Hence
the noise.
It at once occurred to him that the dray must be bound to
the station of which he himself was in quest, and he started
at full speed to find it.
As he drew near, however, he noticed to his surprise
that there was no smoke about to indicate that white
people were encamping anywhere about.
Doubts began to arise in his mind as he recollected the
character of the blacks, and the fact of the absence of the
men from the camp he had seen the evening before.
There was, it occurred to him, just a possibility that
these men had surprised the teamsters and rifled the dray.
He was well armed and felt that, provided he kept out
of any ambush, he could easily get near enough to the
spot to reconnoitre the state of affairs.
Riding slowly, and sheltering himself as much as possible
behind the narrow belts of scrubby timber, he gradually
advanced until he could plainly distinguish two drays
between the openings in the bushes.
A nearer approach gave a full view of the waggons
themselves, but there was no sign of human life near
them.
He began to fear the worst, though perhaps the bullocks
might have strayed and the drivers were away searching for
them.
Determined to neglect no precautions, he satisfied him-
self that the coast was clear before advancing to the
waggons.
When he did so he realised what had happened.
A glance at the drays sufficed to show him that they had
been ransacked of their contents, and that everything
eatable or useful, in a black fellow's estimation, had been
carried off.
Lying beneath one of them was the mutilated body of
one of the drivers and an elderly woman.
Their heads were beaten in with nullah-nullahs, theii
hands and feet had been cut off and probably devoured,
and their bodies hacked and hewed in a revolting fashion.
The tracks of a large mob of blacks were plainly visible,
and it was evident that after their murderous work they
had departed with their plunder in a body.
But to Ned's astonishment he noticed amongst their
tracks the unmistakable footprint of a whhe woman.
There could be no mistake about it.
The ground was soft, and, amidst the traces left by the
bare feet of the natives, that of a woman’s small boot was
plainly discernable.
But where was the other driver.
Either he had been killed at a distance from the camp


or had succeeded in making his escape, in which case he
would probably make his way to the nearest station and
return with a search party.
“ It’s pretty certain,” thought Ned, “ that the blacks
who have stuck up the drays are the myalls of the lot I
came across last night. The tracks are fresh, and the job
was done this morning so they can’t have got much of a
start. It’s pretty certain, too, that there was a girl with
the drays, and they’ve carted her off along with them.
“ The tarnation vermin ! I’m after them, and if I don’t
make ’em hand over that white woman why I don’t know
the crack of a rifle. The niggers can never get within
fifty yards of me. I can down ’em before they know
where the bullet comes from; and I don’t know but a
little black practice won’t keep my hand in. Besides I’m
getting tired of this here work—nothing to wake one up
day after day. This will put a spurt into work, and be
such a jolly lark too.”
Anything was a lark to Kelly that smelt of blood and
danger.
He forgot all about the mission with which he had been
entrusted by Mr. Jackson, and started in pursuit of the
white woman.
The excitement suited him.
He was a man of ready action, but his anxiety did not
lead him into the error of headlong haste.
He did not know how far he might have to travel, and
proceeded to rummage the drays in quest of anything
eatable that might have escaped the notice of the natives.
The blacks had cleared out everything eatable.
So Kelly fell back on his own commissariat of cold
mutton and damper, which he carried with him.
The proximity of the two murdered people seemed to
have little effect upon him.
Nevertheless, he resolved, if he got the chance, if* f ffiin
the ranks of the niggers.
The meal dispatched, he started on the track of the
blacks, which led—though of course he was unaware of
this—in the direction of some large lagoons, beyond
which was a stretch of broken country, affording a safe
retreat to such marauding hordes as the one he was fol-
lowing.
The mob he was tracking were indeed bent on crossing
the lagoon, and gaining this fastness where any attempt at
pursuit would be hopeless.
After some hours’ riding Ned came in sight of a belt of
oak scrub, fringing the head of the lagoon, or rather
lake.
The track of the blacks ran along its shore.
Stopping for a few moments to breathe and water his
horse, Ned began to think matters over.
It would soon be dusk, and, from the freshness of
their tracks, it was plain that the blacks had but a very
slight advance on him, thanks to the speed at which he
had been travelling.
It was also plain that they would camp on the borders
of the lake.
Ned resolved to come up with them at nightfall, and
make an attempt to rescue the girl, if he could see his
way to it.
Wishing to time his arrival, as well as to spare his
horse, he rode slowly along the western borders of the
water, which lay placid and smiling in the midst of a vast
plain.
Splendid pink and white lilies reared their wax-like
heads above their broad leaves, with which its mirror-
like surface was thickly studded to a distance of twenty
yards from the bank.
Amongst these leaves water rails chased each other in
sport, and ever and anon a red-legged crane would stalk
from its coy*** 1 in the tall reeds, or a stately black swan sail
by.
Flocks of wild ducks swam slowly about, diving from
time to time beneath the surface of the water, and now
and then a crocodile would slide noiselessly from the bank
and vanish with hardly a ripple.
As the shades grew longer and darkness fell, the tasi
of the lonely tracker grew more and more difficult, since
he dared not strike a light.
At length, on turning the head of the lake, he caught
sight of smoke, and, advancing a few steps lurther, could
plainly hear the mob of natives.
The time for action had come.
Selecting a secluded spot some distance from the black
camp, he fastened his horse to a tree in such a manner
that the animal would remain, if required, but in case of
the prolonged absence of his master, or of a surprise by
the blacks, could break away without much struggling.
Having disposed of his horse, Ned looked to his revolver,
and taking his rifle, cautiously made his way through the
oaks towards the spot whence the talking and shouting of
the natives reached him.
This time he had no fear of the dogs, as he knew that
when on one of their murderous expeditions the men left
their dogs with their wives and children.
The noise made by the blacks themselves, who concluded
they were safe from pursuit, helped to cover his advance,
made as it was under the dense shade of the oaks which
grew thickly together.
He was not long in gaining a spot whence he could sec
and hear all that went on.
The blacks, whose number he roughly guessed at fifty,
were busily engaged.
Some were disposing of the provisions and articles stolen
from the drays, and others were cutting down branches of
the oaks to make a slight shelter for the camp to wind-
ward and making up small fires.
By the light of these he could plainly distinguish the
prisoner, a white girl sitting on the ground with her face
buried in her hands.
She was unbound but was guarded by three or four
young men, to whom the duty of watching her had
evidently been assigned.
Kelly having satisfied himself as to the number ana
disposition of the men, turned his attention to tne sur-
roundings.
The spot chosen for the native camp, was a natural
clearing of about a quarter of an acre.
It was washed on one side by the waters of the lake,
where a narrow passage had been cut through the reeds,
and bounded in every other direction by the oak scrub.
Glancing towards the lake Ned noticed, to his surprise,
that a number of canoes were lying up in the shallow
water close to the shore.
It at once occurred to him that the blacks intended to
make use of these to continue their flight.
It was doubtless their intention to embark in them the
following morning.
The sight of the canoes gave Ned a fresh idea.
Two days’ hard riding with his weight on its back had
told on his horse, and it was doubtful whether the beast
would be equal to carrying off him and the girl, whilst a
flight on foot would be almost certainly fatal with such
keen trackers to deal with as the blacks.
But it was absolutely necessary to rescue the girl that
very night, and once embarked it would be impossible to
follow her.
Water, too, he reflected, would leave no trail by which
their own flight could be traced.
CHAPTER CCIH.
THE WHITE CAPTIVE AND THE BLACK TIGER.
He resolved therefore to try and carry her off by means
of one of the canoes.
As however some hours must elapse before the attempt
could be made, he drew back through the bushes with the
intention of examining the shores of the lake for a little
distance.
It would be as well he thought, to make sure that no
treacherous sand or mud bank existed in the neighbour-
hood, that might interrupt his flight and render him and
the girl a mark for the unerring spears of the natives.


The sky, which had hitherto been clear, was now
charged with heavy clouds, and a strong breeze had got
up—two things both favourable to his desperate enter-
prize.
As soon as he had got some distance from the camp he
entered the water, and waded out beyond the fringe of
reeds.
He felt somewhat uneasy, remembering the crocodiles
he had seen; but in reality there was no cause of alarm
on this score, as these animals, though numerous in the
inland lakes and lagoons of North Australia, are not
dangerous.
They rarely attain a greater length than six feet, and,
unlike their congeners, the alligators on the coast, never
attack human beings.
Feeling, as has been remarked, somewhat nervons on
this score, he waded slowly and cautiously towards the
camp, the water barely reaching above hi-s knees.
He found no obstruction, and a less depth of water
even would have sufficed for the light native canoes.
In his anxiety to avoid the crocodiles, he had incautiously
approached so near the passage cut in the reeds to the
camp, that before he was aware of it, he found himself
within five yards of a couple of blacks, who were search-
ing for some article they had dropped into the water.
For a moment Ned thought he was discovered, and
stood in readiness to shoot the first who should give the
alarm.
He had presence of mind to cock the weapon noise-
lessly, by pressing the trigger as he raised the hammer;
as otherwise the click would have betrayed him.
Finding that he had not been observed—and if he had,
even had he escaped himself, the fate of the woman he
was scheming to rescue, would have been sealed—he drew
back again into the reeds, and from there watched the
proceedings going on ashore.
The siglvt was a strange one.
Amongst the other goods which the dra~s had contained,
were a case of brandy and a small keg of rum.
These were being broached, and it was evident would,
in a few hours, render a large majority of the savages
helpless.
The very guards appointed to look after the prisoners
were not likely to resist this temptation, though there
was some danger that in their banbanaban orgies the
hapless girl might be brained in mere drunken fury or
sport.
The two savages who had alarmed him, having rejoined
their companions, Ned examined the canoes, and selected
the one he thought best suited to his purpose.
Bending low, and keeping well out of the glow of the
fires, he placed the best paddles he could find in it, and
then returned to his cover in the oaks.
As he was emerging from the water a hand was laid on
his arm, and a voice he thought he recognised, whispered—
“ All right, marmy (master), Tiger come along.”
Kelly’s first impulse at seeing a naked black before him
was to shin him with a blow of his foot, but on hearing the
voice he recognised Tiger, the black, who was to have
accompanied him on his expedition.
Tiger had evidently followed him, but was he a friend
of the blacks in camp before him ?
Might he not be an accomplice in their outrages, and
had he not merely hastened thither to join them?”
Ned felt a bit suspicious.
“How did you know I was tiere, Tiger?” he whispered.
“Tiger yan along a track. Plenty track sit down.
Yarraman baal all same like it.”
A little more questioning showed Ned that Tiger had
followed him shortly after he had left camp, but had been
unable to get ap with him before, owing to an accident
to his “ yarraman ” or horse, which he had finally aban-
doned, pursuing the rest of his way on foot.
“ Marmy,” observed the black, “ White Mary sit down
belongin’ myall camp” (there is a white woman in the
black’s camp).
“ Your ” (yes), answered NecL
“My word ! You want ’em, marmy ?”
“Mine want ’em, and mine get ’em bimeby; ’sposa
altogether kill ’em, myall nigger,” growled Ned, implying
that he would rescue the captive even if ho had to
slaughter the whole of her captors.
“ Plenty canoe sit down, take canoe," suggested Tiger.
“ Canoe all right," answered Ned. “ Plenty grog sit
down, too long a camp, Tiger,” he added, imprudently.
“ My word ! plenty rum, eh ? ”
And the darkey’s eyeballs glistened at the thought of
unlimited rum.
Ned noticed this, and saw his mistake.
He feared for the success of his plan.
He knew the inveterate craving of the blacks for rum,
and he saw that he must at once check this desire in the
breast of Tiger, or simply kill him on the spot.
“ Look here, Tiger,” ho said, “ mine want white Mary
to-night. S’pose you help me mine give it you plenty
rum and baccy long a station. Every day some rum.
S’pose baal (no) get Mary, mine shoot plenty black fellow.
Shoot Tiger first. You see ? ”
The myall had wisdom to see the odds would be con-
siderably against him in a fight, so he at once made up his
mind to accept the compromise of “rum every day,” and
from that moment his whole energies were devoted to the
rescue of the white woman.
“Marmy,” he said after a pause, during which the
blacks in camp had commenced a corroboree, and were
howling in a manner which was in itself a sufficient indica-
tion that the liquor had been tapped, “ you ’top here.
Tiger yan (go) look out. Baal (don’t) walk about.”
His dark form was soon lost in the oak shadows.
In a few moments Ned began to regret having trusted
him so far.
What if the sight and smell of the liquor should prove
too much for his good resolutions?
What if he betrayed him, and brought a horde of
drunken savages down on him ?
Even to a man of Ned’s iron nerve such a prospect was
not a pleasant one, and as the minutes flew by lie grew
more and more uneasy.
“Urra!” said a voice behind him, in the opposite direc-
tion to that in which the black had disappeared from
sight.
Ned wheeled round with his rifle ready, but only to
confront Tiger in person.
“ Baal shoot marmy,” whispered the black, with a grin.
“By gosh, Tiger! hanged if you didn’t give me a start.
What news ? Is the woman all right ? Are the myalls
drunk?”
“ White Mary all right,” answered Tiger, “That fellow
patter (eats) damper. Blackfellow plenty drink it grog.
Mine been bring canoe. Canoe sit down,” and he pointed
to a spot close to where they were standing.
It was very fortunate for Ned that Tiger had been well
treated during the expedition.
Mr. Jackson, knowing that their very lives might at
times depend upon the skill of the blacks accompanying
them in tracking strayed horses or discovering water, had
made it a strict rule to earn their good will, and had
insisted on one and all of those under him acting up
to it.
By this he had secured Tiger's devotion.
It was well for Ned that such was the case, as, otherwise,
the temptation to join in the orgies before him would very
likely have been too strong for the black.
But he regarded the bushranger as his friend, and ex-
tended to him the feeling of gratitude ho entertained
towards Mr. Jackson, his leader.
The possession of the canoe was a grCiivi point in their
favour, but it would never do to allow the blacks to retain
possession of the others.
If they did they would naturally start in pursuit, and,
by their superior numbers, would soon tire out two men
encumbered with a woman in their little craft.


Tiger, on being questioned, explained that he had
waded round into the passage, and, selecting the canoe to
which Ned had already transferred "die paddles, had gently
withdrawn it from the others.
The feat he had accomplished, unseen by the drunken
blacks, who had now scarcely a thought for anything save
the unexpected and plentiful supply of liquor.
The sucoess of this manoeuvre decided Ned to attempt
the removal of the other canoes.
As Tiger was quite sure that there was no watch kept
over them, he was dispatched to bring them away.
This feat he successfully accomplished in a very short
time. C
The two then set to work to damage all, except the one
they had chosen, beyond repair.
With crafts of such fragile build this was easy enough.
A long consultation followed, as soon as pursuit by
water had been thus rendered impossible.
Ned found out that Tiger was thoroughly well acquainted
with the district in which they were and with the situation
of the stations, to one of which he was to have guided his
present companion.
He questioned him as to the size and shape of the lake,
and the best spot to which to make in order to land.
Tiger enlightened Ned to the best of his ability, and the
line of flight was decided upon.
Kelly arranged with Tiger that the latter should attract
the attention of the savages wneai the white woman was
prepared to make for the boats, and thus draw off their
watchfulness.
When this had been settled, Ned thought it was time
to set about the most hazardous and arduous portion of his
task.
That of rescuing the captive girl from the maddened
horde of savages by whom she was surrounded.
CHAPTER CCIV.
KELLY RESCUES THE WHITE GIRL.
Tiger was instructed in the dusk of the evening to get
near the captive girl and convey the intelligence to her
that aid was near.
Stripped to the buff like a native he would be mistaken,
if seen, for one of themselves.
When the savages were engaged in their drinking bout,
he crawled through the grass within earshot of the girl,
and, as instructed by Kelly, said—
A friend, look out."
The sound startled the captive at first, but, after the
first surprise, she sat as still as death, eyes and ears
open.
Kelly being informed that she had been thus made
aware that a friend was near, soon crawled up the edge
of the clearing and again reconnoitred the condition of
affairs.
He found to his great satisfaction that he could
approach so near to the spot where the girl was seated as
to be able to make himself heard by her without attract-
ing attention.
Accordingly he made his way, with the utmost caution,
to a spot immediately in the rear of where she was
seated.
In order to accomplish this, he wormed himself along
like a serpent, taking every imaginable cover, that not the
slightest sound should betray his presence.
He had purposely deferred this moment until the night
had commenced to fall, as he knew daylight would be
most unfavourable to his plans.
A fresh trouble now occurred to him.
This was the likelihood of a cry of joy or surprise
breaking Tcum the girl directly he made his presence
known. .
If this took place both would be lost,
“ I wonder if she’s got the gumption to know when to
hold her tongue," he thought; “it’s precious few of her
breed that have. She seems taking tilings pretty coolly
though, and looks like a wide-awake one too.”
She was a slightly made girl, of about eighteen or nine-
teen, with black hair and large grey eyes.
Ned noticed that those eyes were full of spirit, and that
they glanced round her from time to time as thong a she
was looking for an opportunity of escape on her own
account.
Her features, too, though pale, wore a resolute expres-
sion, and there were no traces of tears on bar cheeks.
“ Now or never,” thought Ned.
Choosing a moment when the corroboree was at its
highest, when the savages were jumping and yelling like
maniacs, their keen perceptions deadened by drink, be
whispered—
“ Missie,”
The effect of the single word was instantaneous.
The girl started half up, but checked herself by a
violent effort.
She resumed her former attitude, and in tones even
lower than his own said
“ Who’s there ?”
“ A friend,” answered Ned, pleased with her evident
courage and coolness. “ I think I can get you out of
this, but it’ll be a risky job, for I’m single-handed. Can
you run a bit?”
“ Yes; I’ll do anything to get away from these
beasts.”
At this moment a black came up to the girl and looked
about him.
He even went to the edge of the scrub and peered into
the darkness.
Ned, however, had drawn noiselessly back on his
approach, and the girl, who guessed that the myall’s
keen ear had caught the sound of voices, clasped he*
hands and began to pray aloud in a low tone.
This satisfied the black, and he returned to the fire.
Ned had noticed the girl’s presence of mind, and con-
cluded she was of the right sort.
As soon as she was again alone —for her guards had been
unable to resist the temptation of the general debauch—
Kelly crawled up again within hail.
“ Look here, missus; I think I see a way out of this
muck if you’ve got pluck enough to try it.”
“ I’m ready for anything,” said the girl. “ Only tell mo
what I’m to do and I promise not to flinch.”
“ That’s your sort, I’ve got a canoe close handy, and
I’ve smashed up all the others. It’s about a quarter of a
mile from here, and, once in it, we can soon get clear of
these herring-gutted devils,” said Ned.
“ How am I to get to the canoe ? ” asked the girl, wno,
with great coolness, kept her position unchanged.
Ned reflected for a moment.
The spot at which th« girl was seated was at the edge
of the clearing but at some distance from the shore of the
lake. >.
“ The blacks seem pretty far gone,” said Kelly after a
pause, daring which he had elaborated his plan of action,
“ and don’t seem to be keeping much of a watch on you,
so you can get up in a minute or two as if you wanted to
change your seat. Stroll about a bit near the fire and
then edge down towards that dead tree near the water’s
edge. Do you see the one I mean ? ”
“ Yes,” answered the girl.
“ When you get to the tree wait, and be ready to slip
into the oaks directly I give a sign. You may have to run
for it pretty smartly, so pull yourself together and keep
your wits about you.”
“ Yes, I promise. But before I start I want you to
promise one thing, too,” said the girl, in a solemn and
appealing tone, but in the suppressed tone necessary.
“ What is it? Be quick.”
“ I don’t know you, but, from your risking your life to
get me off, you are surely no ordinary man. Risk one
thing more. If they—if they lay hands on me before I
can get clear, or if there is no hope of my getting away
unseen, shoot me down as I stand, and with my dying
breath I’ll bless you,"


Hardened ruffian as he was, Ned was moved by this
terrible request so plainly put.
Even in his barren heart there was one vein of gold, one
chord that throbbed responsive to this piteous appeal of a
woman in her helplessness.
No one would have believed, it, and Ned himself less,
perhaps, than anyone else, but he was strangely stirred.
He had in the first place attempted the girl’s rescue out
of sheer recklessness and a feeling of indignation at the
blacks for daring to lay hands on a white woman.
“ All right, my lass,” he answered, “ I promise.”
And he really meant it, though, to carry out his pro-
mise, might only expose his own life uselessly.
For, if it was evident that the girl was too closely
watched to render her escape feasible, nothing would be
easier than for him to abandon all further attempts at
rescuing her and to silently withdraw; but he was essen-
tially a brave man; it was about the only redeeming
quality he possessed.
He determined, at all risks, to stick by her to the very
end.
The orgie of the blacks was now becoming every minute
faster and more furious.
Howling and yelling they poured the fiery liquor down
their throats, every fresh draught render them more
fiendishly hideous in their aspect.
In pursuance of her instructions, the girl rose and saun-
tered towards the tree as agreed.
As she moved past the fire no particular attention was
paid to her until one of the least drunken of the blacks
held out a panakin of liquor to her.
With great presence of mind the girl accepted it.
She knew that it would help her in the desperate task
before her, and did not hesitate to taste its contents.
“ My word, you budgeree, Mary,” hiccoughed the owner
of the pannikin as she returned it to him.
Strolling on the girl gradually approached the dead tree,
and at length gained it and sat down at its foot.
“ All right,” said Ned, whose voice came from behind
the tree; “are you ready?”
The girl was about to reply, when a sudden stir took
place amongst the blacks.
The most sober amongst them had started to their feet,
and seizing spears and firesticks had darted into the scrub,
in the opposite direction to that in which Ned was lurking.
Something had evidently alarmed them.
The whole attention of those who had not gone off,
and who were still sober enough to keep their eyes open,
was fixed on the spot whence the alarm had come.
The opportunity was too good not to be profited by.
“Now, my girl,” whispered Ned, “slip round the tree ;
sharp’s the word.”
Swiftly the girl slipped round the tree trunk and joined
him.
“No time for palavering,” said Ned. “Push on after
me in silence.”
A few seconds later, and the girl and he were speeding
in the direction of the canoe.
They were not, however, to reach it unmolested.
The quick eye of one of the young niggers had noted
the girl’s departure from the clearing.
At once he started in pursuit.
Knowing nothing of the presence of a white man, and
thinking that the girl was trying to escape on her own
hook, he trouble himself to call his companions to
his aid.
He did not anticipate any difficulty in recapturing the
fugitive singlehanded.
Following on their tracks he caught sight of the girl’s
dress, and at once bounded forward and seized her by the
arm.
She had fl*e presence of mind to repress a scream.
The black at first had not noted the presence of Ned.
The latter, however, had marked his pursuit.
It was not until he had clutched the girl that the myall
became aware of the proximity of the bushranger.
Before he could utter a cry or raise his nullah-nullah
or war-club, a tremendous blow on the head frers Kelly’s
sledge-hammer fist, in which there was a large stone,
dashed him senseless to the ground.
Ned had abstained from using firearms, so as to delay
giving an alarm as long as possible.
“Quick!” he exclaimed, as a few minutes later they
gained the water’s edge at the spot where he had. placed
the canoe. “ Quick! into the canoe ! That follow I bowled
over’s sure to bring a swarm of them down on us.”
The girl obeyed him, and stepped quickly but care-
fully into the frail craft.
Her bearing throughout these trying moments had
shown her to be full of courage and resolution.
Kelly was lost in admiration.
What a mate she’d make. Why, she’d be just the Poll
to pot a policeman ! Couldn’t they work together ? He'd
almost give- Marco Polo for her, bless’d if he wouldn’t.
“Tiger!” said Ned, noticing for the first time the
absence of the black from the spot where he had left
him.
“Tiger!” lie repeated, In louder tones, but there was
no response.
The idea of treachery crossed his mind, but, as be
thought it over, he guessed that the sudden alarm
amongst the blacks must have been produced by a ruse of
It was evident that the faithful nigger had attracted the
attention of the natives to the opposite direction to that
in which the projected escape was to be effected, and thus
had probably saved Ned and the girl, perhaps, the former
thought, at the expense of his own life.
Whilst these thoughts were passing through Ned’s
mind he had not been idle, but had seated himself in the
canoe, and had set about forcing it through the reeds.
This he at last effected, and for the moment felt in
comparative safety.
He knew it was no use waiting about for the return
of Tiger, if indeed that devoted myall were still in ex-
istence.
The route to be taken had been arranged beforehand
between him and the black, and in the event of the latter
having escaped he would probably turn up at some point
of the journey.
To tell the truth, Ned did not particularly care whether
he did or not.
Gratitude was by no means one of his strong points,
and the very notion of gratitude towards a black would
have seemed ridiculous to him.
Still the idea did cross his mind that the black might
yet be useful in case any further difficulties had to be
overcome.
“The beggar was a smart varmint and no mistake,”
he thought, “ and we may find ourselves in a tight fix
yet.”
Without delay he began to urge the canoe towards the
northern end of the vast lagoon.
There was a station Tiger had informed him in that
direction, and the homestead overlooked the lake.
This once reached, they would be of course safe from
attack, but the distance to be traversed was somewhat
over forty miles, and there was no knowing whet accidents
might happen on the way.
There was one point especially on the journey where
they were likely to have some trouble.
Ten miles from their destination, as Tiger had explained,
a sand bank, nearly a mile broad, stretched across the
lake.
The only way of passing it was to paddle close to the
western shore, where a passage existed, or to get out of
the canoe and carry it across the strip of sand.
It was just possible, too, that the blacks might discover
the direction they had taken, especially as the fellow Ned
had knocked down and whose skull, like that of all his fel-
lows, was as thick as a bullock’s, had scrambled to iua feel
as soon as he felt that it was safe to do so.


He was soon standing on an eminence, looking out fpr
file canoe.
Their destination once known, the blacks would do their
utmost to reach a spot where they might intercept the
fugitives and recover their prey.
All this passed through Kelly's mind as he paddled
vigorously and urged the light craft onward over the
rippled water.
To the yells of the savages on shore had now succeeded
a death-like silence.
From this he augured that Tiger was either killed or
had succeeded in effecting his escape, in which case he
would, no doubt, pick them up somewhere on the jour-
ney.
CHAPTER CCV.
THE CAPTIVE’S STORY. THE FLIGHT ON THE LAKE.
Up to the moment of pushing out into the lake there had
been no time for the girl to mention her name or to nar-
rate the circumstances which had led to her capture, and
the murder of the unfortunate bullock-driver.
Now, however, that immediate pursuit was not likely,
Ned thought he would like to have a little information on
these points.
“Well, now we seem pretty well out of this blessed
mess,” he began, “ perhaps you could manage to give me
some idea how you tumbled into it ? There must have
been a precious bad look-out kept, it strikes me.”
“I beTer begin at the beginning,” said the girl; “and
then you will understand it all better.”
“All right, fire away. I can listen and paddle, too,”
answered Ned,
T> e girl explained that her name was Bella Bolton.
Her father was established in Melbourne, but a brother
of his, who had settled in Queensland, was at one time a
rather well-to-do squatter.
He had originally settled in the Logan district; but as
the population increased, and the squatters began to find
themselves hemmed in by land selectors and farmers, had
res Ived to go yet farther afield and take up a run in the
fir north, where he would not be likely to be disturbed
for many years to come.
Accordingly he had pushed on, and after a long and
fruitless search, during which he sustained severe losses,
had made his way to the district in which they now
found themselves, where he discovered a stretch of coun-
try that -would have suited the most fastidious and grasp-
ing of bis class.
Richly grassed plains intersected by extensive lagoons,
promising over ample supply of water abounded.
Satisfied with the spot, he started a mob of cattle for
the new country and formed a station.
Things went on very satisfactorily in all respects, save
for the continued hostility of the natives, who were very
troublesome. . ,
The chief drawback, however, lay in the distance from
ttoy settlement, the drags employed to bring up stores
taking months on the journey.
After a time Bolton the squatter, who was a bachelor,
wrote to his brother at Melbourne, asking him if he cauhi
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES
PICTURE BOARDS.
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Willoughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
Passion.
Woman.
The Beautiful Demon
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
spare one of his sons to help him on the station, with a
view of ultimately succeeding him there as his heir.
The offer was gladly accepted, and Philip the second son
joined his uncle, whose affairs soon began to flourish again,
thanks to his energetic aid.
As their comfort increased, so did the ivish to have the
civilising influence of a woman about the house.
Accordingly Philip Bolton wrote to his father and after
some discussion it was agreed that his sister Bella, with
whom he was a great favourite, should join him and keep
house for him and her uncle.
The girl had started, accompanied by her nurse, on her
long and wearisome journey.
All had gone well up to the night proceeding the attack,
which had resulted in her captivity.
On that evening the bullocks had strayed, and one of
the two drivers had started in search of them.
He had not returned at nine o’clock, at which hour
Bella had retired to the shelter fitted up for her under the
tilt of one of the waggons.
The second driver instead of keeping awake as he should
have done till his mate returned, lay down under the other
drag and fell asleep.
Just before dawn the girl was awakened by the sound
of a scuffle, in which she could distinguish the voice of the
imprudent driver, exclaiming—
“My God ! I’m done for.”
In an agony of terror she heard the horrid sound of the
blows that completed his murder, and the fiendish yells of
his assailants. Her nurse also lay a mangled corpse ; but
at some distance from her—she had been brained in her
aleep.
As a bright wood fire was burning during the attack,
the savages distinguished the form and features of the
young girl, whom they resolved to domesticate amongst
their tribe.
Several nullah-nullahs were raised to despatch her,
when some of the savages interposed in her favour.
She was placed in the charge of four or five of the
younger men, whilst the rest proceeded to ransack the
drays.
The blacks, having loaded themselves with their plun-
der, started, with the girl in their midst, to the lake.
(To he continued .)
OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Revelations of a Lady Detective,
The Lady with the Camelias.
Paris Life at Twenty.


TUB I‘L.A.N TO UOP 'HE GOLD CRUSHING HILL.


NED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
• 14 i« well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a scries of dimes wholly incompatible wish
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipovs
*s Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1831. .
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly 3
B&oteeb, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.’ Tit fits, July.
« xhe history of Ned Kellt and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of tee
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
and nis Nag ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction,”— Press., July.
“The stirring story of Ned Kelly, the Australian Bushranger (“Illustrated London Novelette” Office, 280, Strano),
pursues its way with unabated vigour. Full of incident, it should suit those who like their literature as they do their
cigars—full-flavoured. It is published in weekly numbers.” —South London Press, November.
CHAPTER CC V.—Continued.
wI suppose,” she concluded, “you saw my letter, and
that is what made you follow me.”
“ What letter?” asked Ned.
“I took advantage of the confusion to scribble a few
words on a piece of paper, saying that the blacks had
killed the driver and carried me off, and dropped it by the
waggon.”
“No, I didn’t see it,” replied Ned, though he refrained
from adding that if he had it would not have advanced
matters much, since he would not have been able to make
out a word of it. .
Still he could not help admiring the presence of mind
thereon by the girl in writing.
“Did you come across the blacks by accident, then?”
inquired the girl.
‘•No,” answered Kelly ; “I didn’t see your letter, but
I spotted your footprints among the nigger-tracks, and I
Bald to myself, ‘There’s a white girl there, and if I don t
have her out of the hands of those beggars in the shake of
a bull's tail, why I’m not ’ ”
He was just going to blurt out his name but he cnecked
himself in time, and added—
“A chap that does know how to work a thing or two.”
“You are a brave and clever fellow,” said the girl, “and
I owe a debt to you I can never repay. How sorry lam
my poor nurse had no such deliverer as you. Why they
murdered her I can’t imagine. You have saved me from
worse than death. What is your name ?”
“ Tom Smith,” answered Ned, and added, “ Bolton you
gay yours is ?”
“ Yes.”
“ And your father lives at Melbourne. It’s very odd I
can’t call to mind any one of that name I know, but some-
how I’m quite certain I’ve heard of Bolton of Melbourne
before. Yes, I’m sure of it.”
The girl smiled, and said—
“My father is pretty well known there, and there are a
good many who are perfectly familiar with his name but
who have not th« slightest wish to make his acquaint-
ance.”
“ What do you mean ?” exclaimed Kelly.
“ Simply that he happens to be the keeper of Melbourne
jail.”
His mind was quick to grasp the situation.
“By gosh,” he thought, “here’s a young woman who
may do me a good turn some of these fine days, if I pal
up with her properly. This is a streak of luck.”
And he added aloud—
-55 “ Yes, I see. I’ve met a chum or two knocking about
who thinks your guv’aor the last man in the colony he’d
care to drop in and take pot-luck with. But I don't sup-
pose you think I’m one ct that sort ?”
“ No,” answered the girl; “and I am sure my father
would make no one more feV? -*dcome than his daughter's
preserv* r. There is no om* ti' the colony he would esteem
more highly.” . , ~
“ Quite so,” thought Ned, “considering my heads
worth just ten thousand pounds to him or any other man
who can shoot a bolt on me.”
“ Or cherish more closely,” continued the girl.
“ Exactly,” was Ned’s mental commentary. “ He would
‘ cherish’ me, as you call it, my dear, so closely that he
would lock me up in the very strongest bedroom in that
ugly stone jug, and never let me out for fear I should
catch cold till I stepped abroad at eight o’clock some Mon-
day morning to do a little jig in a white night-cap. I
don’t think he’ll get a chance though yet awhile.
“It strikes me,” resumed Ned, aloud, after a pause,
“ that your uncle's station must be the one I was originally
pushing on for when I came across the drays.”
And he proceeded to describe how he had been sent on
in advance of Mr. Jackson’s party.
On comparing notes, it evident that this was the
case, as there was no other station in the direction in
which she had been proceeding, a fact of which her
brother’s letters had informed Bella, who knew a good
deal about Millaroora, as it was styled.
“There’s a chance, perhaps, that the other driver
escaped, in which case he would push on to the station,
and they would send out a scouting party,” suggested the
girl.
“Yes, there is that, but it’s a dicky one,” answered
Kelly. “ I guess we’ve a better chance in pus&t&g on to
this Wirriba station, at the end of the lake that Tiger
spoke of.”
At that moment the cauoe was passing a small islet
covered with rushes, and a sudden cry from IMJa caused
Ned to look up from his paddling.
Plainly visible in the moonlight on the islet was a naked
black fellow, standing up, and apparently only awaiting a
chance th throw his spear.
Ned dropped the paddle at once and seized his rifle.
Before, however, he had time to fire, the black fellow
had evidently come to the conclusion that the odds were
against him, and had ducked down out of sight.
“That’s cruelly awkward, miss,” said Ned. “That
black brute has spotted whore we’re bound to, and we
shall have the w’hole tribe of ’em round to cut us off.”
“Can’t we pass round the other side of the lake?”
suggested the girl, who kept up her spirits wonderfully.
“No,” answered Ned 5 “the sand-bank starts from
that side and runs right across to this. The only chance
is to keep on along this shore and through the channel,
and that’s just where I reckon the niggers will try to nail
us _ for it narrows to a kind of gut—or else'to land and
try to tramp it.”
“ Well,” said Bella, “ I really think I’d rather try it on
foot than be cramped up in this wretched little canoe
after all. Besides, if the blacks are trying to stop us at
the point you say, it strikes me that we shall be more at
their mercy at such close quarters *han if we could hide
in the scrub.”
“ I don’t know but what you may be right, girl, replied
Kellv; “ but we won’t give up the canoe till w r e’re bound
to. I guess you’ll find being cramped up in it easier work
than tramping mile after mile through the bush. If w®
must take the shore we’ll do it as near as we cas to
Wirriba station. I wish, though, I’d had time to pot that
black devil on the island. He's sura to carry the ne»*


ifoc rest of the beggars. But it can't be helped now,
as the hangman said when he found he’d tucked up the
wrong ’un.”
Bella could not help thinking this last remark a rather
strange one nor from noticing that, despite the gallantry
that Ned ksd shown on her behalf, his manner and
speech were decidedly lacking in polish ; for she was a
girl of keen observation, and had all her wits about her.
But this did not in the least detract from the over-
whelming sense of admiration and gratitude tltet had
sprung up in her breast for the stranger who was s& gener-
ously risking his life on her behalf.
Even he seemed influenced by her presence in a way he
could not account for. It made him, not more refined,
but less brutal.
She could not help regarding Ned, whose cool courage
was most conspicuous, as the greatest hero she had ever
seen, and would not suffer these little solecisms to lower
him in her eyes.
All this time the light canoe had been skimming the
surface of the lake.
Ned was not in the least fatigued, and declared that he
could go on all next day.
But he thought it better not to risk travelling by day-
light.
Accordingly at the first streak of dawn he pushed the
cauoe amongst a dense mass of reeds stretching out from
the shore.
In the centre was a small islet large enough to afford
Bella a short promenade and a more luxurious couch than
she would have found in the canoe.
Provisions they had none, but up to the present the
excitement of their escape had made them forget the pangs
of hunger.
Now, however, they began to be keenly felt, but it was
useless to wish for food.
There were several water-fowl within range, but though
Ned’s mouth watered for them, he dared not risk disclosing
their situation by firing a shot, nor could he have ven-
tured to have lit a fire to cook them by.
Having landed the girl, and moored the canoe to the
island, he waded through the reeds towards their inner
margin, from whence he could examine the shore, the
water being shallow enough to allow of this.
The oaks at this point lay back some distance from the
edge of the lake, and he could get an uninterrupted view
of a tolerably wide extent of country.
Nothing suspicious was in sight.
Returning to Bella, he assured her that she might lay
down and take some rest, in perfect confidence.
“I’m used to keep a pretty smart look-out,” he said;
“and even if I wasn’t, the lesson those black devils taught
your driver ain’t going to be thrown away on me. I don’t
mean to be woke up by a tap on the head with a nullah-
nullah, so you can go to sleep in comfort, as the school-
boy said when he put the hedgehog into the master’s
"ted.”
CHAPTER CCVI.
THE ISLET.—TIGER’S PLAN OF ESCAPE,
The girl had the sense to see that sleep would do her
good and help her to stand the fatigues in store for her,
and complied with Ned’s wish.
Ned waded back to the shore and took up a position
amongst the reeds, from which he could command any
approach from that side, the only one whence an attack
was to be dreaded.
He had kept watch for about four hours wheu the
scrub opposite bis post parted, and a black face protruded
cautiously through the opening.
From the spot where he was, he could have planted a
rifle-bullet between the eyes of the intruder.
He decided, however, to wait, aud to be guided by cir-
cumstances.
It would be better not to fire till the last moment, lest
he should bring down the whole mob on him.
After some minutes spent in reconnoitering the ground,
the black fellow probably concluded that he might safely
emerge from his cover.
On las doing so, Ned, to his astonishment and delight,
recognised Tiger.
A slight motion imparted to a branch of a shrub rising
amongst the reeds by Ned’s hand, was sufficient to attract
the attention of the myall.
But, instead of advancing to discover its origin,
took to a tree with the agility bf a monkey, directly he
noticed it.
The habitual caution of the black would probably have
resulted in half a day of manoeuvring before he could
have been made to understand that a friend was at hand.
Kelly, after cursing his black hide once or twice, took
the bold course of showing himself for a few seconds in th«
open.
Five minutes later Tiger stood beside him.
“White Mary sit down canoe,” remarked the black,
pointing in the direction of the islet, and speaking in a
low voice.
“Why, how the devil could you know that, you son of
a burnt gum-tree ? ” said Kelly, in a tone of surprise.
“Quiet marney, you plenty yabber (make a lot of
noise), black fellow sit down all together,” whispered
Tiger, indicating the surrounding scrub and implying that
it swarmed with their enemies.
“ Do you mean to say those myalls are here already ? ”
asked Ned.
“ Yowi (yes) myall. Plenty black fellow. Black fellow
look out for white Mary. Black fellow want white Mary
yakka waddy, dig yam, carry piccaninny, my word.” And
Tiger grinned as he added, “ Baal (not) got um Mary
though, eh marney ?”
“ Here’s a pretty kittle-of-fish, as the chap said when
he boiled the jelly fish. What’s to be done ? ”
“White Mary got patter (food) ? ” abruptly asked
Tiger.
“No, Tiger. Baal damper, baal bullocky (beef), baal
tea,” replied Kelly.
“ You wait,” said the other.
And he disappeared again amongst the oaks.
In a few minutes he returned with a parcel securely dona
up in the thin silvery bark of the tea-tree.
“ Come on,” he said.
Without another word he led the way through the water
to the islet with an undeviating step, which showed that
he must have been aware of the exact whereabouts of the
canoe.
Kelly followed in silence.
Oa reaching the islet they found Bella asleep, but she
started up as they drew near, aud an expression of terror
spread over her face at the sight of Tiger.
However, Ned’s presence reassured her, and it was soon
explained to her who the black was.
Tiger’s parcel, on being opened, proved most accept-
able.
There were several large cakes of flour and water, soma
pieces of beef boiled on the wood pine, some tea and
sugar, and nearly half a pound of tobacco.
The fastidious might have objected that all these were
packed up indiscriminately, but neither Kelly or Miss
Bolton could afford to be fastidious just then.
Kelly however could not help looking suspiciously at
the black.
“ Where did you get all this, Tiger?” be asked.
Myall blackfcllow ruu away ; leavo ’em long a camp
Tiger look out patter (food),” he answered.
“Then it was you,” said Bella, “ wl*o drew off the
blacks whilst we escaped ?”
“ Yes,” said Ned, who had explained xo ner i led
played by Tiger.
“ WTiite Mary patter bullocky (eat oeef),” observed the
black. “ Bimeby talk.”
The advice was good and the three made a heavty uioa* s
after which Kelly and the black filled their pipes.


** Mine think- it, van now,” said the latter, after they
had puffed for some minutes in silence, implying that in
his opinion twas about tb»' they made a start.
“ It’s all very well to say go, my lovely blacking bottle,”
replied Ned, “ but how about the myalls seeing us ?”
“ S’pose myall see budgeree,” said Tiger, ‘‘Myall say
bimeby canoe come close ; ’spear whitefellow ; catch Mary.
Myall altogether yan catch canoe. Canoe baal yan.
Canoe ’top bimeby.”
“ What does he mean ?” asked Miss Bolton, who was
quite at a loss as to the meaning o f this gibberish.
“ He means that it’ll be all the better if they do see the
canoe for it will make ’em think were heading for the
gut I spoke of, and they’ll all hurry on ahead there to
catch us. But instead of going on all the way by water
Tiger means us to land before we get to the gut. That’s
it, Tiger, isn’t it ? Baal yan to Wemba long a canoe, eh ?
(No going to Wirriba in the canoe ?)”
“Baal, baal,” replied the black, “canoe good one, two,
tree hour, then altogether walk about.”
“I see, I see,” said Ned, “off she goes, missie. Get in
with you and with Tiger to help I reckon we’ll spin her
along like the winner of a four mile heat at Paramatta.
Jump in Tiger.”
B«t the black held back.
“ What! aint you coming with us ?” cried Ned.
“ Baal Tiger yan long a canoe. Mine look out black-
fellow. S’pose look out bimeby see Tiger. Then canoe
no good.”
“He means he’ll look out for the blacks on shore and
that we’re to keep a watch for him and to land when we
catch sight of him,” explained Ned, adding, “a first-rate
plant Tiger, we’ll look out for you, but don't go and get
a waddy about your nut.”
Tiger grinned at the idea of such a piece of stupidity
on his part being possible and waded to shore again.
With a vigourous shove or two Ned forced the canoe
through the reeds, and once more they were on the open
lake and in full view of their enemies if they were about,
as there was every reason to believe they were.
But this mattered little ns it was their intention to
allow the blacks to see them.
“Tiger is certainly a most valuable ally,” said Miss
Bolton. “I do not know how we should manage without
him.”
“ That’s true,” said Ned; “the beggar has shown real grit
all through this muss. I question if we’d have managed
that bolt so cleanly last night if he hadn’t sneaked
round and drawn the beggars to the other side of the
comp.”
“ It’s a pity he’s so awfully ugly,” said the girl.
“ ‘ Handsome is as handsome does,’ as the fellow said
when he gave the waiter the bad sovereign to keep for
himself. It’s not everyone can have such a pretty mug as
yours on ’em. But just keep those eyes of yours, and a
fine pair {-hey are, on the shore, so that we mayn’t miss
any sign-'is. Tiger’s watching us as well as the blacks, for
certain,’
They coasted along for over an hour without seeing
any sign of friend or foe.
The sun had come out from behind the clouds, and its
pure rays beat down on their unsheltered heads.
Despite her courage, the heat and her cramped position
were evidently beginning to tell on Bella Bolton.
“ Cheer up, missie,” said Ned, who although she would
not complain, could not help noting her uneasiness. “It
can’t be long now before Tiger makes a sign. I can make
out that blessed sandbank plainly, stretching away there
to the north.”
Sure enough they could make out the long, narrow
peninsula which, starting from tbe eastern shore ran right
across the lake almost to the western bank.
They were rapidly nearing the point of danger, and
unless warned by their faithful ally on shore, another
hour and a half would see them running the gauntlet of
t jie narrow straight at the head of the peninsula.
But they were spared this ordeal.
The girl, who in obedience to Ned’s request had beea
keeping a sharp look out, now uttered an exclamation of
surprise.
“ Look, Mr. Smith,” she cried, “ there is a column of
s moke rising from the shore, just opposite the head of the
sandbank. Yes, and there's another £ can see oyer the
trees nearer here. What does it mean ? "
Ned took a look in the direction indicated.
“It means that the beggars have spotted us,” he
growled savagely. “ Those five lines of smoke are signals
made by the myalls near us to those at the passage. They
think we are going to try it, and now the whole mob will
be hurrying on there to be in at the death, curse ’em.”
The girl could not repress a little shudder.
“ Oh, don't be scared, my lass,” said Ned more cheer-
fully, on seeing the effect his words had produced. “ I
reckon they’ll find themselves sold as far as that goes.
There are one or two little capers they’ve got to be up to
before they’ll get a chance of planting a spear in my car-
case, or yours either.”
“How do they make their signals?” said the girl, re-
covering herself, and desirous of showing that she was
equal to emergency. “ I should have thought that the
smoke from a fire on the ground instead of going straight
up like that above the trees would haye got lost and scat-
tered amongst the branches.”
“So it would,” explained Ned, who was pretty well
acquainted with the manners and customs of the abo-
rigines, “ but when the beggars want to make signals they
just manage to pitch on a hollow tree. Then they cut a
hole in the lower part, and make a fire with damp leave?
and sticks inside it. The hollow stem serves as a chimney
and takes the smoke right bang away straight into the air.
You can spot it miles off sometimes.”
“ Could we manage to cross the sandbank,” suggested
the girl, “instead of trying the passage? The canoe is
not so heavy. Couldn’t we drag it across ?”
“No go,” answered Kelly. “The sandbank, Tiger
says, is a mile broad at least. Besides, you may bet your
boots there’s a gang of them have swam across the gut on
to it, in order to nail us on both sides as we come through.
Hullo, there goes another smoke on the eastern side of the
lake.”
Bella looked in the direction in question.
“ That must be from the mob of old men and gins I
spotted the night before last. They mean to come along
the sandbank to cross the lake,” said Ned.
“ They are not so dangerous, though ?” said the girl.
“ I don’t know about that; those gins are perfect devil*
to fight with their yam-sticks.”
“What are they?”
“ Pointed sticks they use to dig up yams with, and ain’t
they blessed smart in handling them. I’ve seen men
that fancied themselves a bit with the sticks—old soldiers,
mounted police, and the like—cut away at an old gin for
half-an-hourata time, without once reaching her hide, and
she standing as cool as a water melon, just stopping and
never troubling to hit back.”
“Worse than that,” continued Ned. “In a scrimmage
they keep on encouraging the men with songs, and yells,
and chaff, that makes ’em regular mad. The niggers
hereaway, I know, are a sight harder to drive off when
their gins are about, than when they are alone. Oh < the
blacks up here in the north are a deuced sight worse than
the southern ones, they’re a bloodthirsty set of devils, and
always on the look to catch a stray white man, or woman
cither
A few minutes later the bushranger suddenly cried—
“ Hullo ! what’s that away under that snag? ”
The girl looked in the direction indicated, and saw a
black head seemingly resting on the water.
A second glance showed the grinning face of liger,
who beckoned them to come ashore.
Ned quickly paddled to the bank, and helped the girt
to land.


<U Well, Tiger, what’s in the wind now ? ” he asked.
“ Baal wind,” said Tiger. ‘ Make canoe go bong ; no
good canoe.”
By this he meant they were to destroy the craft,
“Can we manage to get away by land from here?”
asked Bella, somewhat uneasily.
“Yes, missie,” replied Tiger. “ Biackfellow alto-
gether sit down long way.”
“He means the whole tribe are squatting together at
a distance,” said Ned. ‘ Are there many, Tiger?” he
“ Penty myall, my word,” answered the black, holding
up his two haads, with the fingers extended, to indicate
more than he could count.
“Then the quicker we’re off the better, as the cook
said to her sweetheart, when they sat down together on
the red-hot stove. Here, lend a hand, Tiger, to smash
up this rotten old bark concern,”
Tiger understood Ned’s action, if the words were un-
intelligible to him.
His tomahawk and the bushranger’s knife soon reduced
the little craft they had travelled in, to a useless sheet of
damaged bark.
“Now, come on,” said Tiger. “Baal yabber (dont
taik -y’
Taking the lead, he started off at a pace which, though
swift, admitted of the girl keeping up with him.
Miss Bolton followed close in his tracks, and Ned,
with his rifle ready for action, brought up the rear.
“Now, missie,” said Ned, as they started, “make up
your mind, and pull yourself together for a final spurt.
We’re on the home stretch now. A ten mile spin from
here will land us safely at the Wirriba station.”
“Never fear for me; I’ll do it,” answered the girl,
pluckily.
CHAPTER CCYIL
THE BATTLE WITH THE BLACKS.
The party led by Tiger moved rapidly away with the in-
tention of making a circuitous course round the point of
danger, where the blacks were assembled waiting for
them to make their appearance in the canoe.
They had walked on for about an hour and a half, and
had accomplished perhaps four miles, for their progress
was hampered by the scrub, when Miss Bolton began to
show evident signs of distress. _ .
Despite her courage, the cramped position in the canoe,
and the heat of the sun had told on her severely, and now
her boots were being cut to pieces and her feet blistering
from the broken nature of the ground they had to tra-
verse.
Once or twice s'm staggered and almost fell.
Ned took her by the arm ; bat, though she would not
complain, it was evident that, despite the mental excite-
ment that in some degree kept her up, she was sinking
witn fatigue.
At length a moan of pain escaped her.
“Courage, missie,” said Ned. “A little more we
shall have broken the back of the journey. Come, I
know you’re a good plucked ’un. Loan on me as heavy
sis you like, and I’ll help you along.”
“I’ll try, I’ll try,” gasped the girl, though her drawn
face, quivering lips, and wild eyes indicated the sufferings
(die was enduring plainly enough. ,
She staggered a little farther with the help ot i\eds
arm, and th*» again paused, half-fainting.
This was mainly due to the glare of the sun on her
head in the boat. . ,
She had hardly noticed its effects at the time beyond
feeling a headache, but now she was walking they began
to develop themselves. .
It seemed to her that a thousand fiery needles were being
plunged ini) her brain, and consciousness was fast desert-
ing her at intervals.
It was evident that she was fast sinking, bub what was
to be done ?
To stop where they were was to linger in the very
neighbourhood of danger.
They were about opposite the strait at the head of the
sandbank, and about a mile from it in ft direct line, and it
was quite possible that while waiting for the canoe’*
arrival a party of the blacks might be out hunting in their
very direction.
“ By gosh, Tiger ! I’m afraid the only way to take the
girl along will be to carry her. She’s quite done up,”
said Ned.
“No good ’top here,” growled Tiger. “ S’pose missie
no walk ’top here. Bimeby myall come, Missie go
bong.”
This last remark meant that she would be destroyed.
Again the girl’s energy, roused by these, words carried
her forward a few paces.
“ That’s your style,” said Ned, encouragingly ; “ Keep
on like that and we’ll be in the parlour at Wirriba in a
couple of hours, all safe and snug as a joey in its mother's
pouch.”
They had now reached a more open tract.
The trees were larger and at further distances apart, so
that progress was less difficult amongst them.
It was evident they were at the outskirts of the timber
bordering the lake, and at a little distance they 7 could sc.!
that the ground was rocky and broken.
Miss Bolton managed to get on a little better as the
ground improved.
All at once they found themselves confronted by six
blacks, who suddenly seemed to spring up before them,
like demons in a Christmas pantomime.
At the sight of their gaunt, naked figures, mop-like
heads of hair, fiercely gleaming eyes, and glittering teeth,
Bella Bolton recovered some of her energy.
tier’s was one of those natures which rise in presence of
actual and deadly peril.
Instead of being overcome by terror she was roused to
exertion by the sight of the wretches from whose clutches
she had bean so miraculously delivered by Ned.
Tiger had already jumped behind a tree.
Ned jerked the girl behind another, and also hastened
to interpose some three feet diameter of growing timber
between his carcase and the weapons of the blacks.
He was only just in time.
A shower of spears was hurled by their enemies, but
fortunately the fugitives had all by this time got sheltered,
and there was no damage down.
Ned raised his rifle. He covered a gigantic savage
evidently the “boss” of the roaring, screaming brutes.
A bright, fierce flame sprung from the mouth of his piece,
and the yelling monster sprung five feet into the air and
fell flat on his face, to the great astonishment and terror
of his party. The latter had evidently never heard this
“ report ” before, nor witnessed the effect. They turned
over the corpse and stared at the blood pouring from the
body.
Another “ ping ” from the same rifle potted the sable
gentleman who was holding this amateur inquest over the
remains of his friend, which so frightened the rest of the
“ l,lack watch” that they took to their heels with a
rapidity which has never signalised the movement of that
celebrated regiment in face of the enemy.
Kelly could not help laughing loudly when he saw the
racing pace at which the niggers scuttled off.
Ned had slipped yet another cartridge into his rifle,
and managed to get a snap shot at another of the gang,
who pitched forward in his flight with a yell of agony aftd
a bullet in his hip.
Shooting a black has never cost any squatter much re-
pentance, as the Government always protect the black
from any retaliation for murdering a white man.
When that awful imbecile Charles Joseph La Trobes
was superintendent of Victoria, ho olficially offered a
reward of £lOO for the conviction of a white man who had
shot a black, and £5O for the conviction of a black wno
potted a Emopean!


“That's scared ’em a bit,” said Kelly, “but the whole
gang will be on us before half-an-hour is over. It’s no
use trying to push on, they'll pick us off to a certainty. We
must try and hud a place where we can make a standing
light of it.”
Tiger uttered a grunt of assent, though if the two men
had been alone bo would doubtless have counselled their
pushing onward.
“That brpken ground out there looks about the best
chance for us. Head for that rock, Tiger.”
Bella Bolton had partially recovered under the new
excitement, and jgianaged to advance at a tolerably brisk
pace by Ned’s side in the direction indicated.
The rock ln> had indicated was an almost square mass
of basalt, rising some twelve or fifteen feet above the
surrounding surface.
The sides, on arriving close to it, they found to be
almost perpendicular, save at one point, where Tiger
quickly scaled it.
He signalled his companions to follow him, with evident
glee.
With some difficulty Ned succeeded in hoisting his own
bulk and helping Bella to the summit, which he found to be
almost level.
Such a formation is not uncommon in the north-eastern
districts of Australia, which exhibit many signs of volcanic
origin.
Ned noticed that there were several loose boulders on
the top which might, with but little difficulty, be arranged
to form a kind of shelter from spears, and even as missiles
to roll down on the foe.
He expressed his opinion to Tiger, and the two set to
work.
In a short time all further ascent at the point where they
had scaled the rock was blocked by a huge mass of
basalt, and the others had been carefully disposed.
“ Ouf,” said Kelly, drawing a long breath, for the exer-
tion had taxed even his herculean strength to the utmost;
“ I reckon we've fixed all that lot up ship-shape. It’s like
the game the kids play at, called * King o’ the castle,’ this
start is ; and I'll bet odds we’ll pepper the hides of a
tidy few of those lanky devils if they come sneaking up
here."
Indeed the boulders as arranged would form a complete
shelter from the spears in case of their being attacked.
Starvation and thirst were, however, the two enemies
they had to dread far more than the weapons of their in-
human antagonists.
Their best chance was that a scouting party might have
been sent out from Bolton’s station, and might yet arrive
in time.
“This looks a tight fix,” muttered Ned, “audit’s arum
start for me to have put my carcase in danger for the sake
of a girl I never set eyes on before. Tiger,” he added
aloud, “ black fellow patter white fellow, eh?”
“ You-, nyam nyam,” was the sententious answer.
“‘Well,” ejaculated Ned, as he glanced at his bulky
figure, “ a nice square meal I should make for a few of
’em, too. They’ll have to eat me with gunpowder sauce
though this time.”
“Mr. Smith,” said “ would you mind letting me
have your revolver?”
“ Can you use it?” said Ned, in surprise.
** Yes, I assure you 1 have often practised, and am a
fair shot. * 1 will take it while you handle the rifle.”
“ All right,” observed Kelly, handing her the weapon.
He had a shrewd guess at her intentions, and, ruffian as
lie was, he could not help admiring, almost loving her.
As the girl took it she said aloud—
“ At least, I shall know what to do with the last charge.
There is no danger of my missing that,”
She had made up her mind to use it on herself if escape
or rescue became hopeless.
An exclamation from Tig*2, wfco was standing like a
Statue of bronze, with his eyes fixed on the quarter from
■jrbioh danger was anticipated, drew their attention.
The black extended his hand towards the timber.
The figures of several myalls could be seen flitting Ilka
dusky ghosts among the trees.
Twice Ned raised his rifle with the idea of trying a
shot, but the distance and the dim shadows of the trees
rendered his chance of a mark doubtful; fto ha
refrained from firing.
“ D'ye think they know wt wre we got to £ * ‘ae inquired
of the black, who stood by his side.
Tiger looked at him in wonderment.
“ Plenty track sit down. Ulackfollow yan along track,”
was the answer by which he denoted that there had been
no difficulty for tiie natives to follow their trail.
A horrible yelling now broke from the blacks, of whom
about fifty bad assembled on the outskirts of the timber
“ The b 'ggars are going to rush on in a minute,” ob-
served Ned.
Miss Bolton stepped to his side, revolver in hand.
“ Look out for their blessed spears,” said the bush-
ranger. “ They’ll go slick through you like a stone through
a window, and the devils barb ’em with bits of fish-bones
and the Ike, so that they tear at your flesh like fifty anti-
podes.”
The rush Ned had anticipated took place.
Like a horde of yelling fiends the blacks advance 1 across
the open to the base of the rock.
The job before them, however, was a harder one than
they had anticipated, the only path to the summit being
seenrely blocked.
A cloud of spears came whizzing and bristling through
the air, and many of them dropped upon the rock.
These were seized upon by Tiger, who hurled them back
at their owners, and in one or two cases with effect.
The almost miraculous dexterity in avoiding and parry-
ing which the myalls possess stiod them in good stead,
however, and the majority of these weapons were thrown
by him in vain.
Ned was more fortunate.
It is more difficult to dodge a bullet than a spear, and
twice his rifle rang out with fatal effect.
Two of the yelling pick dropped in their tracks.
They broke, and retreated to the shelter of the timber,
carrying their wounded with them.
Ned managed to bowl over another of them before they
could get into cover.
A lull now followed.
Ned guessed that there was uot the slightest fear of the
myalls exposing themselves again to such a destructive
fire.
They would take the surer and more successful way of
starving out their enemies.
The chances of their succeeding in doing so were
ominously in their favour.
The little party on the rock had a few mouthfuls of
provisions, the remains of their breakfast, but those
would not go far; and, besides, a yet more terrible foe
than hunger was to be dreaded in the of thirst.
The heat of the sun darting down Jti the rock, and
their own exertions, had increased the feeling till it had
almost unbearable.
In vain they sought to obtain some shelter from the
sun’s rays by crouching close to the boulders they had
piled up together.
The sun had rendered the rock so hot that its contact
almost blistered them.
All the while they kept a keen look-out on the myalls.
Thrice Ned got the chance of a shot at them as they
skulked in the timber, and succeeded in putting a couple
more out of the hunt.
But after that they kept perfectly close.
A couple of hours had passed since the last attaefc
“ 1 don’t like this.” muttered Ned. “ The scaly vermin
are up to some dodge or other, and they 11 come sneaking
on the top of us before you cau say knife, when we least
think of it. Keep a good look out, Tiger, or wo’il be
stuck as full of spears as a porcupine is with quills.”


CHAPTER CCVIIL
THE RESCUE,
All at once a strange and unexpected sound fell on the
watchers’ ears.
It was the discharge of firearms.
With every sense on the alert, the beseiged looked forth
from their rocky f&ftalice.
The shots continued, and evidently came from the
timber in the rear of the blacks.
A wild confusion was observable amongst the latter.
They were running about in evident consternation.
It was plain that a brisk attack was being made upon
them from the rear.
In a few minutes a mob of them broke from the corner
and rushed, helter-skelter, across the open towards the
broken and hilly country of which the rock, where the fu-
gitives had taken refuge, was one of the outskirts.
As they tore along past the rock their exposed bodies
offered a splendid mark to both Ned and Tiger, who sent
bullets and spears amongst them with deadly effect.
“ Hurroo! ” shouted the bushranger. “ That’s the style.”
A party of mounted white men were now to be seen ad-
vancing through the scattered timber, and shouting words
of encouragement to the party on the rock.
“ There’s my brother; I see him, and Carter the bullock-
driver, too,” screamed Miss Bolton.
A 1 this time the scene was a singular one. Several
mounted men, armed to the teeth, were riding furiously
after the flying devils that were flying for bare life.
Crack, crack, was heard on all sides, but the crack was
accompanied by another crack, but of a different character.
The crack of the stockwhip—a divadful instrument, to
which the Russian knout is a feather in severity.
The Australian stockwhip has attached to a handle one
foot long an eighteen feet leather lash, all made of bullock
hide, and the belly or thick part loaded with lead. This
lash, whirled round the head by a practised hand, can be
brought down upon the victim’s hide with a force that
euts through the skin of a bullock and to the bone of a
human being.
The thong at the end of the last is a solid slip, or strip,
of bullock hide. The report of each cut is like the crack
of a rifle.
Rounding up the mob of flying savages who yelled as
the lash fell upon their- naked bodies, they were kept well
together like a mob of cattle, for they dreaded this “cut”
more even than the bullets of their enemies. They pre-
sented a compact body as a target, and down they went
like partridges.
Kelly lent his aid, too, and a wholesome lesson was
taught the bloodthirsty cannibals.
“ Wire in, boys,” shouted one of the rescue party,
“ and knock the beggars-over.”
Crack, crack, went their rifles, and down wont the
miynlls, till, completely routed, they scampered like deer
into the broken country, leaving almost a score of their
number on the field, dead or dying.
Two or three of the rescuers had been slightly wounded
with spears, but this was the extent of the damage sus-
tained.
The party consisted df the two Boltons, and several
other squatters and steaik-keepers.
It turned out that the bullock driver, Carter, had escaped
the blacks.
On his return to the drays, he had found his comrade
slaughtered and Miss Bolton carried off.
He had at once hastened on to the station to give the
alarm.
It fortunately happened that rather a large party were
assembled there.
These at once armed themselves, mounted, and started
in pursuit.
They had several dogs with the®*, which they judged
might be available in tracking.
As soon as they arrived at the scene of slaughter these
animals rushed to a heap of leaves and dry grass.
Carter, the driver, hastened at once to the spot, »ad,
pushing them away with the butt of his gun, called on the
others to help him in keeping the animals off.
This heap of grass he had hastily piled over the murdered
and mutilated body of his comrade 7 -lore starting to give
the alarm.
“ Help me to keep tire brutes ctf,” exclaimed,” and
lend a hand to give poor Jim a decent burial.”
Despite the impatience felt by some of the party to con-
tinue the pursuit, this request was complied with, and the
remains of the murdered driver hurriedly but decently
interred.
Whilst this was being done some of the party searchsi
the ransacked drays, and the surrounding bush for traces
of Miss Bolton.
One of them was fortunate enough to come upon the
note dropped by her, stating that she had been carried
off by natives, which Ned had overlooked.
This at once increased their anxiety to come up with
the plunderers.
The track left by the retreating mob of natives was sc
plain that the assistance of the dogs was hardly needed,
especially as the marks of Miss Bolton's shod feet were
conspicuous amongst the naked footprints of the blacks.
They had accordingly pushed on, and were somewhat
puzzled at the appearance of the hoof tracks of Ned’s horse
evidently following the party of which they were in search.
The discovery of the animal itself, tethered to the tree
where Ned had left it, only served to increase the
mystery.
However, they could plainly distinguish the footprints
of Miss Bolton in the camp that had been made by the
natives at the side of the lake.
Yet they were greatly perplexed, on following up the
route taken by the blacks from this point, to find no
further signs of her presence amongst them.
The dogs wei’e of no use to clear up this matter, for no
ons had brought any little object, especially belonging to
the young lady for the animals to be made to smell, and
thereby understand that they were to follow her especially.
Even if they had, it would only have increased the
puzzle, since the brutes would have only been able to
trace her to the water’s edge, where she took the canoe.
The rescue party were puzzled.
Their hesitation in consequence of this caused some
delay, but at length they decided to push on and comc-
up with the natives at all hazards.
Consequently they tracked them firstly to the spot
opposite the head of the sandbank, where they had lain,
in ambush for the canoe, and thence to the position they
had taken up in front of the rock.
On arriving here, they guessed at once the real state of
affairs, and commenced a sudden and vigorous onslaught
on the assembled myalls, with the resalt already nar-
rated.
For Ned and his companions to quit their rocky fortress
was the work of a moment, and soon rescued and rescuers
were united.
Bella described the way in which Kelly had saved her,
and the two Boltons were profuse in their expressions o:
gratitude to the bushranger, whom she introduced under
his assumed name of Tom Smith.
“ I can never sufficiently repay you, old fellow,” said
the elder Bolton. “You’re « man every inch pt you.
Not one in a thousand would nava ventured Lis car-
case after such a mob of blacks, single-handed.”
“You’re a thundering brick, ” chimed in his nephew,
“and whatever fix you may ever get into, remember
you have a firm friend at Nuliaroora. If the devil him -
self came to fetch you I’d go bail for the man who risked
bia life, as you have done, to save my sister.”
Tiger too came in for his share of praise, and was
assured that “ big one plour, big ontsugar, plenty baccy,
and drink him rum,” should he the least of his engage-
ments for the rest of his natural life.
Ned was somewhat (for him) moved at Bolton’s thanks*,


he did not fail to see the advantage the squatter’s gratitude
might possibly be to him on some future occasion.
He was far more interested, however, as regarded the
impressjon he had naade on Bella, for whom he had
tome idea of “going in.” Not the only instance of
“ Beauty and the Beast.”
Re thought it as well to inform Mr. Bolton of the mis-
sion on which he had been despatched by Jackson, as by
this time his late comrades must be getting into a pretty
tight fix as regarded provisions.
He did so, and it was at once decided that as they were
now only a few miles from Wirriba station, the whole
party should push on there, and that fresh horses being
obtained, a relief party should be organised to join Jack-
son.
“These niggers up here in the north,” observed
Ned, to Mr. Bolton, “are a very different set to those
down south.”
“Yes,” replied the old squatter; “and it's quite
another queer sort of work having to deal with them.
We’ve given them some pretty sharp lessons from time to
time, but it hasn’t taken all the blazes out of them yet.”
“I guess they won’t digest this little scrimmage in a
hurry,” remarked Phil Bolton.
“ It’ll be precious nasty for anyone who tries to ride
through this part of the country single-handed,” replied
his uncle. “They’re a revengeful set of devils, and will
be as keen after a white man’s blood as a cat after
cream.”
In a couple of hours or so the party reached Wirriba,
Avhere they Avere hospitably received.
The necessary preparations Avere very rapidly made, and
the relief party prepared to start.
Before it left Bella found an opportunity of speaking a
feAV Avords to Ned as they stood on the verandah.
“Mr. Smith,” she said, “you have saved me from a
fate so awful that I shudder to contemplate it. I owe
you, I knoAv, more than life itself. I do not suppose I
shall ever have an opportunity of repaying this debt, but
if ever I do, trust me it shall be done ten-fold.”
What a strange compound is even the Avorst of men!
The worst of murderers exhibit affection for somebody.
Lefroy, the cold-blooded assassin, wept over his nephcAv;
Marat loved floAA'ers, Robespierre music. The most blood-
thirsty have “ one virtue linked Avith a thousand crimes.”
Somebody placed flowers OAUjr Nero's grave.”
Perhaps there are none so utterly depraved as not to
feel at odd moments a touch of human sympathy.
It Avas so in this case.
Whether it was that something in the girl reminded him
of Rose, he kneAV not ; but Ned felt strangely softened in
his feelings towards her.
The iron-hearted bushranger, who had shed blood a
score of times in sheer Avantonness, and A\ho had stained
his soul with countless crimes, could not help feeling a
tender interest in the girl he had rescued from the
blacks.
Such a feeling aavis, hoAveA r er, decidedly exceptional on
his part, and it by no means folloAved that he always Avould
play the part of a rescuer of distressed damsels.
Indeed, even in this instance had ho encountered Bella
Bolton under other circumstances, it is probable that he
Avould have been far more, likely to have captured her on
his OAvn account than to nave rescued her.
“No need to come it so strong, my girl,” was his
answer, given with a certain bluntness that sounded
hearty and genuine. “I’m jolly glad to be able to do
you a good turn, for any man can see you’re just built up
with right sort ol Avattle and dab, and no mistake. It
doea a felloAVgood to come across your sort—it does.”
Ned fixed his eyes on the girl as he spoke with open
admiration.
A sudden idea crossed his mind.
He Avould test the sincerity of the girl's avowal.
“ You think you’re in debt to mo, eh ?” he said.
“ I do,” Avas her answer.
“ And yon say you’ll cry quits if ever you get a chance,
that's it, isn’t it?”
“It is, I swear,” exclaimed the girl excitedly, “ tha* 3
will spare nothing to show you my gratitude.”
“ Well,” said Ned gravely, “ it’s as well you should
know who you’re making promises to. For one thing,
you may happen to change your mind when you hear my
name, and for another, you may after all have a chance
of doing me service since your father must be hand and
glove with the traps, The police you know.”
“ The police ! What do you mean ?”
“ I mean that you may be able some of these fine days
to send me a bit of a Avarning that'll come in useful.”
“ I don’t quite understand you.”
“»Oh, I'll soon make matters plain. You say I've
saved you from worse than death, and that if ever you
can help me you will. Noav I believe you, and I’m going
to give you a proof that I do by putting my neck in your
hands.”
“ Your neck ?’’
“ Yes. Give me your hand.'’
“ Now, you’ve taken me by the hand and you’re look-
ing me friendly-like in the eyes. You think, may be,
that I’m a bit rough in my ways and nothing more, and
you feel you are grateful to me for Avhat I’ve done. You
don't mind the roughness I can see, and you don't think
altogether that I’m as rough in heart as in talk and look,
at least not rough so far as I feel toAvards you.”
The girl blushed a little and dropped her eyes,
“Well, noAV I’ve only got to say half-a-doaen words,”
Kelly went on, “ and it’s odds that you don’t drop my
hand as if it was a diamond snake, and bolt away into the
house like a wombat into his hole.”
He felt her hand shake a little in his.
That little speech rather startled her, but she recovered
herself.
“ Tell me what you Avill,” she answered, “ I Avill be
firm and true.”
“I believe you are true as death,” he exclaimed. “ Well,
you knoAv Avhcn I first popped on you in the camp of
those black devils, there Avasn’t much time for an intro-
duction, and that afterAA'ards I told you my name Avas Tom
Smith ?”
“Yes.”
“ Well, it is Tom Smith for the present and in these
parts, but aAvay doAvn south, Avhere it’s posted up on the
Avails of every police-station, it reads different. It’s Ned
Kelly.”
For a moment the girl Avas too puzzled to speak.
Then a light broke on her as to her companion’s identity.
“Ned Kelly, the—the ”
“ The bushranger, Avhose head is Avorth ten thousand
pounds ! Yes, that’s me. I’m the cerrolian (swell).”
Miss Bolton remained silent for a feAV seconds.
The shock of the discovery overAvhelraed her.
She AA r as not exempt from the terror that the mere
mention of Kelly’s name inspired.
But she called all her firmness to her aid, and, though
her blood ran cold at the thought of lioav completely at
his mercy she had been, the recollection of lioav generously
he had acted on her behalf, overpoAvered every other
feeling.
“ I said I OAved you a debt,” she remarked, speaking
Avith some difficulty ; “and, surely, that debt remains the
same. 1 cannot forget that, Avhatever evil may be attached
to your name, you treated me in a fashion the noblest
man on earth could not excel. I repeat, I shall never
forget it, and shall miss no opportunity of repaying it.
And noAv —and now,” she concluded, someAvhat emotion-
ally, “ I don’t feel very well; 1 must go indoors and lie
doAvn.”
And, bursting into tears, she darted away from Ned,
and hurried to the room set apart for her.
“ Women are rum creatures, but this one i?s up to my
measure. She’s the best of the lot I’ve seen as yet,”
thought Kelly.


ar<~ ' ■ ■■ . - ■
He stood musing for some time. Who shall say what
humanising thoughts occupied his reflections?
Did the softening presence of this graceful yoimg girl
conjure up wishes, that appeared like bubbles on the sur-
face of his life, to burst and disappear in a moment?
Was it a vista of what might have been, that coloured
his thoughts, and softened the ruggedness of his features
at that moment?
“Pah!” he ejaculated, suddenly. “All bosh—just
now, at all events. When I make another haul, perhaps
I’ll ask her.”
Half-an-hour later the arrangements of the relief party
were completed, and they set out.
After a toilsome journey they came on Jackson and his
followers, who had been pushing on with great difficulty,
and were in a deplorable plight.
The relief was warmly welcomed, and when the cause
of Ned’s delay was explained, his seeming negligence was
excused.
After making his report to Mr. Jackson, he joined his
mates.
Two of them who had been calking apart in a confiden-
tial manner, suddenly became silent on his approach.
Ned was certain, however, he had caught a bit of their
conversation.
It was only a name, but it produced a very strong
sense of uneasiness on his part.
For he could swear that one of the two had distinctly
uttered to his companion, the word—
“ Bushranger.”
CHAPTER CCIX
A FATAL LEAP.
During Ned’s absence there had been plenty of talk going
on in the camp about him.
The men naturally took to speculating as to when ha
was likely to return with the expected succour.
From this they got to discussing his peculiarities.
All at once it occurred to one of them named Matthews
that he had seen or heard of some one answering Ned’s
description.
The more he thought the matter over the more certain
of this he became, though the puzzle as to when and where
continued to rest unsolved.
One afternoon, however, conversation happened to
turn on bushrangers and their exploits, and the deeds of
many of those heroes were discussed.
A light broke on Matthews.
He had recollected where he had seen the description
of a man closely resembling the one he knew as Tom
Smith.
It was outside a police-station; but the name on the
bill was not Tom Smith, but Ned Kelly.
If the stranger were Ned Kelly he was worth a fortune.
The question was how to grab this reward.
It would not do to proclaim the discovery he had made
to his comrades, for if the whole of them took the matter
up the reward would have to be divided.
Matthews didn't see it at all in this light.
But, on the other hand, he could not, situated as they
were, take Kelly single-handed and convey him to Port
Darwin, their ultimate destination and the proposed ter-
minus of the railway.
He determined to enlist a partner, and arrange with
him to pounce on Kelly as soon as they got near enough
to Port Darwin, and Ko hand the bushranger over to the
authorities there.
He selected a man named Shirley, and imparted his
suspicions and his plan.
Shirley readily agreed that it would be a very good day’s
work to capture Ned, but thought that the identity of the
so-called Tom Smith with the bushranger was by no means
clearly established.
The two were talking of their plan when Ned returned
to the camp, and it was this that caused him to catch the
•word, “ Bushranger.”
Those words were quite enough for Ned. He knew at
once that mischief was in the wind
The two talkers changed the subject as soon as they
noticed him, and did not know they had already betrayed
themselves. They were inartistic in the way they
suddenly pulled up and stared at him.
People don’t suddenly cease talking when a third per-
son approaches, unless they don’t want their conversation
overheard.
In doing so their manner on the approach of the uu-
wished-for party becomes suddenly constrained, silent,
and awkward, betraying the fact they wished to conceal,
Kelly saw this at a glance, and the word “ bushranger”
settled the matter with him.
“ Here’s a pretty go,” thought Ned to himself. ** If I’d
only twigged this, I’d have sloped quietly off without say-
ing a word to the Bolton’s about the fix these lubbers
were in. But then what would have become of the girl,
and she’s worth the whole lot of these lubbers put together.
One can’t do a decent job without being spotted by some
hound or other.”
He made up his mind, however, to try and get off un-
observed as soon as they were near enough to their des-
tination to allow him to do so with safety, for it was
evident that natives were about, and that for a single
man to attempt to make his way to the coast would b®
madness.
Already one poor fellow who had wandered from the
rest, had been discovered speared to death.
They had left Powell Creek where they had made a halt
for the purpose of recruiting men and horses, and were
pushing on for Daly Waters, where there was a small
settlement.
When they were within two days’ ride from this, Ned
determined to abandon the rest of the party and push on.
This purpose he carried out early one morning.
Matthews and Shirley were the first to notice his
absence.
The others thought he had merely galloped on a few
miles ahead, and though this was to a certain extent a
a breach of duty, no particular attention was paid to it.
“ I shouldn’t have thought Smith was such a flat as to
risk riding off like that, after poor Collins’ death and the
brush he himself had with the natives the other day,”
said Mr. Jackson, when he heard of N<ed’s departure.
Like the rest, however, with the exception of Matthews
and Shirley, he never imagined that there was more than
a temporary absence.
These two, however, judged otherwise.
They came to the conclusion that Ned had made up
his mind to slope. He had been unable to conceal his
hatred and suspicions of them. They knew he had spotted
them and their desire to nab him.
“ Even if he hasn’t,” said Matthews, “ here’s a chance
we shan’t get again in a hurry,”
“ What way ?” enquired Shirley.
“ Why, snapping him up quietly. What we had better
do will be to ride after him. He’ll let us come alongside
without suspicion, and Ihen all we’ve got to do will be to
grab him before he knows what we’re up to.”
“And you don’t think he’d be fly to us ?”
“ He’ll never dream what we’re up to. We can swear
Jackson was uneasy and sent us on scouting after him ”
“ He’s a thundering powerful chap though, do you
think the two of us can tackle him ?”
“Of course we can,” observed Matthew, who was a
Eowerful fellow, “ even without the surprise surely we'd
e able to scrag him ?”
The two had quiclky arranged their plan.
They left their companions, and pushed on ahead during
the mid-day heat.
As they jogged along, Shirley said—
“ Why do you think the fellow, whatever his name is,
has bolted?”
“Oh! that’s simple enough. He wanted to get across
the Continent, and, of course, he couldn’t do it single-


handed; bo ho joined on to our party. But now’s he
getting tap to the northern coast he means to sneak away
on his own hook.”
“ Well, but are you sure we shall come up with him?”
“Sure. Well, he’s bound to funk on Daly Waters,
and we can manage to track him from there.”
The two were indeed close on Kelly’s track.
Resolving not to spare their horses, they urged them
on to the utmost speed that was consistent with safety.
They camped out in the open, and next day resumed
their journey.
They had hoped ny pusning on to reach Daly Waters
by nightfall.
However, darkness obliged them to camp within a few
miles of it, much to their disgust.
At daybreak they were once more in the saddle, urging
their jaded beasts towards the settlement.
They entered it some hours later, and learned to their
disgust that Ned had passed the night there, and had
started early that morning on a horse he had obtained in
exchange for his own somewhat exhausted animal.
With some difficulty they succeeded in following his
example, and in swapping their weary nags for a couple of
fresh mounts, though they had to plank down a fair sum
in addition to equalise the bargain.
This done, they pushed on after Ned, who they ascer-
tained was bound for Yam Creek.
Their way lay across a series of plains of eight or ten
miles in diameter, divided by belts and patches of timber
and scrub, and here and there intersected by water
courses, now generally dry, but at certain seasons
evidently torrents.
The horse Ned had obtained was a powerful animal,
with a wicked look about its eye that might have rendered
a less skilful rider than the Bushranger doubtful about
mounting him.
But Ned could sit anything that ever bore a saddle, and
was only too glad to get a beast up to his weight to feel
uneasy.
As he had anticipated, the brute made one or two
attempts to get rid of him, but had to give in to his
master.
Ned halted at midday for a feed and a pipe, having
taken the precaution to hobble his new purchase ; but on
his going to mount him, a little trouble ensued.
The horse backed, sidled, and played sundry other
sapers, till Ned settled him by flinging his blanket over
bis head, and then terrifying him into submission.
But a certain amount of time had been cut to waste, and
on his looking round as soon as he gained the saddle, he
could distinguish two horsemen coming towards him
across the plain at a great pace.
They were evidently in a hurry to overtake him, and
he was by no means over well pleased at this.
People did not ride as they were doing for nothing.
He began to wonder what they could want with him,
and resolved to let them come a little nearer before he
took any decided steps.
At last they got sufficiently close for him to recognise
Matthews and Shirley.
The two had ridden on in the hope of capturing him,
since the words he had heard in camp plainly proved that
they had recognised him,
Ned debated quietly for a moment whether he should
fight or fly.
They were it is fcrsss two to one, but such odds did not
daunt him.
He reflected at the last moment tnat lie could fight at
any moment, but that, if he intended to fly he had better
set about doing it at onoL.
Accordingly he gave his new horse the spur, and was
extremely pleased to find that the animal, when once he
had settled into his stride, apparently forgat all his little
tricks and was a very good goer indeed.
His pursuers on seeing him dart off, at once guessed
that he was intentionally avoiding them.
“ The beggar has smoked the trick," said Shirley.
“I’m afraid he has,” answered Matthews. “He must
have got an inkling after all that we suspected him, ■md
that’s what made him cut bis lucky.”
“ Well, it’s plain it’s no use whistling him back to ha?e
salt put on his tail; the only thing &to go after him.”
“ All right,” answered the other, and, touching up tfeeiir
animals with the spur, they started in hot pursuit.
“Do those two pumpkin-headed fools think they’re
going to collar ame as easily as a more-pock swallows a
midge ?” thought Ned, as he marked the way in which the
others settled down to work. “If they do, they’ll find
themselves off the track. They’ll be precious sick of this
job before they’ve done with it.”
Ned could not tell how his pursuers were mounted, but
he found he had got a capital bit of horseflesh between
his knees, and that the animal carried him gallantly,
Bravo, old boy,” he muttered, as he patted the
animal’s neck, “you’re not up to Marco Polo by a long
chalk, but you’re a devilish good ’un, and you make up
for those little tricks of yours now you’re once settled to
work. ’
But if Ned’s Ikorse was a good one, his pursuers were
almost as well mounted.
It is true their horses had not had the advantage of a
noonday halt, for they had pushed right on till they came
in sight of Ned.
But this was in some degree compensated for by the
lighter weight the animals had to carry.
The chase continued for about an hour in this fashion.
Matthews and Shirley could not tell whether Ned wag-
riding his hardest, but he seemed able to maintain his
advance without much difficulty.
The bushranger did not even turn his head to see if
his foes were gaining on him.
The beggar is taking it easy,” said Shirley,
“Rather,” replied Matthews; “it’s a tidy beast he’s
got, but weight is bound to tell in the end. We’ll nail
him to a certainty.”
After a little time a line of trees appeared ahead like a
fringe along the horizon,
“There’s water there, for a hundred!” cried Mat-
thews.
Sure enough, in a few more strides, the gleam of water
could be distinguished now and again through the
foliage.
“I guess we’ll have him now if he can’t clear it. Be
ready to co off to the left if he turns and tries to double,”
said Shirley.
The two separated, and rode in a parallel line some
twenty yards apart.
As the trees grew larger and nearer, and as the water
flashed back the sunlight, it was evident that Ned would
have a difficulty in getting over.
The water course swept in a curve, and he was head-
ing straight for the centre of this, so that escape either
to the right or left would be impossible, unless he faced
one or both of his pursuers.
The water course was between two steep, rocky banks.
There was no path down to the water.
The sides were as sudden as those of a canal. So he
must either turn or jump it.
“ Blowed if he ain’t going to try it, * cried Matthews,
as he saw Ned swerve slightly from the course he had
hitherto been pursuing, in order to head his horse for a
point which seemed to offer the best chance for a leap.
“ Then blaze away at him,” cried his companion. “ Try
snd nobble his nag, at any rate.”
The two saw that there was a chance of their prey
escaping them, and began to urge their beasts furiously
onward, in order to get within sure pistol range.
Before they could succeed in accomplishing this, Ned
had put his horse at the chasm.
Aiding the animal with hand and heel, he lifted it
across, and though sparks flashed from the rock on which
it alighted from its efforts to save itself from falfeg by


balf-frantic hoof beats, it at length recovered itself, and
was soon sailing away on the other sid\
“After him!” yelled Matthews, excitedly, putting his
steed in turn at the gulf.
The horse rose bravely to the leap, but, whether from
fear or over-anxiety, the rider embarrassed rather than
helped it. and it jumped short.
Shirley saw the forefeet hang, as it were, for a moment
to a jutting bit of stone; a mad, wild effort by horse and
rider; a moment's interval, and then the banks were clear
and peaceful as ever.
The tragedy was down below, where Matthews lay
stretched upon the rocks beside his broken-backed horse,
with his skull fractured.
CHAPTER CCX.
NED TRIES lIIS LUCK ON THE ETHERIDGE.
Ned chuckled as he looked back and noticed that one of
his pursuers was missing, and that the other had reined
up his horse at the edge of the chasm and was gazing
down with an expression of horror into the depths
below.
# “ I reckon that chap has saved me the trouble of cracking
his cocoanut,” was his comment, “and that the other’s
got a sickener of the job by this time.”
This surmise was correct.
Shirley had a sickener of the job, and, after dismounting
and scrambling down to the bottom of the water bed only
to find that Matthews was as dead as a door nail—his horse
having fallen back on him and smashed his spine as well
as his head—came to the conclusion that the only thing
to do was to give it up and to ride back to Daly Waters in
quest of help to bury his comrade.
He resolved, however, not to let out that they had been
in quest of Kelly, lest it might be asked why he had not
given information to the authorities and obtained their
help, but to continue on Kelly’s track in the hopes of
ooming up with him unawares at some future time.
As to going back to Mr. Jackson and his party, that
would never do; as awkward questions might be asked,
touching the reason of his sudden desertion.
Meanwhile Ned had made the best of his way on to
Yam Creek, and thence to Port Darwin.
Here he was lucky enough to find a coasting schooner
on the point of starting.
She was bound for the small settlements at the mouths
of the rivers emptying themselves into the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, settlements which have considerably increased
in importance during the last few years, owing to the
development of Northern Queensland.
Ned landed at the mouth of the Gilbert, and determined
to make his w*y up to the Etheridge district, where he
heard there was a recently discovered goldfield, and where
he thougut he might have a chance of picking up some-
thing.
He found the latest and most successful rush was at a
place called Warramot.
A little was being done in getting coarse gold from
some alluvial workings, but most of the gold raised was
got from tho quartz reefs.
’The quartz when raised was conveyed to a crushing
mill, erected by a company, and was crushed and its gold
retorted.
Ned, after surveying the ground, decided that the only
big haul likely to be obtained would be got from the
crushing mill.
ihe company to which it belont— i had a claim of their
own, which was yielding a good percentage of gold,
averaging about five ounces to the ran, and had plasty of
work to do besides for their neighbours.
The mill had been erected in a somewhat solitary spot.
It stood against a mass of rock cropping ost from the
ground, and from the roots of which a constant supply of
water trickled.
it was this circumstance that had led to the choioo uf
site, water being required for the crushing process
In this the quartz is pounded up by huge stampers into
a kind of paste ; which is then washed until all the pow-
dered stone is carried away, and nothing but the precious
metal is left.
The mining camp and the reefs that were being worked
were situate on the other side of a small range about half
a mile in breadth, and the quartz to be crushed was brought
to the mill in waggons drawn by oxen.
The mill was worked by steam power, and the staff
was a small one, consisting merely of the manager, a young
fellow named Douglas, the engineer, and the feeder, as ho
was styled, whose duty it was to supply the stampers.
These three slept on the premises.
It was customary for the gold, crushed and retorted
during the week, to be delivered to its owners on Saturday
afternoon and Sunday morning.
On the latter day a representative of the company used
generally to drive over in a buggy from the township, and
take their share to the bank there.
Ned by a little judicious loafing about became acquain-
ted with these facts.
He began to think over the best chance of making a
haul.
Singlehanded he thought it was impossible, and kept
his eyes open for a suitable pal.
He found loafing around rather expensive work, for
provisions were at the usual high rates which they rule at
a goldfield, yet he could nob quite hit on a satisfactory
method of bringing off the job he had set his mind on.
He got in the habit of strolling across the range which
lay between the diggers’ camp and the crushing mill, and
reconnoitering the latter at all hours from the shelter of a
patch of timber.
He got thoroughly acquainted the hours of work,
and of meals, the habits of the residents of the mill, the
amount of stuff they managed to crush in a day, and could
even make a fair guess at the number of ounces they
had in store at the end of the week, but he got uo further
to success.
In a little time, however, he got to notice that he was
not the only one engaged in the contemplation of the
Warramot crushing mill at all times and seasons.
An old man seemed to have the same interest in it m
he did himself.
The old man was a queer-looking customer Ned could
not help thinking to himself.
He was a little chap, hardly more than five feet high,
and so lean, dried up, and fragile-looking, that it seemed
a wonder that he did not snap in two at any moment like
a dry twig.
He looked as if in a strong wind he would be blown
away like a leaf.
His features, which were as sharp as a razor edge, were
full of keen intelligence, and his black, bird-like eyes
twinkled like two needle-points.
His hair was gray and worn somewhat long, and when
he lifted his hat it revealed a high, but narrow forehead,
as bald as a billiard ball.
As to his dress it was decidedly the worse for wear.
After a time Ned began to puzzle over this queer old
stick.
He could not help noticing that the same object seemed
to interest both of them.
Both were continually crossing the range to see what
was going on at the crushing mill, and despite their
mutual caution, they kept meeting at odd times.
Ned speculated as to the reason of the other’s presence,
“ I wonder if he’s a trap paid by the company to keep
watch over their place. If I felt ccrt-u of that, I’d lake
him by the scruff of the neck some aa?K night and drop
him quietly down a shaft. I could do it as easily as 1
could lift a kitten. Surely though, he can’t be a fellow
on the same lay as myself.”
The stranger observed Ned tor some time in a ilae
manner.
H a &owey»r O'?in i more cosily come to a decision


as to the bushranger’s object in lurking about the crushing
mill.
Accordingly one day, whilst Ned was at the usual post
of observation, the little old fellow strolled up and sat
down beside him. .. ,
“You’re quite right,” he began suddenly as though
they had been in the midst of a conversation. “It only
wants a little patience and a pal who knows what he’s
about, and the thing’s done as slick as butter.
“ Out with your meaning !” growled Ned,
“I mean you’ve been hankering for a couple of weeks
to put your pickers and stealers on a crushing or two
out of the mill there, only you don’t quite see your way
to do it.” , ,
“Look here,” said Kelly, trying to come the virtuously
.indignant, “if you don’t dry up that sort of lying non-
sense, I’ll just take you up and snap you over my knee
like a dry mimosa twig. What d’ye mean by saying such
things to an honest man, you old varmint. Can’t you
tell an honest man when you see one?” said Ned with a
twinkle in his eye.
“Oh, you’re too blessed honest to live. I know all
about it, we’re all honest men till we’re bowled out. Come,
I’ve twigged your little game for some time past. You
want to nail that gold and you don’t know how.”
There was an ugly look in Ned's eyes as he suddenly
seized the little man by the collar.
“ You know a sight too much for your post,” he said
significantly.
“Don’t be a fool,” exclaimed the other without dis-
playing any symptoms of alarm. “ I’m on the same lay
myself, and like you, I want a pal to help me.’ 1
Ned grinned encouragingly.
“ A pretty sort of chap you’d be at that game. Who
the devil would think of picking out a wretched little
shrimp like you for a pal,”
The other met his look unflinchingly.
“ I’m quite right. If you’ve got muscle enough for two,
I’ve brains and pluck too, for three. By jingo, if I’d
only your strength, I’d have done the job single-handed
by this time.”
Ned looked at him curiously.
Despite his unpleasant position, the old fellow was as
cool as a cucumber.
“ Look here, old bag of bones,” observed the bush-
ranger, “ it strikes me you’re neither more nor less than a
trap.”
“A trap ! why if I’d been one of them sort I should
have let you go in with your plant until I nobbled you in
the act. I knew what your lay was, and I had only to
wait. Haven’t you brains to see that ?” His tone was
jeering, he certainly showed no signs of fear in taunting
his gigantic acquaintance. Kelly somehow felt he had
his equal in nerve, and his superior in brains.
This argument was to a certain extent unanswerable.
Ned released his hold of the eld fellow’s collar.
“ Suppose you just tell me how you think the job can be
jhced ?” he said, reflectively.
“ On one cendition,” was the answer.
“ '"Vhat's that?”
“That we work it together,”
This was the first man he had met with since he ha< 1
been in Etheridge who seemed likely to answer his pur*
pose.
It was true he was not much to look at, but he evidently
was “ a good ’un to go.”
“ All right, mate,” he growled, “ I’m there.”
The old fellow pointed to a delapidated shanty at aboit'u
fifty yards from the crushing mill.
“You see that crib?” he said.
“ Yes,” answered Ned.
“ Have you got a few ounces to spare ?”
“ Why, what the deuce do you want ’em for?”
“If you’ve got them, say so,” said the other, impera-
tively.
“ Well, I might find them at a pinch.”
“ Let’s have your ‘ pinch ’ then. The first thing to do
with your ‘ pinch ’ is to start that shanty as a grog-
shop.”
“ Why ?”
“ Because it’ll give us an excuse to be on the spot, and
to always have an eye on the mill. Besides, it strikes me
that the engineer does not mind a glass, and we might get
something out of him.”
“ Won’t it look queer starting a grog-shop in this out-
of-the-way hole, where there are no customers ?”
“ No; it’ll look as if we started it for the chaps who
come with the quartz. Besides, don’t you go to think
tjhere’ll be no customers. A grog-shop’ll draw customers
as a honey-pot will flies. I believe if you set up one in
the middle of the Mallee Scrub you’d have as many cus-
tomers as a rotting carcase would flies.”
“But now, mate, what’s your name? I like to know
them as I work with.”
“ Oh,” replied the other, “ Avery.”
“ Very good, Avery. I suppose as you’ve been marking
me down over this little matter, you know already that my
name’s Tom Smith?”
“All right. We’re in for the job together as close as
bullocks in a yoke. But work square with me, or, downy
as you may be, you’d better have shoved your nut under
one of the mill-stamps yonder first.”
And the two proceeded to settle the details of their
plan.
(To he continued.')
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards.
Published at 27-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Civil War. hove and Adventure.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“The Black Angel.” Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
American War, Idillion*
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye.— Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Diamond.
Dove’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Tom Holt’s Log.— A Tale of the Deep Sea. Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Road to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunde*.”




BED KELLY: IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
*' : t is Will known S&at for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly'a
Brother, the Captain of what was neither move nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times , July.
“ The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
and ms Nao ;’ in addition to which Ned’s history it true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction " -Press, July.
“The stirring story of Ned Kelly, the Australian Bushranger (“ Illustrated London Novelette” Office, 280, Strand),
pursues its way with unabated vigour. Full of incident, it should suit those who like their literature as they do theii
cigars—full-flavoured. It is published in weekly numbers.” —South London Press, November.
CHAPTER CCXI.
SCREWING OUT A SECRET.
Mr. Douglas, the manager of the crushing-mill, was
rather surprised to see the dilapidated shanty a few
dozen yards from his door turned into a grog-shop.
Like Ned, he was very much puzzled at first as to where
the customers were to come from.
He found, however, that they were not lacking.
The carters who brought in the quartz, and the minors
who came for gold, would halt and take a nobbier there,
and of an evening men would stroll across the range from
the camp.
The place, somewhat to his surprise, was well conducted,
too, for a place of its class.
One of the proprietors, a big man named Smith, had a
knack of slinging anyone who made himself offensive out
of the place in such an effective style that a second lesson
was seldom needed.
Douglas had only one objection to the shanty.
He began to notice that his engineer, whose name was
Hicks, began to call there rather often.
The man was a capital workman, but was rather fond of
a drop, and when he had one, was given to talk.
He did not get drunk in the daytime, but sometimes
when he turned in at night it was evident that he had bad
a skin-full, fresh proof of which would appear in his
shaky state the next morning.
As to the feeder, Barry, he was a somewhat stolid, dis-
appointed-looking sort of a man, who had a habit ul
roving about the ranges when he had nothing else to do,
as though he expected to come across a big nugget by
accident.
One Saturday they knocked off work at noon.
Mr. Douglas could not help feeling a little uneasy,
though he could hardly tell why.
For one thing, the gold belonging to the company had
not been taken to the bank the preceding Sunday,
Hence he had almost double the usual amount in his
v'are.
Some men had called in the morning for their crushings,
but altogether he bad nearly five hundred ounces of the
precious metal in his safe.
Of this three hundred and fifty were in the shape of a
big ingot.
Barry strolled away over the range in his usual fashion
after they had knocked off.
Hicks was engaged in some task of hammering and filing
in the machine-room.
After completing this, he retired to his quarters and
changed some of his clothes.
He lounged for a moment or two at the door of the
little office in which Douglas was sitting making his ac-
counts up.
Are you going' off?" asked the manager.
“ Yes, I’m going down to the camp. There’s a bit of a
spree on. Can I bring back anything for you ?”
“ No, I don’t think so. When d’ you think you’ll be
beck?*'
** A little after dark, I suppose.'
“ All right”
The engineer strolled off.
Douglas felt a bit anxious at his departure.
He did not like to ask him to stop, but yet he felt hall
inclined to do so.
He rose with tin s intention,but checking himself, merely
stood at the door, and watched Hicks’ retreating figure.
To his surprise the man, instead of striking direct across
the raage lounged down to the grog shop.
“ 1 wonder what the deuce he wants to go up there
for?” was Douglas’s comment. For one thing though I’d
rather he stuck there, for he’s close handy.”
He would have been considerably edified if he had fol-
lowed the engineer to the place in question.
Ned and Avery were the only two occupants of the
p va>?e when he arrived.
After a word or two of greeting, a nobbier of whiskey
w as filled by the latter for Hicks.
He drank it off, and a few minutes later, was nodding in
a half-stupefied state on his seat.
“ Another drop, mate,” said Avery.
“ Right you are,” ejaculated the engineer, with some
difficulty.
The second lot completed the job, and he pitched for-
ward with his head on the table in a state of stupor.
“You’re sure you ain’t given him too much?” said
Ned.
“ No,” answered his companion, “I’ve mixed that sort
of stuff too often to make a mistake. I knew to a drop
what would settle him. He’s gone to doss for twelve
hours, and by the time he opens his peepers again, we shall
be * over the hills and far away,’ as the song says.”
“ Well, the job’s only began, it won’t do to crow too
early.”
“ Oh ! I’m not one to count my chickens before they’re
hatched. But everything goes to help us, and we
shouldn’t get a chance like this again in a twelvemonth.”
“ That’s it. Only think of them having a fortnight’s
gold on hand, as the butcher there let out.”
“Yes, and no chance of any one coming over from the
camp. There’s a bruising match to come off this after-
noon there, and I guess we shan’t see a soul.’’
“ When bad we better set to work ?”
“As soon as I come back with the buggy. Meanwhile,
let’s stow this beggar away out of sight.”
They lifted the hocussed engineer, and stowed him
away on one of their beds in the inner room.
Avery then started off in the direction of the camp, and
in about an hour returned with a light cart that had been
retained in readiness for this occasion.
The pair then sauntered up towards the mill.
Douglas was sitting under the verandah of his quarters
which adjoined the main building.
His uneasiness had not diminished.
Still he did not attach any particular importance to this
visit from his two neighbours.
“ Mr. Douglas! Mr, Douglas I” began Avery, aa toon
as they got within hearing.
Douglas rose and advanced to them.
“ Will you step down to our place, your engineei
looked in. and he’s fallen doWAio a sort of—— ”


Whilst Douglas was listening to this statement Ned
eaddenly threw himself upon him and bore him to the
ground.
The manager was a fine active young fellow, but even
had he not been taken unawares, he would have been no
Huttoh for Kelly.
“ Quick! clap the gag into his mouth,” exclaimed the
bushranger, planting his knee on his victim’s chest.
As Avery knelt down for this purpose, Douglas gave a
loud cry for holp.
“Look sharp, man,” exclaimed Ned, clapping his hand
over the niAiuth of the prostrate man. Douglas in his
desperation made his teeth almost meet in it. “The
swine's bitten me to the bone.”
In his rage he seized his victim by the throat with the
other band.
“ Gently, gently does it,” said Avery. “If you choke
him he won’t be able to answer any questions. I’ll make
mm leave go in a minute.”
As he spoke, the little scoundrel placed a thumb on
each side of Douglas’s face just by the ear.
“ I didn’t take my diploma for nothing,” he said in a
half-bitter, half-exultant tone, as the prostrate man’s
mouth opened in spite of himself.
The next moment the gag was thrust into his mouth,
and he was secured by the bonds with which the two had
come provided.
“ Now then for the key,” exclaimed Ned.
With rapid dexterity, Avery searched the prostrate man.
“Confound it,” he ejaculated when he had finished;
“ I’m hanged if he’s got it about him.”
The two accomplices looked at one another.
“We must get it out of him somehow, said Avery.
“Of course,” said Ned. “ Where’s the key of the safe,
you biting Dandicoot? ” he added, fiercely shaking Douglas.
Avery gave a laugh that sounded like dry bones rattling
together.
“ What are you sniggering at, you old skeleton,” cried
Ned, looking up at him.
“ Can’t you see he can’t answer," was the reply, “ with
his mouth corked up like that.
“ True,” said Kelly, and he was about to remove the
gag-
“ Stop a bit,” cried Avery, “ let’s take him inside the mill
where there’ll be less chance of any rumpus being heard.”
Kelly obeyed, and, lifting: up the helpless form of the
manager, carried him to the door of the mill, which was
only latched.
Entering, they found themselves in the crushing room,
the machinery of which was grim and silent.
Avery advanced to the door of the little office.
It was locked.
“I’ll soon settle that,” observed Ned, and, selecting a
bar of iron, he quickly prised the door open.
The safe met their view within.
The two stepped up and examined it.
“ It's a tough one, a devilish tough one,” observed
Kelly, looking at the same with a half-admiring, half-
doubting air, like a connoisseur scrutinising a picture.
“ That’s so,” said Avery.
“ Even with proper tools it would be a long job to
tackle, and there’s neither iron bars nor wedges tempered
to the right pitch amongst these tools here.”
“ Well, then, we’d better try and squeeze the key out
of our friend in the next room,” remarked the older
Villain.
They returned to the crushing room.
“ Look here,” began Avery to Douglas, “ will you pro-
mise not to howl if I take that gag out, but to answer a
question or two civilly ? ”
Douglas made no sign in reply.
“ Well, I suppose I must trust you,” went on Avery,
and as he snoke He removed the gag. “ Now will you tell
UB ”
“ Help, murder, help,” yelled Douglas.
“ Curse you, you squealing pig,” cried Kelly, and the
two threw themselves upon their captive and forced the
gag into his mouth again.
“ What’s to be done with the beggar?” asked KeSy.
Avery remained silent, as if lost in thought.
The bushranger repeated his question.
“Yes, I’ve got it,” replied the other, with a malignant
smile stealing over his harsh skeleton, features, ‘‘ Bolt the
outer door.”
As he spoke he passed into the portion of the building
that served Hicks as a workshop, and was fitted up as such
with bench, vice, &c.
He made a sign to Kelly to bring his victim along and
put him on the bench.
No sooner understood than done.
Avery went out for a minute and then returned, bearing
a pen and ink and a sheet of paper, which he placed by
the prisoner, who appeared as though perfectly indifferent
to what was going on around him.
“ A bird that can smg and won’t sing must be made to
sing,” chuckled Avery to Ned, who continued to regard
these preparations with some amazement.
Avery, addressing Douglas, said—
“ You’ve stowed away the key of the safe—turn it
up.”
“Now no rubbish, my friend! You’re going to do it,
and that pretty sharp, too. Do you think you’re going to
play with two men like us? If you don’t write the word
I want on that paper I’ll make you, that’s all.”
There was the same immobility on the part of Douglas,
who lay where Ned had placed him, apparently quite in-
sensible to the remarks addressed to him.
With diabolical deliberation Avery proceeded to loosen
one of the arms of the prisoner, and, grasping his hand,
placed his thumb in the bite of the screw.
“ Blessed if it ain’t as good as a play! ” roared Kelly,
apparently enjoying the cruelty. “ What a thing it is to
be a doctor.”
Avery gave the vice a turn, and a deep groan issued
from the unfortunate man.
The ruffians saw the test was sufficient, and loosening
the man’s right arm placed ink and paper before him.
He Knew it was useless to hold out against such merci-
less villains, and that human nature would at length be
obliged to yield.
He therefore wrote the desired information, and in a few
minutes the treasure was in the possession of Avery.
“Let’s get it down at once to the trap,” said Avery,
“ I’ll just look out and see if the coast’s clear.”
As he spoke, he moved to the outer door and looked
out.
An exclamation of deep disappointment broke from
him—
“ There’s a trap and a couple of fellows in it driving
straight for the mill. They’ve come to take the gold to
the bank. I know the turn-out as well as I do my own
face.”
CHAPTER CCXII.
GOLD IN BUCKETSFUL.
They resolved to brazen it out to the new-comers. Both
of them stowed Douglas away, gagged, in an inside room,
and were prepared to represent themselves as workmen
employed about the mill, and for this purpose smudged
their faces and clothes with a trifle of grease and smut. A
gunny-bag was carefully thrown over the gold in the
corner.
They would inform the new arrivals that Douglas had
gone over to the camp, and would return in an hoar.
They opened the bolts of the outer door of the mill, so
as to make everything look open and usual.
The next moment the buggy drew up in front of the
crushing mill.
It contained Mr. Staples, the shareholder, who usually
took the gold into the bank, and a friend.
The former sprang down, and stepping to the door,
pushed it open.


Ned met him as he crossed the threshold.
The bushranger held a short but heavy engineer’s ham-
mer in his hand.
Avery noticed that his fingers gripped the handle con-
vulsively,
•Stow that, mate,” he whispered, anxiously in a low
tone.
“ Hallo,” said Mr. Slater, as he stepped across the
threshhold and caught sight of Ned and Avery, “ where’s
Douglas?”
“ Gone over to camp, back in an hour, he said.”
“Hum, hum,” said Slater, who was a red-faced, fussy
fellow. “Is Hicks about ?”
“No, there’s no one here but me.”
“Ah ! Who are you ? I don’t think I’ve seen your face
here before,” and as he spoke Slater stared hard at Ned.
“Hicks has got a couple of days off, he’s a bit queer,
and I’m taking his place. Mr. Douglas told me to stop
here while he went to camp, and said that if you called
you would wait in his house. The door is open, there ain’t
a soul about but myself and this gentleman, who just come
up from the shanty to see Mr. Douglas,” said Ned, indicat-
ing Avery.
Just as Ned uttered these words, there was a crash from
the workshop in which Douglas was lying.
It was reached from the crushing-room, in which they
■were, through an open doorway.
“ What’s that ?” exclaimed Slater, suspiciously.
“ I expect it’s that cat of Hicks.”
Slater hesitated a moment.
He turned on his heels and faced the doorway leading
into the workshop.
He seemed to be debating whether or not to enter it.
Kelly’s grasp tightened on the hammer.
After a few moments hesitation, which seemed to be an
age to the two ruffians, Slater turned away.
In answer to his enquiry, he was informed that the
office was locked, and that Mr. Douglas would not be back
before an hour.
“ I say, Brent,” said Slater to his companion, who was
seated in the trap, “ Douglas is away, and won’t be back
for an hour. We’re to wait. Would you like to have a
look over the mill ?”
No sooner had the two moved away to the stables than
Ned darted into the workshop.
Douglas had heard Slater’s arrival, and by a desperate
exertion managed to get one arm sufficiently free to knock
an oil can, the only thing within reach, onto the floor with
his elbow. He was so tightly gagged that he could make
no other noise.
This had caused the noise they had heard.
He was now making desperate struggles to free himself
from his bonds.
Kelly saw his efforts, and quickly re-adjusted the bonds
of the unfortunate manager in such a way that all chances
of his freeing himself was hopeless.
“ Look here, if you start loose again,” he muttered, “ I’ll
light up the fires, get up steam, set the mill a-going, and
run you through the stampers.”
The new comers had taken up their quarters in the
verandah, and Kelly would be compelled to pass their front
carrying the bucket which contained the stolen gold. The
weight was considerable, but Kelly steadily trotted along
as if carrying a bucket of water.
“ That’s well over. Fill me a nobbier,” was his first
remark on his arrival.
The precious ingots were soon removed from their hiding
place in the buckets, and after being done up in a couple
of blankets, were transferred to the trap.
“ I think there’s nothing left but to start,” said Avery.
“ Those fellows are still on the verandah,” said Ned,
“ and they can spot us easy.”
“ Let ’em watch, whatever they think they can’t follow.
I’ve taken care to spoil that game, their nag has got a nail
iu his foot that won’t make him travel very far.”
In a few minutes more the pair were en route.
Their plan was a simple one.
They had agreed to halt at a spot known to Avery, and
plant the gold there.
This done they were to separate, and either make their
way to mining camps, or get a job as hut-keeper or the like,
for a short time, in some pretty, remote spot, where they
were not likely to get hunted up.
Could this precious pair of villains have read the
thoughts that simultaneously sprung to their minds, they
would have flown at one another’s throats like bull dogs.
The fact was, that each was thinking of '■* disposing ” of
the other at the first convenient opportunity and grabbing
the gold.
We regret that we cannot dignify the Infamous pair
with the interesting qualities usually decorating the cha-
racter of highwaymen, such as Paul Clifford, Dick Turpin,
or Claude Duval, to say nothing of Robin (“ Robbing?”)
Hood; but our history is a true one, not like those alluded
to, pure fiction. We “show vice its own feature,” the
authors of the other named works, show vice tht feature
of virtue, and make infamy romantic ; we make it hikeous.
There are some readers who may think the representa-
tion of Kelly’s atrocities are overdrawn. They are much
mistaken; and Colonial records exhibit bushrangers whoso
villanies would make men of Kelly’s stamp, almost blush.
When the excitement of the gold robbery h .d tied away,
the two thieves were to come back and dig up the golu,
which they would then dispose of.
As they drove along, Kelly could not help looking with
some admiration at his companion.
The old fellow’s daring and ingenuity, his coolness and
fertility in resource, had impressed him.
His observation about the hocussing, and the way in
which he had opened Douglas’s mputh.
“ Haven’t you been a bit of a doctor ? ” he remarked.
The old fellow smiled a little scornfully.
“ A bit of a doctor. lam a fully qualified practitioner,
if you know what that means ? ”
This was Greek to Ned, but he guessed its meaning.
Regular license to kill or cure, eh ?”
“ Yes.”
“ And how did you get out of it. Lushing, I suppose ?”
“No, I’ll tell you if you like, if you’re ready for a
yarn,” and on being told by Kelly to “ shove a-head,” he
began.
CHAPTER CCXIII.
AVERY’S STORY—THE CHAPEL VAULT.
“ My father was a swell in the Midland counties, with a
fair estate and a large family.
“He managed, however, to give all a fair start in the
world ; and after I had taken my diploma, which means a
ticket-of-leave in the doctoring line, bought me a fresl*
practice in a London suburb.
“ I had been doing pretty well for about a year, whef*
one night I was called up to a very rum case.
“ It was late in the morning before I could leave it.
“I had been too busy to think of eating, but when I
got into the street I began to feel a bit empty, and turned
into the first tavern I came across to get something to
wolf. A man named Vaughan was with me.
“It was not much of a place, though it was clean and
decent.
I noticed a man sitting in another box, who caught my
attention at once.
“ ‘ Who’s that man, Vaughan?’ I said.
“ < Don't you really know ? ’ he asked.
“ ‘No.’
“ ‘Well, he’s the owner of the Baal Peor Chapel close
by that’s let to the Grimstonians, followers of the
Reverend Jabez Grimstone. His name is Judkins.’
“ ‘ How do you come to know him, Vaughan ?’
“ ‘ Well, you’re a decent fellow, and 1 don’t mind telling
you. Under the chapel is a vault, and in that vault are
placed the mortal remains of that very eccentric congre-
gation. Now, Judkins manages that part of the business,
and a very good thing he makes of it, too.’
“ ‘ Still, 1 don’t quite see.’


“ ‘ What’s that to do Avith it? Well, if you must know,
Judkins doesn’t mind disposing of a body now and then.’
“ I was a bit startled at this.
“ But, mind you, many years ago body-snatching was
pretty lively.
“‘And you’re a regular customer of his?’ I said to
Vaughan.
‘“Yes. There’s a young subject to be put into the
vault to-day, and he has promised, as young subjects are
scarce, to let me have it. It’s not from mere curiosity
either. The fact is, I was called in to see the girl, though
too late to do any good, and though I wanted to make a
post mortem the parents refused. It is a very singular case
of disease of long standing, and I was determined to
find out something more about it.’
“ ‘How do you get the bodies?’ I asked.
“ ‘ He delivers them to me at his own house, which is
next door to the chapel. My coachman is a steady fellow
whom I can trust, and 1 fetch them away in my carriage.
Once or twice when I have only wanted to make a brief
examination Judkins has accommodated me with his
kitchen.”
“ I felt rather disgusted at this Mr. Judkins, who sold
protection to the dead in the shape of his vault, and then
broke faith, but at the same time my curiosity was roused.
“After a little trouble I got Vaughan to promise to call
on me that same evening and to take me with him.
“Punctual to his time he called, and we were soon on
our way in his carriage to Baal Peor Chapel.
We stopped opposite the court, at the end of which the
chapel was built, and alighted.
“ We dived into the court, and stopped at a house next
to the chapel.
“ Vaughan gave a peculiar knock, which convinced me
that, from time to time, he must have been a regular
customer of Judkins.
“ The door opened, and there was Judkins with a candle
in his hand.
“ He did not look particularly pleased at seeing mn
“ However, when Vaughan had explained that I was a
doctor like himself, he cleared up.
“‘Very glad ter see yer, sir,’ he began; ‘and any
time as yer wants anything in my line I shall be very glad
ter serve yer out of the jam-pot.’
“ ‘ Out of the what ?’ 1 said.
“ ‘ Oh,’ said Vaughan, ‘ that’s an old joke of Judkins’
He calls the vault the jam-pot because his friends are not
cnly preserved there but jammed in pretty tightly.’
“ * Have you any objection to my seeing your “ pre-
serves ”?’
“ ‘ No ; you’re one of us,’ said the fellow.
“As we followed Judkins down the stairs leading to
the kitchen, Vaughan looked rather fidgety.
** ‘ Remember, this is all confidential,’ he whispered to
me, as a reminder, as we groped our way down.
“We reached a large kitchen, in the grate of which a
bright wood fire was burning cheerfully, whilst a pile of
fuel was stacked ready to hand. It was composed of
broken coffins.
“Judkins opened a cupboard in one corner of the
kitchen, and, to any ordinary observer, there would cer-
tainly not have appeared anything peculiar about it.
“ The shelves contained the ordinary crockery. There
was something, however, behind them. Deftly lifting the
whole shelf out, a dooi was apparent in the Avail. The
lock of this Avas quickly turned, the door SAVung back on
its hinges, and Judkins proudly exclaimed—
“ * There’s ray diggin’s ; preserver and all! ’
“ I shrank back a moment, and felt uncomfortable.
“ ‘ Lor’, there ain’t nothing to be afeard on,’ he «dd.
And added, ‘The Grimstonians is all put in doAAm a v..*p
in the chapel floor, and if 1 has a customer for ’em Avhy
they comes out this way through my kitchen.’
“ ‘ But you don’t sell them all ? ’
“ ‘ Dear no, sir. 1 Avishes as I comd
Led the way into the vault.
“ Hardened to the presence of mortality, as tny profes-
sional training had rendered me, I felt really horrified aft
this profanation.
“‘lt’s all the same,’ said Mr. Judkins, as though divin-
ing my thoughts. ‘ Some folks lives on their neighbours
when they’re alive and kicking. I lives on ’em when they
isn’t. And mine is the best way, too, for I don’t take
what they want. They don’t feel that I’m living on them
as if they was alive. I does them no harm, and me a sight
o’ good.’
“ I had had enough of this, and made ray way back into
the kitchen again, for I felt a little queer.
“Vaughan said to Judkins—
“ ‘ Well, where’s the lot I have come for ? ’
“ ‘ Here yer are,’ said Judkins, pointing to a sack in the
corner.
“ Vaughan saw I was rather disgusted, and said, afte*
settling up with Judkins—
“ ‘ Let’s clear out at once.’
“‘All right,’ said Judkins. ‘Lumpy— ksi re, Lumpy,
where are yer ? ’
“In reply to this call there appeared a hideous eld
fellow in a shabby great coat and very little else.
“ As I looked in his face I saw he was evidently some-
what idiotic, a fit person to help Judkins in his dreadful
trade.
‘“Now, Lumpy,’ said Judkins, ‘carry out that sack
for the doctor, and I shouldn’t wonder if he won’t stand
yer a pot.’
“ Lumpy did not hesitate, but with Judkin’s help got
the sack containing the body on to his shoulders, and pre-
ceded us to the court and then down to the carriage, where
the sack was duly placed.
“ Vaughan gav* Mm a trifle, and we drove off with our
ghastly load.
“We reached Vaughan’s house, and stopped at a side
door leading to his surgery, which he opened with a
key.
“ W% carried the body in through the surgery into a
Bmal' 'oom fitted up as a laboratory and dissecting room.
“ Tim <»ack was removed, and the subject placed on the
table.
“It was that of a girl of sixteen or seventeen, of vcr*
emaciated appearance.
CHAPTER CCXIV.
AVERY’S story continued. —the dead alive.
“ Vaughan had just given me some explanation as to the
symptoms of the disease the girl had succumbed to and
the points he wanted to clear up, when there was a knock
at the door.
“ ‘ What is that ? ’ he said, somewhat angrily, for he
could not bear to be disturbed at his work, and it was a
standing order that no one should rout him out of this
den of his.
“ ‘ Please, sir,’ answered his servant’s voice, ‘it’s Mr.
Finch, and he must see you at once.’
“ ‘ Why the deuce didn’t you say I was out? ’
“ ‘ He caught sight of the light in tbs surgery, sir.’
“ ‘ Confound it! I suppose I must go,’said Vaughan
to me. ‘ He’s a crotchety fellow, and one of my best
patients. Wait here ; I shan’t be more than a quarter of
an hour.’
“He went out, and I was left alone with the body.
“ There was nothing unusual in this ; it was a situation
in which I had found myself scores of times.
“ Still, I felt more uncomfortable than I ever had before
under such circumstances.
“The ghastly disclosures of Judkins oppressed my
mind.
“ I could not help a feeling of horror every time my
thoughts wandered to that profaned vault and its hideous
revelations.
“ The very fact of the body having come fro® it in-
creased this feeling.
“ Vaughan seemed a long time gon*L


“ i Began to get impatient.
“ Anything was better than this sickening inaction and
Its accompaniment of troubled idea.
“ I felt I must do something, or I should go mad,
“ I resolved to begin operations myself.
“ I took up a knife and bared the corpse.
“ Even now I can hardly tell what followed.
“No sooner had the knife cut into the flesh than the
subject’s eyes opened, and fixed themselves upon me.
“I gave a shriek, to which she responded, as she slowly
rose into a sitting position.
“ 1 lost all command over myself, and with wild cries
for help, threw open the door and fell into the passage.
“ Vaughan, his patient, and the servants came flocking
up to find me stretched insensible on the floor, and the girl
sitting on the dissecting table, with the blood streaming
from her breast, gibbering like a maniac.
“ Of course it was evident that she had been buried in
a state of catlepsy.
“ The resul t of all this was my ruin.
“The girl’s parents had to be sent for, and instead of
being pleased at her restoration, their only thought was
that of taksng some vengeance on those who had pro-
faned her tomb.
“The news soon spread, and the next afternoon the
Grimstonians, in a body, made an examination of their
vault, and, instead of finding their deceased relatives
snugly reposing therein, they only found Mr. Lumpy
unconsciously drunk.
“ Worse than this, the unfortunate girl only survived a
few days.
“The shock may have accelerated her death, though at
the inquest held it was clearly proved that she was suffer-
ing from a disease that must have ended fatally in a few
days at the farthest, and I narrowly escaped a trial for
manslaughter.
“ But the scandal was so great that neither Vaughan
nor I could hope to face it.
“ I had to cut away.
“For months my nerves were utterly shattered.
“ I bolted to the colonies.
“On the way out 1 took to drinking, and—here I am.
“ Perhaps the strangest part of my tale is to be told.
“ It was just before I embarked that I was down at the
East end of London where I had been down to the
docks.
“There is no lack of squalid scarecrows there, but ray eye
was caught all at once by one of the most ghastly and
tattered objects it is possible to conceive.
“ Looking at it closely, I recognised Lumpy, though it
looked as if ten years instead of ten months had passed
over his head since I had last seen him.
“ He was crawling along in the last stage of exhaustion
and distress.
“ As he paused to beg a copper he recognised me.
I had always wondered what had become of J udkins ;
and I resolved now to find out.
“ ‘ Ah! doctor,’ he said ; ‘ spare us a copper.’
“ ‘l’ll give you five shillings if you’ll tell me anything
you know about Judkins.’
“ He stared at me in a half vacant, idiotic way.
“‘All right,’ he said at last; ‘but give us a drop of
drink first.’
“ I took him into a public-house and gave him a
quartern of gin, which he tossed off at once.
“ ‘ Ah,’ he said, 4 1 don’t care for wittles. I live on
drink. A stunning dron o’ summat like that does wake
you up.’
“ c Well, he go t to hear of there bein’ summat wrong.
He had gone out early, and he comes boltin’ back as white
as a sheet. * Lumpy,’ he says, says he, ‘ its all up; th#
gaff’s blowed, and we’re just about bust up in our little
game.’ He began to rummage about a bit, and he says,
* There’s half a quid for yer. Go and try yer luck at
summat else.’ ‘ What,’ says I, * half a quid.’ ‘Yes,’ says
he, and he chucks it down on the table-’
“‘ I looks at it,’ continued Lumpy, * and says, ‘Mr
Judkins, if it’s all up, you aint made a bad thing o’ the
business. Give us five quid and I’m off.’ Well, doctor,
he wouldn’t, but away he went out.
“ ‘ Now I knew as how he had money hid somewheres,
but I never nicked where he kep’ it. However, thinks I,
he’ll get it now and be off, so I kep’ a good watch on him,
and I see him go into the chapel, and then I knew he had
all his money hid away there. And mv as empty
as this here pewter.’
“ I understood the hint, and had the quartern refilled,
“ After a pull, Lumpy went on—
“‘I was in the vault, you must know, for I’d gone in
there to listen, and I could hear him trampin’ about over-
head, when the idea all of a sudden came acrost me that
he might as well come down below. So I jest undid the
two bolts as held up the trap door in the chapel floor,
down which they used to put the bodies, and in about
half a minute Judkins treads on it, and down he comes.’
“ ‘ Was he killed ?’
“ ‘ Not quite, 1 think. He was only stunned a bit, I
fancy, so I got a hundred sovereigns out of his pocket and
into mine, and then I pops him into an empty coffin. It
was the one as had held the young girl, as there was all
the row about, I found out arterwards.’
“ ‘ And then?’ I gasped.
“ ‘ I’ll tell you,’ and he lowered his voice confidentially.
‘ I went into the kitchen, and I broke open the cupboard
where old Judkins kep’ his sperrits, and mixed myself a
drain. Perhaps I overdid it, but all at once some idea
came acrost me that I’d better make old Judkins snug, so
I just went into the vault again and screwed him down all
proper.’
“ ‘ In the coffin ?’
“ ‘ Rather,’
“ ‘ And what happened then ?’
“ ‘Well, I hardly know. I set there a-drinkm’ till a lot
of people came and punched me all round and turned me
out, and since then I’ve spent all my tin, and come down
to what you see me. But if so be as you wants Judkins
very particular, you’ll find him there now,’ and the fellow
chuckled at the thought.
“ I felt as if I could havo annihilated the monster, who
related the horrible fate of his former master as he would
that of a trapped rat or reptile.”
“ How jolly nice you are all at once,” said Kelly, with a
diabol: 'al sneer.
“ Oh, 1 forgot. Birds of a feather, you know,” retorted
Avery, with a look that spoke of contempt and dislike,
“ However funny as it may seem to you I was disgusted
with the brute, and throwing him his five bob, motioned
him to be off, which he was not long in doing.”
CHAPTER CCXV.
NED PLANTS THE SWAG AND HIS PAL.
Thus ended Avery’s “ strange, eventful history.”
On the pair drove for some considerable time.
Avery appeared to know every inch of the way, as well
as if he had been “ prospecting ” there all his life.
“Pull up,” at last he cried; “here’s the spot (at the
foot of a large tree) where the plunder can be hidden
until we come and get it.”
Each of the parties had their own idea of which would
be the successful “ digger.”
Avery meant treachery, not death • Tr elly meant the
latter.
Ned drew the rein.
It was a dreary flat, the horizon only broken in one di-
rection by a dim line of rock and tree.
“ Are you sure we are right ? ” he asked almost incred-
ulously.
“ Quite,” answered Avery; “yonder lies the river.’*
He pointed, and Ned, following the direction of his
finger, could distinguish its course, marked by the sullen
water-holes lying between its banks like a string of irregu-
lar beads, as it swept away to the horizon like a writhing


snake in alternate articulations of sand, and sedge, and
pool.
“ Should we drive up to it? asked Kelly.
“No,” replied Avery, “wo mustn’t bring the wheel
tracks any further."
The two men alighted and secured the horse.
Ned pullea out the blanket containing the gold, and
with some difficulty hoisted it on to his broad shoulders.
“ Come, show the way,” he said to his companion.
Taking a spade, Avery stepped olf in front.
They were making their way to an elbow in the river at
some distance ahead.
Nevertheless despite the weight Kelly had to carry, he
appeared to bo the fresher of the two when they gained
the banks of the stream.
His fragile companion seemed utterly exhausted as he
cast himself upon the turf.
The bushranger proceeded to spread out the blankets
in which the gold had been wrapped.
Then with great skill he trimmed round three sides of
an oblong of turf, and rolled it back so as to lay bare the
soil beneath it.
This he began to dig out, casting the loose earth as he
threw it out into the blanket.
Avery stretched upon his stomach, with his chin sup-
ported by his hands, watched him in silence for a few
moments.
“ You’ll excuse me helping you, I’m sure,” he at length
remarked, in a tone of old world politeness, strangely at
variance with his appearance, and his usual style of address
towards Ned.
“ All right,” ejaculated the latter.
Avery took up a handful of earth, and let it dribble
through his fingers, with his gaze fixed on the far away
horizon.
In the hush of the night, the only sounds were those
of Ned’s hard breathing, and the grating made by his
spade.
Avery continued to look across the plain to the horizon
now dying out in dimness against the darkening sky.
“Yes,” he resumed, as though speaking to himself,
“this is the safest bank, a bank that holds more secrets
than gold”.
Ned had all but completed the hole to his satisfaction,
and straightening himself as he stood in it, bent on his
spade.
“I reckon that's deep enough,” he said.
“You’re right, deep enough and strong enough. The
turf will keep it better than three-inch iron could.
You’ve been in quod, mate?” he continued abruptly,
changing his tone to his usual one of familiarity.
“ Yes,” replied Kelly in some astonishment.
“Then I suppose you’ve heard the chaplain preach
there, if yon never did anywhere else. Do you recollect
the text about laying up treasures where moth and rust
corrupt, and thieves break through and steal ? ” he con-
tinued in his sneering manner.
“ No,” said Ned surllenly ; “I think you’re a bit over-
head from the way your e jabbering.”
“I almost think so, too.”
The bushranger had by this time finished the hole to
bis liking.
Stepping out of it, he knelt by its side, and taking up
the smaller ingots began to throw them in one by one.
Kelly had thrown all the smaller ingots in, and only the
big one remained.
The bushranger to his feet with this held in both
his hands.
Avery was again staring aimlessly into the night
Just as this moment a spear came whizzing past Kelly's
head, and the two men sprang to their feet. The view
that met their astonished glances was not very encourag-
ing. Some fifty Aborigines, laden with spears, seemed to
spring like ants from the ground, and a shower of spears
fell amongst the two white men, making a noise like the
rustling of bird’s wings. Kelly shouted out—
“ It's all up ! ” and bolted like mad for where the hors*
was tethered.
He unharnessed the animal, took a saddle he had
bßought with him, in case they wanted to take up a stray
mount, and clapped it on the horse with the speed of a
practised hand.
As he looked round he saw Avery down with a spear
through his body, and being smashed up under the mur-
derous blows of the waddys wielded by the savages. The
bushranger was soon on the back of the horse and was
off, the fate of Avery not causing him the least concern.
He muttered something about being saved the trouble,
and looked forward to subsequently exhuming the buried
gold, and having no claimant for a share of it.
CHAPTER CCXYI.
BLACKS AND WHITES,
Ned judged that the best thing would be for him to shift
his quarters for a few months, and get a berth at a con-
venient distance from his late exploits.
He could there lie perdu till the robbery had blown over,
and come back to unearth the gold.
He heard that a hut-keeper was wanted at an out-
station on the Flinder’s river; and, after an interview with
the owner’s overseer, undertook the berth, and started for
the out-station.
As he approached it, laden with the saddle of a
knocked-up horse, a rough but anxious voice rang out—
“ Who’s there ? ”
Ned was some yards from the door, walking on the
grass and, as he judged, making very little noise.
However it was evident that he hat keen either seen or
heard, for the voice continued—
“ What cheer, mate? ”
He soon enlightened his interviewer, giving hts name as
Smith.
A door was unbarred, and he was asked in, and when
he had entered the bars were at once replaced.
He found himself in the presence of three men.
One who had just refastened the bars was putting back
his gun into a kind of rack, the other two were watching
suspiciously.
“ You seem precious skeary of strangers, mates,” said
Ned. “I’ve been sent up here by Mr. Calthorpe, and
have been on the road since Monday.”
“ Oh! you’re the new hut-keeper, are you,” replied one
of the men who was the shepherd. There’s the billy, tha
damper’s on the table. Our mutton is rather high,”
Neel began to eat his supper.
The other two men were sawyers, stout, broad-chested
fellows, who appeared to have lived so long in the wilder,
ness as to have got to regard speech as almost a super-
fluity.
“ And what did old Calthorpe say about the Warrekerro
station?” asked the shepherd, when Ned had satisfied his
hunger.
“ Didn’t he pitch it to you that this was the healthiest
spot in the colony, that there was next to nothing to do,
and that the blacks had given over troubling us.”
“ Yes,” answered Ned; “ he said the blacks had bolted.”
The shepherd laughed grimly.
“Bolted. They’re all round here as thick as sheep
tracks, and it’s as much as one risk one’s nose outside with •
out the chance of a spear in his liver.”
“ Lively that,” said Ned.
“ We were bailed up in this very hut, two of us were,
last year for a week, and were pretty well dead with thirst
before a party came up and drove the beggars off. We’d
got some rum, but hardly any water, and the hut-keeper
got so mad from thirst and liquor, that I had all my work
cut out to keep him from opening the door and bolting out
into the middle of ’em.”
“ Why didn’t they burn you out ? ”
“ It’s an awful sight a fired station,” meditatively pot h
one of the hitherto silent sawyers, an elderly man. “ I
mind one down on the Murray, years and years ago, and


the sight of the poor old squatter, lying with his white
hair dabbled in blood, and his daughter, a likely lass of
seventeen, stuck as full of spears as ever the poor lassie
had stuck a pincushion of pins, will be before me to my
dying day.”
“The fighting blacks are all wiped out there now,” said
the shepherd
“ Yes; we didn’t leave many after that. The settlers
mustered every man they could, and in two months there
wasn’t a black fellow in the district.”
“Were you in the bunt, old ’un?” enquired Ned.
“Yes,” replied the old fellow, “and we didn’t much
care how we destroyed them. One time, I mind we got
hold of an old four pounder gun that some naval officer
had brought up country with him as an ornament. That
was a fine lark,” and the old boy chuckled at the reminis-
cence.
“ How did it work?” asked the shepherd.
“Oh ! beautifully, beautifully. We got scent of a big
mob, who were pretty well driven into a corner, and
were going to make a stand for it So we just sent a few
fellows forward with the gun to tempt ’em out. They
didn’t twig it, but made a rush and then it was blazed off
at ’em at close quarters.”
“ What was in it, slugs?”
“ Slugs, no; we’d crammed it to the muzzle with broken
glass and old nails. A lot of us came up and then we had
a little more fun, for we lighted a big fire and clapped
all the howlers we could lay hands on on the top of it.
There was one old beggar, I mind me, who was extra
cunning and shammed dead, thinking that we’d respect
his corpse.”
“Respect a black fellow’s corpse,” laughed Kelly,
that's a good ’un.”
“He didn’t play ’possum quite well enough, for he
couldn’t help shaking a bit, may-be he was scared, so we
chucked him on the top of the fire with the rest. He
tried to wriggle out again from the burning logs like a
snake, but we twigged it and chucked him back again
along with a snake that the fire had drawn from a hollow
log.”
“ Two reptiles got rid of at the same time,” said the
shepherd sententiously.
After one or two more brushes they were quite settled,
though to my mind if I’d have been one of them I'd rather
have been wiped out that way than served as a mob were
by a canny Scotch squatter on the Murrumbidgee.”
“ What’s the yarn?”
“ Why, he just let them help themselves to as much
poisoned Hour as they could lay hands on. He’d got a lot
of arsenic up for dressing the sheep and he mixed it up
with flour so that the beggars poured down on it and
carried it off to their camp. I didn’t see that myself, but
a chap as did told me that the sight in that camp, when a
visit was paid to it, was enough to make a fellow feel a
bit creepy. Men, women, and children all stiffened out
with their faces twisted up in their agony, their teeth
bare, their lips drawn back, and the whites of their eyes
showing as they had rolled back in their sockets.”*
“Well,” remarked Kelly, “I only came across your
northern blacks for the first time the other day, and I
shouldn’t mind if the whole blessed boiling were served
in that fashion. I had spears and clubs whistling round
my head till I got sick of the music.”
He proceeded to relate his adventures with Bella.
“Ah,” remarked the old sawyer whose name was
Bailey, “ all that nonsense has been pretty well knocked
out of ’em in the south.”
And so it had and by a summary process.
_ When the squatters of a district used to find that their
lives and those of their families and servants were in dan-
ger and that no assistance was to be obtained from the
• These details (the cannon, burning the black and the poisorea flour)
will be found detailed in an Australian journal, Melbourne. 1868.
Colonial Government, they used to take the law into theix
own hands.
They and their most trusted stockmen on whose’fidelity
they could rely, used to meet at an appointed spot and
hunt up the tribe of blacks against whom their vengeance
was aimed.
Now and again a white man drops from the saddle with
a spear in his body, or a horse darts off, maddened by
pain ; but as a rule, those engaged are old fighters and
know how to avoid these hurling shafts.
As the spears whiz past them they manage to catch and
break them, so as to prevent their being used again.
At length the ammunition of the blacks gives out.
Then their foes tighten the fatal circle, till those en-
closed in it are driven into the marsh or the water-hole.
This object attained, fire is opened on them from the
revolvers of the horsemen.
One by one they are bowled over as they “squatter”
like young wild ducks on the pool, and then the whites
ride back with the knowledge that that district will be safe
for a time at least.
The Government, it is true, regard the proceedings in
another light.
But then, thanks to the influence of Exeter Hall, they
have peculiar views as to the relative value of a black and
a white man’s life.
In the north the Government has taken a view more in
accordance with that of the settlers.
The Queensland Commissioner of Police, in his report
for 1878, wrote as follows—
“ The complaints of cattle killing and hut robbing by
the blacks along the northern coast, from Cairns to
Crooktown are never-ending, and will never cease as long
as there are blacks there.”
The whole coast is studded with timber-getters and
settlers, by whom the blacks are disturbed, and prevented
from getting their natural food in that direction; whilst
further inland the country is occupied by small cattle
stations, which again cut them off from their hunting and
fresh water fishing grounds.
The intervening scrub is small, affording but a scanty
supply of fruits in their seasons, and hence the natives
take advantage of the cover it affords, to make sudden
raids on the cattle and huts, which are rendered more easy
by the nature of the ground.
Hence the bitter feeling between the settlers in the
north and the blacks, from whose assaults they are never
safe; and hence the terrible thoroughness of the ven-
geance they have from time to time taken.
On one occasion, in Northern Queensland, two white
men were speared.
The rest met and determined, as a measure cf precau-
tion, and to ensure their future safety, to hunt the blacks
out of the district.
A party was organised, and well mounted and equipped,
they set out on their expedition.
They were not desirous of making captures, and set to
work in the usual fashion.
Dividing, so as to effect a surround, they came upon a
tribe of blacks encamped near a water-hole.
Fearful of reprisals, or apprehensive of danger, most of
the blacks took to the water, and diving like dab-chicks,
tried to elude the bullets of their foes.
It was a vain hope, however, for the whites surrounded
the water-hole, and succeeded in “potting” no less than
fifty of the unfortunate wretches as they swam about in
wild terror.
Near Crooktown, almost within gun-shot of a popular
town, the murder of some white men was similarly
avenged, by the destruction of a whole tribe by the police.
Several of the blacks in this case swam out to sea, to
escape the bullets of the police, and never returned to
shore.
Out of a party of thirty-five men, women, and children,
only three women and a child escaped the triple perils of


the revolvers of the police, the waves of the ocean, and
the jaws of the sharks, with which that portion of the
coast abounds.*
A writer in the Australian Mjrazine has asserted that
the policy of the Queensland Govowrraent has much to do
with keeping up the chronic ill-feeling between black and
white.
He represents* the superintendent of an absentee
squatter getting instructions, if he anticipates annoyance
from the blacks, to send for the native police.
A travelling trilv' crosses the run and startles the
cattle.
Perhaps they spear a few, or wantonly chase them, and
in the season when the beasts are “ topping up ” such a
scare may take from off the fat “ mob ” of say three hun-
dred beasts a certain percentage of weight, which in the
aggregate represents a fair sum.
Brown, the superintendent, writes to the officer in
charge of the district at once.
The lieutenant and his party ride up a few days later.
Each of the troopers has one spur only ; consequently
one side of the horse goes faster than the other, the
result being a peculiar amble styled the “policeman’s
jog.”
Next morning after their arrival at the station they take
a circuit of ten miles and quarter the ground backward and
forward till they hit on a solitary track.
They run this track with a speed and certainty which
the trained bloodhound alone can equal.
No impress on the soil, no bent blade of grass escapes
them.
Presently more tracks join, all going in the same direc -
tion, and it is evident that they have struck the main trail
of the blacks.
The party dismount and hobble their horses in a hol-
low.
Two of them peel themselves of every rag of uniform
and glide on ahead, crawling and dodging.
In about an hour they come back with the report that
there is a camp of blacks on the edge of a scrub some two
miles off.
The party stay where they are all night, but at the first
streak of day they mount and push quietly but rapidly over
the ground.
When they catch sight of the fires of the black camp
they rush on at a gallop.
The alarm is given, the camp is empty in a few
but the troopers are off their horses and into tL, f-crub.
carbine in hand, throwing off their clothes as thes jp m
hot pursuit.
The lieutenant waits outside smoking his pipe and
meditating over the prospects of a deal for a colt that has
caught his eye at the station.
Shots are heard in the scrub, and the troopers come
back after an interval.
They have cut off some half-dozen of the last of the
fugitives, whose dead bodies are lying in nameless gullies
under bush and thicket.
The leading men of the tribe have of course escaped,
and, with broken-hearted women and wailing children,
shriek to heaven for vengeance against the horrible
“ whitefellow,” to whom they ascribe all this.
It is as likely as not that Brown, the superintendent,
never pulled trigger on a black, and does not even hear
of how the lieutenant and his men carried out their
“ duty.”
Only, if Brown’s horse does come home riderless some
evening, and his owner’s carcase is discovered riddled
like a sieve with spears, it is hardly to be wondered at.
As to his superiors, they, of course, never know any-
thing about the matter, being merely business speculators
working the station with bank money.
Questions of policy or humanity to the blacks have
nothing to do with them.
* Inglis—Our Australian Cousins—lBBo.
CHAPTER CCXVII.
AN ATTACK ON THE HUT BY SAVAGES.
He looked round.
“ Blacks on our premises ? Why then, they i fere tres-
passing. It’s clearly the business of the authorities to
turn them off.”
That is all they know or understand about it.
Their concern with the Gondary station is simply one of
pounds shillings and pence, and, as long as the money
comes out right, what more is wanted ?
Meanwhile, half-a-dozen black corpses ho in their blood
in the scrub, because the tribe they belong to, or some
other tribe unknown, is suspected of having gone near the
Gondary cattle camp.
Ned found a hutkeeper’s life fearfully wearying. The
silence all day until the return of the shepherd at sun-
down left him without resource.
He resolved to “cut it” at once; but he had a little
experience to go through before he carried out his inten-
tion, which was not altogether unpleasing to a man of his
active habits.
He soon had an opportunity of becoming practically ac-
quainted with the dangers of the spot.
It was five or six mornings after his arrival.
The shepherd was away on his rounds, and the bush-
ranger was alone.
He was sitting in his usual place, and before him hung
a little circular mirror resting on two nails.
He threw a careless glance at this, and all at once his
attraction became fixed on it.
Across its face were reflected two small straight
sticks.
He usually sat in that position, and knew every bough
outside that the mirror reflected; but these two sticks
were new to him.
He was about to go to the window and put out his head,
when a sudden reflection caused him to change his
mind.
He leaned forward instead, and slightly shifted the
position of the mirror so as to take in a wider field.
He was partially successful in this.
He could see a little more of the sticks, and also make
out the slender fingers and muscular forearm of the native
who held one of them.
It was evident that they were a couple of spears, and it
was odds that one of them did not come flying through
toe open window of the hut and into his body.
The position was a ticklish one, and Ned knew it.
He felt that the black outside was watching him, and
that if he gave the slightest sign that he was aware Of
the enemy’s presence it would be the immediate signal for
an attack.
His gun was in the rack, but if he stepped up to get
it, no doubt the spear would at once be thrown.
“ Curse that black snake !” he muttered; “ he’s got his
eye on me for a certainty.”
The door of the hut as well as the window, was open,
and, for aught he knew, a black might be lurking by that,
too.
The window could be closed by a shutter now swung
back against the wall, but to step up to it for that purpose
would be to receive the black’s spear in his chest.
At length he made up his mind what to do.
He rose and took up a pail as though about to leave the
hut.
His eye was on the mirror, and he noticed that the posi-
tion of the spear shifted.
It was evident that the savage was watching every
movement he was making.
“ He’ll think he’s got a better chance of nailing me out-
side,” muttered Ned, and moved to the door.
But instead of passing the threshold he swung the door
to, shot the bolt, and jumped back at once into an angle
of the hut formed by the walls, ua which the door and
window were.


It was well he did co, for even as h> moved away a spear
came flying through the window a*~i truck the door, just
where he had been standing, and wSfe bllowed by another.
In his angle he was comparatively safe.
The wall in which the door was lay to his left, and that
in which the win ow opened to his right.
Hence he was out of reach of any spears, unless tn«
thrower thrust his head into the hut.
But with only one opening to guard instead of two, Ned
felt pretty safe.
The next job was to shut the window.
If the shutter had swung back towards him as he stood,
this would have been easy enough.
But, unfortunately, it swung back against the further
half of the wall, so that to get to it, it was absolutely
necessary to pass before the window.
His gun, and also his revolver, which he had not dared
to seize for fear of drawing the fire of his enemies by this
action, were also beyond the window.
A clumsy-looking, old-fashioned pistol of the shepherd’s,
was, however, hanging on a nail on the wall near him.
He unhitched it, and examined it.
It was loaded, but had evidently been charged a long
time before.
“ Just the sort of thing to miss fire when a chap’s life
rests on it,” he thought, “ I must get mine at any risk.
Here goes.”
It was absolutely necessary to cross the window to get
to his arms.
The only plan to do so without being seen, was to crawl
along the floor of the hut in a stooping position.
But could he be certain of doing this unseen ?
How did he know but that the blacks had not found
some crevice or knothole, through which they were observe
ing his movements.
He could not tell bow many foes he had outside.
More than one he was certain, by the way in which the
two spears had been thrown.
After reflecting, he decided to crawl along past the
window, keeping as close to the wall as possible.
He lay down, not on his face, but on his back, so that
he could watch the window all the while.
As noiselessly as possible he worked himself along.
His eyes were fixed on the square of sunlight opening in
the wall, as inch by inch he edged himself along.
At length he was abreast of the window, which his glances
had never left.
A moment more and he would be past it, out of reach of
arms, and with weapons to his hand.
All at once the patch of sunlight was darkened.
A hideous shadow obscured it.
A face appeared at the opening.
A black, repulsive face with gleaming teeth, and eyes
aglow with the fire of savage vengeance.
A woolly head was thrust boldly through the opening
simultaneously with a lean, but muscular arm, holding
a short, sharp spear.
Ned’s movements had evidently been guessed.
A grin of triumph spread over the face of the black as
he marked the position of his prostrate foe.
He poised the spear just over Ned’s chest.
A look of anticipated enjoyment rendered his features
positively demoniacal.
For a moment even Ned’s blood ran cold.
There was no way of avoiding the coming stroke, by
jerking or rolling himself to one side.
Accustomed to spear fish in the rivers, the black’s arm
is a sure one.
The bushranger glanced up at the grinning face above
him, and read in it a desire to prolong the agony of anti-
cipation he was enduring.
The black did not notice the pistol, and thought that his
enemy was quite unarmed.
“If this old pistol is a duffer, I’m a gone coon.”
Raising the weapon in question, he took a swift aim at
the hideous face bending over his own, and before the
black had even time to lealise that hia foe was armed,
pulled the trigger.
As he did so he jerked his body towards the middle of
the floor.
There wae a flash and a report followed by a cloud of
smoke.
Ned heard the spear feebly strike the floor, and simul-
taneously the thud of a heavy body falling across the
window-ledge.
Then came a pattering sound, like a gentle rain.
By this time he had secured his gun and revolver, and
advanced to close the window by closing the shutter.
There was an obstacle to this.
As the smoke cleared away he saw the body of the
black hanging as limply as a damp rag over the window-
sill, with the blood pattering on the floor from a ghastly
wound in the face.
“ I reckon you’ll never come trying to spear white
fellows again, you crawling black viper,” w T as Ned’s only
comment.
Grasping the body with one powerful arm, and pulling
it into the hut, Ned peered rouhd the edge of the shutter.
He caught sight of another black stealing off towards
the nearest shelter.
He raised his gun.
The steady barrel flashed out, and the second native
seemed to sink peacefully down.
Ned glanced around.
There were no more signs of natives in that quarter.
A noise from the side of the hut in which the door was,
attracted his attention.
Fastening the shutter he stepped towards the door.
As he neared it a blow was struck against it, and a voice
without feebly cried—
“ Open quick, mate.”
Ned withdrew the bar, and cautiously opened the door
to the extent of a couple of feet or so.
The shepherd staggered in and sank on to the nearest
seat.
“ Hullo,” said Ned, seeing him sway from side to side,
“ are you hit, mate ? ”
“ Yes,” moaned the other feebly ; “ a spear under the
shoulder. There are a gang of the devils gone down to
the river to surprise the sawyers. Can you get down
there in time to warn them ? ”
Ruffian though he was, Kelly was by no means the man
to let such a tragedy be perpetrated without trying to
prevent it, even at the risk of his own skin.
After fixing up the shepherd’s wound as well as he
could he left the hut, which the other barricaded after
him, and started for the sawyers’ camp on the river.
Scanning the ground as he advanced, he noticed a
swaying of the grass some distance ahead.
Presently he noticed the upper part of a native’s head
rise above it, and the thought of an ambush occurred to
him.
If there was only one, he judged the best plan would
be to advance, risk a spear, and boldly rout the lurker
out.
Again the grass moved, and again the black fellow’s
head rose above it as Ned drew quietly nearer.
A couple of bounds would place him at Ned's mercy
before he had time to raise a weapon.
Clutching his gun, Ned jumped forward.
The head was again lifted and the eyes looked straight
into his, with the perplexed, wild look of a trapped
animal.
The face was drawn with pain, the lower lip had fallen
and the brow was damp with sweat.
As the wild, clouded eyes rested on Ned, the wretched
creature held up first one hand and then the other, to
show that he was unarmed. c
It was the native he had fired at from the hut.
Ned’s bullet had struck the black fellow’s spine, render-
ing his lower limbs dead and useless.
Behind him the grass lay broken down in a long furrow,


where he h*? '.ragged himself along by the mere strength
of his hands and arms, in the hopes of gaining the river.
Ned looked at the wretched creature, and, raising his
gun, hesitated as to whether he should put an end to his
■sufferings.
He reflected, however, that the shot might attract other
blacks who might be prowling about, and passed on.
It was not long before the blacks showed themselves in
a party of about a score, headed by a fellow of gigantic
size.
Ned saw at once he was the leader, and resolved to
shoot him down.
Just as he raised the gun, a long, faint “Cooey” fell
ea his ear from the direction of the sawyers 1 camp.
As soon as they heard it the blacks plunged into the
scrub, and disappeared with the quickness of
Ned cooeyed in reply, and made his way in the direction
of the sound.
As he pushed through the thick scrub he could not help
thinking how easy it would be for the blacks to send a
dozen spears through him before he caught a glimpse of
them, but at the same time he guessed pretty well that the
danger for the day was pretty well over, as far as he was
concerned.
CHAPTER CCXVIII.
THE MASSACRE OF THE SAWYERS.
The melancholy tone in which his “cooeys” were answered
from the sawyers’ camp told him that mischief had been
done there, and he had no doubt that it was the party he
had just sighted who had done it, and who, having accom-
plished their murderous work, were wriggling back to
their holes like snakes.
The sawyers whom he had seen at the hut, had told him
that the blacks were ever on the alert for mischief, and
that whenever they left their huts for any time to look for
timber they were down on them like hawks.
Not a bit of flour or a rag of clothing could they keep,
and, on several occasions, they had come home tired and
hungry, to find their bark “ humpies ” burnt down, and
every bite and stitch carried off.
As he drew nearer he caught sight of the man who was
cooeying.
It was one of the sawyers, a man named Jem Holt,
who was sitting on a dead log with his hands and face
covered with blood.
At his feet lay his brother, Bill, a fine young fellow of
about twenty, stretched on his back with the blood bub-
bling in crimson froth bells from between his Bps every
time he breathed.
“ Hullo, mate,” cried Ned, “ here’s a precious lively
game on. What’s up, and where are the rest?”
“ Done for, I think,” gasped Holt. “ Leastways, Raikes
and Bolton are ; I don’t know about Bailey.”
“ How did it come about ?”
“ I’ll tell you. You know we five were in a gang, and
had come up '•♦■ream some way above any of the other
lots who are woralong the river ?”
“ Yes, I know.”
“ We kept our camp on the banks instead of building
a hut close to our sawpit, because we’d got a boat to look
after, and knowing that the blacks had been plundering
the other gangs directly their backs were turned, we
settled that one of us should always remain in camp and
look after the boat."
“That’s just wdiat’s made the blacks so darned spiteful
towards you,” said Ned. “ They saw there was no way of
robbing you without a fight, and they’ve gone in for it.
If they could have sneaked your swag on the quiet they
would.” f
“I guess that was it. Well, this morning my brother,
Raikes, and Bolton, left the hut with me, and Bailey
stayed in camp. We saw nothing of the blacks, and after
awhile we had all got to work. Bill and I were at the pit,
and the other two were cross-cutting a big cedar-tree we’d
cut down yesterday.”
“ Hadn't you your guns ? 11
“Yes, they were close handy, but we hadn't no tin o
to use ’em. As I said, Bill and I were at the pit—he on
the top, and I at the bottom—and the saw was going
merrily, when all of a sudden I felt it stop in my hands.
Before I had time to look up to see what was the matter,
there was a loud cry from poor Bill, and a screech from
twenty black devils. It told me all at once what was up.”
“ Aye, there’s no mistaking when the brutes do give
tongue.”
“ I scrambled out of the pit, and the first thing I saw
was ray brother lying bleeding just where he had fallen
after jumping off the log. Before I had time to see any
more, a whack from a waddy tumbled me back into the
pit. I was stunned, and the fellow who hit me thought
he’d settled my hash at one swipe; and I don’t wonder
at it, for he was the biggest black I ever set eyes on.”
“ A big black? ”
“Yes, a whopper—nearly seven foot high, I should
think.”
“ That must be the same chap I saw just now, heading,
a party. I wish I’d have had a chance of a shot at him,
I’ve got a fancy for that fellow. Well, what happened
next V ” said Ned.
“ I lay stunned for some time, as I guessed by the sun.
and when I came to myself all was quiet. I got out of
the pit, and there was poor Bill, lying where 1 saw him
before, with a pool of blood round him. He had five
spear-wounds in the breast, but, for a wonder, not a blow
on the head; and he just gasped out to me that the tall
black had the chief hand in it,”
“ Curse that black! we owe him one.”
“ Owe him one, aye, and I’ll pay him,” said Holt, with
flashing eyes. “ I’ll never rest till I’ve had his blood.”
“And the other two men, what about them?’’asked
Ned.
“Raikes and Bolton. They were lying a few yards
away quite dead, with their sculls and faces battered in,
and their arms and legs broken by waddies. I was hardly
able to hold up, but I managed to get poor Bill on my
back, and I brought him on as far as this, till I felt clear
knocked up, and obliged to sit down. So then I began
to cooey, in the hope the shepherd might be this way, or
that Bailey might hear me from the camp by the river.”
“ Perhaps they’ve done for him too,” suggested Ned.
“ I think not; he’s an artful old fox, and up to all their
dodges. But come, mate, I feel up to moving now ; so
leudftme a hand to get poor Bill down to the river. There
may be a chance of his pulling through after all.”
Ned looked at the prostrate man.
He was no surgeon, but he saw at a glance, from the
blood coming from his mouth, that the poor fellow had
been speared through the lungs, and that his case was-
hopeless.
Even as they looked, the eyes of the dying man were-
turned upwards till nothing but the whites were visible,,
and a thrill shot through his frame.
In another minute all was over.
Even Ned was moved, as they stood in the lonely scrub,
with the corpse at their feet.
An Australian thicket is a dull place at ail time, and
now it was doubly gloomy.
The two brothers, though rough fellows, had been very
fond of each other, and had gone through many dangers
in company. .
They had been sailors, and had run from their ship
together, and intended as soon as they had got some
money, to go back to England, where their mother was.
Jem suddenly threw himself down on the ground beside
his brother’s corpse.
He seized the clay-cold hands in his. '
“ I know what’ll make the earth lie lighter on you, Bill,
and by , I’ll do it! If ever I set hands on that big
black—and I’ll not rest night or till I’ve done so—
P2J put him across the pit alive and eross-cut him witn
the saw.”


There were do means of digging a grave for the murdered
man, so they broke off some boughs to rudely cover him,
after Jem had cut off a lock of hair with his knife.
After a brief consultation, they settled that they would
first push on to the camp by the river and ascertain Bailey’s
fate.
They found him stretched on the grass, pinned to the
earth with a spear, and with his head and face mutilated
out of all knowledge.
Close at hand lay the body of a gaunt native, slain by
an axe blow, and two more black corpses announced that
the old fellow had sold his life dearly.
His murderers had probably been alarmed at something,
for the hut had only been partially pillaged, and, to the
great satisfaction of Ned and Jem, the boat had apparently
escaped their notice, and was neither staved nor stolen.
Ned bound up the wound on Jem’s head, which was
fortunately not serious, and another consultation followed.
Night was approaching, and they decided to remain
where they were until the next day, and then to start for
Ned’s hut, get out the wounded shepherd if he was still
alive, and then make their way down stream in the boat.
Jem insisted that they should also bury his brother’s
body before they started, being resolute not to leave it to
the mercies of the native dogs, and Ned agreed that this
should be done.
All at once they heard a sound from the river that
roused them to attention.
It was like the stroke of oars.
Listening again they felt sure they could not have been
mistaken, for they heard a voice sing out, ' In bow,”
followed by the crushing of brushwood, that showed that
a boat had shot into the bank.
Ned and Jem hastened down the track made by rolling
timber to the river, and found a large ship’s boat containing
five and twenty men, sailors and sawyers, and all well
armed.
A few words sufficed to explain matters.
The boat belonged to a little trading schooner that was
moored a short distance up the river.
For greater convenience, a tent had been pitched ashore
and used as a storehouse; but one morning, about fifty
black fellows had darted from the woods, murdered the
two men in charge of the tent, seized everything they
could lay hands on in a hurry, and set fire to the rest.
Before the remainder of the crew could get on shore,
they were off with their prey, shouting and waving their
weapons in defiance.
The captain of the schooner was a determined fellow,
and made up his mind for revenge.
The next morning early, he started off in bis boat, call-
ing at all the saw pits on the river, and beating up for
volunteers
The sawyers were ready enough to join, and, with them
and his own men, he had got a pretty strong muster.
“ Our hut was robbed and burnt down yesterday,” said
one of a gang working down the river to Jem, “ and we
were just thinking of coming up and asking you and your
mate* to join us iu giving the devils a lesson on our owe
account, when the skipper here came alongside/*
Then he went on.
Anonyma, op Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
Life and Adventure.
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly.
THE “ANONYMA” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS. PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Kate Hamilton. j Formosa, the Life or a Beautiful
Agnes Willoughby. i| Woman,
“ -Aye,” said one of his mates, “ and it’s that big brute
of a Cobawn Jack who is at the bottom of it all.”
“ Who’s Cobawn Jack ? ” asked the captain.
“ A great bulking beast of a black as big as a bullock,”
was the answer. “ He’s had a hand in stirring up all the
devilry on this river, from the very beginning.”
“ An awfully big fellow, did you say ? ” said the captain.
“ Yes ; tall as a gum tree.”
“ Why, that’s the very chap then who headed the lot
who killed my two men. If I only get a chance of a shot
at him he’ll never spear another.”
“Mates,” said Jem, with a solemn earnestness that
touched even the rough fellows with whom he was sur-
rounded ; “ I’ve just got one favour I’d like to asx of you
all.”
“ What is it, Jem, old man? ” said several of the sawyers.
“ It’s about that Cobawn Jack.”
“Fire away, boy.”
Jem glanced round at his auditors.
“ It was him who headed the mob who burnt your tent,
captain ?”
“ Yes.”
“Then you and your men will know him again directly
you set eyes on him?”
“Just so ; and if ever I do set eyes on him, I’ll ”
“ Stop a bit, captain. Now you say, Banks, he was with
the lot who burned your hut.”
“I’m certain of it.”
“ Well, mates, Cobawn Jack gave me this crack on the
head you see, though I don’t count that for much ; but
he did more than that for me. He struck down my poor
brother.”
“Ah ! I see,” said the captain. “You want to kill him
yourself.”
“No,” answered Jem, simply, “I want to take him
alive ; so on second thoughts, if you can blaze at his legs
and cripple him, I’ll be much obliged to you.”
There was plenty of talk that night about their plans,
and it was agreed that all hands should keep close on the
spot where they were till the next evening, when they
would start and give the blacks a lesson.
(7b he continued.')
The Soiled Dove. _. „ ..„ .
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of The Beaut,ful Demon.
a Fascinating Woman. Revelations of a Lady Detective,
Love Frolics of a foung Scamp. The [_ ac jy with the Camelias.
incognita, a Tale of Love and _
Passion Paris Life at Twenty.




NED KELLY; IRONCLAD BUSHRANGER.
St is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned K'dly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
as Dick Turpin’s Black Bess in these islands.”— Telegraph, 7th July, 1881.
“ It is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by the assistance of Ned Kelly s
Brother, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrate! black horse. Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of the
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performancs of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘ Ned
bnd his Nag in addition to which Ned’s history is true, and Turpin’s is pure fiction,"— Press, July.
- The stirring story of Ned Kelly, the Australian Bushranger (“ Illustrated London Novelette” Office, 280, Strand),
pursues its way with unabated vigour. Full of incident, it should suit those who like their literature as they do their
cigars— full-flavoured. It is published in weekly numbers.” —South London Press, November.
CHAPTER CCXYHl.— Continued.
JTem Holt was like a madman, and could hardly rest a
minute, but kept starting up to see if it was time to rise,
and fingering his gun.
All were glad when daylight came, and a party set off
to fetch in the wounded shepherd from the hut from
which Ned had started, and another to bury the dead.
The shepherd was found alive, and his wounds were
judged not to be mortal by those of the party who had the
best knowledge of surgery.
Poor Bill Holt had not been touched by the wild dogs,
though the other two men had been shockingly torn by
them, and those deputed to bury them had not much
heart cor dinner when they came back from the job.
The rest of the day was spent in cleaning firearms,
casting bullets, and making up cartridges.
Some blankets were torn up to muffle the oars, and by
nightfall all was in readiness.
The blacks, it had been ascertained, were in the habit
of encamping on an island in the river.
One of the arms of the stream divided by the island
was broad and deep, but the other was narrow and com-
paratively shallow, forming a kind of ford, across which
the blacks were accustomed to wade to reach tire shore.
The attacking party mustered twenty-seven in all, and
it was arranged that the captain and half-a-dozen men
should take the boat belonging to the sawyers’ camp and
pull up the broad arm of the river abreast of the island.
Here they were to land, crawl up to the blacks’ camp,
and fire a volley.
Naturally all who were not hindered from further
flight by bullet or buckshot, would at once bolt across
the shallow arm of the river, in the hope of escaping into
the scrub on the mainland.
But here they would find the other boat containing
Kelly and the rest of the sawyers and sailors waiting to
pepper them on their retreat.
The white men had altogether about forty guns, besides
pistols and revolvers, and counted on making a terrible
slaughter.
It was a bright starli fflt night when they pushed off,
and dropped down the river, hardly dipping the oars into
the water, and keeping close in under the shade of the
scrub.
In about a couple of hours they reached the end of the
island, and here the boats separated.
Holt, who knew the place well, had gone in the captain’s
boat to serve as a guide.
Kelly, with the rest, pulled up the other arm of the
river, carefully sounding as they went in order to discover
the shallow.
When they found it, two-thirds of the party landed on
the island, leaving the rest ir the boat, which pulled out
a little way again.
However, as time went by, and there was no sign of the
1 expected attack from the other side, some of the men
began to get impatient.
Kelly, who bad, to a certain extent, assumed the com-
mand, suggested that they should themselves push on and
caake an attack.
“ There’s enough ©f Ets to tackle five hundred black
fellows,” he said, “ so let's go in and have a slap at ’em at
once, like bulldogs. Is that the sort of game, mates ?”
Some of the rest were tempted to listen to his sug-
gestion, but more prudent counsels prevailed, though
doubts were expressed as to whether the captain’s party,
instead of surprising the natives, had not been themselves
surprised and cut off.
“ No,” said one of the number, “we should have at
least heard one or two shots in that case.”
It afterwards turned out that the captain was puzzled to
find a good place to land, without making too much noise
with the crackling of the dry reeds and branches which
stretched right out into the river.
All at once Ned’s party heard a shout, evidently from
a black fellow, followed by a general hooting and yell-
ing, and the discharge of firearms.
It was evident the attack had commenced.
“ Steady, mates, we shall have ’em here in a minute,”
observed Ned.
The party with him stood to their arms, a* the howling
and hooting came nearer and nearer.
Presently the blacks came pouring over a little ridge,
near which Ned and his companions were lying in ambush,
and began to leap into the river at the shallow place.
“ Now’s the time," cried Kelly, and the volley rang out
with deadly effect.
Surprised and staggered by this discharge, the blacks
turned tail and met a whole lot more of their fellows
coining over the ridge.
Whilst the two lots of blacks were in confusion, the
one party striving to make their way down to the water,
and the other to fly back into the island for shelter, the
whites had time to reload.
Advancing from their ambush before their foes had
time to get out of each other’s way, they poured another
volley into them.
It was as equally destructive as the former, as the groans
and yells amply testified.
The whites got behind shelter to load again.
Bub their big stroke of work was done.
Such a formidable camp of fighting black* were not
going to be frightened very easily.
Their numbers were higher than had been suppose!.
They had been taken by surprise, and would have been
glad enough to get away, but now that they were “ bailed
up,” like rats in a trap, and could not turn away without
facing the guns, they showed fight like devils.
There were no women or children amongst them, hut
only the warriors of their tribe.
They left off their wild screaming and yelling for a
steady cry of
“ Wah ! Wah ! Wah!”
“ I know that screech,” said one of the sawyers. “ That
i* as much as to say they mean to face the music and see
it out.”
“ I hat’s so,” replied one of his companions. “Heads
below, and look out for squalls. _ Well have spears and
■ticks whizzing round us like bees in a minute "
His prophecy was


A shower of spears and nullah-nullahs flew through the
air, and the fight began in earnest.
It raged for upwards of an hour.
The blacks kept so well under cover that their adver-
saries could no longer infl ct anything like the preceding
umount of damage upon them.
The whites were too strong to be in much danger, but
they fired away almost at random, for when once the
blacks had got amongst the trees it became almost impos-
sible to get a fair aim at them.
Big as he was, Ned had also managed to get very fair
eover for his carcase, and the sawyers, all pretty well
broken to such fighting, were equally lucky.
The sailors, however, were unused to bush work, and
four of them were lying wounded, though not mortally,
and there was a prospect of using up all their ammuni-
tion.
“ We had better get back to the boat,” suggested the
mate of the schoouer, but this was found to be no easy
matter.
The ground was more open nearer shore, and, as Ned’s
party began to attempt a retreat, they were exposed to the
lire of the blacks.
One of the sawyers dropped with a spear in the thigh,
&nd the mate of the schooner had the top of his ear cut
off.
The whites retreated back to their cover again.
“ All we can do is to keep close under shelter, pop
«way, and take care of the wounded,” said the sawyer.
“It’ll never do ; our powder will give out in time, and
then they will rush us. We must get to the boat.”
They were preparing to move down in a body at all
risks, when a thought occurred to Ned.
He communicated it to the others.
It was that he should slip down to the six men left in
the boat, and get them to land and fire a volley.
Under cover of this the retreat could be effected.
It was agreed *O, and, with some difficulty, Ned managed
to crawl down unobserved to the water’s edge, and to sig-
nal the boat.
Alarmed at this, and thinking that the captain’s party,
which had first surprised their camp, had come round to
the help of the others, the blacks took to their heels, and
retreated towards the middle of the island.
There was no time to be lost, so the whites picked up
■*‘N*r wounded and hurried at once to the boat.
trust as they had got afloat the blacks made a final
charge, dashing into the shallow water and hurling a
cloud of spears, several of which got home, for the men
were too closely packed in the boat to be able to dodge
them.
But their own black bodies standing out above the
shining stream also afforded capital marks, and a succession
of shot* from the boat dropped several of them into the
water to rise no more.
The boat was pulled down stream after this parting
salute, and the blacks could be distinguished crossing in
a body from the island which had witnessed this scene of
•laughter, to the mainland.
“I reckon a few of the devils have stopped behind for
the night,” observed one of the sawyers grimly.
Such indeed was the case, and from that day forward
the natives have shunned a spot so fatal to their race.
Just as Ned and his companions reached the end of the
island they met the other boat.
It had been arranged that, after starting up and scaring
the blacks, the captain and his party should wait a bit on
their side of the island, in case the natives sought to escape
on that side, and then pull round to Ned’s party.
“ We’d have been here before,” said the captain, in ex-
planation of the delay, “only we’d got a prisoner.”
“A prisoner? What did you want with a prisoner?”
•aid the mate.
It was a black who had had his kneecap broken at the
first shot, who was lying, tied neck and heels, at the bot-
tom of the boat.
By his side, looking at him with a look of bitter exulta-
tion, never suffering his glance to stray for a moment from
his face, was Jem Holt.
As to the prisoner's identification, it was easy enough to
all who had once seen his gigantic figure.
It was Cobawn Jack.
The next morning, at the request of Holt, the prisoner
was left in his hands, and, with the exception of himseJ
and Kelly, the rest of the party separated.
The exact fate of Cobawn Jack is a mystery which will
never be fully salved.
Change of air < ccurred to Ned as being again advisable.
A report of the atrocity in which he had been engaged
might, he thought, possibly reach the ears of someone in
authority, and lead to au investigation and to his
identification.
In reality he need not have been alarmed.
The authorities in Northern Australia take very goot.
care to close their ears when any such reports are flying
about.
The black question, in any shape or form, they utterly
abominate; and they would be only too glad to hear of
the utter extinction of the troublous race.
The schooner was still at the mouth of the river, and lie
resolved to offer his services to the captain.
As the skipper was very short-handed, Ned’s proposal
was readily agreed to by him.
After touching at a number of places she worked her
way, by coasting via Torres Strait, down to Brisbane, raid
here Ned abandoned her.
He resolved to make his way from here over-land to the
neighbourhood of Melbourne, and recommence his old
career in the south.
He had heard of a capital haunt in the neighbourhood
of the head of the King River.
He had entered the territory of Victoria, and all went
well till one afternoon, when, after traversing an undulat-
ing and somewhat sparsely inhabited tract, he resolved
to halt and camp for the night.
Although if he had chosen to push on, he might have
obtained shelter either at an inn or a station, he had
avoided doing so, and also shunned the more beaten
tracks as much as possible.
He had hobbled his horse, lit a fire, and prepared to
make himself comfortable for the evening, when he
observed two horsemen coming in his direction.
A glance at them showed him that they were both
armed, but in ordinary civilian costume.
“As long as they're not any of those cursed traps, I
don’t care who they are,” thought he, but at the same
time he felt it just as well to be cautious, and placed his
gun convenient to his hand.
The two men rode straight up to him, and the bigger
of the pair, a tall, red-headed fellow, ranged his horse
alongside him, and began, with a hand at his holster :
“ Hullo mate ! I’ll trouble you ”
Before he could get any further Kelly was on hia feet,
and had covered him with his gun exclaiming:
“ Trouble me for what, you lubber ? by if you
move your fist an inch nearer your bolster I’ll drop you
out of the saddle before you can wink an eyelash.”
The fellow stared at him in a somewhat bewildered
way.
Kelly kept his eye on him and also on bis mate who
was gazing at the bushranger in somethinsr the same
fashion.
“ I'm hanged,” ejaculated the latter, a swarthy, ill-look-
ing ruffian, “ but it’s Ned Kelly.”
Ned recognised this man directly he had spoken.
He had been a member of his old gang.
“Hullo Briggs!” he exclaimed in turn, “what the
devil are you cruising about here for?”
“The old lay, boss;” replied Briggs, “we’re just
doing a bit of toll collecting in these parts. We thought
you were a stranger hereaway, and were, going to make
you take out a travelling license.”


“ Catch a weasel asleep,” grinned Ned.
“Just so. But what brings you out here, squattin’
under a tree, for all the world like a blessed mushroom
a springin’ up, or like the pannakin in the wilderness that
Holy Joe, the devil dodger, used to sport about in Pent-
ridge jail on a Sunday?”
“Pelikin, not pannakin, you fool,” growled his mate,
who had remained all the while like a statue without
daring to move a finger covered as he was by Ned’s
S un -
“ Oh! it’s all the same, This here is a pal, Tom
Spurrell, boss. I don’t think he knows you, but you’ll
get on well enough. But whfct have you been a doing of
all these long months ?”
Ned after telling Spurrell that he was welcome, and
requesting the two men to join him in his evening meal
gave a brief account of his adventures, which were loudly
applauded.
“ S’elp me, but you are a stunner, and no mistake,”
cried Briggs. “There ain’t a man like you in shoe leather.
If you’re goin’ to start the old game I’m with you, and so
is Spurrell here.”
“ Yes,” said Spurrell, somewhat sulkily.
Kelly told them his ideas, which were to get the old
band together again.
In course of the evening the two men found themselves
alone for a few minutes, and Spurrell said to his com-
panion :
“ Look here, Briggs; I suppose when a good chance
does come in your way you’re not such a fool as to let it
slip, are you ?”
“ Not me, I reckon, but what are you driving at?”
You wouldn’t mind a little risk for the sake of pick-
ing up five thousand pounds to your own cheek, eh ?”
“ Bather think not.”
“ Well, if you’d only have been of that mind an hour
ago, and had had your pistol handy, you might have
earned it.”
“How?”
“How? Why, isn’t there a reward of ten thousand
pounds for Ned Kelly, and couldn’t we have gone
snacks ?”
Briggs was somewhat staggered at this.
He had served under Kelly, and had yielded to that
peculiar and marked influence which the bushranger
exerted over all whom he was brought in contact with,
that moral as well as physical ascendency which stamped
him, all illiterate as he was, as a born leader of men.
Spurrell, who only knew Ned by reputation, had not
had time to fall under such influence.
“Look here,” he went on, “ here’s a chance we shall
never get again, if Kelly’s going to get a gang together.
It’s now or never. Five thousand quid and a free par-
don, or say a year’s knocking about, with such scraps as
we can pick up, seasoned with Kelly’s bullying, and death
in your shoes at the end of it.”
Briggs was rather staggered by these arguments.
Still he had an awe of Kelly.
“ It’s all very well to talk about, but you don’t seem to
think what a job it’ll be,” he said.
“ Ain’t we two to one ?”
“Yes; but you don’t know what sort of a customer
you’ve got to tackle. I’d sooner take hold of a five-year-
old bull than grip Ned Kelly when his monkey’s up. Why
he’d catch hold of us and bash our heads together like a
couple of cokernuts.”
“ Couldn’t we sex-ve him as Mike Howe, the Van
Diemau’s Land bushranger, was served by his two pals?”
suggested Spurrell.
“ How was that?’’
“ Why, they got him to stoop down and blow the Are
un with his mouth, and then the pair of ’em jumped on
lus back and tied him up.”
“ Yes ; but with Kelly you’d first of all have to kid him
into blowing the fire up, which wouldn’t be so blessed
easy as you may think for, and in the second, if you
jumped on his back, you’d get a hoist that would send you
as hi r ;h as the top of that gum tree before you could say
knife.”
“Well, then, knife let it be. Let’s stick a knife into
him.”
“No, that’ll never do. If we did, the blessed traps
would swear we found him dead in the bush from their
shots, in order to do us out of the reward. If we want
the cash and the free pardoE, must take him in and
hand him over alive.”
The temptation had staggerer JBriggs, rnd he was now
quite willing to enter into a scheme for Kelly’s capture.
“We shan’t have far to go for the traps, if once we get
him,” he observed.
This was true, for the two men were themselves being
pursued by the police, and knew where to find these latter.
In a few more words they briefly matured their plan.
Ned returned to the camp a minute or so later.
He had no particular suspicion of Briggs or his com-
panion, but habit had rendered him cautious in such com-
pany.
He kept his gun beside him, and his revolver ready to
his hand.
The two traitors began to think their plan would not
be such an easy one, after all, to carry out.
It was agreed that they should watch in turns through
the night.
Briggs and Spurrell thought that there might be a
chance of surprising Ned in his sleep, but he lay with hi*
hand on the stock of his revolver, and when one of them,
whose watch it was, accidentally approached him, started
up in a way which showed he slept with one eye open.
Next morning they gathered round the fire.
Spurrell brought up some wood to feed it.
He threw on two or three boughs, and then laid hold of
one about four feet long and as thick as a man’s wrist.
He raised it, but, instead of pitching it into the fire,
brought it down, with the swiftness of a crack-stiok
player, smack on to the top of Ned’s head.
The blow a tremendous one.
It would nave cracked the skull of nine men out of tea
like an egg-shell.
But Ned’s skull was almost as thick as a bull’s, and wa»
almost as hard to damage, as though he had his iro,
helmet on.
The blow, too, was deadened by the thick felt of hail
with which his nut was thatched, and by his hat.
It was hard enough, however, to make him imagine that
a procession of thirty-six thousand lighted candles was
passing before his eyes, and to knock him backwards in a
semi-stunned condition.
Simultaneously with the blow, Briggs gave the bush,
ranger’s gun, which was lying beside him, a lift with hr
foot that sent it flying ten paces off, and, at the same tinu
slipped a noose, he had in readiness, round his arms.
Spurrell dealt him a second blow with the stick tha6
stunned him, and, after snatching Ned’s revolver from his
breast, joined Briggs in the task of securing him.
Before this was entirelly completed, Ned partially re-
covered.
But Spurrell held his own revolver within a foot of his
head.
“ Now, just see here, Kelly,” he said, “ we're playing
life and death, and I hold the ace of trumps here in my
fist. It sno time for joking. If you make a single move
to wriggle loose, by the Eternal, I’ll manure this strip of
turf with your brains.”
Ned was too stunned to make much resistance, either
mentally or physically, and Briggs rapidly finished securing
him.
He roped him as strongly with the horse hobbles, and
tethered his limbs as though he had been a young ele-
phant.
He had too often seen the bushranger exert his Herculean
strength not to use every precaution.
N e d, when the pinioning was completed, rose to his feet.


His senses had returned to him.
He glared at his captors with the blood-shot eye of an
enraged tiger.
His face became almost black as the blood rushed to
his head from the excess of passion; his eyes glowed like
live coals, his brows met, and his nostrils dilated.
The corded muscles on his massy limbs writhed and
swelled like serpents, and as he stood there in his might,
like the bound Samson before the Philistines, it seemed as
though he had but to make an effort to break his bonds,
“ as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth fire,” like
the Hebrew champion ere his locks were shorn
Spurrell read this danger.
“1 swear to ,” he said, “if you loosen a single
knot it’ll be a dead man the rest will be tied round. It’s
our life or yours, and we can’t throw a chance away.”
“ You mean, canting, white-livered, treacherous
skunk !” said Ned, “ what’s your game? What d’ye want
to do with me now you’ve tied me up like a wool-bale ?”
“Well, we’re going to hand you over to the traps, and
I reckon they’ll cart you off slick to Melbourne.”
Melbourne.
The word fell on Kelly’s ear as one of hope.
It was a good distance to the capital of Victoria, and,
for aught he knew, a dozen opportunities of escape might
turn up on the road.
“ You’re a cursed set of hounds to try this game on !
A nice pal you’ve got hold of, Briggs.”
“Well, you see,” said Briggs, apologetically, “the traps
were getting precious inquisitive after us, and we ran a
devilish close chance of being nabbed. And when it was
a question of that or of earning five thousand quid, a free
pardon, and what the blessed newspapers call the grati-
tude of the entire community, why we couldn’t resist
it.”
Ned was not only bound, but, as an additional precau-
tion, was made to walk on foot between the other two,
who were mounted, with a rope from each side secured
to his captors’ saddles.
Such was the awe with which he inspired them, even in
his bound condition, that they rode revolver in hand, and
warned him that at the faintest sign of an attempt at es-
cape they would shoot him down without mercy.
The almost miraculous escape of Mike Howe was fresh
In their minds.
After his capture, as related, this miscreant was
marched off strongly bound, one of his captors going in
front of him and the other behind.
Both were armed with loaded muskets.
Suddenly Howe, by a miraculous effort of strength,
snapped his bonds like pack-thread, faced the man in his
rear, disabled him by a kick in the stomach, sprang on the
foe in front, tore away his knife and musket, stabbed him
to death, and then fired at, and mortally wounded, his com-
panion.
Briggs and Spurrell were determined to allow no such
tricks to be played upon them by Kelly.
Towards noon they arrived in sight of a station, to which
they conducted Ned.
To their great satisfaction, some of the police engaged
in their own pursuit were at hand.
Kelly was promptly given over into their care.
The sergeant in command replaced some of the bonds
by handcuffs, and somewhat slackened the others, besides
allowing him a horse.
His party was strong enough to admit of this.
It was, of course, settled that Spurrell and Briggs
should accompany the party to Melbourne.
Ned’s eye never quitted the traitors.
On the second day, when they were about to start, he
managed to edge up within reach of them.
All of a sudden he shot out one leg with the speed
And viciousness of a kicking horse.
The. iron-bound toe of his heayy riding-boot alighted
just where he meant it to-on the tip of Spurrell’s
knee
With a yell of agony the traitor sank to the ground
His knee-cap was smashed, and he was lamed for life,
“You’ll have to limp to blazes now!” roared Ned,
darting forward at Briggs.
His hands were bound, but he dashed tne top of his
cast-iron-like head full in the man’s face, smashing his
nose and sending half his teeth down his throat.
It was a trick like this, in the days when butting was
allowed in the ring, that alone won young Dutch Sam his
fight with Tom Gaynor.
Briggs was picked up insensible, and fearfully dis-
figured.
This manoeuvre caused the sergeant to keep a close?
look out on Ned than he would perhaps otherwise have
done, and hence he had no chance of escape on the
road.
But the bushranger kept up his spirits, counting on
finding friends in Melbourne.
CHAPTER CCXIX.
NED ESCAPES FKOM MELBOUkNE JAIL.
The news of Kelly’s capture spread like wild tire through
the colonies. His daily progress towards the capital was
duly telegraphed to the papers. The liveliest interest in
his movements was evinced by all parties, especially by
the Government he had baffled and bamboozled so often.
He felt almost proud of the notice he attracted. All
great, that is, notorious criminals, luxuriate in the in-
famous eclat they produce.
Kelly was the object en route of almost ovations from
the lower classes. His air was jaunty, and he had that
“ don’t care a button ” demeanour, which was remark-
able in the launching into eternity of the convict criminals
during the reign of convictism in Van Dieman’s Land.
Many of these wretches, at the last moment, kicked off
their shoes and danced. It was a dance of death that
never entered Holbein’s brain when he painted his
celebrated picture under that title.
The mob threw themselves in his path as he approached
his goal. He was a celebrity ; thar made him with them
a god. A bad eminence excites as much attention as a
good one.
Many were the cries from the sympathising crowd to
“ keep up his pecker,” &c.
Thousands would have walked miles to see Lefroj who
would not cross the street to look at the saintly Earl ot
Shaftesbury.
Besides, there were plenty in the colony who looked
upon Kelly rather as a hero than what tie was—namely, a
villain.
Brute courage will always have its worshippers amongst
the English race, and no heroes are so popular as those
who display it.
Two powerfully-built fellows, dressed as diggers, made
themselves conspicuous by pushing their way roughly
through the crowd until they got quite close to the front.
They did not, however, seem to be very ardent admirers
of Ned.
On the contrary, one of them shook his fist at the
captive bushranger and roared out-
“ Ah ! you black-muzzled bandicoot, so they’d laid you
by the heels at last. If they’d only have done it a bit
earlier, I’d have been a few ounces the better off in this
world.”
Ned recognised the voice.
It was that of Zeph,
He glanced at the speaker, whose disguise was so perfect
that but for his voice he would have been unable to
penetrate it. and then at Ins companion, who roared out in
turn—
“ Yes, the greedy sarpiut. You won’t get another
chance of plundering honest diggers again in a hurry. As
old Mother Flannigan in Hell-street said to me last night.
Old Nick’ll have a partner before the month’s oirt.”.
This time Ned recognised Salmon Roe.
H© knew, of course, that all this abuse snerely meant


that they were on the alert to help him, and guessed that
Salmon Roe’s mention of Mother Fiaunigan meant that
they could b? cc inmunicated with through her.
He was careful, however, not to exchange the slightest
Hgn of recognition with the pair of ruffians, who, after
blackguarding him a little longer, fell back amongst the
crowd and related to whoever chose to listen to them, how
they had been st ck up “and eased of a considerable
amount of gold dust by Ned” some months before.
“ Well,” he thought, ‘ I’ve got friends outside the
at all events. This child don’t mean to dance on
Nothing this time.”
On arriving at the jail there was a regular assemblage
to meet the modern Hick Turpin. Curiosity was abroad,
and no tickets on a Patti night at the opera could have
commanded a higher price than a “pass ” to see Kelly had
they been obtainable for money.
Every old lag in the colon)'’ —and Van Dieman’s Land
had emptied her jail birds into the colony—trooped to the
jail as Ned approached and gave him a regular reception.
Amongst those who regarded the Herculean ruffian
with more than ordinary interest was a young girl. In
coolly scanning the crowd, Kelly’s glance fell on the
girl; he started nervously, and looked at her in a marked
and meaning manner.
The girl almost screamed, then trembled, and a flush
rose to ber face.
Ned had recognised Bella as the daughter of the head
jailer at .vlelbourne, and who had returned from her visit
to the north.
She too had recognised in the person of Ned Kelly, the
bushranger, the so-called Tom Smith, who had preserved
her life and honour from the blacks.
Ned felt still more pleased at recognising her than at
his meeting with Salmon Roe and Zeph,
“ She ought to prove a friend at court at all events,” he
thought, and it was with a somewhat jubilant feeling that
he crossed the thresh hold of the prison.
But when He massive door of his cell had clanged to
behind him, and he was left in solitude and silence,
matters did not wear quite such a rosy hue to his imagi-
nation.
lie seated himself on the edge of bis bed and began to
rack his brains as to the best means of opening up a com-
munication with his f iends outside.
He knew that his former escape from Sydney would lead
to his being closely watered, and that unless he had an
ally within the jail as well, he would not have much
chance of giving his captors leg bail.
Meanwhile Bella Bolton was in a far more agitated con-
dition than Ned himself.
She had recognised iu him the man who had rescued her
from captivity amongst the blacks.
Ned’s courage and consideration, as displayed on that
occasion, had greatly impressed her.
He was not the man to inspire love in the heart of a
cultivated woman, but nevertheless there was much that
was essentially fascinating to a girl in his reckless daring.
She felt she ought not to rest while the man to whom
she owed so much was languishing as a captive.
Ned was aroused from his reverie by the appearance of
one of the warders.
lie looked hard at the man but could not remember
ever having set eyes on him before.
On the fellow opening his mouth, however, he at once
detected, from his brogue, that he was an Irishman.
An idea struck N ed.
He made the Fenian sign.
To his great satisfaction, it was at once answered.
Ttie man was one of the brotherhood.
There was nothing astonishing in this.
In Ireland itself the. bulk of the staff of some of Her
Majesty’s jails were Fenians.
The escape of Mead Centre Stephens, who walked out
of Richmond Bridewell, Dublin, as he would have talked
out of his own house, is a proof of this.
A similar state of things j: -e tailed in the Antipodes.
In April, 1876, it will be remembered the whole of the
Fenian convicts in Western Australia were able to effect
their escape in a vessel specially chartered by their breth-
ren in America, thanks to the concurrence of some of
those appointed to look after them.
Neither will the attempted assassination of the Duke of
Edinburgh in Australia be forgotten, though it is main-
tained by many that private vengeance for a wrong of per-
sonal character, and not Fenianism, was the motive that
prompted this deed.
The story they tell is a curious one, and some day may
be printed at full length.
If Ned had been a headcentre, or any similar great gun,
he would simply have ordered the man to arrange his es-
cape when he saw his sign responded to.
But he thought he could not go quite so far as that, and
merely asked him if he could bring about an interview
with Bella Bolton.
Ned would have written to the girl had he been able,
but, as it was. ho had to content himself with a verbal re-
quest for an interview.
The warder was somewhat puzzled, but consented to
carry Ned’s communication without much demur.
The next day, Bella, by the connivance of the warder,
paid a visit to Ned unobserved.
The interview was necessarily a brief one.
Miss Bolton could not help feeling greatly moved at
Ned's unpleasant situation.
“ I will tell my father all I owe to you,” she said, “ and
I feel sure he will do everything in his power to render
your position tolerable, lie would do a great deal, lam
sure, for the man but for whose courage he would never
have set eyes on his daughter again.”
“ Begging your pardon, miss,” said Ned, who had already
framed some notions of a plan of escape, “ but I’d rather
your father didn’t show me any too much outward kind-
ness. If, though, he could just manage to shut those eyes
you spoke of for about half-an-hour or so when the time
comes, it would help me more than a little bit.”
“ I can hardly pledge him to that,” said the girl, “ but
I will do my best.”
.Ned briefly instructed her how to enter into communica-
tion with Zeph and Salmon, and this duty she willingly
undertook.
Several days elapsed, and, thanks to the system of com-
munication established through Bella and the warder, Ned
was kept fully acquainted with all the measures in progress
for his escape.
Still, as time slipped on, and the hour for him to make
his appearance in court drew near, he could not help feel-
ing a little anxious, though he did not lose lus trust in hi*
friends.
He was quite the lion of the hour, and would have had
as many visitors as Jack Sheppard had iu Newgate, had it
been allowed.
At length the assizes commenced.
The calendar was a very heavy one, and Ned's name was
somewhat low down on the list.
Mr. Bolton, the head jailor, and his second in command—
a somewhat scatterbrained young fellow, named Hammond,
whose chief characteristic was a habit of falling in love
with one pretty girl after another, and who, at this mo-
ment, was a helpless captive to the charms of Bella, held a
brief consultation overnight.
“ It’s pretty nearly certain,” said the former, “ that
Kellys trial won’t come on till the day after to morrow,
for there are ten cases to be settled first. I’ll go down
with those ten to court and leave you to keep a watch ovey
our iron-clad friend.”
“All right, sir.”
“Of course, if the trials are got over quicker than w©
think for. I’ll send down to you to bring him along,”
Bella was present at this interview.
She saw a splendid chance of carrying out the plan that
had already been partially agreed ou, and at onco seat »


note containing full particulars, and also another docu-
ment, of which more hereafter, to Zeph and Salmon Roe.
The next morning Mr. Bolton marched off with the ten
prisoners whose names were first on the list, for trial to
the court house.
Hammond feeling his responsibility as regarded Ned,
passed most of the day in the lodge of the prison-yate
Shortly before half-past three o’clock, Bella came that
way, equipped for a walk.
He gallantly came forward to see her let out, and
began to talk to her.
Contrary to her custom, instead of snubbing him she
became very amiable; and, consequently, he fell in the
seventh heaven of delight.
While they were so engaged, a squad of four of the
fort police marched up to the door of the jail.
Their leader saluted Hammond, and handed him a
letter.
It ran as follows—
“Dear Hammond, —Send Kelly along at once, under the
escort of bearer. No evidence was offered by the prosecution
in two of the cases I took up this morning, and the other fellow
pleaded guilty ; so it is settled they will take on Kelly’s case,
and open pleadings at once.—Yours truly,
“Peter Bolton."
Hammond glanced over the document.
It was, he had no doubt, in Mr. Bolton’s handwriting
He at once gave an order for Kelly to be brought froca
his cell, and handed over to the policemen.
“ I suppose you four will be enough to take care of
him ? ” he said.
“ Oh, yes, sir,” observed the leader. “ We’re to take
him up in a cab, Mr; Bolton says. Nobody thinks that
his trial's coming on to-day, and there’s not many people
about.”
“ Very good.”
One of the policemen had been sent for the cab, and
by the time he returned with it, Kelly had been brought
to the lodge.
He was handed over to the custody of the police, three
of whom got into the vehicle with him, whilst the fourth
mounted the box by the side of the driver.
Just as they were going to drive off, Hammond, who
did not seem quite at ease in his mind, made a motion for
them to stop.
He was about to put some quest’ons to them.
But Bella Bolton began to chatter to him, and in an-
swering her, he quite lost sight of what he had been
going to say, and just waved to the cab to continue on
its way.
It drove off, and was lost to sight round a corner.
Miss Bolton, after a little more conversation, during
which she expressed her regret that duty hindered Mr.
Hamraona from accompanying her on her walk, also left
the prison.
Left alone, Hammond lounged about the place.
He had pulled out Bolton's letter, and was reading it
for the second time, when the head jailor returned with
several of the prisoners he had taken away in the morning.
Hammond glanced over the ranks.
“ Hullo! ”he said. “ Where have you left Kelly? ”
“Kelly?” repeated Bolton. “Why, you must be
wool-gathering. I left him with you this morning. A
nice fellow you are to leave in charge of a jail, when you
forget all about the most important prisoner in it.”
“Don’t humbug,” said Hammond, nervously; “you
know you sent for him.”
“ Sent for him! tVhy, what the deuce do you mean ? ”
“ Why this,” repried Hammond.
As he spoke he held out Bolton’s letter.
The head jailer took it and glanced at it.
As he did so he became white as a sheet.
“ Great heavens!” he gasped, “ I never wrote that.”
“ What!” yelled Hammond.
“ I never wrote that. It—it’s a forgery.”
** 1 could have sworn it was your handwriting.”
“ It is awfully like it. Aud do you mean to say you ha**
given up Kelly?”
“Yes, to an escort of four policemen who brought your
note.”
“Four policemen? Four bushranging devils in dis-
guise.”
“ That was the only thing that made me at all suspicious,
I did not recognise any of their faces as belonging to the
force, and thought they were hardly wall set up. But it
was your handwriting clenched the matter, or I should
have questioned them.”
He omitted to mention how much his attention had been
taken up by Bella.
That young lady shortly afterwards returned, and ex-
pressed the utmost amazement at what had taken place.
She, of course, carefully avoided mentioning the fact
that the letter by which Ned s release had been obtained
had been forged by her.
Nor did her father even suspect this; or, if he did, he
kept his suspicions to himself, no blame attaching to him
in the matter.
CHAPTER CCXX.
NED GIVES A POLICEMAN A LESSON IN SURGERY.
It is hardly necessary to state that the supposed police
escort consisted of Zeph, Salmon Roe, and a couple more
of Ned’s friends, aud that the cab-driver was also a con-
federate.
As soon as they were out of sight of the prison the
policeman on the box jumped down and hurried away.
There was nothing left to attract attention to the cab,
those inside it sitting well back with the windows up, so
that their uniforms might not be seen.
After sundry twistings and turnings it stopped at the
door of a small house in the suburbs.
The four men alighted and hurried into this.
Fresh disguises were hastily assumed, and they then left
the house one by one, a rendezvous having been previously
arranged.
This rendezvous, was at a lonely hut situate at a
spot known as Eleven Mile Creek, between Winton and
Greta.
It was tenanted by a young fellow a namesake of Ned’s*
named Dan Kelly, and by two old women, named Wright
and Mulligan, and bore by no means a good reputation.
Ned was pleased to learn that Marco Polo was in safety,
and that Zeph and Salmon Roe had given orders that he
should be taken to the projected rendezvous so as to be in
readiness for his master.
Ned having been dressed and “made up ” with as much
care as if he had been a leading tragedian about to step
on to the stage, started on his journey, and was clear of
Melbourne before Bolton’s return to the jail had led to
the discovery of his escape.
He travelled for several days without let or hindrance,
and the nearer he got to his destination the more at home
he began to feel.
Not only was the country a wild and broken one,
affording capital cover in case of pursuit, but the sym-
pathies of the populace were decidedly not on the side of
law and order.
At several out-of-the-way spots Ned encountered men
who recognised him, but whom he found had not the
slightest idea of betraying him to the authorities.
it was almost nightfall when he reached the hut on
Eleven Mile Creek that had been appointed for the ren-
dezvous.
It was a dilapidated looking erection of timber, serving
as a kind of sly grog-shop aud meeting place for hone
and cattle stealers.
Kelly approached it with great caution.
He dismounted on reaching the shed serving as a stabls,
and looked in.
To his astonishment he saw a horse which, from it
accoutrements, he at once guessed to be that of a troop*s
of the mounted police.


Taking his revolver in one hand, and retaining a hold
on the reins with the other, he crept to a window giving
him a view of the interior of the hut.
The table was spread for supper, and at it were seated
four persons, the women Wright and Mulligan, Dan
Kelly, and a trooper of the mounted police.
For a moment the ruffian thought that he was betrayed,
and that this was a plot to ensnare him.
He debated for a moment whether he should not fire
through the window and shooS w>wn the whole party, and
then ride away.
When an Irishman is bloodthirsty, he’s a human tiger.
He resolved to wait, and a few scraps of conversation
convinced him of his error.
The facts were that the constable, whose name was
Fitzpatrick, had ridden over that afternoon from Bennala
with a warrant for the arrest of Dan Kelly.
He had made his appearance so suddenly / that the
latter, who was unarmed, was compelled to surrender, and
had the handcuffs put on him.
Instead of riding away at once with his prisoner, Fitz-
patrick, who was a good-hearted, jovial fellow, consented
to stop and have some supper, to which the others invited
him.
Their object was of course to gain time for the arrival
of friends, or to make Fitzpatrick drunk.
The latter sat opposite his prisoner with his revolver
handy for use.
He kept a keen eye on Dan, and was surprised to see
his face suddenly assume a jubilant look.
The truth was that Dan had just caught sight of Ned’s
well-known face at the window behind Fitzpatrick.
Fitzpatrick’s suspicions were aroused, and the noise
made by Ned, who proceeded to open the window, con-
firmed him in the idea that something was up.
He seized his revolver and faced round.
As he did so Ned fired at him point blank.
The suddenness of Fitzpatrick’s movement saved his
life, for Ned’s bullet, instead of entering his body, struck
him in the right arm, causing him to djrop his revolver.
One of the women snatched this up and flung it into a
corner of the hut, and the two then threw themselves on
to the unfortunate policeman and bore him to the ground.
So closely were they mixed up that Ned dared not fire
again but entered the hut.
At the sight of his levelled pistol Fitzpatrick offered to
surrender.
Dan was freed at once from the handcuffs.
A sudden notion struck Ned.
The trooper had not recognised him as Ned Kelly, and
if he at any future time turned the tables on him, could
only charge him with shooting at himself. The proceed-
ings of Kelly to frustrate future evidence against him,
as far as the production of the bullet was concerned, are
historical and well known in the colony. He simply com-
pelled the unfortunate trooper to cut out the bullet from
the wound (fortunately it was not very intricately buried
in the muscles) and hand to him.
Kelly grinned at the pain and humiliation inflicted on
the constable, saying as he removed the lead—
“JSo fitting this to the barrel to prove I used it.”
The woman pitied the poor wretch, and gave him some
brandy, bound up his arm, and helped him to mount his
horse.
The man was only too glad to escape with his life.
No sooner had he left than the sound of horses’ hoofs
were heard.
Kelly sprung to the door.
“He’s bringing back the traps,” ne yelled.
However, a brief examination proved to him that the
newcomers were in reality friends.
To his delight, Zeph and Salmon Roe, under the names
of Byrne and Hart, made their appearance.
Kelly related with great glee the surgical operation per-
formed on the constable, at which Zeph grinned grimly,
saying—
“You didn’t perform the operation as I’d have done.
It would have been much safer when you had aim to have
kept him. He’ll bring the traps on you.”
“By jingo ! you’re right. But, you see, I was on the
bolt myself, and did intend to wait for them. However
let’s stop his gallop.”
The three mounted and started off at a break-neck pace
towards Bennala on the trail of Fitzpatrick.
The poor fellow had been riding slowly on account of
his wounds, but was roused when he heard the noise of
his pursuers, who, feeling sure of their prey, came tearing
along at the top of their speed, yelling like demons.
Fitzpatrick put npurs to his horse and rode for his
life.
He guessed the bloodhounds were on his track.
Fortunately for him his horse was fresher than those of
his pursuers, and had had a good rest in the inn shed.
Once, nevertheless, they got near enough to fire at him,
though without effect.
This, however, was a final effort, and they had to give
over the chase, for their animals were fairly distanced.
CHAPTER CCXXL
THE STRINGYBARK CREEK ENCOUNTER.
[The rest of this eventful history is taken from the Colonial
press. Our Melbourne contributor has, in the foregoing, sup-
plied us with Kelly’s history up to the time his deeds became
public records. —Ed.]
On Fitzpatrick reaching Bennala, and stating what had
happened, the authorities had no difficulty in guessing
that the perpetrator of the outrage had been no other
than Kelly.
The entire police force of the district began to scour
the country.
It was known he had taken up his quarters somewhere
near the head waters of the King River, where the ground,
cut up into numerous deep and narrow gullies, and covered
with luxuriously growing vegetation, afforded splendid
cover.
At the close of September 1878, a party of four police-
men, who were in quest of him, pitched their camp at a
lonely spot known as Stringybark Gully, about twenty
miles from Manfield.
They comprised a sergeant, named Kennedy, and three
constables, named Scanlan, Lonigan, and MTntyre.
They had a shrewd idea that Ned and his gang were
hovering somewhere in the vicinity, but they bad the
greatest difficulty in obtaining the least information as to
his movements.
Numerous sympathisers kept him fully posted iu eveiy
movement of the police.
The men boasted of doing so at drinking bar. and
other gatherings.
The movements of the little party of police, already
spoken of, were well known to Kelly.
He was under the impression that they included two
men, named Steel and Flood, against whom he had regis-
tered a vow of vengeance, and full of this idea, resolved
to pay them a visit, and, in his own words, to “ wipe the
lot out.”
The police had a tent with them, and had pitched it
near the creek, between the ruins of two deserted huts, in
a spot where the reeds and long grass grew thick ann
tall.
On the morning of September 25th, Kennedy an-
Scanlan left the camp, and went scouting across tht
ranges.
MTntyre and Lonigan remained in camp, and in
course of the morning, the former fired at some parrots.
The sound of the shots reached the ears of the bush-
rangers, who were already stealing on their prey.
“ I reckon that’s the last shot some of those beggars ’ll
fire,” observed Ned.
The two policemen left in camp were quite unsuspicious
of any danger.
MTntyre, who had left his revolvers iu the hut


sitting on a log, whilst Lonigan was standing set a short
distance from him.
All at once there was a slight rustling in the dry reeds
aear them.
The two policemen turned their heads.
The bushrangers, gliding like serpents through the grass,
had crawled up on their hands and knees, till they had
gained the camp.
Springing as one man tc their feet, at the first move-
ment of the police, they levelled their guns at them, and
called upon them to surrender.
“ Bail up, or we’ll let daylight through you,” roared
Ned.
At the sight of the four outlaws rising from the ground,
like pantomime demons from a trap, the police were for a
moment paralysed.
MTntyre, who was unarmed, felt that the situation was
helpless, and threw up his hands at once.
llis companion, however, was a brave lellow.
He drew his revolver and darted towards a tree for
shelter.
He was not quick enough.
Ere he could gain the tree, Kelly, who had covered him
from the commencement, glanced along the barrel of the
Spencer rifle with which he was armed, and pulled the
trigger.
As the echoes of the shot died away, Lonigan was seen
to throw up his arms and pitch heavily forward on his
face.
“ Who are the other two with you ?” enquired Ned,
MTntyre hesitated to answer.
“It’s no good playing any tomfoolery with me,” waid
Ned, holding the muzzle of his rifle within an inch of his
prisoner’s head.” “ I know there are two more of you
(vho left camp this morning, who are they ? Give me an
tn answer or I’ll drop you.”
“ Kennedy and Scanlan,” replied MTntyre, who saw it
was no use hesitating as his life was at Kelly’s mercy.
“I was hoping it was Flood and Steel,” observed
Ned.
MTntyre shuddered at a threat that was uttered by
Ned.
Burning alive was as atrocity not unknown in bush-
ranging annals.
Two well-known Tasmanian outlaws had once captured
i bullock from a run and had just slain and skinned it,
when they were surprised by the owner.
Without a moment’s hesitation they seized him, rolled
him up in the yet reeking hide of the slain animal, and
threw him into the large fire they had kindled to cook
their plunder at.
The hide contracting with the heat held the unhappy
wretch as in a vice, till he was roasted alive.
One of the pair confessed this atrocity when under sen-
tence of death for other crimes.
Ned s rage against Flood and Steel was based on a per-
fectly legitimate feeling.
His sister Kate had shortly before left Sydney, and was
residing in the Mansfield district.
The two policemen in question had ridden up to her
house one day, and under pretext of searching for a clue
as to Ned’s whereabouts, had not only ransacked the place
but had grossly insulted and ill used her.
Kelly s intention was to cut off the whole four police-
men, and thus strike terror into all future pursuers. Only
that he subsequently confessed as much, such silly atro-
city would be incredible.
Under his direction the party set to work to arrange
what was destined to be a death trap for the unfortunate
sergeant and his comrade.
i’he body of Lonigan was removed from the spot where
It had fallen, and concealed in the tent, where Ned also
retreated.
The other three bushrangers retired into the long
grass.
MTntyre, whom they had kept covered with their rifles
all this time, was forced to resume his seat on the log, and
warned that if he gave the least warning by word or ges-
ture to his returning comrades, his death would be the
immediate penalty.
The hapless constable’s feelings as he took his post on
the log may be more easily imagined than described.
To sit in feigned unconsciousness that four deadly muz-
zles were levelled at him, and that twice that number of
ferocious eyes were watching his every re-
quired no slight effort.
The minutes seemed hours as he sat there
Ned had announced that he intended to bag the whole
lot, and MTntyre, believing this, felt the full horror of
the part he had to play.
Some time elapsed, and M‘lntyre felt as though he
should go mad with suspense.
At last his straining ears caught the clank and jingle of
accoutrements and the beat of hoofs.
A few minutes later Kennedy and Scanlan rode up to
the front of the tent.
With an effort MTntyre found his voice.
“ Sergeant,” he said, “ you’d better bail up at once.
You’re surrounded by bushrangers.”
Kennedy hesitated, thinking he was joking,
“ Bail up,” shouted Kelly from the hut.
Kennedy still thought a joke was intended, and that it
was Lonigan who was speaking from the tent.
He merely laughed, and carelessly advanced his hand
to his holster.
“ For heaven’s sake don’t resist,” cried MTntyre, who
knew the fearfully dangerous position in which his com-
rade stood.
At the same moment one of the hidden bushrangers,
seeing Kennedy’s movement, fired at him, but only hit
his horse, which he slightly wounded.
Kennedy instantly threw himself from the wounded
animal, and jumped behind a tree.
Scanlan, who was armed with a Spencer rifle, also dis-
mounted, and attempted to follow his example, but was
shot down before he could reach cover.
Kennedy opened fire in turn from his revolver on Ned,
who had stepped out from the tent.
One of his shots actually passed through the fellow’s
whiskers, and another tore the sleeve of his coat.
Seeing he was in danger of being surrounded, Kennedy
made an attempt to gain another tree, in order to effect a
gradual retreat.
As he was trying this move, Kelly fired again, the bullet
striking him :n the side, just as he reached the wished-for
cover.
.The sting ©f the bullet caused him to throw up his right
hand in token of surrender, an action which Kelly thought
was for the purpose of getting another shot at himself.
Accordingly he fired again, and this time with fatal
effect, his shot stretching the unfortunate sergeant dead
on the ground.
Meanwhile MTntyre had become alive to the true state
of affairs.
He saw that the death of his unfortunate comrades was
resolved on, and that he would in all probability share
their fate.
Profiting by the confusion, he manage 1 to spring on to
Kennedy’s horse, which was only slighuy wounded, and to
gallop off at full speed.
He was pursued by a volley of shots and oaths by the
bushrangers.
Riding for his life, he tore along at a breakneck pace,
urging his half-maddened animal over ground which the
boldest steeplechase rider might have
hesitating to cross in cold blood.
The pursuit was somewhat slack.
The bushrangers had left their horses at some distance,
when they stole up to surprise the camp.
Of the animals belonging to the police, that of Scanlan
nad dashed off, alarmed at the firing, and the other two
liad been unsaddled.


Hence, by the time these were in readiness, M‘lntyre
had got a good start.
Dan Kelly and one of the others mounted and rode a
abort way after him, but abandoned the pursuit on seeing
the hazardous line of country taken by M‘lntyre.
When they returned to Ned he was greatly enraged at
this fact.
“ I bowled over two out of these three single-handed.
I don’t know which of you hit Scanlan, but 1 mean the
whole of us to be tarred with the same brush in this
matter. Every man jack of you must put a bullet into
each of them.
The others were surprised at this, but thought it as well
to comply with Ned's whim.
The arms of the slain men were then collected, and after
securing them and some other articles that took their
fancy, the bushrangers set the tent on fire and departed
Meanwhile M‘lntyre continued his ride for life.
Before he got much further his horse fell, throwing him
heavilv.
On recovering from the shock, he found that the animal
was on the point of death, and unable to carry him
further.
He made his way some distance onward, and in the
anticipation of pursuit, concealed himself in a wombat
hole.
Finding no signs of the bushrangers being on his track,
he stole out again, and at length arrived at a station on the
outskirts of Mansfield.
Utterly exhausted by his tramp, he had sunk down
insensible amongst some reeds in a patch of swampy
ground, when he was discovered by one of the ladies ©f
the station who had ridden out on some errand.
CHAPTER CCXXH.
NED VISITS FAITHFUL CRhEK STATION.
The sensation created when the news of this outrage
reached Melbourne was indescribable.
People could scarcely believe it possible that even
Kelly would have ventured on such a thing as an un-
provoked attack on the police.
Bushranging was not unknown in the colony, but it had
been fondly supposed by the authorities that it was becom-
ing as much a thing of the past as the exploits of Robin
Hood in Sherwood Forest and Rob Roy in the Highlands.
Since Ned’s former exploits, matters had been pretty
quiet in Victoria.
Power, the most notorious of his predecessors, had care-
fully avoided taking human life, and when he was
captured iu 1870, was only sentenced to fifteen years
penal servitude in Pentridge jail, which he is still under-
going.
But here was a man reviving the worst exploits of the
bloody and relentless Morgan and the reckless Thunder-
bolt.
The authorities resolved to spare no pains to capture
the daring outlaw, whose exploits were even brought
before the Legislature in course of a debate, owing to a
letter being put forward as having been written by Ned to
one of its members detailing the particulars of the attack on
the police at Stringybark Creek, and corroborating some on
of M‘lntyro's statements.
The entire police force o; the colony was despatched in
pursuit of Ned, and was supplemented by a number of
artillerymen drawn from those in garrison at Melbourne.
The departure of these men resembled that of troops
proceeding to the seat of war, and to the encounter of a
formidable army rather than a gang of bushrangers.
In a short time no less than two hundred and fifty
police and artillerymen were scouring the Strathbogie
ranges in which Ned was supposed to be lurking.
Several armed parties of volunteers joined in the
pursuit, but the bulk of the inhabitants of the district,
many of whom were related to Dan Kelly, displayed far
more sympathy with the bushranger than with the
authorities.
Kelly received timely warnings of all the movements of
his pursuers, and was enabled to baffle them with ease,
though fifteen years imprisonment was proclaimed as the
penalty of all who sheltered him.
In vain they beat up the head waters of King's River
and the Mansfield Range, amidst the dense vegetation of
which Ned had been lurking, and in vain they strategeti-
cally surrounded a lonely hut on the Wombat Ranges,
where it was reported he had been seen.
In every case the bird had flown before their arrival.
They began to suppose ’hat he had worked his way
north into New South Wales, going round by the head «f
the Upper Murray and thence to Gippsland.
All at once news reached them of a fresh outrage.
On the afternoon of the 9th of December, one of the
station bands of the Faithful Creek Station, named Fitz-
gerald, was standing at the door of the homestead, when
he observed someone approaching on foot.
The new-comer was a tall, powerfully-built fellow, with
a heavy beard.
“ Good-day, mate,” he began. “Is Mr. Macauley in?”'
“No, not just now.”
“ When d’ye think he’ll be back? ”
“ Well, we expect him in this evening ; but if it’s any-
thing particular, maybe I could help you ? ”
“ Oh, it don’t matter,” replied the stranger, turning on
his heel.
He walked away for a short distance, and suddenly
halted, waving hie hand as a signal.
At this, three mounted men, whom Fitzgerald had not
noticed, rode up at a swift rate, one of them holding the
rein of a led horse.
The first stranger vaulted into this, and rode up to the
front door with his companions.
Alighting, he boldly marched into the house, into which
Fitzgerald had already retreated in some alarm, chiefly on
account of his wife, who was its only other inmate.
“How many men have you got about the place?’’de-
manded the stranger. “You’d better tell the truth, or
we’ll make it hot for the lot of you.”
“There's only myself here now,” answered Fitzgerald,
“ and a young fellow working at the back.”
“ Well, look here,” observed the stranger; “ you’ll
have to bail up. We don’t want to hurt you, but w©
must have some grub, and some feed for our horses.”
“ But who are you ? ” gasped Mrs. Fitzgerald.
“Ned Kelly,” was the answer; at which the poor
woman almost fainted away.
Ned was wise enough in his present position not to
meddle with station hands and the like, amongst whom he
might pick up plenty of valuable information.
Still, he thought it was as well to take certain pre-
cautions.
“ You’re quite welcome, I’m sure, to grub and horse-
feed, as far as I’m concerned," replied Fitzgerald.
“Of course, I knew I should be. But see here now,
I think you may just as well wait iu that slab hut
yonder, while we rest a bit. Your wife shall wait on us,
but I promise you she’ll not come to any harm.”
There was no help for h,
Fitzgerald had to proceed to the slab hut, over which
Dan Kelly was posted as a sentry.
Zeph and Salmon Roe went in search of the young
febow he had spoken of, and consigned him to durance
vile in his company.
The bushrangers then proceeded to feed their horses,
and to partake of refreshments, insisting that Mrs.
Fitzgerald should first taste everything put before them.
“ I’m not going to be poisoned by you, you old cat, ii
I can help it,” observed Ned, when die poor woman—who
was half-choked with terror —showed some reluctance to
comply with the request.
“No,” echoed Zeph, “we know tßat trick; so just
shove your grinders into a slice of that muttou, lest
you’ve been making a mistake and sprinkling it with araeni®
instead of salt, as I’ve heard has been done.”


There wa« nothing to be done but to comply, and the
poor woman, with great difficulty, managed to gulp down
a few mouthfuls.
Whilst partaking of their repast, the bushrangers did
not neglect to keep a good look-out.
Four of the men employed on the station, who came
up to the homestead in the course of the afternoon, were
promptly seized on and bundled into the slab hut, to keep
company with Fitzgerald and his companion.
“ If 1 catch one of you as much as poking the tip of his
Boee outside,” said Zeph, who had replaced Dan Kelly as
sentry, “ I’ll blow your heads off.”
About half-past four the owner of the station, Mr.
Macauley, came riding heme.
On crossing a bridge leading to the cottages, it struck
him that the place presented a somewhat deserted look.
Being under no apprehension of danger, however, he
rode on, and drew rein in front of the door.
Fitzgerald appeared at the window of the slab hut.
“ Mr. Macauley,” he exclaimed, “ for the Lord’s sake,
be careful! The Kellys are here, and if anything goes
wrong the lives of the whole lot of us ’ll have to pay for it.”
At the same moment Ned stepped through the door,
and made his appearance on the verandah, revolver in
band.
“ You’d best go slow and behave yourself,” he said;
'* it’s not the least use kicking up a row.”
“ But who are you V” said the bewildered overseer.
“ Ned Kelly,” was the reply, in an undaunted manner.
“ Who?” he repeated, for, like almost every one else
in the district, he imagined Ned -was scores of miles away.
“I’m Ned Kelly; so just get off that horse of yours
without any more nonsense.”
Macauley complied, and at that moment Dan Kelly,
whom he knew by sight, made his appearance, and con-
vinced him as to the hands he had fallen into.
“ 1 don’t want to shut you up with the rest, since it’il
never do for a boss and his hands to be put on the same
footing,” said Ned, whose dinner had put him into a good
humour, “ so Dan can just keep an eyo on you.”
The overaeer was tolerably satisfied with this arrange-
ment.
“ 1 don’t want to shoot any one unless I’m forced to,
and I only want to use this station as a camping-ground
to rest ourselves and our horses,” continued Ned.
The overseer was struck with the appearance of their
horses, and especially with that of Marco Polo.
“ You’ve got a pretty valuable lot of beasts there,” he
observed ; “ and they don’t look as if they wanted much
feeding either.”
“ No,” replied Ned ; “we can always lay our hands on
good horses when we want ’em.”
After a short interval a cart was seen approaching the
station.
It belonged to a hawker named Gloster, who had a
place of business at Seymour, and was in the habit of
travelling about the district, vending clothes and fancy
goods.
He was a pretty frequent visitor to the station, and, in
accordance with his usual custom, he drew up his cart and
unharnessed his horse within a stone’s throw of the home-
stead.
Leaving a boy who assisted him in charge of his cart,
he stepped up to the kitchen to get some hot water for
his tea.
Mrs. Fitzpatrick met him there.
“ For goodness’ sake, be careful,” she said; “ the Kellys
are in the place.”
Like Macauley, the man was incredulous, and simply
laughed at her.
“ It is so, I assure you,” she said.
“ Nonsense,” was the answer. “ I ain’t a-going to be
gammoned in that way.”
Mr. Macauley, who was sitting in front of the house,
knowing Gloster to be a plucky fellow, grew terribly
anxious at bis advent.
He felt almost certain that he would show fight, and
feared, in this event, that the life of every one in the
station would be sacrificed without mercy,
Gloster was about to return to his cart when Ned
called out after him—
“ Stop.”
The hawkers, who thought it part of a joke, paid no
attention to this command.
Dan Kelly levelled his gun and was about to fire, but
refrained at Macauley’s entreaties.
Meanwhile Gloster had gained his cart and mounted it.
Ned, however, had stridden after him, and clapping a
revolver to his cheek, ordered him to descend.
“ What d’ye mean ? ’’ replied the other.
“ What do 1 mean, you infernal fool,” cried Ned;
“ why I mean you to bail up, to be sure.”
Still Gloster seemed unable to realise the fact that he
was stuck up by bushrangers.
“ Who are you, with your airs ? ” he said sneeringly.
“ I’m Ned Kelly.”
“ Go to blazes, I ain’t a-going to swallow that yarn.”
“ Oh, you ain’t. Then it strikes me you'll never wait to
swallow anything else in this world.”
Ned’s finger was on the trigger, and probably in another
minute he would have fired, when Mr. Macauley, who had
come up, interfered.
“ Don’t fire, Kelly, for heaven’s sake. Gloster, this is
Ned Kelly; and the lives of the whole of us are at his
mercy.”
“ I’d like to have met him, Ned Kelly or no Ned Kelly ;
with one no else to look on,” said the undaunted hawker,
“ I’d have cut his work out for him.”
“ I’ll blow the top of your skull off, and see whether
you’ve got any brains at all inside, if you say another
word,” shouted Kelly, who was losing all control over his
temper.
Again Macauley interposed.
“ I’ve a devilish good mind to put a bullet in him; there’*
not one man in a hundred would have dared to cheek rao
in that fashion,” grumbled Kelly.
Gloster began to realise his peril, and reluctantly con-
sented to join the other prisoners under Zeph’s charge in
the hut.
The two Kellys and Salmon Roe proceeded to ransack,
his cart.
The find was a capital one, the man’s stock consisting o 3
clothes.
Each of the four desperadoes in turn selected a complete
rig out.
“ This is a bully find,” said Salmon Roe, strutting about
like a peacock.
“ Smartens one up a-bit,” said Kelly as he inundated his
beard and garments with a bottle of scent from the
hawker’s stock of perfumery.
“ It'll be just the thing for our visit to Euroa t®»
morrow,” said Zeph.
“ Right you are,” said Ned ; “ why, we look so respect-
able, I guess the bank clerks won’t be able to refuse ua
anything.”
“ What are we to do with the old duds? ” asked Dan
Kelly.
“ Oh, leave ’em about,” replied Salmon Roe.
“ Not a bit of it,” broke in Zeph ; “ we must burn every
stitch of ’em right off.”
“ Why?” enquired Ned.
“ So that they may never be used as a means of tracking
us. Suppose they were used to give a biood-hound to
smell, in order to put him on our trail ? ”
Their toilettes completed, the bushrangers sat down to
supper.
Mr. M mauley had the honour of sharing their meal,
but only as a precautionary measure.
As with Mrs. Fitzpatrick, he had to partake of every
dish in turn Detore they ventured on a moutaful, lest
they should be drugged or poisoned.
Ned showed himself in rather a jovial mood at supper.


He conversed freely with Macauley, and related with
exultation the manner in which he had surprised the
police camp at Stringybark Creek.
“ It’s not the last job I’ll do either,” he said. “ I’ll
send a hundred of ’em to kingdom come in a bunch, one
fine day.’
It was afterwards known that he had referred to a plan
he was hatching, for pulling up the sleepers on the railway
line.
The gang watched their prisoners turn and turn about
throughout the night.
CHAPTER CCXXIII.
HOW NED STUCK UP THE BANK AT EUROA.
The next morning the bushrangers appeared in high spirits.
They had a risky, but, as they judged, a prosperous day’s
work before them.
They carefully cleaned their arms and looked to their
horses.
The spot at which they found themselves, the homestead
of Faithful Creek station, was situate some four miles from
Euroa, on the road to Violet Town.
The North Eastern railway from Melbourne ran right
past the homestead, so close, in fact, that with a field glass
a passenger in the train might be easily recognised.
This fact will serve to show Kelly’s audacity in selecting
such a spot for a temporary resting-place.
He did not neglect precautions, however; for, at the pas-
sage of every train, he compelled his prisoners to keep under
cover, lest they should strive to draw attention by means
of signals.
It must appear almost incredible that four men should
hold possession of a house only four miles from a town and
within a stone’s throw of a railway-line running direct to
the capitld’of the colony; but, daring as was the act, it was
subsequently far outdone.
A number of trains passed during the morning, and
amongst them a special one conveying a cricketing eleven
to Melbourne, which town was about ninety miles off.
Struck by a sudden idea, Ned ordered Salmon Roe to
disconnect the telegraph wires running along the line.
Salmon Roe succeeded in uprooting or beating down
several of the telegraph posts, disconnecting the wires,
breaking the insulators, and practically cutting off all com-
saunicatxon.
Noticing the state of the wires, several of the trains
stopped on the way, and in some instances the guard
alighted to inspect the damage, which was set down to
accident.
It never for one moment crossed the minds of any one
that it was the work of the Kellys.
On its being reported at the nearest railway station that
the telegraph poles were injured, two navvies were dis-
patched to repair them.
Whilst engaged in this task, Salmon Roe and Dan Kelly
marched down, surprised the men, and made them walk
np to the homestead, where they w r e r e locked up with the
iest of the prisoners.
It may hardly be credited, but by no
jess than two-and-twentv cantives at the
“ I reckon we’d better be making a move,’’ said Zeph.
“ That’s so,” replied Ned,
“But what are we to do with all these prisoners? ” ob-
served the other. “If we leave ’em here they’re bound to
get loose, and come running after us into the town.”
“ That’s awkward. They’d rouse the place on us.’’
A counsel of war was held.
“ Suppose we cut all their blessed throats,” suggested
Ned, half in jest.
“ No, that won’t do ; it’ll only rile people. Look here,
we’re coming back this way. Let one remain to keep
guard over ’em, and the rest pick him up as they come
back.
Lots were cast for the awkward, if onerous, post of sen-
try, ail'd the duty fell to Zeph.
He was left single-handed,jf well armed, in charge of
nearly two dozen people.
Daring as this might be, it pales before the enterprise on
which Kelly and the other two set out.
The hawker’s cart and a spring cart were brought out
and horses put to them.
Ned got into one, Dan Kelly into th« other, and Salmon
Roe mounted his horse.
On reaching Euroa they separated for a time, and SdL
mon Roe, riding boldly up to the North-Eastern Hotel,
ordered dinner.
At the conclusion of his repast, he sallied out, and
rejoined his two companions.
The three made their way to the local branch of the
National Bank.
Ned drove up to the front door, and Dan into the back-
yard, whilst Salmon Roe rode up to the front of an adja-
cent public-house, and fastened his horse there.
Ned knocked at the door of the bank, which was
opened the accountant, whose name was Bradley.
“ What is your business, if you please ? he enquired
politely.
“ I’ll just trouble you for the cash for this,” replied
Ned, pulling out a cheque, bearing the signature of Mr,
Macauley, which he had exacted before leaving Faithful
Creek from his involuntary host.
(To bt continued .)
THE CELEBRATED NOVELS,
BY W. STEPHENS HAYWARD.
Picture Boards
Published at 2/-
The Black Angel, A Tale of the American Demons of the Sea.
Givi! War. Love and Adventure.
The Star of the South.— A Sequel to Run away from Home.— A Life of
“ The Black Angel.’’ Adventure.
The Fiery Cross.— A Tale of the Great The Golden Reef, or a Dive for Half-a-
American War. Million.
The Rebel Privateer, or the Last Cruise The Idol’s Eye. —Adventures in Search
of the “ Black Angel.” of a Big Diamond.
Love’s Treason, or the Two Privateers. j Lord Scatterbrain, or the Rough
Tom Holt’s Log. —A Tale of the Deep Sea. i Diamond Polished.
Wild and Wonderful.
Rodney Ray, or the Life and Adventures of
a Scapegrace.
The Cloud King.
Mildred’s Cross, or the High Koad to
Ruin.
One in a Thousand.
Andrew Lorrimer.
Robert the Rover.
The Mutiny of the “Thunder.”




WED KELLY; IROMCLAD BUSHRANGER.
Tlt is well known that for many years Ned Kelly had made himself notorious by a series of crimes wholly incompatible with
the civilisation of the nineteenth century. Ned Kelly’s celebrated steed, Marco Polo, is as well known at the Antipodes
ns Dick Turpin’s Blaca Bess m these islands ’ —I elegragh, 7th July, 1881 __ (
“ it is notorious that the robbery of Mr. Steward’s corpse was mainly performed by (he assistance of Ned Kkllt s
Bkotiikk, the Captain of what was neither more nor less than a pirate ship.”— Times, July.
“ The history of Ned Kelly and his celebrated black horse, Marco Polo, will ever live in the recollection of jibe
Australian public. The deeds of Dick Turpin, and the performances of Black Bess, are tame beside those of ‘Ned
and ms Nag in addition to which NedV history is true, and Tnrpm’s is pure fiction.”— Press, July.
‘•The stirring story of Ned Kelly the Australian Bushranger (“ Illustrated London Novelette” Office, 280, Strand),
pursues its way with unabated vigour. Full of incident, it should suit those who like their literature as they do their
cigars —full-flavoured. It is published in weekly numbers.” —South London Press, November.
CHAFTER CCXXTir.— •Cominued.
Bradley smiled that bland smile, peculiar to bank clerks
when they hi ve anything disagreeable to say.
“ It is past banking hours,” he said.
“ What!” cried Ned, “ can’t you cash it? ”
“ It is past four o’clock—the bank has closed for the
day.”
“ Can’t I see the manager? ”
“ Hum ! I’m afraid it is no use.”
“ Oh ! you know Mr. Macauley’s all right, and I’ve go-
to start up country to-night,” pleaded Nad, with well-
assumed anxiety.
The accountant thought that there might be some
truth in this story, little dreaming that Ned had purposely
put off his visit until the bank was closed, in order to be
flecute from interruption from any customer.
“ Perhaps you’d better see Mr. Scott,” he said.
He us' ered Ned into the bank, where the manager and
two clerks were engaged in making up the day’s accounts,
and balancing the books.
“ A man who will insist on seeing you about a cheque
of Mr. Macauley’s,” said Bradley to Scott, who was
busily writing.
Ned stood in front of him with his hands in his pockets,
and the downcast, sheepish air, of a countryman who has
come to ask a favour, and does not quite see his way how
to do it.
“ Well, sir, what can I do for you? ” said Scott, looking
up from his desk.
At that moment, a dft.or at the other end of the room
softly opened.
A man entered with noiseless step.
It was Salmon Roe, who had quietly managed to gain
admission into the rear of the bank.
At the sight of him, Ned’s bearing and appearance
changed as if by magic.
He drew himself up to his full height.
Whipping his hand® from his pockets, v e displayed a
brace of levelled revolver*,.
Covering Scott and his companion with them, he re-
plied to the former query,
“Do for me ? why throw your hands up, every mother’s
son of you, in double quick time.*
Salmon Roe advancing in turn, displayed a brace of
similar weapons, which he pointed at the clerks.
“ What is this? Who are you?” exclaimed Scott in
the wildest bewilderment.
“ Bail up, without any blasted cackling, or by I’ll
blow a hole through you,” was the reply, “ as sure as my
name’s Ned Kelly.”
The very name of the ruffian had a paralysing effect
upon his hearers, in whose memory his late terrible
exploit was fresh enough to need no recalling.
They threw up their hands above their heads,
“ That's pretty now,” said Ned, “ I see you know who
you’ve got to deal with.”
They did, only too well.
“ Now I warn you that the first one that tries any tricks
on, I’ll bowl over,” continued Ned, “ and that I’ve got
half-a-dozen fellows outside to help me.”
The prisoners were obliged to stand in a row in. the cen-
tre of the room, whilst Ned searched them; Salmon Roe
and Dan Kelly, who had come in after him, keeping guard
over them.
“ Now where’s the way ?” said Ned.
Scott, who was a courageous man, had by this time
recovered himself.
“ I can’t, perhaps, prevent you from taking whatever
you may lay your hands on, but I’m hanged if I’ll help you
to a single farthing,” he said.
Ned glared at him with unmistakable ferocity, and be-
gan to search the place.
He succeeded in laying his hands on £3OO in gold, notes,
and silver.
“ This ain’t enough,” he said. “ Keep a close look-out
over these beggars, whilst I overhaul the rest of the crib.”
As he spoke he moved towards the door, leading to
Scott’s private residence, which adjoined the bank.
The manager, heedless of his peril, stepped forward with
flashing eyes and clenched hands towards him.
If you come an inch nearer I’ll drop you,” said Ned,
with a stern look.
“Listen a minute, Kelly,” said the other, in excited
tones, “my wife and children are in there, and you will
frighten them to death. If you’ll only let me go first to
reassure them by a word, I promise i’ll not try to give
the alarm. But if you hurt a hair of their heads, I’ll avenge
them even if my life’s the forfeit.”
“ Ail right,” said Kelly, surlily, “ I don’t want to harm
your blessed kids.”
Scott advanced to the door of the room, in which his
family, consisting of his wife, her mother and seven child-
ren, were, and implored them to remain quiet and not be
alarmed
He then broke to them the news that they were in
Kelly’s power.
The ladies took his ad ice and did not betray any out-
ward alarm, though they felt anything but at ease.
Ned, after rummaging about, discovered the dour of
the strong-room, and fitted one of the keys found on
Scott, to it.
On opening it he discovered upwards of £2,000 in gold,
silver, gold-dust and notes.
He also came across a couple of revolvers, and some
cartridges, which he secured.
The plunder having b«en placed in a strong sack, pre-
parations were made for an immediate departure.
Dan Kelly was sent to get cut Mr. Scott’s buggy and
harness his horse to it.
“ What are you going to do witn us?” said Scott.
“ Well we’re just going to take you for a little jaunt
into the country along with us,” replied Ned.
“ And my wife ?” cried the manager.
“ Oh, we’ll bring her and the kids along too. Don’t be
skeary, we’re not going to hurt any of you.”
With the vague idea of putting off the departure as long
as possible, in the hope that help might turn up in SOK3
way or other, Scott said—
“ Will you have a drink before you go ?’ 5
“ I don’t mind one,” was the rep T f.


A Lottie of whiskey was produced from the dwelling
Louse, and a stiff dose poured out.
“ Now, then, bottom that,” said Ned to Scott.
But 1 don’t care about it.”
“ Whether you do or not, you’ll just lap it up before I
swallow a drop. lam not to be dosed”
Scott swallowed the whiskey in order not to arouse
Ned’s suspicions any further, and then the bushrangers
each took a glass.
Now then,” exclaimed Ned, “off we go.”
The procession that started from the bank was one of
the most singular ever witnessed.
Indeed, the whole of the details of this daring robbery
are of so startling a character as to be almost incredible.
First came the hawker’s cart, driven by Dan Kelly, and
containing the three bank clerks and a female servant.
Next came the buggy with Mrs. Scott, Mr. Scott’s
mother, and the children, seven in number, packed into
it.
This was followed by the spring cart, in which the sack
containing the money had been placed, and which was
driven by Ned himself, his companions being Mr. Scott
and a female servant.
Salmon Roe brought up the rear on horseback.
“ Just listen to me, one and all of you,” said Ned, when
they were on the point of starting. “If any one of you
—man, woman, or child—mises the least alarm as we go
through the town, or doeo the least thing to call attention
to us, I swear I’ll shoot you down on the spot.”
The way in which this threat was delivered was
enough.
It is one of the peculiar features of the affair that this
motley party of fifteen prisoners and three guardians, failed
to attract the least notice when passing out of the town-
ship.
This was all the more strange as the bank was only a
lew yards from the railway station, and was only separated
from the other houses in the vicinity by a small, vacant
allotment.
The party drove straight for FiSatbful Creek Station, Ned
nonsuiting Lonigan’s watch, winch he wore in order to
ascertain the progress they were making.
The only incident on the road was the falling of the
horse Ned was driving, which caused a temporary delay.
Faithful Creek being reached, the whole fifteen were
placed in the hut with the twenty-two people already in
custody, this making a total of thirty-seven prisoners.
The gang then began to make preparations for depar-
ture.
“Hang it,” said Zeph, “you’re always flashing that
blooming tuber. I’m dashed if I don’t have one, too !” ex-
claimed Zeph, and stepping up to Mr. Scott, he coolly
appropriated his watch and chain.
“ Now listen to me,” said Ned, addressing the prisoners.
“ It’s now half-past eight. We’re going to start, but we’re
going to leave one of our pals behind here to watch the
hut for three hours. It’ll be done, and the first of you that
puts his nose outside before that time is up will be shot
down. So you’d better keep close ‘if you value your
flkins.’ ”
Mounting Marco Polo, to whose saddle the sack con-
taining the money had been attached, Ned rode off in com-
pany with his three compankms.
Such was the terror he had succeeded in inspiring, that
not one of the captives dared venture outside the hut till
the three hours were up.
At the expiration of that time they started for Euroa,
and gave information to the police there, who were thun-
derstruck at the occurrence.
CHAPTER CGXXIV.
NED VISITS NEW SOUTH WALES, AND DRAWS HIS DIVIDENDS
FROM THE JERILDERIE BANK.
This feat of Ned's was the signal for the commencement
of something very like a reign of terror amongst the banka
of Victoria.
The managers of the local branches kept flocking into
Melbourne to escape being served like Mr. Scott.
The police on their part kept dancing ab nit fruitlessly
for months, and it was proposed to call in the aid of the
black trackers from Queensland, and of bloodhounds from
Tasmania to aid them.
Whilst the authorities were utterly at a loss to guet>
where Kelly and his friends had got to, Ned suddenly took
it on himself to reveal his whereabouts in a most startling
way , , . ~ . . _ „ ,
He had quietly crossed the Murray into New South
Wales.
At midnight on Saturday, February Bth, he, with Dan
Kelly, Zeph, and Salmon, rode into the town of Jerilderie,
situate some forty miles across the border.
They .first proceeded to the local police barracks, in
which two constables were quartered.
They alighted from their horses and began to knock at
t-hs door.
“Who’s there?” demanded ono of the bobbies, in a
drowsy tone.
“ Hi, rouse up!” was the reply. “There’s a —of a
shindy going on at a public down town, and you're wanted
there.”
The two policemen, whose names were Richards and
Devine, unsuspiciously came out and were confronted by
four levelled revolvers.
Resistance was useless, and they were instantly made
prisoners.
The gang remained in quiet possession of the police-
station during the whole of the following day. whicu wty
Sunday.
Zeph and Dan Kelly remained in the barracks, keej&if
watch over one of the policemen they had captured.
Ned and Salmon Roe, both got up in police uniform
which they had found in the barracks, walked through the
streets with their other captive, and compelled him to
point out the bank they intended to rob the following
day, and to give them all the information they required as
to the best means of carrying out the projected robbery.
He did not dare reveal who his companions were, and
none of those who saw the trio guessed that the tall, full-
bearded fellow, whose stalwart figure was set off to such
advantage by his uniform, was Ned Kelly in person.
Early on Monday morning, Zeph took the whole ol
their horses to the blacksmith s to be shod, and Salmon
Roe sauntered into the town and purchased some pro-
visions.
At ten o’clock the gang left. the barracks, leaving one of
the constables bound within the building and taking
Richards the other with them.
The two Kellys walked with their prisoner between
them, Zeph and Salmon Roe following on horseback.
Ned, Dan, and their captive proceed straight to tlu
Royal Hotel, which they entered.
The landlord advanced to meet them.
“ Mr. Cox,” said Richards, addressing him, “ this is NW
Kelly.”
“ Don’t be flurried, old bladder chops,” said Ned. “I ra
Ned Kelly sure enough, and I want to use your crib
whilst I rob the bank ; but I’m not going to hurt any one
if they’ll only be quiet.”
The cool audacity of this statement was nothing to wha<
followed.
Zeph and Salmon Roe rode up, end dismounting, sta
tioned themselves in front of the hotel.
As fast as customers came up to get a drink they were
seized and compelled to enter a room where Dan Kelly
stood as sentinel.
Ned then actually proceeded alone to the bank, which
he entered from the rear.
Suddenly making his appearance with a revolver in each
hand, he called on the manager and his clerks to sur-
render,
“ Bail up, every one of you; I’m Ned Kelly, h#
shouted.


The order rame on them like a thunderbolt, for they
had not the slightest notion that Ned was in Jerilderie.
He had reckoned, however, that the mere mention of his
name would be enough, and so it proved, for his order was
instantly complied with.
After locking up the staff ot the bank in an inner room,
Ned set to work to ransack the premises.
Whilst he was engaged in this pleasing t~ok, three gen-
tlemen entered the bank on business.
To their amazement the building seemed deserted.
Suddenly Ned popped out of the manager’s room, re-
volver in hand.
The three stood petrified.
Then one of them turned to flee.
“ Stop,” roared Ned. “If you pass the doorway 111
drop you like a dingo.”
The three saw thaft escape and resistance were equally
out of the question, and having surrendered were com-
pelled to join the bank clerks in their confinement.
Dan now .joined Ned, leaving the other two bushrangers
to look after the prisoner at the hotel, and the pair, after
getting together upwards of £2,000 from the bank coffers,
amiLed themselves by destroying a lot of the books.
The four robbers then began to disport themselves
about the town like the soldiers of a conquering army.
Incredible as it may seem, they went from hotel to hotel
drinking and standing treat to everyone they met with
with great apparent civility, but keeping Richards in
their company.
At one hotel, in sheer bravado, Ned placed both his
revolvers on the bar, and swaggered up and down the
room with his hands in his pockets.
So universal was the terror that he inspired, that not a
man present dared attempt to seize his weapons and shoot
him down.
The bushrangers then “ stuck up ” the telegraph office,
destroyed the wires, and compelled a number of residents
to cut down several of the telegraph poles.
At seven o'clock they left the town in triumph, with
their plunder and two splendid horses belonging to the
police, and recrossed the Victorian boundary.
“ What are you going to do with all that money ?”
inquired one of the townspeople to Ned before he rode
off.
“Oh, I’m going round robbing banks to get a pile for
my sister to marry on,” was the jesting answer, though, if
the truth be known, it was to the judicious cT 'ri-
bution of some of the stolen money by Kate Kelly that
much of the sympathy and assistance received by tue
bushranger were due.
There is no doubt that the police had their share
of it.
As soon as they heard of this inroad into their territory
the New South Wales Government added three thousand
pounds to the reward already offered by the Victorian
authorities, but with no result
Neither were the Queensland black trackers, who were
now employed, and who could follow a man’s trail at full
gallop, in any way successful.
For some time Ned and his gang lay hid on an island of
the Murray, whilst no fewer than three hundred mounted
police were being employed in their search at a cost of
no less than five thousand pounds a month beyond the
usual expenditure.
A local writer was very bitter on this, declaring that all
the police officers did was to do “a quiet cigar in the police
stables after breakfast, a stroll to the hotel for lunch,
another stable inspection with the aid of a fragrant weed,
another walk to dinner, and then cigars and billiards for
the rest of the evening.”
About nine hundred pounds were collected for a memo-
rial to the police shot at Mansfield, towards which two
banks, inspired probably by a lively apprehension of a
visit from Kelly if they showed themselves too liberal, con*,
tributed the insignificant sum of half-a-crown apiece.
As to the men who were arrested from time to time as
sympathisers with Kelly, not only were the police unable
to secure convictions, but several of the parties accused,
on their release, began actions for damages against the
magistrates who had remanded them, whilst, owing ilo the
withdrawal of a large body of the Melbourne police to joiu
in the hunt for Ned, crime of all kinds began to become
rife in that capital.
In the Legislature it was admitted that this hunt had
already cost the colony twenty thousand pounds, but that
there was no better prospect of success than at the outset,
and, after some time, most of the police were withdrawn to
their usual posts.
A singular proof of the terror universally inspired took
place at Lancefield.
Two men entered the Commercial bank there, just after
it had opened in the morning, gagged the accountant,
placed him in an inner room, and made off with six hun-
dred and fifty pounds.
A customer who came in while they were there to de-
posit two hundred pounds, saved his cash by the ruse of
calling their attention to tne fact of the blinds being up,
which enabled people to see what was going on from
outside.
The robbers turned to the window's to puli down the
blinds, and the man profited by this to slip his money,
which was in notes, under the hearthrug before they
searched him.
But this was all he dared do.
The singular part of the story is, that when both men
were captured, which occurred the following day, neither
of them were found to be armed.
The mere fact of their being supposed to belong To
Kelly’s gang, and the presentation, by one of them, of -a
pipe cas which terror magnified into a a hacPbeen
sulfide*" -vor both bank clerk and customer.
Meanwhile, Ned and his friends were let and com-
fortable.
After a time they quitted their island retreat and led a
pleasant nomadic life, being well informed of all the
movements of their pursuers beforehand, and well sup-
plied with necessaries by their friends.
It was during this period that Ned caused suits of
armour, similar to his own, to be forged by a blacksmith
out of boiler iron for the rest of the gang.
“ I’m blessed if I don’t ride into Melbourne and stick
up the governor himself one of these days,” he said,
- rigged up as we are we could lick the whole colony.”
time to time they were reported as having been
seen and the police bolted off after them, but in vain, till
the old doggrel rhyme made when Sir Frederick Pottinger
was Superintendent of Police in New South Wales and
spent his time in fruitlessly chasing Frank Gardiner, the
bushianger, and beginning “ Sir Frederick Pott shut his
eyes for a shot, and missed in the usual way,” began to
be applied to them by one and all,
Kelly’s example led to similar deeds in New Soutl?
Wales. _ v *
A man named Scott who took the alias of
Moonlight, and who had already served a term of itfcjbri-
sonment in Penbridge jail for highway robbery, 'got a
gang of half-a-dozen together and began to' plunder on
the Murrumbidgee.
On the 16th November, ?,870, he stuck up the inn at
Wantabadgery, twenty-tk'/j miles from Wagga-Wagga,
where Orton used to live.
Information reached this laHer place and four police
started for the scene of the outrage.
They came up with the bushrangers, six i» vumber,
near the inn.
After a sharp encounter, the police being outnumbered
were forced to retreat into a swamp.
As they had previously hitched their horses to a fence,
these were seized and carried off by the bushrangers.
Being reinforced by five mounted and two foot con-
stables from Gundagai with a vehicle containing extra
arras and ammunition, the police again started in pursuit


They proceeded to Wantabadgery station, where they
found the bushrangers had bailed up thirty people from
tlie Saturday n.ght till the Monday morning.
No one however had been ill-treated, except the over-
te r, whom Moonlight had commenced to hang but had
reb ased from the noose on account of the screams of the
women tor whom the bushranger professed a chivalrous
respect.
When the powie r-'ached the station they found Moon
light and hia had left, intending to rob the Gundagai
bank, but they succeeded in coming up with them at the
farm of a selector named McGlede, where they had a
number of people bailed up.
On being summoned to surrender, the bushrangers re-
fused.
Some sharp firing took place for half-an hour, during
which two of the bushrangers—one of t.iem being Nesbit,
the second in command—were killed, and one wounded,
after which the rest surrendered.
One of the police, named Bowen, was shot in the neck
by Moonlight, and die 1 of his wounds.
Moonlight was tried at Sj J n.ey, and hanged, in company
with another of his gang, on the 20th of January fol-
lowing.
Notwithstanding this, Ned’s capture seemed as far off
as ever, though the hour was approaching when he, too,
was to pay the penalty of his crimes.
CHAPTER CCXXV.
KELLY TEARS UP THE RAILWAY LIVES,
For some time Ned remained quiet that a local writer
observed that “ the Kellys are ‘ . forgotten, and may
be enjoying ti emselves m Loudon for aught we know.”
The truth was that h# was still lurking in the north-
eastern part of the colony, where the billy and rugged
nature of the country, with every inch of which he was
familiar, and the information freely imparted to him by
his sympathisers in the district enabled him to set all
pursuit at defiance.
Of all outlaws the Australian bushranger ', perhaps,
the most difficult to catch.
Native and to the manner born, he knows every lurking-
place and fastness of the wilderness, over which his by*
extends.
Riding like a Comanchee, he is usually mounted ou a
horse, in whose veins run the purest blood in the stud
book, and who would fetch a “ monkey ” at Tattersall’s
any day.
Hence he has little difficulty in showing his heels to the
police if they do catch sight of him.
Only this does not often happen, for he has, in the
broken and mountainous country, a host of scouts of an-
ti /ailed keenness and dexterity. ”
se form the “ bush telegraph.”
I hre wn-faced urchin, lounging after his father’s cows
on a tVee-legged screw, with a ragged saddle and green
hide-girth, fixes his watchful eyes on the troopers as they
enter the forest and disappear up the winding, slate-
strewn ravine.
They wear rough, tweed suits and old felt hats, and are
riding in stockmen’s saddles, with rusty stirrup-irons.
But he knows them for all that, and marks them down.
So the bare-legged girl, tending a flock of sheep or
racing after the milkers’ calves, meets them camped by a
creek, and demurely answers all the questions they put to
her about the strayed bullocks they pretend they are in
search of.
But, all the time, she knows the “ traps ” by a dozen
signs known to the initiated.
And before midnight the news of their presence has
been conveyed to the outlaw in the lonely hut or sylvan
den that is his lurking-place, and when his pursuers arrive
and surround the spot it is only to find that he has flown
on, silently as the night-hawk.
The King River, which is a tributary of the Murray,
Vas Ned’s favourite lurking-place at the time, and here
be had selected an unassailable position, from which as
it was afterwards admitted by the authorities—a hundred
armed men could not have dislodged him.
As to the sympathy and support he then drive eeci dis-
trict, it may be judged from one simple fact.
4 A State school-teacher—a profession one would have
thought to be above all others calculated to inspire its
follower with a respect for law, and a love of morality,—
at Hurdle Creek was dismissed by the Minister of Educa-
tion, for his partisanship of the c 'daws.
Nor can it be denied that much of Ned’s immunity was
due to the blundering inefficiency of some of the police.
A Royal commission, appointed to enquire into the
reasons which enabled Kelly and his followers to set the
authorities, at open defiance, declared that the administra-
tion of the police in the north eastern part of the colony
had been anything but satisfactory.
_ The conduct of Captain Standish, the Chief Commis-
sioner, was not characterised either by good judgment or
by zeal for the interests of the public service ; and tho ?h
Mr. Nicholson, the assistant commissioner, showed himself
to be a capable and zealous officer he laboured under
great difficulties, through the undue interference of the
captain, and the jealousy occasioned by the latter’s
favouritism towards Superintendent Hare.
Inspector Brook Smith, for having neglected a favour-
able opportunity of capturing the outlaws, in November,
1878, was recommended to retire.
The Commission also, amongst other things, recom-
mended that Superintendent Sadleir should be placed at
the bottom of the list of Snpf rintendents, for errors of
judgment whilst assisting in pursuit of the gang, that Ser-
geant Steele should be reduced to the ranks, for having
failed to take advantage of the opportunity of capturing
the gang, thrown away by Inspector Brook Smith; and
that Detective Ward should be disrated, for having misled
his superior officer on several occasions.
Such a state of things as is revealed by these recom-
mendations, plainly establishes a v good reason for the
length and success of Kell /’s pridatory career.
It is a fact worthy of ' Me, bat very many, if not most
of the leading busluangers of the Australian colonies,
were shot or tured by private individuals, and not by
th- police.
Ned continued to have his imitators throughout the
colonies, though, it must be confessed that their success
was not equal to his.
On November 6th, 1879, two brothers, named Shank,
young men of twenty-one and twenty-two, attempted to
stick up the Bank of Australasia, at Moe, in South Gippes-
land, but were beaten off by Mr. Munro, the manager,
and subsequently captured.
A man named Wills, stuck up the Queensland National
Bank, at Cunamulla, the following January, and secured
£l7O, after shooting a local store-keeper, who came to the
assistance of the bank managers.
He left the building, and would have got clear off, had
not his horse, which was a magnificent one, broken away
before ho could reach it.
Owing to this, Police Sergeant Byrnes and some of the
townspeople were enabled to secure him.
On the other hand, Ned’s freedom from arrest during
this period, was ascribed by the local journals, to the
assistance afforded by sympathisers.
As a writer in the Argus remarked, “ A large proportion
of the inhabitants of the ‘ Kelly country ’ was favorable to
the outlaws, whilst the remainder was kept quiet by a
system of terrorism.”
What this system was, may be judged from a letter
written by Zeph,-under the name of Byrne, to one of the
police, and stating that if the gang could lay hands on
him, they would “ place him in a hollow log and burn him
alive.”
No wonder that the police felt chary of facing suck
foes; though, so _ disgusted were the authorities of the
colony the supinenem or inefficiency of the force, the*


ir 4pril they had announced that, if the Kelly's were not
captured by the beginning of July, the reward offered for
their apprehension would be entirely withdraw?
To maintain the system of terrorism in al 1 bf efficiency
and ai the same time deal a crashing and, in aiv probability,
final blow at the police, Ned resolved on a master stroke.
I'm going to set a little trap for some of the big bugs
amongst ’em that’ll open their eyes a bit,” was his remark.
In obedience to his orders, his three associates got ready,
and, on the evening of Saturday, June 26th, the four bush-
rangers, well mounted aid armed to the teeth, swept like
a dark thunder-cloud down the ranges towards the little
township of Glenrowan.
Glenrowan, which is in Moira county, is situated about
136 miles from Melbourne, in a gap of the Putter's Ranges,
which bound it to the north-west and to the south-east.
To the north-east, in the direction of Wangaratta, is an
extensive plain, whilst to the south-west the ground is
low, fiat, and swampy.
At a short distance from the town stood the hut of a
young man named Aaron Sherritt, who had at one time
been an acquaintance of Ned’s, but who had recently
married and had settled down to hard work.
Ned had received information, which was correct, that..
Sherritt was in communication with the police.
Indeed, at the very moment of the outlaw’s arrival there
were four members of the force in the hut.
The gang became aware of this on inspecting the stables.
“ What do you mean to do, Ned? ” asked Dan Kelly.
“Do? Why, try and snap up the whole blessed lot of
’em, since luck has thrown ’em in our way. We’re a match
for ten times a* many in onr armour.”
“ All right,” was the reply.
“ But, first and foremost, we must settle up square with
the sneak who wants to sell our necks. I’m not going to
miss him at any rate, to-night.”
“ We’d better ’tice him outside then,” said Zeph.
“Yes. He don’t know youf/voice, so you’ll be the best
to do it, but, mind, I’m going to have first crack at the
crawling skunk.”
“Very good; we’ll not fire unless you miss,” said
Salmon Roe.
“ That’s not very likely,” was Ned’s grim remark.
Advancing softly, Zeph knocked at the door of the hut.
“ Hi, Sherritt!” he called out.
The unsuspecting man opened the door.
At first he did not recognise his visitors.
“Just step out a minute, I want a word with you,” con-
tinued Zeph.
Sheri itt stepped across the threshhold, and, as he did
so, Ned strode forward and confronted him, revolver in
hand.
The unhappy man realised his peril.
He guessed Ned’s terrible errand only too well
Fear, however, paralysed his movements.
His tongue refused t? utter a word, and, before he could
iry to flee, Kelly had covered him.
“ You know what I’m here for, you sneaking blood-
sucker,” cried Ned. “You thought to handle the pile
that’s offered for me, only, like one or two more in their
time, you’ll find that it’s lead not gold you’ll be paid in.”
As he spoke he pulled the trigger, and Sherritt dropped
a corpse.
“ Shot down as though he were a dog,” to quote the
in which this outrage was recorded.
One of the police within the but had risen, on hearing
what sounded like an altercation outside the hut, and
reached the door.
"'On hearing the sAot fired, he thought discretion the best
part of valour, and, careless of Sherritt’s fate, at once
banged to the door and secured it with the bar.
This, probably, saved the lives of himself and his com-
rades, though they were subsequently severely censured
by the royal commissioners for not making any attempt to
avenge the poor fellow whose fate they had
Kelly ordered.au attack on the hut, but effect.
The door was too strong to be forced, and the bush-
rangers were exposed to the fire of their adversaries, which
but for the protection afforded by their armour would
probably have thinned their ranks.
Nor was an attempt at firing the hut more successful,
the tough iron-bark shingles of the roof, and many log*
which formed the walls, defying the flame.
“ Never mind that lot of cowards in there,” said Ned, a«
he withdrew his forces, “they’ll do their work for us aa
well alive as dead,”
“ How do you mean ?” inquired Zeph.
“ Why, as soon as news c# ’ikis gets to Melbourne they’d
send down all the police and Inspector
o‘Connor from Queensland, with s&®«e cursed black
trackers of his that they've got there. Those are th:p
beggars above all others I want to wipe out, for as to tb./
Victoria police they’re the biggest set of duffers that evr t
straddled a saddle.”
“ You’re right there,” said Dau Kelly ; but what is your
dodge when they do come ?”
“ Why, I’m going to pull up the rads at Glenrowan.
They’ll send the traps on from Melbourne to Beechworth
in a special train, that’ll come scooting along twenty miles
an hour. Only instead of Beechworth being the end of
their trip, they’ll just find themselves in ”
Kelly’s surmise was correct, for on the news of the out
rage at Shirrell’s reaching Melbourne, a special train was
despatched, containing police officers and trackers, shortly
after 10 o'clock, for Beechworth, the capital of the district,
situate some miles beyond Glenrowan, through which the
railway runs.
Meanwhile, however, the gang had made arrangements
for its reception.
At about three o’clock on the Sunday morning Mr.
Stanistreet, the station-master at Glenrowan, was roused
from Iris slumbers by a knock at the door of the station.
Huddling on some clothes he went to the door, but
before he could reach it it was burst in.
“Who are you? What’s this mean?” cried the be-
wildered official, as several man entered the passage.
A tall man clad in a long overcoat stepped forward.
“ I’m Ned Kelly, and you’ll hawe to come along with
me and pull up some of the rails.”
Stanistreet, having finished dressing, followed the bush-
ranger out on to the railway line, where six or eight of the
inhabitants of the township were standing, under the guard
of Salmon Roe alias Stephen Hart.
“Now then,” roared Kelly, “ tell those beggars how to
get the rails up. We’re expecting a special directly.”
The unfortunate station-master felt his blood run cold.
“ I know nothing about lifting the rails,” he gasped.
“ Who does then, you thick-headed fool ?"
“ The platelayers.”
“ Where are they?’
“ In their hut, about a quarter of a mile down the line.”
living Salmon Roe in charge of the station-master,
\ proceeded to the hut occupied by the platelayers,
whom he roused from their slumbers, and obliged to
return with him to the station.
“ Now then,” said Salmon Roe, giving a
prod in the ribs with his gun, “ where are the tools to rip
rails up.”
“ I haven’t got the key,” was the reply.
“ Where are they?”
Stanistreet had to point out the place where the tools
were stored, which was in a shed near the station, the lock
of which was promptly forced.
Forcing the two platelayers to equip themselves with
the necessary implements, Ned started off with them to a
spot a little beyond Glenrowan towards Wangaratta.
Here, under his direction, the rails were tore up and a
trench cut across the line.
“I guess if they once get into that fcole th ay’ll not
wriggle out in a hurry,” muttered Ned, as he surveyed
the result of two hours’ labour on the part of the piata*
layers.


This task accomplished, he returned to the tool-house,
/here the station-master and six or eight others had re-
gained prisoners, in charge of Salmon Roe.
Ned proceeded to question Stamstreet as to the method
tf signalling.
The other gave acme explanation.
“ But there’s a way of stopping a train with a lamp, ain’t
there ?” said Kelly.
The station-master admitted there was,
“ Well, now, you just mark my words. There’s a special
train coming, and it’s just going to run on clean through
past this station. If you try to stop it by your lamps or
flags, or other devilments, you’ll be a dead man the next
minute. Watch his face,” and here Ned turned to Salmon
Roe, “ and if he gives any sign shoot him down.”
The station-master and his companions were marched
hack to hi' dwelling, and left under the charge of Salmon
'loe.
Otha' persons were made prisoners and lodged in the
»ire building, to the number of seventeen.
Tfey remained locked up all day on Sunday, but in the
v veniug were allowed to go over to Jones’ Hotel, situate
close to the station, where Ned and the other two bush-
rangers had taken up their quarters, with several other
captives, Salmon Roe occupying the station-master’s house,
*nd continuing his watch over that functionary.
Ned's plan was diabolically ingenious.
He counted that the train would pass through Glen-
rowan without stopping, and would come to grief just
beyond the town, where he had torn the rails up.
He had, therefore, settled with his mates the.t, as soon
as it had passed the station, they were to mount thvhr
horses, gallop on to the scene of the inevitable accident,
and, in his own words—
“ Rake the whole concern with shot till not a beggar
was left alive on it! ”
Sunday night came on, and it was evident that the train
could not be much longer in arriving.
With their rifles in their hands, three out of the four
outlaws gathered on the verandah in front of the hotel,
listening in anxious expectation for the signs of its ap-
proach.
Every ear was on the alert; but the hours rolled on and
ikere was no sign.
At last, towards three o’clock on Monday morning, a
faint noise was heard away to the southward.
Is that it ?” whispered Dan.
“ Hush! I’m not sure.”
A few moments elapsed.
The noise was louder and nearer.
“ That’s it, I’m certain ” cried Zeph, exultingly.
“ That’s so,” echoed Dan. “My eye ! what a jolly fine
smash-up there’ll be in a minute or so.”
“ All ready for a start, boys ?” inquired Ned.
“ Yes,” was the reply.
“ Cut across to Salmon Roe,” ordered Ned, “ and tell
him to keep his eyes open, and see that that cursed station-
master isn’t up to any tricks to stop the train, and then
to come on with us directly it has passed the station.”
Zeph darted off on this errand, and soon returned.
Louder and louder grew the noise of the approaching
train.
A few minutes more would decide the fate of all on
board it, for, once past Glenrowan signals, it would rush
unchecked into the pit prepared for it.
Soon its lights became visible as it drew nearer.
“ It’s going a blessed sight slower than I care for,” he
muttered. “By it looks as if it was going to pull
up at the station ! No !”
As he spoke, a dark mass was visible on the line, and
rolled slowly past the station.
“ It’s all right! ” cried Ned, “ let’s be off. JBttt what a
vhort train ! ”
Zeph had h ; s hand on his arm
“ Look * ” he exclaimed, and Ned glanced ia the direc-
ioa indicated.
Behind the dark object appeared another.
“What the devil’s this? - ’ cried KeHy, “
train?”
As the words left hia lips th© second object ro l A along-
side the station platform and came to a halt.
A host of dark figures leaping from it ad />iced towards
the hotel.
CHAPTER CCXXYI.
THE ATTACK ON JONES’ HOTEL AT GLENROWAM.
The fact was that the attacking party had availed them-
selves of a measure which Ned had not foreseen.
The train had reached Benalla at half-past one o’clock,
hav lnspector O'Connor and his black trackers aboard,
and was there joined by eight troopers and their horses,
under the command of Superintendent Hare.
As they were now about to enter the Kelly country it
occurred to the authorities that it would be as not
only to keep an extra sharp look out, but to send on a
pilot engine in advance.
This according done, and the train resumed its
journey at two o’clock. *
It was travelling .at a rapid pace, and had arrived within
a mile and a quarter of Glenrowan, when it was stopped
by the pilot engine, owing to the following circumstances.
Amongst the people captured by Ned at Glenrowau was
the schoolmaster, a man named Curnow, who was seized
in company with his wife and sister.
Ned, however, allowed him to go home with these
ladies, at the same time warning him “to go quietly to
bed and not dream too loud,” or he might get shot.
Curnow had heard the outlaws mention the plan of
lying in ambush for the train, and resolved to foil it.
He went home quietly, but got ready a scarlet woollen
scarf to serve as a danger signal, and a candle and matches.
With these he started from his house during the small
hours, and met the pilot engine a little way from Glen*
rowan. •
On reaching a straight part of the line, where he judged
those on the train would be able to see the signal at some
distance, he lit the candle and held it up behind the red
scarf.
This was observed by the peaple on the pilot engine,
who at once puMed up.
Curnow came forward and told them that the Kellys
were in Glenrowan, add that the rails had been torn up
just beyond the town.
The pilot engine halted, and warned the train when it
came up.
Superintendent Hare ordered the carriage doors on each
side to be unlocked, and his men to get in readiness.
The lights on the train were then extinguished, and
following close behind the pilot engine it advanced on
Glenrowan.
It was the pilot engine that Ned had mistaken for the
train, but he was quickly undeceived, for whilst it passed
through the station and then halted, the train itself drew
up alongside the platform and the police leaped out.
The next moment Salmon Roe came rushing up from
the station to the verandah of the hotel, where Ned and
the other two were still standing in amazement.
“ The traps, the traps!” he gasped. 'They’re on us
thick as wasps—a whole train full—trooper and black
trackers.”
The words had hardly escaped his lips, when the dark
mass of men was seen advancing from the station towards
the hotel.
The police on alighting from the train had at once been
told of Kelly’s whereabouts.
Hare at the head of his troopers, followed by Connor
and his blacks, advanced on the hotel building, the out-
lines of which they could discern in the darkness.
“ Come on,” shouted the former, charging almost Tip to
the verandah. ♦
“ I’ll take the crow out of that cock," said Ned 4 “tears
him to me. Now Haze away, boya.”


A fringe of fire broke out along the verandah in
obedience to this order, and lit up the black darkness
beyond.
A groan escaped Hare as Ned’s bullet struck him on the
left wrist and shattered it.
Nothing daunted, however, he continued to fire with
one hand, till he became exhausted from loss of blood.
The police fired a volley, and a bullet struck Ned on the
left foot.
“ Curse it, I’d like have my hand on the neck of the
skunk who fired that shot,” he growled. “ It’s so dark
that there is no chance of spotting the man who hits you,
or even of shooting straight,”
This was indeed the case, and to it must be ascribed
the slight loss sustained by the attacking party, who, after
their first rush, had sought cover behind trees and palings,
sheltered by which they continued to pour in their fire.
The first brush was exceedingly hot, but, for some time,
there was more powder burnt than mischief done.
The police and the bushrangers blazed away at each
other furiously in the darkness for about a quarter of an
hour, during which the reports of their weapons and the
screams of the terrified women, kept as prisoners in the
hotel, made in combination a deafening uproar.
« I’m hit again, curse it,” said Ned, who was fearlessly
facing it all
“ Where? ” asked Zeph.
“In the left arm. It aint much though. They’ve
rapped my carcase half-a-dozen times, but its no use
their trying that game when I’ve ninety-seven pounds
of iron-plating on me.”
“It strikes me,” said Salmon Roe, “that we’re in a
tiglitish fix.”
“ We’d better get inside the hotel, or they’ll be sneak-
ing round and getting into the back,” suggested Zeph,
This advice was adopted.
A lull followed, though nothing could be distinguished
for a moment on account of the smoke.
escape, and it was better, he thought, that one at least
should be saved.
Still he felt angry and ashamed of himself.
He was in a rage, and naturally wanted to vent it upon
some one.
A respectable old fellow, named Martin Cherry, who
was one of the hostages the bushrangers held as prisoners
in the hotel, was standing near him.
“Pull aside that blind,” said Ned, indicating one that
hung before a window through which he wished to recon-
noitre the ground.
The old man hesitated, as well h*. might, since to do so
would probably be to draw a shot from the watchers
without.
“ Pull aside that blind,” repeated Kelly, “or I’ll blow
your brains out, you old bandicoot ”
And as Cherry stood bewildered with fear, he raised hia
revolver, and sent a bullet through the old man's body.
Up to this time the prisoners, amongst whom were
several who were in reality active sympathisers with the
Kellys, had been well treated.
This unprovoked act of brutality filled them with horror.
Ned saw this, and it fairly maddened him.
Suddenly quitting the room, he darted down the veran-
dah steps and was soon swallowed up in the darkness.
No sound reached those within indicating that he had
been spotted by their foes.
“ By all that’s lively,” exclaimed Zeph, “ I believe Ned
has got through them.”
And so, indeed, he had.
Of all the miraculous escapes that marked Ned’s career,
there is not one more wonderful than that from the be-
hotel at Glenrowan
' noiselessly as a ghost across the ground, he ad-
perceived towards the cordon of police by whom
As soon as he was close upon them he threw himself on
his face.
The police driving their adversaries more, and deter-
mining to cut off their retreat, scattered and surrounded
the building. c
Hare had retreated to the railway station with a shat-
tered wrist, bleeding profusely; but after Carrington, the
artist of the Australian Sketcher who had accompanied
the expedition, had bound the wound up with a hand-
kerchief, he returned to the scene of action, and cheered
his men as best he could, and urged them to keep a good
look out
At length he became exhausted from loss of blood and
had to retire.
Inspector Connor and Constable Kenny took command
and kept pelting away—the former, with his black trackers,
having taken up their position in a little creek running
along the front of the hotel, the banks affording them
capital cover.
“We’ve only one chance,” said Ned, “and that is to
break through their lines whilst it is still dark. By day-
light we shall have fifty more of the vipers round the
place.”
“ We might get through singly, but they’d spot and
push us if we tried to do it in a lump,” said Salmon Roe,
“ and if they bowled over our horses, what chance would
we have.”
At these words a chance of escape flashed across Ned’s
mind.
His horse was not In the hotel.
He had hidden Marco Polo in the bush, a few hundred
yards from the building, on the way to the spot where
the railway lines had been torn up.
That few hundred yards covered, and he would be on
the back of the fleetest horse in Australia, and could defy
pursuit. a
A momentary struggle stirred ham at the thought of
abandoning his companions.
They had stuck to him faithfully and well.
But, on the other hand, it was evident that all could not
They did not see him.
Wriggling along like a snake, he passed between a couple
of them, and had soon gained the cover of the bush and
broken ground extending in their rear.
He made his way in silence towards the spot where he
had tethered his horse.
In a few moments more he stood beside Marco Polo,
who joyfully pressed his velvet muzzle to his master’s
shoulder in greeting.
In a few moments Ned could be free from all danger.
He had but to spring on Marco Polo’s back and give the
noble beast the rein, and he had seen the last of his perils
for many a day to come.
Yet something seemed to weigh heavy on Ned’s mind as
he stood in silent thought with his hand upon hig horse’s
bridle.
CHAPTER CCXXYIL
NED KELLY IS CAPTURED.
Meanwhile the siege continued, the hotel being sur-
rounded, and a vigilant watch being kept up through the
dark hours.
Firing went on intermittently, as occasion served, and
bullets were continually heard whizzing through the air.
Several fired from the hotel lodged in the station build-
ing, and some struck the train ; but the police had found
admirable cover amongst the trees and palings, and were
not hurt.
All at once, about five in the morning, a heart-rending
wail, issuing from the beleaguered betel, chilled the blood
of all who heard it.
It was the voice of a mother mourning for her firstborn;
of Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be
comforted.
The son of the landlady, Mrs. Jones, had t?een acciden-
tally struck in the back by one of the besieger’s bullets,
and it was supposed fatally wounded.
The distracted mother came out of the hotel crying


bitterly and wringing her hands, and then returned in
despair tc its shelter.
She ultimately succeeded m removing the wounded boy
from the i milding, with the aid of the released prisoners,
whose escape is referred to furtuer on.
Another bullet trom without, flew, though also by acci-
dent, to a fitter mark.
At half past 6«ro, Dan Kelly was standing in the bar
ro«m.
“ I’m sick of lugging aoout this hundredweight of iron,”
he grunkd, as he temporarily relieved himself of his
armour. “It’s all very useful when you’re in the open,
but, cooped up here as we are, all it does is to tire a chap
and hinder him from jumping about as spry as he might.”
“ Don’t make a fool of yourself, Dan,” said Zeph.
“ You’d better stick to your plating to the end.”
“ I wish,” said Salmon Roe, half to himself, “ that the
chap who first hit on the plating dodge had stuck to us as
well as it does.”
“What d’ye mean?” cried Zeph, “d’ye think Ned’s
bolted for good and all?”
“ Well, it looks something like it.”
“ Not a bit of it. He’s working some dodge to pull us
all through, I'll swear. Ned Kelly’s not the cove to go
back on a pal,” cried Zeph, whose faith in their leader
was of the most robust character and who firmly believed
Ned was absent on seme scheme that was to free them
all
“Yes,” exclaimed Dan, who had filled himself a glass
of whiskey at the bar and was in the act of raising it to
his lips, “ Ned’s a rare good ’un, and we’ve not seen the
last of him yet.”
Even as he spoke a random bullet entered the bar-
room window.
The glass he held dropped from his fingers with a
crash on to the floor, and the next instant he had sunk
down beside it as though paralysed.
Zeph and Salmon Roe advanced to raise him, but he
was already a corpse.
“ If Ned doesn’t pull us out of this,” exclaimed the
former, “ we’re in a trap for certain.”
“ If it is one I’m not coming out of it alive,” was the
reply, given with despairing energy.
“ Will you shake hands on that, mate ?”
“Yes, if I can’t walk out of here scot free, I’d rather
lie alongside Dan there than give Gateley a job,"
Gateley was the Victoria hangman, a vicious and de-
praved fellow who passed most of his time in prison for
misdemeanour, and when free was generally drunk.
“ I’m with you then,” said Zeph, and the pair shook
hands on the bargain to die rather than surrender.
Then they turned their attention to external matters
watching for the flash of their assailants’ guns and sending
a shot in answer.
At daybreak police reinforcements arrived from Benalla,
Beechworth, and Wangaratta, raising the number of the
attacking party to thirty men, of whom Superintendent
Foster now took command.
On the new comers dispensing, to take up the best
positions they could around the building, numerous shots
were fired at them from the hotel, most of them striking
the fences or burying themselves in the turf.
“ I expect they’ll make a sally and try to break through
us as soon as it is fairly daylight and they can see where
they are going to, and once in those cursed ranges we d
have all our work to do over again; so be on the alert,
boys,” was the superintendent’s order,
“ I can make out some horses in the little yard at the
back, sir,” remarked a constable named Dwyer. “ Hadn t
we better pepper away at them, and try to cripple ’em ?
Tljat’ll stop their bolting.”
“ Bravo ! a capital dodge!” cried the superintendent.
This brutal but far-sighted plan was promptly carried
out, and soon the sickening screams of the wounded and
maddened horses were added to the other infernal sounds
of warfare.
“ They've hit the horses,” said Salmon Roe to hig pal.
“ Yes, and what’s more they meant to, ' replied the
other, who had guessed the plan. “ The fellow who is
bossing this show has got his head on the right way, and
our chance looks devilish dickev.”
Nevertheless, the two bushrangers had no thought of
flinching, but continued to load and fire steadily.
“Hullo, here they come at las*' Stand firm, boys,”
cried the superintendent.
The door iiad opened, and several figures appeared in
front of the hotel.
“ Hold on, don’t fire,” yetted Connor, whose keen-
sighted blacks had detected who these were ; “ they are
women and children.”
They were, indeed, the women and children who had
been made prisoners in the hotel, but who were now
suffered to depart,
“ Let ’em through one by one,” was Foster’s order,
“and see there are no tricks on travellers. I don’t want
to have Master Ned go sneaking off under our very nose
under cover of a petticoat.”
Accordingly the women were challenged individually as
they approached the police lines, and were carefully
examined before they were allowed to pass through them.
Close attention was paid to the hotel, it still being
taken for granted that the whole of the gang was there,
for Ned’s departure and Dan's death were unknown to
the women who had left.
Before daylight a revolving rifle and a cap had been
found about a hundred yards from the hotel, in a pool
of blood.
They were Ned’s, who had found that the wound in his
arm was more troublesome than he had thought, and who
had consequently abandoned his rifle.
Suddenly, whilst every eye of the attacking force was
fixed on the hotel, a series of shots rang sharply out in
their rear.
They turned, half panic-strickeq, nor was the sight that
met their eyes, one calculated to i‘e-assure them.
A weird, unearthly-looking figure could be dis-
tinguished, gliding towards them through the trees.
Its stature approached the gigantic, and its bulk seemed
still further magnified by the grey light of early morn,
whilst its outline was startling and fantastic.
The head was covered with a strange and hideous mask
of iron, and a long grey garment floated down to the
knees.
1 ‘ It’s a madman ! ” exclaimed one of the constables.
“ It’s the devil! ” cried a second.
“ Holy saints ! it’s a bunyip,” ejaculated a third, named
Murdoch, in accents of unfeigned terror.
The bunyip is a mysterious and destructive creature,
on which no white man in Australia has yet set eyes, but
which the natives, who profess the deepest dread of it,
assert to have a semi-human shape, and phenomenal
strength and rapacity.
Then a voice rang out—
“ Steady, boys, it’s no bunyip ; it’s Ned Kelly himself.”
A brief glance showed that it was indeed Ned, who
had made up his mind to free his comrades at any cost.
The police at once opened fire on him.
His wound prevented him from using a rifle, but he
carried a revolver, and walked coolly from tree to tree,
receiving the fire of the police with the utmost indiffer-
ence, and returning a shot whenever a good opportunity
presented itself.
Their bullets rattled off him like rain-drops from a
window-pane.
“ It’s charmed he is,” cried Murdoch. “ Nothing but a
silver bullet will ever bring him down.”
“ Deuce take me, if I can make it out,* said a steady
old trooper. “ I sighted fair at bis chest, and 1 swear 1
saw my bullet pop off him like a parched pea,"
Shot after shot was fired without effect, and the men
were fast getting demoralised by their seemingly super
natural antagonist, who bade their bullets defianoa,


Ned passed further along the line, and found himself
confronted by Sergeant Steele, of Wangaratta, Constable
Kenny, and a railway guard, named Dowsett.
They too opened fire on him persistently, but, to their
surprise, with no effect.
“ His hide’s bullet-proof,” said Kenny.
“ No,” suddenly exclaimed Steele, “ he has got armour
on. Blaze away for your lives at his legs.”
Steele set the example.
His first shot aimed at Ned’s legs made the bushranger
stagger, and a second brought him to the ground, with a
cry of—
“ I’m done ! I’m done ! *
Steele and Kenny rushed up, followed by some others.
The former threw himself on Ned and grappled with
him, escaping by the closest shave, a ball from the out-
law’s revolver.
Ned howled like a wild beast at bay, and strove to
strangle his determined antagonist.
The others threw themselves on him, and a desperate
struggle ensued.
He kicked, bit, tore and yelled, till at last numbers and the
loss of blood prevailed over his Herculean might, and he
was disarmed and secured.
“ Curse you all, I wish I’d have shot myself,” he ejacu-
lated as he lay bound and panting. “You think you’ve
done a precious fine thing, you cowards, when I’d only
one arm and couldn’t handle my rifle. I could have got
away last night if I’d have liked, for I got into the bush
with my horse and lay there safe and snug all night. Yes,
I could have got off, but when 1 saw them ail pounding
away I thought I would wait and see it over.”
At this moment a woman dressed in a black riding
habit, red underskirt and white Gainsborough hat,
galloped recklessly up, despite the warnings • of the police
for her to keep back.
On seeing Ned she sprang from her horse and threw
herself down beside him.
It was his sister Kate.
“ Oh ! Ned, Ned," she cried, “ have they got you ? ”
“ Yes, through no cleverness of theirs, though. I got
into the bush with Marco Polo and could have rushed
away, but I wanted to see the thing out, and remained.”
Ned was almost fainting from loss of blood.
He was at once carried down to the station and
attended to by Dr. Nicholson, of Benalla.
His face was smeared with blood, and his body literally
covered with wounds.
He had been shot in the left foot, left leg, left arm,
right hand, and twice in the region of the groin, but no
bullet had penetrated the armour that had protected the
vital parts of his body.
Hi* wounds having been dressed, the doctor declared
that he was in no danger from them, and arrangements
were made to convey him to Melbourne in course of the
day.
CHAPTER CCXXVIIL
DESTRUCTION OF THE GANG,
The siege had all this while been maintained without
intermission.
The fact that the other three outlaws were in the place
was confirmed by Ned, who was ignorant of Dan’s fate,
and they could be heard shouting and rapping their
armour.
The interest and excitement heightened every moment.
The Kelly gang were at last within reach of the hand
of the law they had so often defied.
Only before that hand could tighten its grip on them,
it was very probable that there would be a siege on the
green.
Zeph and Salmon Roe had witnessed Kelly s attack on
the police, which they judged was intended to release
them.
They marked his fall, and knowing that he had vowed
not to be taken alive, held that he was slain.
“ Ned's gone under,” exclaimed Salmon Roe.
“ Yes,” said Zeph, “ didn’t I tell you he’d not desert
his pals while there was life in him.”
“ You were right. He was a game one.”
“ A game one. The pluckiest bit of mac, flesh that
ever trod in shoe leather.”
The two continued to keep ap a steady lire from the
rear of the building where they had barricaded them-
selves after Dan’s death.
From time to time they expose rirejoselves recklessly
to the police, shouting defiantly p diey did so.
It was the mad recklessness of despair, for it was
impossible for them to hold out for ever, despite the
mail made out of ploughshares with which they were
covered, and which at lea*, a dozen times saved them from
what would have otherwise been a deadly bullet.
It struck Foster that the police would act with still
more vigour if the persons whom he knew were confined
in the hotel were allowed to make their escape.
At ten o’clock in the forenoon he gave orders to cease
firing, and called on all prisoners to make their escape.
As soon as word to that effect was passed on by the
police lying nearest to the front of the building, a white
handkerchief was held out as a flag of truce at the "ront
door.
Immediately afterwards there was a rush of about thirty
men out of the building, all holding up their hands above
their heads in token of their harmlessness.
“ By Jove, there are a lot more than I thought for,”
said Foster. “We must take care and see if there is any
wheat in all this chaff ”
The police levelled their guns at the advancing crowd,
and called upon them to stand.
They at once did so, and then, in obedience to a further
order, threw themselves down on the ground, a precaution
highly necessary, as the outlaws might have been amongst
them.
The scene presented, as they all lay on the ground at-
tempting to verbally demonstrate their respectability of
character, was unique.
“This is shameful! I’m a respectable citizen,” cried
“ I’m Smith—John Smith, of Glenrowan.”
“ I’ve lived here twenty years,” shouted another.
“ Good heavens ! do I look like a bushranger? I’m a
barber,” yelled a third.
“ I’m a storekeeper from Benalla,” exclaimed a fourth.
“It don’t matter, darlins, who the divil ye are!” ex-
claimed an Irish constable, in answer to these appeals.
“ It’s only what ye aren’t, we’re afther seekin’, and if ye
aren’t Kelly’s lot, we’ve no consarn wid ye.”
Nevertheless they were all examined, and passed be-
yond the police lines one at a time, two brothers, named
McAnliffe, suspected as Kelly sympathisers, being de-
tained in custody.
The police now heard of Dan’s death, and that there
were only two of the desperadoes left alive.
The siege was kept up till three o’clock in the after-
noon, by which time the fire from the hotel had grown
considerably slacker.
The police were so sheltered that Salmon Roe and
Zeph had resolved not to throw away any ammunition on
them unless with certainty.
They thought that by playing ’possum a bit they might
tempt them into the open.
The assailants, though sticking to their cover, began to
grow impatient.
The best part of the day was over, and things seemed
very little advanced.
“Mayn’t we j;ush the place, sir 9” was an appeal made
by them to their leader several nines.
“No,” was the reply, “ 1 can t risk your lives. There
are several hours daylight yet, and we re bound to tret the
best of them.”
“ But there are only two— or, mebbe, one— left
could do them easily,” expostulated Kenay.


*
*
♦
*
“ Yes, and how many of yourselves at the same time ?
A rush in the house could not be supported from the out-
side, as there is a long narrow passage, and we don't know
in what part of the house they are. You know you can’t
knock ’em over till you’ve actually got your hands on 'em,
because ol Uaeir armour.”
“ But their powder must be running out. They’re not
firing at all,” pleaded the pertinacious subordinate.
“Don t trust that; they’ve lots of ammunition. Their
final capture is a certainty, for there is a cannon on the
way from Melbourne. I have a telegram to say so.
They’ll soon be at the e d of their tether, but meanwhile
I won’t waste life.”
A cannon was actually on its way as stated, though the
affair was ended before its arrival.
Moreover, such an importance had the siege assumed in
the eyes of the authorities, that preparations were also being
made to despatch an electrical lighting apparatus to
Glenrowan in case the conflict shou d be prolonged into
t*>e hours of darkness.
Nevertheless, after a little more impofi ;nity Foster con-
sented to another plan.
The fire from the hotel had slackened to such a degree
that he began to surmise that, after all, the inmates might
be dead or crippled.
By his orders they were formally called upon to surren-
der, but still no reply was returndd.
A short consultation was held.
Constable Charles Johnson of Violet-town, volunteered
to fire the building.
Foster accepted his offer.
A strong body of the assailants was massed in front of
the hotel and another on the west side, both approaching
as closely as they could, though keeping well under
-over.
“ W’lat’s this mean ?” said Salmon Roe to Zeph as he
marked this disposition of the attacking force.
“ Blamed if I know, but we’d better keep our eyes
open,” was the reply.
“ Well, if they’re going to try to rush us up by a rush,
I guess one or two won’t see the inside of this caboose.”
The two then separated, in order for each to look after
one of the threatened frontages.
Suddenly each of the two parties of assailants poured in
i tremendous volley.
Under cover of the smoke Johnson dashed boldly for-
ward towards the house.
He carried a large bundle of straw, which, having
fired, he placed on the ground on the west side of the
building.
It broke into flames.
Salmon Roe fired twice at the daring fellow, but with-
out effect.
“ Devil smother them all,” he muttered, “ but they
mean to burn us alive, the cowards.”
There was a moment of intense excitement, and the
hearts of all Avithout the building Avere relieved when the
daring fellow, who had accomplished this feat, wae scan to
regain, uninjured, the shelter he had left.
In the meantime, the straw, which had burnt fiercely
at first, had all been consumed, and doubts began to be
entertained as to whether Johnson’s exploit had been
successful.
Not many minutes elapsed, however, before smoke was
seen coming out of the roof.
Flames were then discerned through the front windows
on the western side.
“ By the hookey, the crib’s ablaze, and if those beggars
don’t come out now they’ll be roasted in that armour of
theirs like lobsters in their shells,” exclaimed a policeman.
A light easterly wind was blowing at the time, and this
had carried the flames from the straw underneath the
house, which was built a little way from the ground on
piles as is the custom.
As the building was all wood, when once these flasnee
reached the floor, and this caught, they spread rapidly.
The house began to fill with smoke, which rolled in
stifling clouds along the passages.
Flickering tongues of flames leaped up here and there
from the floor, and darted up the walls which tb*y
attacked.
To the sharp crackling sound of blnfc*,»g timber, was
joined a muffled roar like that of a furnace in full blast.
The fire had got well hold of the house.
Zeph and Salmon Roe retreating before the flame
gained a room in the rear,
“ W lat's to be done?” said the latter, “it seems to nu
that this time the game is up.”
“ I’m afraid so.”
“ Well, shall we bolt out of this infernal blazing hole.
We’ll be roasted if we stop much longer.”
“ I don’t much see the good of bolting out,” remarked
Zeph calmly.
“ Have you got a fancy to be grilled?”
“If the parsons are right, we shall both be grilled to
all eternity, so a little more or less won’t matter. B *
sides, I’d as soon be grilled as hanged ”
“ So’d I, for the matter of that.”
“ Well, see here. If we get out, we can’t get clear
They’ll fire at us, and as they can’t kill us through oiii
armour, they’ll cripple and capture us to hang us at
Melbourne.”
“ I’d blow my brains out first.”
“ That’s just what I was thiuking of. Only I’d as soon
die by a pal's hand.”
Salmon Roe understood him.
“ You're right there,’ he answered.
The two men so strangely united by the bond of long
continued common crime held out each a hand.
They gave one another a firm grip to bind the strange
bargain they had concluded.
Then each laid aside his breast armour.
Standing face to face and levelling their revolvers at
each other's chest they pans d for a moment,
“ At the word three,' said Zeph.
In unison they counted “ One! two ! thro#!*
Then there was a loud report.
“ What is that? 1 ’ cried one of the assailants.
“ It must be the fire got to some cartridges,” said a
comrade.
It was the death-knell of Salmon Roe, alias Stephen
Hart, and Zeph, alias Byrne, who had fallen, shot to the
breast each by the other’s hand.
Several more explosions followed from the burning
building.
Still no signs of life appeared, despite repeated calls
addressed to the inmates to surrender.
All eyes were fixed on the blazing and now silent pile,
and the besi- gers began to close in rapidly on it, some
dodging from tree to tree, and others, persuaded that
everyone in the hotel must be dead or hors do combat , ad-
vancing boldly into the open.
Father Gibney, a priest, who had already started for
the house, and had been checked by the police, was the
first to enter.
At much personal risk from the flames, he hurried into
room to the left, and saw two bodies lying on tlieor
hacks.
From tbeir position it was evident that they had shot
each other.
He touched them, but only to find that life was extinct,
and had barely time to ascertain this, before the flames
forced him and those who followed him, to leave the
room without venturing to risk attempting to remove the
bodies.
They were those of Zepn and Salmon Roe.
They certainly were not “ lovely in their lives,” but it
could be truly said of them that “in their deaths they were
not divided.”
The corpse of Dan Kelly, which lay at thr entrance te
the bar-room at the eastern side of the house, was
recovered, but not until it had been dreadfully scorched.


Hardly had this been done than the roof fell in.
In a few minutes all that was left of the hotel was a
lamp-post with a signboard bearing the following inscrip-
tion :—“The Glenrowan Hotel. Ann Jones. Best
accommodation,” swinging in mockery above the pile ol
sm< king ashes, that had formed the funeral pyre of the
“Kelly Gang.”
CHAPTER CCXXYIII.
CONCLUSION.
Ned, after having had his wounds seen toby Dr. Nichol-
son and Dr. Ryan, was placed in a railway van and sent
off to Melbourne, where the excitement during the
“ Battle of Glenrowan ” had been indescribable.
The newspapers had been publishing fresh editions
concerning it every hour.
When it was known Kelly was en route, this excite-
ment increased, but the authorities did all they could to
keep the time and place of his intended arrival dark.
Crowds assembled at the Spencer Street Station, but
the tram halted at North Melbourne, where he was re-
moved, prostrate and helpless, from the van on a
stretcher, transferred to a covered waggon, and driven
to Melbourne iail, where another dense crowd was
assembled.
As soon as he had been sufficiently doctored np, he
was taken to Beechworth, the chief town of the Murray
River and Ovens districts, by special train on August
6th, and placed at the bar of the police-court charged
with the murder of Constables Lonigan and Scanlan.
Being committed for trial, he was brought up at the
Beechworth Circuit Court on August 11th, and sentenced
to death.
THE END
Anonyma, or Fair but Frail.
Skittles, a Tale of Female Life and
Kate Hamilton.
Agnes Will ;ughby.
The Soiled Dove.
Skittles in Paris, a Biography of
a Fascinating Woman.
Love Frolics of a Young Scamp.
Incognita, a Tale of Love and
Passion.
Woman.
Adventure.
Left her Home, a Tale of Female
The Beautiful Demon.
Life and Adventure,
Annie.
Delilah, or the Little House In
Piccadilly
THE “ ANONYMA ” SERIES OF POPULAR NOVELS.
PICTURE BOARDS. • PUBLISHED AT 2/-
Formosa, the Life of a Beautiful
The excitement in Melbourne continued t© be immense
and a strong feeling of sympathy manifest# itself in his
favour.
“ Flying Send ” was put on at one of tLe theatres, in
O! der to introduce Ned’s horse, which was loudly cheered
every evening.
A monster meeting, presided over by no less a person
than David Gaunan, Chairman of Committees in the
Legislative Assembly, was held at the Hippodrome, and
the 4 000 persons who obtained admission, and the 2,000
more for whom there was no room, passed unanimous
resolutions in favour of a petition for a reprieve for
Ned.
It was signed by no less than 82,424 people.
Nevertheless the law took its course, and on the 11th
November the Victorian Jack Ketch fitted the fatal
noose round the neck of Ned Kelly, the Ironclad Bush'
ranger of Australia.
Revelations of a Lady Detective.
The Lady with the Camellas.
Paris Life at Twenty.




1508
02028505
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




'X XI £
by W. ML PH ENS H AYWARD
Jfc, ft, fit t JSfe ,
■r>j»nin»l»TWT rwr*f «*.■'*»■ '-'fUnTVI IMP I »XT
Tl’jS Afrgs!. A ltd* of the American Civil War,
T t ->tT of t>je South. A £«t|««l to “-Ik Siao'n A>tf»l.”
i f} r f OrOSS. A T&le o> ti. - ’'rut Ariv Hear. War.
Thu Heos. Privateer 5 ar h t U«t Cmk* a* Iks “Bfoci
Love’s Treason, or the Tvrs Privateers.
Tom Holt’s Log, A TaJ« of its BsepSaa.
Demons of tho ?oa.
Love Hid Jidtffeiilure..
Ran away from }forr,e. % Life of Advert;ure.
The Golden f^eef s »r a oiv* p*- K^ta-upfon.
.!"■
The idol’s Eye. — Ad'/enture? Searcl| of a Big OiaiHOftti.
Lord Scatterbrain, or Rough UiatßCßiS Fobbed.
Wild jand ’Wonderful.
|^.y 3 or the I ana P.‘’vBi|li3 «of a Scapegrace
Th.e Cloud l^ing.
I
J
\
Mildred’s Cross, or tv.e to Ruin
fe iii a Thousand.
Andrew Larrimer.
Robictthe Rover.
The Mutiny of the s: Thunder.”
Bi< 'H OFSGA
LOND 0 N, E. C.
l3 FOY EL^
Picture Boards. $•? i-c Published at 2/ 1
JILFBIB J. ISAACS & SOlhlSv
3, CAMOMILE STREET, and IB & 10, BURY STTT *2l,
c*r* v-h: 4 Addi’css:— lalepWae Ne.
“ ashyls, 2154 n:
. y' A ■■■ • •“* u.; -
