







,


NELLIE DORAN
A STORY OF AUSTRALIAN
HOME AND SCHOOL LIFE
MIRIAM AGATHA
With a Preface by His Grace the Coadjutor
Archbishop of Brisbane, Queensland
SYDNEY
E. J. DWYER
705 GEORGE STREET
1914
PRINTED IN ENGLAND


Printed and bound by the St. Winifred Press, London.


PREFACE
SOME time ago I perused with much pleasure
the MS. of the story which is now being
presented to the public in book for under the
title of Nellie Doran. As a versatile writer of
children’s stories Miriam Agatha has already
won an Australian reputation. To those who,
like myself, have known the Authoress from
her early girlhood it is no surprise to learn that
she has rapidly grown in favour with her young
readers. Miriam Agatha is in full sympathy
with the children of her own sunny Australia
and she tells her tales in a most engaging
manner. Nellie Doran is a fascinating story
of the bush and Convent School life, and
like every story from the Authoress’s facile
pen it has a beautiful moral. We owe Miriam
Agatha a debt of gratitude for her excellent work
in a field of literature that is but too little cul-
tivated. We feel confident that Nellie Doran


will be warmly welcomed in school and home
and that the story will meet with that measure
of kindly and encouraging criticism which the
efforts of the young Authoress so richly deserve.
* JAMES DUHIG,
Archbishop of Armida.
“Dara"
Brisbane,
Queensland.


PAGE
9
. 19
. . . . 26
. 37
• 47
60
CONTENTS
CHAP.
I The Dorans 9
II St. Mary’s 19
111 The Arrival 26
IV The First Night 37
V In School 47
VI Music 60
VII “ Shrove Tuesday ” . . . .68
VIII Lent 82
IX Thelma 90
X “ May Days ” 96
XI “ That Concert ” 103
XII Twenty-fourth of May . . .112
XIII Mid-Winter 122
XIV An Invitation 131
XV The Ball 138


. • . i8 5
. 192
. 200
. 207
. 212
. 217
. 222
. 229
. 236
CHAP.
XVI That Girl —My Cousin ! . . 145
XVII Pat’s Visit 153
XVIII The Retreat 161
XIX “Have you seen her?” . . . 172
XX Nellie’s D6but 178
XXI Milcie’s Dilemma .... 185
XXII Herr Hartmann 192
XXIII The Disclosure 200
XXIV What the Girls Said .... 207
XXV A Picnic 212
XXVI At Boonwooroo 217
XXVII The Decision 222
XXVIII Mostly Editorial .... 229
XXIX Au Revoir 236


CHAPTER I
THE DORANS
THE Dorans’ selection was situated “ out-
back” in Western Queensland, far, far
away where the sun sets. Mat Doran had come
from Ireland, years ago, to make a fortune in
Queensland and then return to the old land. He
had settled at Boonwooroo, and the years went
on and on, finding Mat still on the little selec-
tion, the fortune still unmade. His children were
healthy Irish-Australians, children of the bush.
It had been the dearest wish of Mat and his
wife to give their children a good Catholic edu-
cation —to send the girls to a Convent and the
boys to a Catholic College. But it was always
beyond their means. When the Dorans first
settled at Boonwooroo, there was a little school
at Nofurther, but many families left the district
in the bad seasons, and after a few years the
little school was closed.
Mrs. Doran taught her children the little she


knew herself, and instructed them carefully in
their religion. When Father Ryan came on his
rare and long-looked-for visits his heart
delighted to find the children prepared for the
Sacraments —each in his turn. The elder ones
soon knew the Catechism through, from “ Who
made the world ? ” to “ What means Amen ? ”
and the little ones could lisp their prayers and
say “ God made the world.”
But that was years ago. There were no little
Dorans now, the youngest member of the family,
Nellie, being fifteen years old. Nellie was the
hope of the Dorans; they had determined years
before that she must be sent to school. A little
money had been put aside, month after month,
for that purpose, but it was still too little. The
father and Mary “figured” it out often. She
must have three years at the Convent —nothing
less would do, and she must have music lessons.
Music was decided on, because one day, when
they were at Nofurther, Nellie had played “St.
Patrick’s Day,” and “ God save Ireland” with
one finger on the old piano in the parlour of the
“ Bushmen’s Retreat.” Yes, she must have
music lessons. But it took so long to save
money at Boonwooroo.


Then a wonderful thing happened, and made
Nellie's education possible —made it possible
for her to go away to the big Convent board-
ing-school far away in the city by the sea.
Pat, the eldest boy, loved horses. He had
studied them ever since he was a barefooted
boy of fourteen. When the Dorans came to
Boonwooroo there was a handful of horses
running half-wild in the low ranges south of
the homestead. Pat had devoted his life to
them, they were his constant care. And now,
he was a man of five-and-twenty, and in those
low ranges there was a mob of sturdy stock,
not particularly beautiful animals, but staunch
and upstanding, just the style of horse to carry
a man steadily all day, and look fresh when he
camped at night. Pat was proud of them. But
the towns were so far away, the market at
Nofurther was useless, he could never get a good
price there for his horses. Sometimes he
thought of taking a few right away to the coast
towns, driving them himself. But mother
always said it was too far, and father laughed at
the idea of Pat’s “ nondescripts,” as he called
them, bringing a decent price.
Then the wonderful thing happened.


Mick Regan, an old friend of Mat’s, came to
Boonwooroo. It was fifteen years since he had
been in Western Queensland, and he saw many
changes. Pat took him off in the afternoon to
see his horses and the old man was delighted.
“ Why, man,” he said to Mat that evening,
“ there’s a gold mine in those ranges.”
“ A mine ! ” Mat said incredulously.
” A mine—Pat’s horses are the gold.”
“ Pat’s horses,” laughed Mat. “ Sure what
good are they ? Reid in Nofurther won’t give
the price of a sheep for them. And Pat there,
has spent all his time on them, and his little bit
of money too.”
“ Won’t Reid give a good price ?
" Not a bit of him.”
“ Because he’s a cunning rogue,” exclaimed
Mick. “He wants to get them cheap and sell
them at an outrageous profit. Oh he’s a cun-
ning rogue. When did you try him last ? ”
“ Oh, months ago. We have not been next
or nigh him for ages.”
“ Well then, it’s a fine lot of stupids you are,
and if I hadn’t chanced to come, you’d miss this
golden opportunity.”
Mat puffed at his clay pipe and watched his


old friend wonderingly. “ What are you talk
ing about, man, with your golden opportu
nities ? ” he cried.
“ Well, you see, Mat, there's a buyer in
Nofurther now. I saw him as I came through
yesterday. He's buying horses for Japan —
the war you know. 'Tis himself knows what he
wants too, if he is a Jap. I thought those
Japanese knew nothing at all, at all, about horse-
flesh, but this Jap does. Reid won't take him
in, clever as he thinks himself. He didn't let
you know about the Jap buyer. He doesn't
want you to know. He'd like to get Pat's fine
cattle for next to nothing and then sell them to
the Jap buyer at a great profit. And here
you are at the back of Godspeed and not know-
ing a thing that's going on outside your selec-
tion. Why you buried yourself in this outland-
ish spot miles from any one I can’t for the life of
me think. 'Tis mad you were. But now you
and the lads round up Pat's best horses and in
to Nofurther with you and believe me you'll get
a cheque as big as a haystack. We'll spoil
Reid's game. No doubt he'd be out here one
of these fine days, offer you a fair price (for him)
and you simpletons would take it, and then he's


back to the Jap and make a little fortune.”
Mat puffed on, a half-doubtful look in his blue
eyes, Pat breathed hard —his chance had come
at last.
“ We'll go to-morrow, father. Tim and I
will get them rounded up now, and we'll start
first thing.”
“ Tis a good thing for you that I came along,”
Mick said complacently, “ and if you will stay
here, behind everywhere, try and find out what’s
going on in the townships about for the future.
Try not to be so far behind the times.”
Next morning the pick of Pat’s mob were
started for Nofurther, and a few days later he
and his father came home, Mat’s eyes shining
with the joy of success, the first big success of his
life, and then, as he reflected, it was Pat’s work,
not his.
That night a family conclave was held. They
decided on what improvements were to be made
about the place—how the precious cheque was
to be invested. The father cleared his throat
nervously —after all it was Pat’s money, not his.
“I’m thinking Pat ” he paused.
" Well, father ? ”
“ That perhaps we —you —might give ”


Pat smiled. “ Why, father,” he said, “ speak
up. What do you want ? The money's mine,
you say, but what’s mine is yours. It’s the
first decent cheque I’ve ever given you and
mother, and well you deserve it. Do what you
like with the money.”
“ Well, Pat, it’s the little girl—Nellie. Per-
haps we could give her a year or two at the Con-
vent, and then perhaps we could scrape enough
for the third year before the others are over.”
“Of course,” Pat smiled. “ Isn’t that what I
was thinking all the way back from Nofurther ? ”
“ God bless you, Pat. You’re a son to us,”
his mother said brokenly.
And that is how it came to pass that Nellie
was to go to St. Mary’s High School in the far-
away city by the sea.
* * * * *
Nellie’s box was packed. It was an old
wooden box that mother brought from Ireland
nearly thirty years before. Nellie and Tim sat
on it, to press the lid down. It was roped
securely and labelled. Next morning before the
sun was up, Tim harnessed the greys into the old
buckboard buggy, for the road to Nofurther
was a long one and an early start necessary.


Now and then he paused to brush his hand
across his eyes, for Nellie was going away, and
he would be so lonely without her.
Breakfast was a dismal meal. Then Pat
drove the greys round to the front verandah,
the box was tied to the back of the old buggy
and father took Pat’s place as driver. Nellie
was kissed and blessed by all. Mother warned
her to be good and obedient to the Sisters —
“ God’s own holy people.” Kate and Mary
tried hard to keep their tears back, Tim fumbled
with the ropes of the box, bending over it to
hide his face. Father kept his eyes on the
greys and wondered why his voice was
husky.
“ God bless you, child. May the Holy Mother
of God keep her mantle round you and bring
you safe home. Be good. We won’t mind if
you are not clever if you are good. Learning
is not everything, alanna,” mother said between
her sobs.
Nellie was lifted to the front seat by helpful,
loving hands. Mat shook the reins. “ Get up,
Galtee More,” he said huskily, flicking the near
horse. The greys pricked their ears and stepped
off.


Tim jumped up beside the box, in readiness
to attend to the slip rails.
“ Good-bye/'
Mother waved her apron in response to a
fluttering handkerchief. Pat and “ young " Mat
got out of sight quickly. Kate and Mary gave
way to their tears, and Cushla, the cattle
dog, looking up into the mother's face, and
knowing there was some sorrow in the
family, lifted up his head and howled dis-
mally.
The buggy was lost to view behind the clump
of ti-trees. Mother threw her apron over her
head and hurried inside.
Tim let the rails down. “ Good-bye, Tim,"
Nellie said sobbingly.
“ Good-bye," he replied stolidly as if he didn't
care. But when the buggy was out of sight,
he replaced the rails and leaning his head on
the top one, burst into tears, for there was no
one to see him there—no one, only the gums
and wattles and an old kukuburra that perched
on a bare branch above him. Tim was seven-
teen, but not too old ,to cry —if no one were
looking.
He marked down on the post of the milking-


shed date Nellie left home, and the Doran
family determined to wait patiently for the long,
long months to pass by, until Christmas would
bring them Nellie.


CHAPTER II
ST. MARY’S
IT was afternoon-recreation at St. Mary’s.
A group of girls were sitting under a leafy
tamarind tree watching others engaged in tennis
and basket-ball.
“Tm too tired to play this afternoon/’ Marion
Stanley said languidly; “ when my turn comes I
shall beg some one else to take it.”
“ Oh, you are too tired to live,” laughed Bet
O’Neill; “I wonder you don’t die some day,
just because you are too tired to go on living.”
“Bet and Kitty are too much the other way,”
remarked Margaret Kelly, who stooped slightly
and wore gold-rimmed glasses. “ I wonder
they can sit so still as long as they have this
afternoon.”
Kitty O’Brien, a bright-faced girl, moved
impatiently. “ Milcie, do stop tossing your curls;
we know they are pretty, we all admire them.


but don't be for ever tossing them this way and
that."
Milcie Grogan pursed up her pretty lips.
“ Kitty O'Brien, you are rude, you are always
passing personal remarks."
“You make me," Kitty cried impatiently.
“ Now, now, darlings, don’t quarrel," inter-
posed a tall girl with drooping eyelids and very
long lashes. She was Angela Carmichael, com-
monly known as “ The Angel " or the “ Angel
Michael." She had a sentimental air and was
considered artistic. Kitty said she “gushed"
too much, her endearing words did not suit
matter-of-fact Bet or Kitty. Angela had a
fresh “ craze " every few weeks. Her present
one was a mania for sketching “ Gibson heads."
Alice Hayes came flying along the path just
then, crying excitedly —
“ Girls, girls ! I've just heard something ! "
“Of course, you are always just hearing
things," Elsie Ryan said impatiently. Elsie
was small and sallow-faced, with discontented
eyes and cross lips.
“ Oh, tell us, Alice, quick ! What is it ? I
just want to hear something fresh. I hope it's
exciting," exclaimed Bet.


But Alice teased and tormented for several
minutes before she would satisfy their curiosity.
Then she said—
“ There’s a new girl coming. She is from far
out west, somewhere behind nowhere ! ”
“ Is that all ? ” sneered Elsie, “ I thought you
had something interesting to tell.”
“ A new girl! ”
“ In the middle of the term ! ”
“ What a time to come ! ”
“ From out west too ! ”
There was a chorus of comments, and Elsie
remarked, curling her lips, “ She will be a real
‘bushie’ if she is from far out west.”
“ I come from out west,” Marion said very
superiorly.
“Oh yes, but this girl is from out-back, I
suppose—the real Never Never. She is sure
to be awkward and stupid-looking.”
Milcie smiled complacently; she knew she was
not awkward or stupid-looking—she was the
prettiest girl at St. Mary’s, everybody said so ! ”
“ Em glad she’s coming,” Eva Hanley cried,
“ she will be a diversion. I love new girls to
come, they are interesting, like new books.”
Nance Birmingham wondered if the new girl


would have a post-card album. Nance had
the post-card craze badly and yearned for a
kindred spirit.
“ Post cards, Nance ! Of course she won’t
if she’s from the Never Never,” laughed Bet.
“ Poor girl, she will be so lonely and so shy,”
little Dot Lawless said softly. Dot was a kind
little girl, beloved of everybody; she had a
sweet little face and was never known to say an
unkind word to any one.
There was much talk about the “ new girl,”
much wondering about her appearance, age,
abilities, just such wonderings as schoolgirls
wonder about new girls.
The games continued, merry laughter floated
over the lawns and away to the blue sea shin-
ing so brightly in the afternoon sun. Sister
Mary Beatrice went from group to group, keep-
ing a motherly eye on every one. At last the
little ones prevailed on her to take the seat under
the mango trees in the comer, and tell them a
story. There was much crushing and schem-
ing to “ sit near Sister,” much pleading to be
allowed to hold her beads. The girls near the
tennis court watched the scene admiringly.
“ What a picture that makes —Sister surrounded


by the little ones, and tiny beams of light fall-
ing on them through the trees. I wish I could
paint it," Kitty cried.
“ Oh, you are always seeing pictures, Kitty,"
Bet smiled. “ Why, girls, she wakes me up to
watch the moon on the water, or the light on the
frangipanni flowers."
“ Luna —the moon : lunatic," Margaret said
slyly.
Kitty only smiled. “ I love the moon and
everything beautiful. But come. Bet, let's run
over and listen to Sister; her stories are always
lovely." The two friends skipped away to join
the little ones under the mango trees.
The story was just finished and “ Oh's," and
“Ah’s " and “ Thank you. Sister," were echoing
in the air, when clang, clang rang the tea-bell.
At tea-time “ The girl from the bush " was
the topic of conversation. Kitty gave her the
sobriquet, although nearly all the boarders were
“ bush " girls. But this particular girl, since she
was coming from far out back, was certainly the
girl from the bush.
“ I suppose she is rich," remarked Eva. She
had an idea that all westerners were squatters
and millionaires.


“ All western people are not rich,” Margaret
said seriously. “We are not/'
“ I wonder what she is like/'sighed Alice; “ I
am dying to see her. I am always so curious
about new girls.”
“We must only wait and see,” Marion re-
marked placidly—Marion was always placid.
“ And finish our tea,” giggled Bet: —Bet was
always giggling.
At study time Kitty and Bet had a few whis-
pers about the girl from the bush.
“ Oh, how I wish she were very rich, or had an
earl for a grandfather or a grand-uncle, just to
take Marion down a little. She is so boastful
about her wealthy relatives,” sighed Bet.
Kitty nodded.
“ Or,” she went on, “ I wish she were pretty —
beautiful, just to do Milcie good, she wants
‘ taking down’ too.”
“ Um,” mumbled Kitty.
" I wonder is she pretty or plain, rich or
poor.”
Sister Mary Beatrice looked suspiciously in
their direction, and Kitty and Bet thought it
well to observe Rule 3 if they wished to avoid
bad marks.


That night Nellie finished the coach journey
from Nofurther to Railwaytown, and the follow-
ing morning Father put her in the train under
the care of a friendly westerner like himself,
and Nellie was borne away to be a Saint Mary’s
girl.


CHAPTER 111
THE ARRIVAL
NEXT afternoon all the girls seemed greatly
interested in the drive, and the road
that ran over the hill to the town was constantly
examined by bright inquisitive eyes.
Margaret Kelly, the studious girl with stooped
shoulders and gold-rimmed glasses, was pacing
up and down the verandah near the study, an
enormous history in her hand. Dot had pro-
mised to tell her when the wagonette entered
the gates. Milcie pretended to have no interest
in a “ bush girl/’ and practised “ Balancelle ”
on the piano in the first music room. She
generally used the end-room piano, but of
course, if she chose to change this afternoon, no
one need remark it. Elsie Ryan stitched away
at her Corticelli table centre; she did not care a
scrap about the new girl; she had already pro-
nounced her as “ sure to be horrid.” Bet was
leaning out a top window, shouting out messages


to Kitty, who was paying for idleness in class
by working a long French exercise. Marion
said, in her languid voice and well-rounded
vowels, that Eva Hanley and Nance Birmingham
had gone down to the summer house to get the
first glimpse of the new girl. As for herself,
she thought it rude to be so curious, and was
going to the studio to get on with her pastel
drawing.
“Something coming now, Kit,” Bet tele-
phoned through her hands, then in a disap-
pointed voice, “ oh, it is only the old 'bus.
Hurry and finish, Kitty, and come up.” Kitty
hurried and finished, and was soon leaning
perilously out the second window.
“Those bamboos are in the way. I could see
right up to the top of the hill only for them; I
wish ”
“ Here it is, here it is,” excitedly interposed
Bet. They hurried down the stairs, Kitty
declaiming in her “ stage voice,” “ Sir Peter
Molone’s carriage in sight. She comes, she
comes, the girl from the bush.” They calmly
seated themselves beside the study door, over-
looking the field of action. The big black
horses turned im at the gate —Elsie missed a


stitch, Milcie struck a wrong chord, and Margaret
and her history secured a good position.
Of course they did not stare. They, the young
ladies of St. Mary's Convent High School, stare !
They would not be guilty of such a breach of
etiquette. To onlookers they appeared to be
merely admiring the garden-beds and lawns.
The wagonette drew up at the steps, Peter
dumped a large old-fashioned box on the top step
and muttered, “It’s heavy anyhow."
A girl in a crushed holland frock, and a dilapi-
dated-looking pink sun-bonnet stepped out of
the wagonette. Sister Mary Beatrice grasped
the girl’s hands and kissed her. “ Welcome,
child," she said in her warm kind way.
Elsie curled her thin lips into a disdainful “ I
told you so." Bet seemed disappointed. Kitty’s
eyebrows described semicircles on her broad
forehead. “ Where ever did that box come
from ? " she whispered. “It must have
belonged to some of the Noahs." Milcie’s heart
exulted as she surveyed her slight figure and
pretty face in the study door—it was a glass
door with a dark blind, and served admirably
for a “ full-size ’’ view. Milcie was the prettiest
girl at St. Mary’s and was always in dread of


new boarders, lest they should eclipse her
charms, and put her from her pedestal. But
this girl was freckled and dowdy-looking. Milcie
need not fear her.
Then as Sister led the holland-frocked one
into the refectory, a sunburnt hand was hastily
brushed across downcast eyes. “ Poor little
girl,” Margaret said, and a mist dimmed her
glasses.
“ I suppose she is lonely without —without
her m-mother,” little Dot said brokenly.
They stood in a group in the study, curiosity
giving way to kindly feelings of sympathy and
charity. Even Elsie’s discontented face had
a softened expression, and Milcie turned her
back to the glass door.
“ It is such a wretched thing, homesickness.
The miseries I went through, my first week,
were really terrible. I hate to think of it,” Kitty
sighed.
“ And I,” cried Margaret. “ I just wept for
ten days. I felt I must run away somewhere, on,
on until I got home.”
Dot was sobbing into Margaret’s elbow, the
big history hiding her little face.
Bet hated “ scenes,” and said rather brus-


quely “ Well, we cannot help her by talking
about it. All be as kind as we can, and help her
that way. Everybody who leaves home must
go through the mill.*'
Just then Angela came in; she had been for
her music lesson. “ Has she come ? ” she asked
breathlessly.
“ Yes.”
“ Poor darling, how lonely she must be;
where is she ? ”
“ Having lunch in the Ref.
There was another sob from Dot, and Kitty
blinked suspiciously.
“ Come on, girls, there is no need for all to
commence sighing and weeping. That will do
no good,” said Bet, as she covertly wiped her eyes
and led the way to the court. Dot did not follow,
she paced the study, thinking sympathetically
of the sorrows of the girl just from home and
mother. She seemed to think that her sympathy
might be conveyed to the lonely one through
the wooden walls.
Poor Nellie sat before the dainty lunch and
bit her under-lip hard to keep back the sobs.
She must not cry before this kind Sister. Sister
Mary Beatrice understood all about “ new girls ”


—their shyness and timidity —and left her alone
for awhile.
In the study Sister found Dot still pacing
up and down. “You are just the little one I
want. Come now and comfort this poor little
home-sick girlie.”
Dot followed eagerly; she loved the part she
was to take. “ Nellie, this is Dot. Dot, this is
your new sister,” said the kind nun, and then
left them.
Dot wondered what she should say. She
longed to be sympathetic and make Nellie at
home, to tell how “ lovely ” all the Sisters were,
and how nice all the girls, and that the boarding-
school was grand—after home-sickness wore off
one. But she could not say a word. She just
stared at the pretty pink milk-jug and felt very
stupid indeed. At last her kind little heart
overcame her natural shyness.
“ Are you tired, er—Nellie ? ”
“No,” Nellie replied, and nervously brushed
the hair from her forehead. In doing so her
hand struck against her teaspoon, and it fell to
the ground with a loud clatter that made poor
Nellie blush furiously. Dot restored the spoon,
and to cover the other’s confusion burst into


conversation. She talked of everything she
could think of, and pressed Nellie to take more
bread and butter. No. Some cake? Well, just
a little more tea.
Then she led the way to the dressing-room,
poured out water, procured her own “ scenty ”
soap, and was as kind as kind could be. Nellie
followed her, painfully conscious of the noise
her new leather boots made, and of the soft foot-
fall of Dot’s neat kid shoes. They went up the
broad stairs to the intermediate dormitory, Dot
pointing out the beauties of oratories and
pictures and the white holy-water stoup at
the top of the stairs.
What a number of little white beds ! How
cool and comfortable they looked, Nellie thought.
Dot named off the owners of the beds, and
showed Nellie where she was to sleep.
“Now for the last beautiful thing to show
you.” She laughed. “ Close your eyes, Nell.
Don’t peep.” She put her hand lightly over
Nellie’s eyes and drew her out to a wide bal-
cony. “Now look ! ”
Nellie looked, and drew in a deep, deep
“ O—oh ! ”
Before her lay a bay of blue, blue waters;


a beach stretching in a graceful semicircle;
one high green island in the centre of the blue ;
vague, shadowy islands in the misty distance;
a high arm of land’stretching out round one side
of the bay, and in the distance the broad
Pacific. All along the beach rose tall majestic
cocoa-nut palms, waving their feathery branches
in the soft breeze.
There was a deep reverential look in Nellie’s
eyes. “ I have never seen the sea before,”
she said. “ Oh, I wish Tim —my brother,” she
stopped, remembering the presence of the strange
kind little girl at her side.
Sister was heard calling from the foot of the
stairs. They crossed the dormitory and de-
scended, Dot first sprinkling Nellie and herself
in a shower of holy-water from the little stoup
the white angel held at the top of the stairs.
Nellie was taken along the passage, now covered
with sweet-scented honeysuckle, to the Con-
vent, to see Rev. Mother, and then Sister brought
her back to the lawn, and called the girls to
meet their “ New Sister.” Now that the pink
bonnet was gone they could see her face clearly.
“Why, Kit,” Bet whispered, “she is not as
plain-looking as I thought. The longer I look


at her the better-looking she appears to be.
There's a cleverish look about her eyes and fore-
head.”
Poor Nellie looked very miserable and out
of place amongst these neatly-dressed girls
in their blue linen frocks and dainty white
collars. Dot seeing the difference, and wonder-
ing if Nellie felt it, slipped her soft white hand
into Nellie's hard sunburnt one.
The senior girls were introduced and Nellie
gave each a hearty “ out-back '' hand-shake,
and crimsoned anew at each introduction.
Milcie and Marion bowed their best society bow,
and little Dot thought indignantly that they
should have tried to be more friendly. The
girls stood round in awkward silence, as girls
do on such occasions, the little ones stared from
distant points of the grounds, and the ordeal
was over —Nellie was a Saint Mary's girl.
Kitty wondered if she should inquire whether
they had had rain out west lately; westerners,
she knew, were always talking about rain.
Eva Hanley thought that some one should
inquire if she (the new girl) had had a pleasant
journey, but she was not going to —Kitty and
Bet were the greatest talkers, let them do it.


Bet, as usual, came to the rescue. “Do you
play tennis, Nellie ? ”
“No,” Nellie answered, wondering greatly
what “ tennis ” might be.
“ Well, you girls go on with the game, and
we will watch. Come and sit over here,
Nellie.”
Bet talked, and talked, and talked, but the
“ new girl ” only answered “ yes ” and “ no ”
in a dull quiet voice, and Bet was almost in a
frenzy. The others smiled at her despairing
face, and joined in the conversation now and
then with a commonplace remark.
Nellie felt very miserable and unhappy,
everything was so new and so strange. The
convent and boarding-school were “ skyscrapers ”
to her bush ideas; the hotel at Nofurther, or
even the Post Office at Railway town were
nothing in comparison. There was such a bewil-
dering number of girls, tennis was such a bewil-
dering game, and there was that wonderful
fascinating stretch of blue, blue water. She
felt as if in a new strange world, and longed for
the bush and—mother.
A certain kind of pride—“ bush-pride ”
kept her from expressing surprise at anything


she saw, and she just answered Bet’s prattle in
low dull monosyllables.
The tea-bell rang, Bet jumped up with a sigh
of relief, and Kitty whispered, “Tea will make
her talk.”
“ Nothing will,” Bet whispered in reply with
an air of conviction, “ absolutely nothing.”
Elsie smiled behind the new girl’s back, her
thin lips framed a soundless “ gum-leaves,”
and Dot looked the indignation she felt, for Dot
was the essence of kindness.


CHAPTER IV
THE FIRST NIGHT
NELLIE was tucked in her little bed with
the snow-white curtains, and all the
other girls were tucked up in their little beds with
snow-white curtains too. Sister Mary Beatrice
had kissed her good-night, and told her not
to let her thoughts wander westwards. Dot
peeped out from her cubicle, and waved good-
night with a pillow-cover. The gas was turned
off and the pale moonlight flooded the dormi-
tory.
Of course Nellie's thoughts flew to home,
and she put a corner of the sheet into her mouth
to smother the sobs that would rise from her sore
little heart. She could see it all so plainly—
the moon shining above the clump of ti-trees at
the side of mother's little garden ; Tim seated on
the log-step, singing " A Strapping Young
Stockman," and accompanying himself on the


concertina, and Cushla howling dismally at the
moon and the music. But perhaps Tim would
not play to-night, perhaps he felt sad, as she
did.
Then mother-
Her thoughts were here interrupted, for a
figure passed between her bed and the window,
and she turned to watch it. The figure leant
out of the window, and a wrapt voice exclaimed,
“ Glorious ! Glorious ! ”
Nellie recognised Kitty’s voice, and wondered
what she was doing there.
Kitty went over to Bet’s bed, and called
very softly, “ Bet, Bet, come and look at the
moon.” But Bet only answered, “ Silly ! Go
to bed ! ” and with a soft little laugh Kitty
returned to her post at the window, and Nellie
went on with her picture of home. Mother
would be But the thought of mother was
too much, and a sob burst out. In an instant
Kitty was at the bedside, had drawn the curtains,
and seated herself comfortably on the bed.
“ Don’t cry now, be brave, and just don’t
give in. You will be as happy as a fairy in a
week or two.”
Nellie choked down her sobs and listened to


Kitty’s whispering chatter and smiled, even
laughed softly at some of her sallies. Then she
wondered at herself for laughing when her
heart was almost breaking with horrid “ home-
sickness.”
Kitty painted the lights and shadows of
boarding-school life—the bright, bright lights,
and the faint, faint shadows. “ You know I
should not be talking now, after lights are out,
but I simply cannot help myself, especially on
moonlight nights. I think Sister Colette
knows I am not responsible for my actions on
moonlight nights. That’s Sister’s cell across
the passage.” She paused a moment, listening
intently, then exclaimed, “ There! That is
Milcie, snoring, and when I tell her she snores,
she will not believe. She gets quite indignant,
and denies it. She seems to think it is not
genteel to snore, and Milcie just aches to be
genteel. I’ll go and whisper to her that she is
snoring, a most unladylike snore.”
She stole off, like a sprite of the noonlight,
her white dressing-gown trimmed with little
silver, shimmering streaks of light.
“ Milcie ! Mill! ” she called softly, shaking
the sleeping girl.


“ Ye-es,” drawled Milcie sleepily, “ time to
get up ? ”
“No, dearie. I just want to tell you that
you are, that is, you were, snoring in a most
unladylike fashion.”
Milcie was awake instantly. “ Oh, you are
horrid, Kitty. Ido not snore.” Then she sank
sweetly back to the land of dreams.
“She will be so cross if she remembers,”
Kitty laughed, as she again seated herself on
Nellie's bed. “ Perhaps she will not speak to
me for a week. But I cannot keep from teasing
Milcie. I love it. It is not uncharitable either,
Nellie, because it does her good. She goes on
with such a lot of nonsense, I do not know what
would become of her only for Bet and me.
We administer nauseous doses now and then
to keep her vanity down. Marion is another
patient of ours. They are both nice girls, but
their affectation spoils them. Milcie is so
pretty, and every one notices her and admires
her, so of course she cannot help being a little—
er —you know. But do not mind that, she is
nice enough only for that. I thought, at
least some of us thought, that you might—
that is, have—er—noticed ”


Kitty stopped confusedly, at a loss for words —
the first time in the history of her boarding-
school days. But how could she apologise to
this quiet little girl from the bush for the chilly,
patronising way Milcie and Marion had treated
her at tea-time and afterwards ? Kind little
Dot had noticed, and called Kitty’s attention—
Dot went to Kitty in all her perplexities. Kitty
had promised to smooth things over the very
first opportunity —she had not thought the
opportunity would some so soon, or that
the “ smoothing over ” would be so diffi-
cult.
There was silence for a few moments. They
could hear the boom, booming of the waves
on the beach, and the shrill whistle of an out-
going vessel. Then Kitty plunged again into
her task of “ smoothing things over.”
“You see, Marion is the eldest of her family,
and her mother simply idolises her, and spoils
her dreadfully. She is rather delicate too, and
the Sisters take great care of her, and give her
every possible attention. So of course she puts
on airs you know. Milcie adores Marion, and
copies everything she does. Milcie is so fond of
her, just because Marion is the grand-niece of


Lord Somebody-or-other of Somewhere-in-Eng-
land."
“Is she? " Nellie said in surprise.
“ Poof! that’s nothing/' returned Kitty
disdainfully, as if she were a princess of the
blood royal. “ / count people by what they
are themselves, and by what they do, not
by their relations. It is only chance. I might
have been a duchess ! I often tell Marion that,
but she replies grandly, ‘ But you are not a
duchess, Kittay and Miss Kitty mimicked
Marion's voice to perfection. “You might
have been Lady Nell Someone, and if you were,
it would be nothing to make a fuss about.
Titles are nothing—absolutely nothing ! They
don't count! "
“I'd rather be plain Nellie Doran than Lady
Nell Someone," Nellie said with great convic-
tion.
“ Wouldn’t you prefer to be pretty Nellie
Doran ? " Kitty laughed, then she grew serious
and went on with her tirade:
“ I suppose God does not mean every one to
be great in this world, and He seems to give
some people more chances than others. Some
do not take them, and others make wrong uses


of their opportunities. I often wonder how
many people there are in the world who would
be grand, clever men and women if they had
education and other opportunities. Napoleon
was a marvellous man, but perhaps there was
an ordinary private soldier in one of his regi-
ments, who, if he had had the opportunity
would have been as great or even greater than
Napoleon. There must be hundreds of heroes,
and musicians, and painters, and singers, and
everything-elses in the world, but you see we
shall never hear of them because for some
reason or other they will have no opportunity to
advance. Sometimes when I see a man working
away on the road, I just think that perhaps he
would have made a Shakespeare or a Nelson or
a Somebody great. Milcie does not think that
though. She thinks if she had an earl or a duke
for a grandfather, that she would be perfect.”
She paused for breath, and Nellie silently
wondered if any of the other girls were accus-
tomed to pour forth like this one. Kitty again
went on. “ Milcie adores Marion because she
is the grand-niece of a lord. If I were the lord's
grand-niece, Milcie would adore me. She imi-
tates Marion in everything, her voice, her walk,


her actions. We call her ‘ Marion's Under-
study/ and ‘ Marion’s Mirror/ but .she does not
mind. Bet and I have organised a reforming
society, and we are striving desperately to
reform these two lassies. It is dreadfully diffi-
cult.”
She sighed as if all the troubles of the universe
were on her shapely young shoulders, and then
broke into a soft little laugh. “You must think
me a queer girl, Nellie —so I am. At least the
girls say I am. But you are sleepy now, so I
will trouble you no more to-night. Try to be
brave, just do not give in to home-sickness. We
will all be so good to you; St. Mary’s girls are
all nice when you know them, and St. Mary’s
Sisters ! Why ! they are the loveliest, darling-
est nuns in Australia ! Once you get into the
way of things you will be quite happy.”
She paused/and if it had been day-time, Nellie
would have seen the pink colour rise to Kitty’s
cheeks, but the moon hid her blushes. Kitty
hated “ parading ” her piety, but she felt she
must add just one pious little thought.
“ Make a little agreement with our Lord to-
night, Nellie, offer Him all the heart-aching you
will feel during the year, in union with all the


Sorrows of His Sacred Heart. Good-night/'
She glided softly away to the window, and
Nellie drew out her rosary beads from under
her pillow. The beads slipped, one by one,
through her fingers for some minutes, then the
fingers relaxed, her thoughts blurred, the words
died on her lips —she was asleep.
She dreamt that she was Lady Nell Some-
body of Somewhere -in - England, and that
Napoleon was her great-great-grand-uncle.
Kitty remained at the window, watching the
moon and the stars, and thinking “ white
thoughts." As she passed to her bed, she
paused by Nellie's curtain to ask if she were
asleep.
Nellie lay with her arms folded, as mother had
taught her; the tamarind tree just outside the
window threw tiny, fantastic, leaf-shadows
over her face and along the bedclothes.
“ She is pretty Nellie Doran now," Kitty
softly whispered. “ I wish Bet could see her."
Then she went to bed, and was soon wander-
ing in dreamland, far, far away from St. Mary's
moonlit dormitory.
The waves still boomed on the shore; now
and then a distant boat whistled, but no one


in that long dormitory heard. They slept the
sound sleep of innocence, wrapped round in
that white moonlight, tenderly guarded by
angels' wings.


CHAPTER V
IN SCHOOL
NEXT morning Nellie went through another
trying ordeal when she was taken into
the schoolrooms, each holding row upon row
or desks filled with girls, girls, girls ! “ What
a number of girls ! ” Nellie mentally exclaimed.
And they were all regarding her curiously.
And why not ? Was she not a new girl ?
And isn't a new girl meant to be looked at ?
Poor Nellie was very ignorant of even the
simplest things, and was put into a class with
tiny children, barely up to her shoulder. Sister
Mary Alacoque asked her if she would like to
study alone, until she was fit for one of the
higher classes, but Nellie wisely remarked that
she thought she could learn better with the
others, and that she did not mind being with
the little ones.
But deep down in her proud little heart
she felt it a humiliation to be in such a low


class, and made up her mind to work hard,
and so leave the little ones as soon as possible.
She thought of Kitty's pious little pieces of
advice, and made an offering then and there
of this little humiliation to the Sacred Heart.
After observing all the teachers, Nellie felt
quite sure that hers was the very nicest Sister
in the school. But then every girl who came
to St. Mary's revered Sister Mary Dolores. They
had been doing so, each in her turn, ever since
Sister “ entered," seven or eight years before.
Some girls loved this nun, others loved another,
but all, from Catherine Reilly, the “ head
girl," down to Molly Brennan, the “ baby,"
loved Sister Mary Dolores. She sympathised
and rejoiced with every one ; she praised when
praise was deserved, and reprimanded when
necessary; in fact, she was the girls' guardian
angel.
Nellie looked into Sister's seraphic blue eyes
and loved her at once; Sister looked into
Nellie's grey eyes, saw what Bet had called
the “ cleverish " look in them, saw too, through
those clear mirrors, that Nellie's soul was
pure as a child's of tender years. Each felt
satisfied with her estimate of the other.


Several times that morning a sharp pain
caught at Nellie’s heart, and tears filled the
grey eyes; but the tears did not fall, though
there were so many things to call them forth.
The holy picture of the Sacred Heart, just
facing Nellie, was like the one in—in —mother’s
bedroom. The little girl who answered correctly
everything Sister asked her, and tossed her
head as if she knew “ lots ” more besides, had
blue, blue eyes —just like Tim’s. Even the
bright red geraniums, that pushed their pretty
heads so familiarly through the verandah rail-
ings, reminded her of the ones that grew in her
little garden, beside the old red tank, away,
far away in her humble western home.
But she would be brave —of course she would.
She should be delighted to be at school. So
she was —of course she was. But still —the
tears again welled up, but she blinked them
away and went on with her brave resolves.
Mother and father should not be disappointed
in her. She would work hard, oh so hard,
because it was her duty to God, to mother and
father, and to Pat.
Then there was another little trouble—no,
it was not a little trouble, it was a great big


trouble for a schoolgirl to bear. St. Mary’s
summer uniform was dark-blue linen, and
Nellie’s dress was of dark-blue linen, the exact
shade the other girls wore. But—there was
a difference. The other girls’ dresses were
made as fashion indicated schoolgirls’ dresses
should be made—nice wide tucks, full skirts,
and oh, such neat pretty blouses. Nellie’s
dress was made after the same pattern that
Kate and Mary’s had been fifteen years before,
for Madame Mode is not fickle in the bush as
she is in the town.
Mother, Mary and Kate had made Nellie’s
dresses —all handwork too —machines were
unknown commodities at Boonwooroo. They had
seemed so grand three days ago, and now .
But she would not be so silly as to let a dress
trouble her, a dress was only a dress, and, after
all, she was only “ plain ” Nellie Doran.
Mother and the girls should never know how
old-fashioned, plain and “ home-made ’’-looking
the dresses were that they had worked at
so long and so lovingly. All things considered,
Nellie’s first day at school was not a very happy
one. Everything was too new, too strange.
She was quick to notice the differences between


herself and the other girls, and felt it
acutely.
The final bitter drop in her cup came when
a little day-pupil, who had the tenderest little
heart imaginable, but a thoughtless head,
whispered to a companion as Nellie passed,
“ Gum leaves ! ” Then the tears fell. But
the thoughtless, tender-hearted little girl did
not know, no one knew, except Nellie’s guardian
angel, and the new, home-made linen dress
on which the hot tears fell.
Dot had kept a watchful eye on Nellie through
the day, and between classes took her round
the grounds to see all the “ show ” places of
the school —the grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes,
the huge Celtic cross, St. Joseph’s statue in
the rockery. Sister Celestine’s prize orchids,
and all the Convent “ pets.” In the afternoon
Kitty and Bet laid it upon themselves to
sacrifice all their own little plans in order to
help in “ cheering-up ” the new girl. They
had noticed her drooping lips and sorrowful
eyes. They succeeded so well in the “ cheer-
ing up ” that by the time the tea-bell rang
Nellie had forgotten the cut of her dress, her
thick leather boots, and the unkind thoughtless


“ nickname.” Her eyes were shining with
happy laughter, and she thought St. Mary's
girls the kindest girls in the world—with the
exception of two of three, who seemed very
distant and unfriendly. The home-sickness
was not gone, but it was dulled; now and
then it came with all its horrid aching and
longing, and Nellie had to bite her lips hard
and say such a lot of aspirations to keep the
tears down.
Days passed, and Nellie, drawn into the
busy ever-moving circle of school-life, had
no time for the luxury of tears. Gradually
the home-sickness wore away and she was
as happy as the happiest at Saint Mary’s. Her
frank, amiable disposition made her many
friends, and she was soon a general favourite.
Kitty and Bet had undertaken to teach her
tennis, cricket and croquet; Margaret " coached ”
her every evening in order that she might
soon be promoted; Angela called her “ Dar-
ling ” and presented her with a “ Gibson
girl ” (remarkably well done), and Dot was
so constantly by her side that Bet christened
her " The Shadow.” Elsie; who was generally
disagreeable with every one and discontented


with everything, offered to help her with her
fancy-work, and Marion stepped down from
her pedestal and offered, rather condescend-
ingly, to teach her how to make huckaback
ties.
The little ones adored her. Whenever she
appeared they " just swarmed round her like
bees round a mignonette bed,” to use one of
Bet's similes. They laid offerings at her shrine
in the shape of flowers —ofttimes rather faded —
pictures, shells, pins, needles and other mis-
cellaneous articles of no intrinsic value, but
which were accepted by their “ divinity ”
with evident pleasure and appreciation. The
little ones loved to coax her away to some shady
nook and sit round her, listening to her stories
—Nellie told the loveliest stories imaginable.
Sometimes she spoke of the wonderful bush,
its flowers and trees, its birds and animals.
Sometimes she repeated the stories father
and mother told of that dear little “ Green
Isle ” they loved so passionately. The tennis-
court, the terraces, and lawns of St. Mary’s
would vanish, and Nellie and her listeners
would roam through fairy paths, haunted
castles, gory battlefields and wonderful churches.


And oh the characters she painted in the
expressive language of the Celt, expressive,
though couched in cold Saxon —the heroes,
the saints, the fair ladies and brave knights.
Sometimes the senior girls would cluster round
and listen as eagerly as the little ones.
Milcie, however, had not fallen a victim to
Nellie’s charm of manner. “I do not like
her,” Milcie would say peevishly, “she gets
on my nerves.”
One day she lost guard of that troublesome
member, her tongue, and said scornfully,
“ She looks so dowdy in those atrocious frocks
and horrid leather boots. I hate her to be
on the line when we go out. I take care never
to have her for my partner. Fm sure she is
no credit to Saint Mary’s.
Kitty jumped up, her eyes flashing angrily.
“ Oh, indeed! Is that it ? ” she exclaimed.
“ A girl can wear old-fashioned dresses and
leather boots and be refined and ladylike.
Clothes do not make a lady. And a girl can
wear fine frocks, expensive kid shoes —like you
do —and be a nasty conceited little creature.
Milcie Grogan, it is you who are no credit to
the school. You, you, you! if you only


knew it —could see it. I did not think any
Australian could have such snobbish ideas as
you have. Nellie Doran is one of the most
refined, nicely-mannered girls here. I heard
one of the Sisters say so. So there ! ”
“So there ” was flung out defiantly as
Milcie “ swept ” through the study door.
Kitty sat down trembling with indignation,
and Bet, the only witness of the storm, vigo-
rously applauded the plain-spoken speech. By
the time she had finished Kitty had cooled
down and only said dismally—
“ There, I’ve done it again. I am so sorry
I was so fiery. I promised Sister Mary Dolores
that I would say an aspiration before I spoke,
every time I felt angry.”
“ Never mind, Kit, dear,” Bet said consolingly,
“ that was just anger. But I think poor old
Milce must feel as if she has had a shower bath
of vitriol. I hope it will do her good.”
“ Oh, Bet, however shall I do it ? ” Kitty
wailed miserably.
“ Do what ? ” Bet questioned in surprise.
“Apologise to that little —to Milcie.”
“ Apologise ! ” almost screamed Bet. “ Why,
you need not. You only did the right thing—a


virtuous thing, Kitty, you defended the absent
one.”
“ But see how I did it! Oh, Bet, I said she
had snobbish ideas. How it must have hurt
her! ” Kitty’s cheeks crimsoned at the horrid
word. “Yes, Bet, I’ll simply have to apologise.”
Bet said no more; she would not argue
against Kitty’s conscience. “ Very well, my
dear, I know you are a scrupulous soul. Do
whatever you think is right.”
“ Oh,” Kitty sighed. “ I am so glad there
was no one here but you, Bet. I could not
apologise before a lot of girls. It will be bad
enough just to herself, she will be so, so —there
I am again! Oh, Bet, please say a ‘ Hail
Mary ’ that I may be able to do it—it is so
hard.”
“I’ll say three ! Come now, straight away
to the chapel, a little prayer there will help
you more than anything else could.”
They put on their “ choir veils ” and made
their way down the palm-shaded “ chapel
walk.” At the end of the walk was the cross-
crowned little porch with its mantle of creepers.
At different seasons the porch was covered
in a mass of glorious colour, sometimes the


creamy honeysuckle decked it, sometimes the
purple blossoms of the bogainvillea or the
passion flower, and sometimes the old-gold
of the Chinese honeysuckle. The creamy honey-
suckle was now in blossom, and a few graceful
tendrils crept right up to the white arms of the
cross.
They entered softly, and knelt before the
great God —the God of humility—and Kitty
prayed to Him to help her to humble herself.
“Jesus, meek and humble of heart, make my
heart like unto Thine/’ she repeated over and
over again.
That night the apology was humbly made,
and Milcie received it grandly. “ Very well,
Kitty,” she said, in her most “ grown-up ”
voice, “ you were rude, but I shall overlook
it this time.”
Kitty bit her tongue to keep it submissive,
and hurried away lest it should “ break
loose.”
Bet was almost purple with indignation.
“ Oh,” she burst out, when they were out of
hearing, “ how I should love to shake her,
and box her pretty pink ears.”
Kitty breathed hard but said nothing, and


Bet continued, “ If she thinks she is ladylike,
she "
But Kitty laid a restraining finger on Bet's
lips. “ H-ush, Bet. You are nearly as bad
as I am. The Sisters will say I am spoiling
you." And Bet “hushed," though the words
almost forced themselves through her lips.
The “ vitriol shower" did Milcie no good.
The truth was, she, the prettiest girl at Saint
Mary's, the finest dressed too, and the most
liberally supplied with pocket money, was
jealous, jealous of “ that insignificant girl from
out west." She hated to acknowledge it to
herself, but she knew it was so. Since Nellie's
arrival Milcie had not received half so much admir-
ation, nor had she half as many listeners to her
accounts of all the parties she attended during
the Christmas holidays, and of all the com-
pliments she had received. Most of the girls
found Nellie's stories far more entertaining.
To Milcie, praise and notice were sweeter
than honey, and to see another girl receive
either was painful to her vain, selfish little
heart. Poor child, she had been badly trained.
Her vanity and selfishness had been encouraged
by a foolish, worldly mother, and the girl had


never been taught to consider the comfort
or convenience of any one else in the world—
except that of one person, and that person
was Milicent Margaret Grogan. Her vanity
and selfishness made her a most unhappy girl
sometimes.


CHAPTER VI
MUSIC
WHEN Milcie heard that Nellie Doran
was to take violin lessons, she curled
her lips into a pitying smile. “ She will never
make a musician. It will be waste of time and
money. Her large, red hands look more suited
to a broom than a bow," and she regarded
complacently her own soft white hands and
their pretty pink nails each marked with a
milk-white half moon.
Marion, who was generally too . ladylike
to say anything uncharitable, remarked that
she was afraid Nellie would never master the
violin, it was such a difficult instrument, and
Nellie certainly did not look like a musician.
Milcie and Marion were the best violinists
at St. Mary’s—they both played exceptionally
well for schoolgirls. It had never been decided
who was the better musician; some of the
girls were quite certain Marion was, and others


were equally positive that Milcie was. Sister
Mary Cecilia never expressed any opinion,
and strangely enough at each examination the
two received equal marks. They were too
conscious of their talent however, and I regret-
fully admit that they gave themselves “ airs ”
on account of it.
One morning Sister Mary Cecilia sent for
Nellie, Milcie and Marion. It was the first
time Nellie had entered “the” music room.
She had passed it often and longed for the time
when she should have the privilege—she con-
sidered it a privilege—of entering Sister Mary
Cecilia’s sanctum.
She stepped in softly, almost reverently.
A large picture of Saint Cecilia hung on one
wall, and. a statue of the saint crowned the
music press. Small pictures of master musicians
adorned the walls, and Our Lady Help of
Christians smiled down upon all from the
great picture above the piano. The air was
filled with a sweet scent from the red roses in
vases round the statue. Nellie drew a deep
breath, she felt so happy. Music seemed in
the air, and her heart swelled with joy, her
fingers tingled with pleasant anticipation.


Milcie and Marion played a duet, then each
gave a “ selection ” in her very best style.
Marion swayed to and fro, and sometimes
turned her eyes ceilingwards; Milcie frowned
at the appassionato, passage and smiled
like a cherub at the con tenerezza . But all
the “airs” were lost on Nellie; she listened
entranced, and did not once glance at the two
girls. Her eyes were fixed in a far-away
dreamy gaze. What beautiful sounds ! When
should she be able to produce such ravishing
notes? Sister Mary Cecilia, too, gave not a
glance to the performers. She stood back
a little and watched Nellie's face —her eyes.
What did she see in them to make her own
light up with joy, almost triumph?
Sister Mary Cecilia was a wonderful musician.
When she said good-bye to the world and
entered the Convent, people said, " There's a
musician spoiled. She is a genius—a genius
going to waste her talent in a convent.'' Her
friends pleaded, coaxed, in vain. Her talent
came from God, and to God alone would she
devote it. What a lot she had done for Him
in those fifteen consecrated years —every note
she played, played in God's honour, not one


little chord wasted, all, all had gone to swell
the glorious symphony that sounds about the
feet of God. She had taught many girls in
those fifteen years. Some were clever musicians
and continued to bring praise and renown to
their “ Alma Mater "; others played fairly
well, and others again were dismal failures.
But Sister was always watching, waiting, hoping
for a real musician, a girl with a soul for music.
This one played correctly, every note exact,
every little trill as it should be, but
That one's technique was excellent, remarkable,
but There was always something want-
ing, something defective, and Sister watched
and waited, and hoped.
When Marion and Milcie had taken them-
selves off, well pleased with their playing,
Sister turned to Nellie.
“Do you like music, Child ?
" I love it. Sister," Nellie answered in a
low tense voice.
Sister spoke of music, and Nellie listened
eagerly, those eyes with the “ cleverish " look
in them fastened on the nun's face. Then
there followed a short “ object lesson" on
the instrument, and at last the violin was


put into Nellie’s hands. She held it gently,
lovingly. Strange, it seemed to fall into its
place in her left hand. The fingers seemed
made for it; there was no pushing or fixing
as is usual with beginners, and she held the
bow exactly as she had seen Marion hold it.
“ Have you ever held a violin before, Nellie ? ”
“ No, Sister.”
Sister Mary Cecilia smiled, a mysterious,
happy smile, and her heart exulted.
Nellie played the open strings again and
again without “ scraping.” The lesson was
all too short, and she sighed regretfully when
it was over. Sister told her that her violin
was ordered, and would probably be delivered
some day during the week. Nellie was told
she might practise at the end of the long corridor
upstairs. It was as well for a beginner to
get as far away from every one as she possibly
could (for obvious reasons), and besides, she
would have no distractions up there.
One afternoon the violin arrived, and she
hurried to Sister’s room for it. There it lay
in its blue-lined case. Now she loved it
already—her own, own violin. Sister tuned
it, and Nellie took it up in her arms, case and


all, and hurried up the stairs with it. She
placed it on a chair in the corridor and knelt
down beside it; she laughed softly while
the tears filled her eyes, she stroked the violin
gently with her fingers, took it out, pressed
it against her face, and —kissed it!
Yes! my dear readers, she really did. I
fancy some practical-minded girls will exclaim,
“ Silly ” ! when they read the above paragraph,
and I admit that Nellie must have been a little
sentimental. Perhaps she had listened too
often and too dreamily to the whispering
breezes in the wattle, and the call of the birds
in the scrub.
There was a beautiful devotional statue of
Our Lady Help of Christians at the end of
the corridor, and taking the violin and bow
in her hands Nellie went and knelt before it.
She held them up in her arms towards the statue,
just as a child is held when being dedicated,
and so in her own simple words Nellie dedicated
her violin to the Mother of God.
She practised then for an hour, and was
perfectly happy.
Many of St. Mary's girls like “ to get out ”
of practising, and I am afraid they often


“ schemed ” for that purpose; but Nellie never
did; she loved her violin, and every spare
moment found her up in the corridor, practising
under Our Lady’s eyes. No one ever dreamt
of coming up the stairs to listen to her; she was
only a beginner, and most of the girls were quite
sure she would never be much more. No one
noticed the triumphant light in Sister Mary
Cecilia’s dark eyes, or if they did, did not under-
stand it.
The weeks flew by; Nellie studied, and
played, and practised. At study time none
worked more industriously than she ; at recrea-
tion no one entered more fully into the joy of
the moment, and ah 1 no one practised as
constantly and painstakingly as she did.
Every week a long letter went speeding on
its western way, to gladden all at Boonwooroo.
At letter-writing on Sundays, some of the
girls would sit biting their pen-handles, and
wrinkling their foreheads in vain attempts to
find “news”; then they would look at Nellie
filling page after page, and wonder wha iever
she could be writing about.
t
But there was so much to tell, and so many
questions to ask. She had to inquire after each


one, from mother and father down to Tim
and Cushla. Were the new sheds finished ?
Was Pat's cold quite better ? Was Tim taking
good care of her garden and her collie puppy ?
Had Mat broken the grey filly into side saddle ?
Had Kate finished working the quilt for Mrs.
Martin ?
Then she had to tell about her studies, her
loved violin, of the tea-cosy she was working
for mother, and the ties she was making the
boys. She described all the wonders of St.
Mary’s —the rooms, the gardens, and the sea —
the glorious sea. She told of every little act
of kindness that was done for her, but never
hinted at any slights shown her, nor at the
unfriendly criticisms that sometimes reached
her ears.
Yes, there was plenty to write about.
Time passed on, and the purple shadow that
is thrown from the Cloud of the Passion crept
closer and closer. Lent was very near.


CHAPTER VII
“SHROVE TUESDAY ”
MARGARET was slowly pacing up and
down the study verandah, her eyes
intently fixed on the book she carried—it had
an uninteresting-school-book-looking cover.
Little Mollie Brennan rushed up to her,
clapping her hands gleefully, “ Oh, Margaret,"
she said, “Sister Julia is making such piles of
pancakes, and Sister Stephen is sugaring them
and putting the fortunes in."
“ Yes, of course, dear, it is Pancake Tuesday.”
“ Oh, I know," replied the little one grandly,
“ and to-morrow is Ash Wednesday, and we
get ashes on our foreheads. And oh, there'are
lots of cakes and red apples in the kitchen."
Margaret's eyes had wandered back to the
big Mollie left her, to find a more
appreciative listener. f
Kitty and Bet came out just then, and both
assailed Margaret and her history.


“ Put that horrid-looking book away.
Professor. There's no study—nothing but
recreation from now until ten p.m.," cried
Kitty, and Bet made a trumpet of her hands
and shouted, “No study, no study, hurrah ! "
“ Well, you see," Margaret explained, “ I
missed this war the other morning, and I am
just skimming through it."
“No wars on Shrove Tuesday —away with
the book. I wonder will I get a fortune in
my pancake to-night. I have never had one
since IVe been here," said Kitty.
“ Last time I got the screw," laughed Mar-
garet. I don't think I'll be a screw. I hope I
shall not."
“No, you won't be a screw, but you'll be a
dreamy old bookworm. Put that nasty old
thing away, and
“ Come, my own, my sweet;
Ct>me, my own, my sweet;
Maud, Maud, come; I am here at the gate alone,”
warbled Kitty, and waltzed down the verandah.
Thus invited, Margaret put the objectionable
book in her desk and went off with the merry
pair. •
Fun was in the air. “ Noooh-oooh study,"


the jackass seemed to laugh from his perch on
the silky oak. “No study, no study, no study,”
the waves whispered from the beach. “ N-o-o-
--oh stud-y ” screamed the outgoing mail steamer.
There were girls everywhere, and everywhere
the girls were there was a bedlam. Every one
was talking, and no one was listening. They
were going to have a glorious night—some girls
were to sing, some to recite, others play, and
Kitty was to give “ impersonations ” of all the
actresses she had seen during her holiday in
Sydney (she was a wonderful mimic). There
was to be a little dance, and lastly, supper.
Mother Agatha had promised a sumptuous
supper, and of course these healthy schoolgirls
looked on this as an appropriate ending to the
feast, and a fitting beginning for the coming
fast.
At tea-time the pancakes caused great merri-
ment. Every one was “ dying ” to find some-
thing, yet half fearful that it might be a joke
against herself. Each little “ fortune,” as the
girls called them, was enclosed in a piece of the
dough, and rolled up in the cake.
Some one passed the plate of steaming hot
cakes to Kitty. She closed her eyes and moved


her fingers weirdly in the air, as she had seen an
Indian juggler do. “ Jildee, jildee, jildee,” she
said, imitating the old Hindoo’s voice, then she
took a cake. She opened it daintily, her fork
sank into the thick sugar, and found —nothing.
The girls laughed long and merrily at her dis-
appointed face. “I really thought 'Jildee,
jildee,’ would find me something good,” she
said sadly.
Bet’s cheeks were crimson, and she tried to
push something under her cake.
“ Oh, she has something.”
“ Bet has something.”
“Don’t be mean, Bet; open it.”
Bet knew well what it was by the shape of the
little casing. She reluctantly broke it off with
her fork, and a black rosary bead rolled out on
her plate.
“ Bet has the vocation.”
“ Bet’s going to be a nun.”
“ Send me some reception-cake.”
“ How are you. Sister Mary Bet ? ”
Poor Bet’s colour heightened to a rich scar-
let, and she felt very cross with the innocent-
looking black bead.
Elsie found the “ screw,” and Milcie unkindly


remarked that it was well-placed. But her
own turn came when she found a button in her
own cake.
“ Oh, what a joke, Milcie’s going to be an old
maid.”
“ Will you keep a parrot and a dog, Milcie ? ”
“ You must get glasses —gold-rimmed ones.”
“ And wear caps and aprons.”
Milcie tossed her curls, tried to look indif-
ferent, but, as Bet expressed it, she “ tingled
with rage.”
The little ones were delighted by finding
shining coins in their cakes —bright new three-
penny pieces, and little Agnes found a pretty
gold cross.
When tea was over Milcie went to the re-
fectory door and hurled the button far into the
night. Bet thought of sending her fortune after
it, but changing her mind, she dropped the bead
into her desk, “ Perhaps ! Who knows ? ” she
murmured thoughtfully.
The study-hall was changed into a spacious
ballroom, the desks were all moved on to the
verandahs, and chairs brought in. The stage,
at the end of the room, was decorated with
palms and ferns. How Kitty enjoyed pacing


that stage, now draped artistically in yards of
soft cloudy art-muslin, now muffled in the large
red tablecloth from the study table. The
audience were most enthusiastic, and encored
her again and again; finally she was presented
with a huge bouquet of pampas grass tied with a
long silk sash.
Milcie played the “ Intermezzo from Caval-
leria Rusticana,” and rolled her eyes about and
frowned and smiled at intervals. Marion
recited “ Curfew shall not ring to-night/' and
a muffled voice from the verandah called out
a little, but a very expressive word :
“ Jam! ”
But Marion went on calmly to the end, nothing
less than an earthquake could disturb Marion.
The little ones sang and danced, and seemed
well pleased with themselves and the world in
general. Flora Macdonald, the school Melba,
sang “ Tatters," and was pelted with red gera-
niums from the basketful Bet provided.
Bet mounted the stage, and announced there
was to be a series of “ local impersonations ”
given by Mademoiselle Kitt-ay O'Bray-n.
A silence fell on the Hall; the senior girls
whispered, and one or two looked rather alarmed.


The little ones spread out their dresses and
settled themselves more comfortably on their
chairs, as if determining that they would feel
amused, be the entertainment what it may.
After an interval of seven minutes (Kitty
thought a slight delay would give a more dra-
matic effect) she appeared.
Her hair was brushed severely back from her
forehead, she wore gold-rimmed glasses, her
skirts reached her ankles, and she carried a
great big book —the biggest she could find in
the library. With shoulders drooped and head
bent over the book, she paced the stage, her
lips moving as if learning a lesson.
The audience cheered. “ Margaret, Margaret.
Just the image of her ! ”
Kitty bowed herself off, and in about two
minutes she re-appeared wholly transformed.
She had bunched her long hair up in some
mysterious way so that it looked like short
curls. The smooth, studious forehead of a few
moments before was covered with little ring-
lets ; the glasses were gone, the skirt was short-
ened, and the comfortable-looking square-toed
shoes had been changed for high-heeled, patent-
leather ones, with rubbers and large bows.


Kitty minced across the stage and tossed her
curls, screwed her lips into all possible shapes,
and held out her hands with the little fingers
well arched.
The girls screamed, they did not laugh —
few girls can laugh—they generally giggle or
scream.
“It's Milcie! ” “The picture of Milcie.”
“ However does Kitty do it ? ” they cried.
Milcie tried to look amused, and even called
up a sickly smile, but she did not relish Kitty’s
“ turn ”at all. The girl pacing the stage —her
very self —seemed accusing her of many faults.
“ Do I really appear so ridiculous and vain ? ”
Milcie asked herself, and sighed and resolved to
try to be different.
The girls waited eagerly for the next “ turn,”
and each wondered if she should find herself up
on the stage as one of the living pictures in
Kitty’s caricature album.
With leisurely step Kitty came again in view.
Stay : it was not Kitty, it was —but the girls
will tell you themselves.
The long plait was hanging down her back,
the curls were gone; she wore a high white
collar and a dainty tie, her chin was elevated


called out “ Marion/' “ The living image o
the Duchess." “ Beautifully done, Kit."
in what the girls called a “ touch-me-not ’
style. She called out in a well-known, high-
pitched, languid voice, with unmistakably
rounded vowels, “ Kaindly go down town, ark
bay me aet yards of brown ribbon/'
Between their gasps of admiration the gir
Marion laughed her languid laugh and clapped
as energetically as it was possible for Marion
to clap. The actress was showered with im-
promptu bouquets ; and they waited impatiently
for the next impersonation. In a marvellously
short space of time Kitty was back again. Her
face seemed to have lengthened, her eyelids
drooped until they almost covered her eyes.
She held her head slightly to one side and
walked as one in a dream. She drew out
black-board from behind a clump of palms, am
began a sketch of a “ Gibson girl." It wa
atrociously done, but the artist received a
overwhelming applause. Bowing her thanl
she said, in a slow abstracted way, “ You se
darling, I cannot sketch well to-night, m;
nerves are not steady. I must wait until
spirit moves me." Then she glided away.


“The Angel/’
“ The Angel Michael.’’ “ Do
me next, Kitty,
please.’’ “Please, Kitty, give
me a turn.’’
The artist was back in a flash. This time her
face was screwed up into a discontented frown,
her lips pouting. She carried a length of fancy
work, and petulantly dragged at the cotton
which seemed to have knotted. “ Horrid thing!
It’s always the same. I hate fancy-work,”
and she threw the pretty satin on the floor.
Elsie blushed and smiled faintly. She knew
well how short-tempered and disagreeable she
was, but she did not realise until now how
repellent she must appear to the other girls.
But Kitty’s acting showed her her real self,
stripped of all the charms and graces she fancied
she possessed. “ What a horrid girl I must be !
How the girls must hate me! ” Elsie sighed and
resolved to be pleasant and agreeable in future.
The hour was getting late, so Bet announced
that there would be only one more impersona-
tion. To her surprise Kitty appeared in one of
Bet’s own dresses, her hair dressed just like
Bet’s, and she walked round the stage with
Bet’s well-known quick, short steps. Then she
stood in the centre and called out, “ Give


me the jolly—l mean give me that boo]
please/'
I must explain that Bet had a number i
brothers, a “ crowd of brothers," as she express(
it, and she had been well used to slang fro:
her babyhood. She was continually beir
reproved for it, but found it difficult to correct tl
habit. She tried earnestly, however, and tl
girls were always amused at the way she won
stop short in the middle of a sentence and corre
herself.
She laughed now and said Kitty was “ mean ”
to “ take off " her own partner. She slipped
away while Kitty made a speech, and when the
speech was over and all the audience clapping
vigorously, Bet appeared with Kitty's raincoat
enveloping her person, and a basket of Kitty’s
hanging on her arm.
She made such a ludicrous picture that tb
all giggled and screamed, and clapped, ai
called “ Encore ," and some one said, “ The mim
mimicked." m
Bet stopped suddenly in her walk across tl
boards, cast her eyes towards the ceiling, thre
out her hands dramatically and exclaimed
“ Oh, what a picture ! Look how the mo<


hides behind that soft white cloud. Isn't it
glorious ? ”
Kitty laughed and applauded, and Bet swept
one of Kitty’s stage curtesies and said, “ Hie
thee, wench, call my chair,” and disappeared
from view.
Then followed the dance. Never in all their
lives could they forget that dance, even when
school-days will be a memory of the past and
they are “ out ” and dancing at balls with
“ real ” (not girl) partners. No dance will
surely be more full of innocent delightful enjoy-
ment than that one.
When all were tired out and quiet reigned
again, Catherine Reilly struck a few rich melo-
dious chords, and the girls sang, “ Sweet star
of the Sea.” St. Mary’s was renowned for its
choral singing, and to-night the girls sang their
best —their hearts were singing, not merely
their voices. The evening’s recreation had made
them so happy, they felt at peace with all the
wide, wide world. Kitty’s little impersona-
tions had come as a revelation to some, and
filled them with earnest resolutions to correct
certain little disedifying faults. No one felt
any resentment against her, indeed they felt


they owed her a debt of gratitude. Each one
had taken the little lesson in the spirit in which
it was given—no one could be angry with Kitty.
The sweet music flooded their souls and
brought a reverential light to their eyes. Milcie
felt so sorry she had made the unkind remark
against Elsie, and resolved to atone for it as
soon as possible.
The beautiful hymn floated out through the
study windows above the sleeping flowers in
the garden until it reached the sea and mingled
with the music of the waves.
“ Sweet star of the sea,
Sweet star of the sea,
In the depths of thy shining,
Sweet star of the sea.”
When the last soft note had trembled away
into the night a bell rang out loudly and merrily
—not like the “ school-bell ” or the '‘call-
bell ” or the “ study-bell/' but such a jolly,
rollicking, ringing, holiday-bell. Kitty grandly
offered her arm to Bet, and they led the way to
the refectory, or rather the supper-room —
refectory is a word that belongs to school-days,
certainly not to holidays. Milcie walked by
Elsie’s side and took her hand. On another


occasion perhaps Elsie would have spurned the
hand after the unkind “ cut " at tea-time, but
she too was softened by the evening's fun and
the sweet hymn to Our Lady, and she took
Milcie’s hand, returning the soft pressure that
asked mutely for forgiveness.
The supper was delicious; all the girls agreed
on that point, and they drank Mother Agatha's
health and various other toasts in lemonade,
raspberry, ginger-ale, and every conceivable
soft drink. Mother Agatha kept a lolly-shop
in one of the old class-rooms —such delicious
lollies, all “ home-made." To-night she dis-
tributed these in generous helpings, for the shop
was to be closed for seven long “ sweetless "
weeks. A lolly was not to be even seen during
Lent.
The banquet ended, as every earthly thing,
however delightful, must. The glasses ceased
to clink, the merry voices died down, and when
the corridor clock struck ten the refectory was a
“banquet hall deserted,” and all the merry
revellers were kneeling round Our Lady's feet,
saying their night prayers in the dormitory
above.
BT. MARY'S PRIMARY SCEOOL
BATHUEST, F


CHAPTER VIII
LENT
THE slow-moving Lenten days passed on
and the angels were kept very Imsy
recording all the little acts of mortification that
St. Mary’s girls were earnestly practising. At
recreation hours the chapel had its train of
followers of “ The Way of the Cross/' and the
little disagreements that will occur at boarding
school were beautifully few and far between.
Cocoa-nuts ripened and fell to the ground and
were left unnoticed, although the “ little ones ”
considered it a wonderful thing to find a cocoa-
nut “ first.” But they had all resolved to deny
themselves the delicious nut and valiantly
kept their resolution, though Lucy sighed to
herself and a large fallen nut, “It’s very hard
to leave you.”
Milcie’s guardian angel knew how hard it
was for her to close her eyes when she passed
the glass-door with the dark blind, and knew,


too, that she had put away her prettiest collars
and wore those she “ hated ” because some one
had said they did not suit her. Elsie tried
very hard to be agreeable, and succeeded fairly
well, and Kitty was constantly biting her
tongue to keep back hot, stinging words. Each
girl was doing her best and sought to keep her
“ acts ” a profound secret. If One happened
to discover what another was practising, she
smiled to herself and said nothing. Not one
little act was passed over, the angels counted
every one, and marked them down with golden
strokes in the Great White Mark Book.
One day little Agnes O'Malley, who was “ six-
and-a-half,” received a box of chocolates from
home —such a lovely big box, filled with “ gin-
gers,” “ creams,” “ almonds,” “ jellies,” and
all manner of varieties. She clapped her hands
at sight of the silver-papered beauties, then
bravely closed the box. “ It's Lent. We can't
eat them now,” she said to the other little ones;
“I'll share them with you when Lent is
over.”
“ St. Patrick's Day is coming,” volunteered
Mollie.
“ Oh, yes ! so it is, and it's a great feast-day,”


Agnes replied gleefully; “ well, we’ll have a
chocolate-party on St. Patrick’s Day.”
A few days later every one was employed
making green bows, harps, and shamrocks. The
air round the music-rooms was sweet with Irish
melodies and the dear old songs were on every
one’s lips. Kitty was most enthusiastic; she
stitched away at the little “ bits o’ green,” her
eyes bright with patriotic fire. “You see,” she
explained, “ My father and mother are terribly
Irish. We are an Irish family; even the dog is
Irish —he’s an Irish terrier. Of course, I like
Australia best—Australia is the loveliest coun-
try in all the world, but I love Ireland too, and
I love the green. On St. Patrick’s Day I always
feel as if I wanted to cry and laugh and scream
out at the top of my voice.”
“So do I,” put in Bet; “ but you see, Kitty,
we belong to the O’s ; the banshee in our fann-
ies makes us so er—hysterical.”
“ Oh, we are all Irish on St. Patrick’s Day,”
laughed Alice.
Kitty had finished her harp, and pinning it
on her blouse, she strode up and down the room
singing with spirit:


“ Remember the glories of Brian the Brave,
Though the days of the hero are o’er.”
The girls applauded, and one or two “ chimed "
in./
“No one but an O'Brien could sing like that,"
declared Alice; “you see, Kitty is descended
from Brian Boru and the spirit is in her."
“ Yes," laughed Angela, “ she wanted us to
write her name O'Brian, but we refused —posi-
tively."
“ Our house is named ‘ Kincora,' " Kitty said
proudly, “ and my father's name is Brian
O'Brien."
“ Well, if you are a descendant of Brian
Bom's, I am a descendant of Niall of the Nine
Hostages—O'Neill," Bet said emphatically.
“ Oh, do stop, please," Margaret expostu-
lated, “or go a little further back and claim
kindred with Adam."
The conversation was brought to a close by
the clang clang of the study-bell, and Kitty
whirled away, humming softly, “ List, list, list
to the Convent Bells."
St. Patrick's Day dawned clear and bright,
with just a little snap of the coming cool weather
• 1 •
in the air. The grass had been freshened by the


recent rain, and every tree was “ wearin’ o'
the green/' The bay was one great big glitter-
ing sapphire—the two colours seemed to run
into each other, the blue mingling with the green
—Australia and Ireland.
Just as the first streaks of sunlight were
flashing up from the sea, a burst of music
swelled triumphantly through St. Mary's halls,
and the girls woke up to the lively strains of
“St. Patrick's Day" and “ Garryowen."
“ Oh," they exclaimed, “ it's Brian Boru's
relation. Some one go and hurl a pillow at
her "
But the music went on, and on, tune after
tune, and there was no more sleep that morning.
After mass the girls sang a hymn to St. Patrick,
and fire and fervour trembled in the voices
of the Irish-Australians. Little Mollie whis-
pered to Lucy afterwards, “ There were tears
on Kitty O’Brien's face, and her lips were laugh-
ing, and she was singing as hard as she could.
Isn't she a funny girl ? "
“ Vewy funny," agreed Lucy.
Breakfast was a pleasant meal; every one was
in holiday humour, and smiles and jokes were
the order of the day. Nellie's smiles were a little


pensive, and there was a soft mist about her
eyes. She was thinking of St. Patrick's Day at
Boonwooroo, and wondering if they missed her.
“ Madame Deschamps is going to the concert
with us to-night; she's such an old nuisance, and
I am so unlucky, I always manage to sit next
to her, and she talks —gabbles —French at me,
and I can only stare stupidly at her, and nod
my head with here and there a “ oui or a
“ non," sighed Bet.
“ I love madame. She is a darling old
chaperon," Angela said. “ I love to sit near
her, and try to keep up a conversation in
French.'
“ You have strange tastes, Angelina Loo;
you love marmalade —nasty bitter stuff! And
you love all soury things—including madame,"
Bet returned.
“ I like madame while she talks English—
slowly ; but when she gabbles French sentences,
I wish her a thousand miles away," Kitty
tragically exclaimed. "You see, Bet and I are
hopeless at French, and that is why we have no
love for madame."
Madame Deschamps lived close to St. Mary's
and always acted as chaperon to the girls. She


was a kind woman, and fond of her charges, but
she had very prim ideas that did not quite
please these Australian maidens. Bet said that
when madame fixed her bright eyes on one,
one straightened instantly into the stiffness of a
poker, and remained rigid until madame turned
her eyes elsewhere.
The concert was greatly enjoyed by all. It
was Nellie’s first concert, and excitement flushed
her cheeks and brightened her eyes, and Milcie
said amazedly, “ Why, Nellie Doran looks really
pretty ! What a pity she hasn’t a nice dress
instead of that calico thing.”
But unmindful of the “ calico thing ” Nellie
was supremely happy, for music was round her,
and music was her delight.
The national airs floated through the hall
and brought memories of home to all the exiles
there, and fancied visions to all those who loved
the dear little western isle, although they had
never seen her fair wondrous beauty.
Sometimes the faces were sad as wailing
melancholy notes stole upon the air; then eyes
brightened and flashed, as stirring martial
strains woke the Celtic blood, and again, lips
smiled tenderly at some old crooning melody


that seemed to have been wafted straight from a
Connaught cabin.
Kitty and Bet sat as far away as possible
from madame, and when “ O'Donnell Aboo "was
sung, Kitty could scarcely refrain from helping
the singer.
The girls sighed regretfully when the concert
was over. “ Oh," Bet said wearily, “no more
jollifications until Easter."
“ What a long, long time," the girls wailed
in chorus.


CHAPTER IX
THELMA
I ENT slowly passed away and Easter drew
near. Oh, the joy of packing up for the
holidays ! Home for ten days —ten glorious
days—no lessons, no early call, no practising,
no silence. Ten days of perfect bliss. Some
girls looked on sadly, while others hilariously
packed dress-baskets, for when one's home is
too far away to allow Easter flitting it is rather
depressing to watch another's preparations for
the home journey. Many girls took friends
home with them, and there were only a very few
solitary beings to stand on the verandah and
wave handkerchiefs to the last “ departures."
These lone ones soon brightened up, for the
Sisters did everything to make their holidays
pleasant. There were picnics, parties, sea-trips
and land-trips, and even a fancy-dress ball,
with a prize from Rev. Mother for the best


costume to be made by the wearer herself,
without assistance from anybody.
Dot took Nellie home with her; Mrs. Lawless
had written out to Boonwooroo weeks before-
hand, and the Dorans were delighted that Nellie
was to spend her holidays with the dear little
girl they knew and loved through Nellie's
letters.
The Lawless' home—“ The Bungalow," on
Titree Road, was a beautiful house, beautifully
furnished, and Nellie felt rather awed at first
by all the unaccustomed grandeur, but she
soon discovered there was an atmosphere of
love and kindness in “ The Bungalow," and it
is in such an atmosphere that sensitive people,
like our little bush maiden, thrive and are
happy.
Milcie and Marion were staying with Milcie's
aunt, who lived just across the river from the
Bungalow, and the girls met very frequently
during the holidays. Lent had so improved Milcie
that she was quite affable to Nellie, and even
danced with her at Dot's “ evening," although
there were many fashionable young ladies
present, before whom, some weeks back, Milcie
would not have recognised Nellie Doran.


Marion had grown fond of the quiet little bush
girl, and sought her company on all possible
occasions, and Milcie sometimes felt very jealous.
The holidays slipped by all too quickly, and
at last the tenth day came, flew away, and cabs,
phaetons, victorias, and one or two motor cars,
brought back St. Mary’s wanderers.
The first news that greeted each girl on her
arrival was, “ Oh, there’s a new boarder, her
name is Thelma Ray. She is such fun, and so
conceited.”
Of course every one was “ dying to see her,”
particularly when they heard she had “ piles
of lovely clothes,” and “ heaps of beautiful
jewellery,” and that her father kept The
Waratah, the ultra-fashionable hotel of the
city, and owned a motor car, a motor launch,
and every conceivable luxury.
Of course she could not wear the lovely dresses,
she must robe herself in navy blue linen, like
all St. Mary’s girls, and of course the piles of
beautiful jewellery would be locked up in
Mother Ita’s press; still she had them, and every
one might see them before they were taken
away.
Thelma was rather tall, plain-faced, very


affected and very indolent. When Milcie heard
of the new girl’s wealth, she felt her heart drawn
towards Thelma—at least to the motor car and
the “ sweet little launch.” Poor child, her love
of wealth and fashion was very great and very
lamentable. The charitable Lenten thoughts
and the resolutions against her pet fault began
to evaporate, and when Thelma laughed at
Nellie’s leather boots, and asked did her dress
come from Paris, Milcie joined in the laugh and
pretended not to know Nellie Doran " very
well.”
Thelma and Milcie became friends at once —
they were kindred spirits. Milcie was shown all
Thelma’s treasures, her dresses, ribbons, ties,
jewellery (of which she had a ridiculous amount
for a schoolgirl) and the “ darling ” little silver-
topped toilet set. Milcie sighed enviously at
each fresh wonder and felt that she loved Thelma
Ray.
Thelma gave a vivid account of her father’s
wealth, of their house on the island, where they
spent the summer months, of their other house
out on Dover Road, the station “ up country,”
the dinners, balls, etc., etc., and Milcie told her-
self in the extravagant language of a school-


girl that she “ simply adored ” Thelma Ray,
and considered Marion quite a secondary person.
Marion, although the grand-niece of an English
peer, was rather stinted, for times had been
“ hard ”to squatters lately. Angela had come
back with a new craze in the shape of a dainty
little autograph album with a pretty red kid
cover. The whole day her soft voice was heard
asking, “ Would you please write something in
my little autograph album ? ” And then
“ Thank you so much, darling/'
Angela tried to attract the new girl's attention,
but Milcie considered it her privilege to mono-
polise Thelma’s company and feast her ears
on Thelma's gorgeous stories. At night-recrea-
tion Angela at last succeeded in putting the
little red-covered book in Thelma's hands, and
that young lady wrote —
“ I care for nobody, no not I !
And nobody cares for me."
Bet, smiling suggestively at the two newly-
made friends, wrote on the opposite page —
“ O wad some pow'r the gif tie gi’e us
To see oursel’s as ithers see us."
Dot’s verse was the sweet little hackneyed—•


“ Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever ;
Do noble things, not dream them all day long.”
Nellie’s—
“ This is the luxury of music. It touches every key
of memory and stirs all the hidden springs of sorrow
and of joy. I love it for what it makes me forget and
what it makes me remember.” —Belle Brittain.
Kitty preferred to be original and scribbled
hastily —
“ Just see my face—
My seraphic look—
I’ve writ my name—
In the angel’s book ! ”


ST. MARTS m-vMrv o
SCHOOL
batkjjhst.
CHAPTER X
“MAY DAYS”
OUR Lady's month was always fittingly
celebrated at St. Mary's. It was a time-
old custom for the girls to try who would be
down in the study “ first" on May Day. The
“ early bird" was allowed to place a pair of
rosary beads (provided for the purpose) in our
Lady's hands, and to write her name on the
white card attached to the beads. It was consi-
dered a great honour to have one's name on that
white pearl rosary, and each girl told herself
that she would be first.
The faintest glimmer of day was breaking
across the sea when Kitty stepped softly into
her slippers and wrapped her dressing-gown
about her. The dormitory was quiet, no one
seemed stirring. She tiptoed across the corridor
and down the stairs —ugh, how cold it was;
how the stairs creaked, but how “ lovely "to be
first! She entered the study. It was rather


dark and the air was heavy with the breath of
the white chrysanthemums that decked Our
Lady’s statue. She groped her way between
the desks and was half way across the room
when a beam of light came through an eastern
window and showed her that the pearl rosary
was already in Our Lady’s hands, and Nellie
Doran, enveloped in the bright-red wrapper
that Thelma Ray styled a “ crow-scarer,” was
kneeling at Our Lady’s feet.
Kitty tiptoed out and her lips trembled just
a little with disappointment. At the foot of
the stairs she met Bet, and Marion was seen
further up. “Too late, too late, ye cannot do it
now. Nellie Doran is there. She must have
slept in the study.”
“Oh, I am so sorry; I wanted to be first
because I knew Our Lady would keep me good
the whole month if I were. Oh, I am a sleepy
head,” Bet wailed.
They were too disappointed to return to bed,
but stole softly on to the balcony to enjoy the
wonderful picture the sun was painting. Straight
across the east a thick grey cloud hung like a
curtain. One little red spot appeared in the
centre of the grey; it widened out, further and


further, the grey cloud was torn across, with
bright red streaks showing through the rents,
all the grey melted, and 10, the sun was up, smil-
ing on the blue bay and tipping the convent
crosses with the softest little good-morning kiss.
“ Glorious/ ’ sighed Kitty, with a wrapt look
in her eyes.
“ Um," Bet replied in a soft undertone, for it
was too early for loud talking, “it is glorious.
Puts me in mind of bacon and eggs—egg I
mean. The sun looks like a lovely big fried egg,
and those little red clouds like pieces of bacon.”
Kitty turned a wrathful glance on Bet, and
Marion actually laughed outright.
Two or three girls jumped out of bed a few
minutes before the call-bell rang and made an
attempt to rush downstairs.
“ Don’t hurry, Nellie Doran was down before
sunrise,” somebody said, and the late ones
sighed regretfully.
Two senior girls—children of Mary —had
“ charge ” of Our Lady’s oratory in the study,
and they took great care of it. Such soft white
clouds of feathery chrysanthemums they wrapped
about her feet, and what pretty little twinkling
red lamps they set amongst the flowers ! It


would do you good to see the oratory, and to
hear the sweet hymns the girls sang each even-
ing.
Nellie had “ charge ” of the statue of Our
Lady Help of Christians in the top corridor,
where she practised, and the girls were aston-
ished at the artistic way she arranged the
flowers.
One day Kitty said to a little group of girls,
“ Nellie Doran has such taste ” (Thelma tit-
tered). “ Yes, she really has,” Kitty went on.
“ Our Lady’s statue in the top corridor is just
beautifully decorated. The flowers form a
large capital M, and they are not the least bit
stiff either. I wish I had such taste, and that you
had too, Thelma.”
Each girl went up during the course of the
day to see for herself, and Bet happened to go
while Nellie was practising. She came down
again, a mystified look in her dark eyes, and
went straight to Kitty. " Kitty,” she breathed
excitedly,” Nellie Doran is practising, and it’s
just heavenly. Why even the scales she plays
are worth listening to, and she has only been
learning one quarter. Kitty, I believe Nellie
Doran is going to be a great musician.”


“ Oh, if she were going to be anything wonder-
ful, Sister Mary Cecilia would have known long
ago, Bet/'
“ Yes, but she would not have told any of us.
Oh, Kit, do you remember the guesses we had
about Nellie the night before she came ? You
know we were hoping she would take Milcie and
Marion down a little/' Bet rattled on breath-
lessly.
“Yes,” Kitty returned with exasperating
coolness, “ I remember distinctly, but why so
excited, my sweet coz ? ”
“ Simply because she is going to do it after
all—not with her beauty (although her appear-
ance is wonderfully improved), not with a rich
grand-uncle, but with her music. Mark you,
Kitty O'Brien,” Bet said with affected solemnity,
“ Nellie Doran is a budding genius. I know
music when I hear it, although I am a failure
myself. I have never heard any girl play like
Nellie does, and then she has been learning such a
little time. Yes, Kitty, she's a genius.”
Kitty laughed.
“ Very well, laugh,” Bet said huffily. “But
if you won't believe me, go and listen your-
self.”


Kitty stole up to the top of the stairs and
listened. “You are right, Betty, I believe.
Right for once in your life. She is not only a
budding genius, but a real blossoming one.
Why that piece is much better than anything
Marion or The Mirror play."
“ Don’t tell a soul, Kit. This is our discovery.
Let it burst upon the girls like a bombshell.
Oh, it will do Milcie good. She is getting vain
and affected again. She was much better just
before Easter holidays, but since that Thelma
Ray arrived Milcie is worse than ever.”
“Yes," Kitty sighed wearily, “ Thelma is
another patient for our reforming medicine;
Marion is almost cured, but this new one is a
very bad case —the worst stages of vanity and
affectation. Oh, what a surprise for some
people if the girl from the bush turns out to be
a wonder in disguise."
“ No ‘if’ about it, Kitty O’Brien, it is quite
certain."
The white May days slipped into the past —
May days always seem white, Bet said, because
there are so many white chrysanthemums
about. The gardens were crowded with these
beautiful blossoms, and there were beds of


cosmos —all colours —that looked just like flights
of pretty butterflies when the soft breezes moved
their petals to and fro, up and down.
The May mornings were very sweet and the
girls loved a morning stroll in the gardens. A
favourite walk was down by the white paling
fence that led to the side gate. The old fence
was tangled in creepers and at present covered
in blue convolvulus, whose flowers, alas ! only
lasted during the morning.
Nellie was often seen pacing this quiet walk,
watching the sea and the flowers and listening
to the morning call of the pewits in the trees.
No wonder, then, that when she practised, her
music had something of the sweetness of the
birds in it and something of the soft moaning of
the sea.


CHAPTER XI
“THAT CONCERT”
SOMETHING unusual was in the air; the
whole day the senior girls wore mysterious
smiles, and gathered in groups of threes and
fours to discuss whisperingly some important
matter. The juveniles wondered and sighed
enviously to be “ big girls/’
Alice Hayes first heard the news and spread
it abroad. And what was it? Just this —the
senior girls were all going to a grand concert, to
be given by a celebrated company in the theatre.
“ Father O’Rourke has invited us, he invited
every one, even the babies, but Rev. Mother will
not allow the tiny ones to go. Of course they
could not appreciate it,” Alice had said.
After the first bursts of delight some one said,
“ Oh, isn’t Father O’Rourke a perfect angel ? ”
“ Isn’t he kind ! ”
“ I shall say a decade of my rosary for him
to-night.”


“ One decade ! I shall say the whole rosary."
41 And I."
“ And I."
“ And I."
That afternoon girls were to be found brush-
ing out their white dresses, smoothing ribbons,
fixing laces, putting a stitch here and a stitch
there. After an early tea, the fortunate ones
hurried to the dressing-room and the “ little
ones " sadly went their weary way. “ I wish I
were a big girl. Big girls have all the fun,"
Mollie said poutingly.
Meanwhile in the dressing-rooms above all
was confusion. What else could be expected
when twenty-two schoolgirls were dressing?
The conversation was something like this :
“ Oh, my dress is so crushed, I shall look a
hideous fright."
“ Could any kind person oblige me with a
white hair-ribbon, some one has spilt ink on
this ? "
“ Did Mother Ita give you any jewellery, Kit ?
I begged for my sweet little cross and chain,
but she refused, and only gave me this horrid
old brooch."
“No. I don't want any. I hate jewellery.


I think it's barbaric —I feel like a South Sea
Islander if I wear any.”
“ Kitty O’Brien, you are queer.”
“ Did any one ever see such a forehead as I
have ? ” wailed Margaret as she tugged at her
black locks. “My hair will not come down nicely
like other people’s, it goes up into two horrid
little cows’-licks ! ”
“ Cows’ licks. Peg ! Why they are a sign of
Beauty.”
“ Only the sign.
“ Please tie this bow, it simply will not tie
properly for me.”
“ Who took my hair-pins ? ”
“ Has anybody a button-hook ? A button-
book, a button-hook! My kingdom for a
button-hook ! ”
“ Milci e,when are you coming away from that
glass ? Remember there are twenty-one of us
beside you and each one has a face.”
The glass was long, and set in a stand, and
could accommodate a dozen girls at the same
time —six on each side. They were peeping
over one another’s shoulders and peering under
one another’s elbows. Milcie had monopolised
one corner—the corner nearest the gas.


Just let me see if my belt is straight/’
“ Just a moment, please, until I have a glance
at this back-bow. Do you think the colour
suits my dress, or shall I wear this cream piece ? ”#
“ This blouse is too small. I have grown
since I wore it. I feel so squashed. I hope I
shan’t sneeze; I’m sure some buttons will fly
off if I do.”
“ I cannot find my skirt. Did any one move
it, I left it here on the stand? Now I cannot
go. I knew something would happen to pre-
vent my going. I cannot go without a skirt,
can I ? Will nobody help me to find it ? ” This
last lament came from Elsie Ryan as she threw
herself on to a chair and burst into tears.
Six girls flew to assuage her grief; six more
dashed about looking for the missing garment,
and three others pounced on it, simultaneously,
just where Elsie had hung it herself. She
smiled through her tears, “ Oh, thank you, I
remember I hung it over there.”
Nellie was ready long before the others, and
made herself generally useful by tying bows,
fastening hooks, arranging curls, etc.
“ Oh, Nellie, you are a darling,”
“ Thank you so much, Nell.”


“THAT CONCERT” 107
“ Please, Nellie, come to me next, you have
such clever fingers, mine are so clumsy.”
“ Nellie, could you untie this knot ? The
provoking thing gets tighter and tighter the
harder I tug —ugh! Oh, thanks, Fm everlast-
ingly obliged to you, alanna.”
Nellie was attired in her white cotton dress
and looked very stiff and very old-fashioned.
Thelma Ray in a soft cloud of crepe
de chine, smiled as she compared her dress with
Nellie's. Had she but known it, Nellie made a
far more pleasing picture, for her face was
simple and girl-like, while Thelma’s wore a silly.
affected expression that was anything but
becoming.
When Kitty was ready she put in the time by
sweeping curtesies to the wardrobes, quoting
lines from various poets, and sometimes burst-
ing into original “ un-scannable ” rhyme, like
this :
“ There was a sound of revelry by night,
St. Mary’s dressing-room was all a flurry,
Her maidens to a concert grand were going,
And that’s the reason of the tear and hurry.”
Wheels sounded on the gravelled drive,


every one made a frantic rush for a last look in
the mirror. “Do let me have a peep/'
“ Move your head, please, Milcie.”
“ I can’t see a thing. Some people are vain.”
Kitty was leaning out the window. “ One,
two, three, four. Just fancy, girls, four cabs,
’twill look like a wedding.”
“ St. Mary’s on parade.”
“ Madame has arrived,” announced Dot.
“ Don’t keep her waiting a minute or she
will tell us, in French, that it is not ladylike to
be unpunctual,” Bet said warningly.
A bell rang in the study. A few very vain
girls lingered a moment for another peep in the
mirror, and then made their way after the
train of white-robed maidens descending the
stairs.
Madame counted them all; Sister Mary Bea-
trice said “ Good-bye, God bless you.” The
girls settled themselves in the cabs, there was a
grating of wheels on the gravel and flicking of
whips, and they were off.
“ What a blessing it is a moonlight night,”
sighed Kitty contentedly. “ Half the pleasure
of the evening would be spoiled if it were dark.
When I grow up and give parties and things, I


shall always have them on moonlight
nights.”
“ Oh, Kit, we just managed to escape Madame;
that is a greater blessing I think. I saw her
going towards that cab with the grey horses,
so I ran to this one. Madame has an affection
for grey horses. I suppose that is because
Napoleon's pet horse was grey.”
“ Poor Thelma and Milcie. They are with
Madame, and they simply detest French. I feel
so sorry for them.”
Nellie was sitting opposite Kitty; she had
not been listening to the foregoing conversation,
her thoughts seemed miles away—“ wool-gather-
ing,” Bet called it. Nellie leant over towards
Kitty. “ Are you sure there is a violinist ? ”
“ Positive. Alice saw a programme.”
Nellie leant back again, with a happy little
smile breaking round the corners of her mouth,
her fingers lightly over an imaginary
finger-board. Bet threw Kitty a significant
glance, and they both smiled, knowing little
smiles.
Madame marshalled her twenty-two maidens
like white sheep before her, and then seated
herself in the centre of them. Poor Thelma—-


who still struggled with the opening chapters of
Chardenal —was at her right, and Milcie —who
had been right through “ Charie,” and forgot-
ten more than half of “ him” —was at her left.
Both girls looked sadly uncomfortable.
St. Mary's girls looked very “ nice” and many
people cast admiring glances at them.
“ What a charming set of girls ! ” a lady
observed to her companion. “ Did you notice
how well they carried themselves; they look so
lady-like, see how upright they sit.” (Who
would not when Madame, that most proper
person, was in charge!) “ Those Catholic Sis-
ters have marvellous success with their girls. I
quite admire them.”
Father O'Rourke sat up in the dress-circle
and received twenty-two pretty little bows,
and twenty-two expressive looks of gratitude.
The concert proved everything that was antici-
pated. The violinist was a mere boy, but played
with a strong full tone, and Nellie listened to
his playing in an ecstasy of joy. Bet and Kitty
exchanged more smiles and glances.
“He is only a boy,” Nellie told herself.
“ Oh, if I could play like that! Some day I
shall play like that. Some day. Some day.”


The strains of the violin floated softly through
the air, and seemed to whisper—“ Some day.
Some day/’
The programme was long, but no one tired of
it, for it was all so beautiful.
The four cabs rolled up St. Mary’s Avenue at
half-past eleven. “ How delightful to be up so
late,” Kitty whispered.
“ Quite a novelty ? ” Bet replied, stifling a
yawn.
There was a tempting little supper ready,
and Sister Mary Beatrice was waiting up as
solicitous as Martha. Every one attended to
Madame, and offered her dainties in good, bad
and indifferent French. Then everybody thanked
her, wished her “ Bonne nuit,” and four girls
escorted her to the little gate that led into her
own garden.
After supper the revellers ascended the stairs
and whispered sleepy “ good-nights.” Nellie
went to sleep, with little snatches of that won-
derful boy’s playing running through her mind
and making her fingers tingle.


CHAPTER XII
TWENTY-FOURTH OF MAY
ONE evening, just as recreation began,
Kitty and Bet were holding a conclave
in suspicious undertones, and their dark eyes
sparkled mischievously.
“You know we will not really frighten her,
but just give her a little start. She was boasting
of her bravery the other day, and said she was
afraid of nothing —absolutely nothing on earth. "
“Oh yes, Kit, what fun ! But are you sure
she is going to bed early ? "
“Yes, I heard her say so. We'll hide in the
bottom corridor just at the foot of the stairs.
We must bring some of the girls with us to
enjoy the fun, and to behold the brave and
courageous Milcie."
Bet had qualms of conscience. “ But, Kitty,
don’t really frighten her, perhaps she has heart
disease, and you might scare her into the next
world."


“ Pshaw ! Heart disease ! Indeed she has
not; she has no heart, so could not possibly
have the disease. Besides, I won’t frighten her
much, I'll just step out wrapped up in a sheet,
and say something appropriate.”
“ I don’t quite like it, Kitty. She might get a
great fright.”
“ Silly ! She will not; I promise I shall not
go too far.”
They separated, and in a few moments the
news was imparted to the select few who were to
witness Milcie’s “ take-down.”
One or two girls objected, as Bet had done,
but Kitty assured them there was no cause for
alarm, “she would not frighten her very much,”
so they, too, joined the little group who crouched
at the side of the staircase. The gas was
lowered to a ghostly glimmer, and Kitty
robed herself in the sheets she had stripped
from her bed. She really presented an uncanny
spectacle as she stalked the dim corridor for
the girls’ admiration. Then she drew into the
shadow and waited. After a minute or two
the door at the end of the corridor opened, and
steps were heard approaching. There were a
few smothered chuckles, and a great deal of


“ hush-hushing/' beside the stairs. The steps
came nearer and nearer, and Kitty made her
ghostly appearance, with outstretched arm
from which the draperies hung in weird
unearthly-looking folds. She clasped her victim:
“ Hamlet, I am thy fa ”
There was a suppressed little shriek, and a
soft: “ The Lord save us ! ” fell on Kitty’s
trembling ears.
She released her hold and dragged frantically
at the sheets to uncover her face. “ Oh, Sister,
I beg your pardon. I thought—l mean I didn’t
think —at least Oh, Sister, have you heart
disease ? ” The more she tugged at the sheets
the tighter they enclosed her.
“ Glory be to God, what ails the child ? ”
Sister Mary said amazedly, thinking pityingly
that one of the boarders had “ gone wrong in her
head.”
The other culprits emerged, all apologising
profusely, and explaining that Kitty “ didn’t
know,” she didn’t mean,” etc., etc., until Sister
was well-nigh bewildered and wondered if all
the boarders had had a sudden seizure of insanity.
They dragged the winding sheets from “ Ham-
let’s father’s ghost,” and some one became
coherent, and Sister grasped the case.


She was not angry, and the girls called her “ a
duck,” “ a peach,” “ a lovey-dovey,” and such
like irreverent appellations. She gave them a
little lecture on the evil of playing practical
jokes, and departed to her cell amid a shower of
blessings and good-nights.
Just then Milcie appeared with a supercilious
glint in her pretty blue eyes and a perter toss
of her fair glossy curls.
“ That was a failure,” she said in her exaspera-
ting way. “ I knew. A little bird told me of
your mean plot, and I saw Sister Mary coming
along and let her go first! ”
“You wicked girl. How did you know that
Sister might not have a weak heart ? ” said Bet,
for Kitty was too humiliated to speak. “We
knew yours was not weak, because you haven’t
one.”
Milcie waved an airy good-night and kissed
her fingers provokingly as she ascended the
stairs.
“ Yes, it was a failure,” Kitty said sadly. “ I
rather think I got the fright. When I felt the
veil I nearly collapsed. Oh, if it had been Rev.
Mother ! I thought it was for a fraction of a
second, and the harder I tugged at those horrid


sheets the tighter they seemed to get. Oh, it
was dreadful. Eve finished with frightening
people/’ She sank dejectedly upon the lower
step and gazed piteously into the laughing faces
around her.
“Oh yes, you can all laugh. But if you had
been the ghost you would feel rather serious/’
Milcie leaned over the bannister and smiled
a smile that positively sparkled with triumph.
“ Hamlet, I am thy fa ” she laughed mock-
ingly.
The disappointed jokers returned to the study
and Kitty was unusually quiet for the remainder
of the evening, a nasty feeling of failure hung
over her. “ Fancy letting that horrid little
Milcie Grogan turn the joke against me”
Next day, May the twenty-fourth, the feast of
Our Lady Help of Christians, Patroness of Aus-
tralia, was of course a holiday. At breakfast-
time a rumour spread to the effect that Nellie
Doran’s oratory in the top corridor was just
“ divinely” decorated.
“You see, as it is the feast of Our Lady Help
of Christians, she wanted to have it extra beauti-
ful, and she has succeeded. It’s just too lovely
for words,” Bet said in a rapturous tone.


After breakfast many of the girls went up
to see the oratory, and for fully five minutes
nothing could be heard but “ Ooohs ” and
“Aahs” and an avalanche of adjectives.
Nellie had surpassed herself. White chry-
santhemums, forming a lyre, extended to the
very crown of the statue, and feathery asparagus
fern had been entwined with the flowers to
make the curves graceful. Long white tapers
stood in lines, following the outline of the lyre,
and the pretty blue lamp was close to Our Lady's
feet. The tapers were not to be lit until even-
ing, but the lamp was shining and twinkling
through its blue glass, and throwing little waver-
ing shadows over Our Lady's face until it
seemed that she was really smiling. In front of
the lamp lay (oh, marvel of marvels) a little
violin made of white chrysanthemums, with a
“ real" bridge and strings of white rope silk.
Tiny pegs had been carved out of pine, and a
sweet little bow made by means of a smooth
switch and some fine sewing silk. Graceful
pot-plants were arranged round the stand, and
a blossoming eucharis-lily held the place of
honour in front. Crossed behind the lilies were
two Australian flags.


“ Lovely ! ”
" Sublime ! ”
“ Splendiferous ! ”
“ However did she do it ? ”
“ What a sweet little violin 1 ”
“ Nellie Doran is an artist. Look at the
bow.”
“ Isn’t it perfect ? ”
“ Won’t it be lovely when the tapers are
lit.”
“ Behold the flag ! Our flag,” said a patriotic
person.
“ Our Lady Help of Christians bless Australia,”
whispered a pious little maiden, and those beside
her murmured an earnest “ Amen.”
Milcie was standing aloof, a hard critical look
in her blue eyes. She disliked hearing Nellie
Doran praised so much. It was really ridiculous;
why the girl would be getting vain if it went
on much longer.
“ I don’t see anything to rave about,” she
remarked with a curl of her “bow-shaped”
upper lip.
“Of course not. How could you ? There
is not a scrap of art in you. You are blind
to all beauty —except the little you see


reflected when you look in the glass/’ cried
Kitty hotly.
“ Any one could do it if she had the flowers/’
Milcie replied carelessly.
“ If I get you piles of chrysanthemums will you
do it like this —exactly like this—to-morrow ? ”
Bet put in quickly.
“ Of course I shan’t.”
“ Because you could not. Why can you
not be just, Milcie, and acknowledge good work
when you see it ? ” Marion said, her words
coming a trifle faster than usual. She felt really
annoyed with Milcie, and wondered that any
girl could be so narrow-minded and selfish
as to deny Nellie’s work its meed of praise.
“ Well, really, there is nothing marvellous
about it. I hurried my breakfast to come up
here. Had I known this was all to be seen,
I should have had another cup of tea, and at
least two more slices of toast,” Thelma said as
she twined Milcie’s curls round her long bony
fingers.
Kitty’s cheeks grew crimson—a sure <f danger-
signal ” with her—and she opened her lips to
pour forth a torrent of red-hot words. But
a finger was lightly placed on her lips and she
was gently drawn away.


“ Sister Mary Dolores! ” she exclaimed,
and her cheeks grew redder. Milcie, too,
coloured and Thelma looked slightly discomfited.
Had Sister heard their mean remarks they
wondered ? Kitty felt very much ashamed;
she had been “ in a temper ” again and right under
Our Lady’s eyes. Sister Mary Dolores tact-
fully opened a conversation, and seemed to
have heard nothing of the little “ tiff.” The
girls crowded round her, every one trying to
show her something.
“ Look at the violin, Sister.”
“ Isn’t the bow sweet ? ”
“ The lyre is perfectly done. Don’t you
think so, Sister ? ”
“ Isn’t Nellie marvellous ? ”
“ Did you ever see anything lovelier ? ”
Sister was enchanted with it all, and her
warm praise quite made up for Milcie and
Thelma’s disparaging remarks.
When Milcie heard (several girls made it
their urgent duty to tell her) that Rev. Mother
had actually come all the way over from the con-
vent just to see Nellie Doran’s oratory, she said
angrily : “Far too much notice is taken of
that girl. She will forget she is only a common


bush girl, and imagine herself better than all
of us. I shan’t fall down and worship her
though. I can see nothing out of the common
in Nellie Doran.”
The girls had tea under the cocoa-nut palms
in a secluded corner of the beach that afternoon,
and right royally they enjoyed themselves.
“Oh ! if boarding school were only made
up of picnics and holidays, and no lessons or
practice,” Bet sighed.
“ Bet, you surprise me, at least you would if
I did not know you do not mean it,” Sister
Mary Dolores said smilingly. “You are not
quite so indolent.”
“Yes I am, Sister, but I cannot help it—
it’s a failing.”
They did not go home until the moon was
shining, and then Kitty had to be forcibly
conveyed. She said it was a sin to go indoors
on such a night, that they should stay out until
the moon sank. No one else agreed with her,
however, and they slowly walked home along
the beach, keeping time to the soft humming of
“ fhe Swanee River ” —a favourite air of Bet’s.


CHAPTER XIII
MID-WINTER
OH, Nellie, I am so delighted. But of
course I knew Our Lady would do
something for you, she always does for the May-
day girl! ” was Bet’s exclamation when she
heard that Nellie was to receive the “ green
ribbon” on the last Sunday of May. The
green ribbon, as every one knows, is bestowed
on those girls who aspire to be Children of Mary.
While wearing the ribbon they are known as
“ aspirants.” Nellie smilingly thanked Bet
and the other girls who crowded round to con-
gratulate her, and silently resolved to try hard
to win the coveted blue ribbon of the Sodality.
Mid-winter drew nigh, and the girls were
planning what they should do during that
sublime fortnight, and vowing schoolgirls’ vows
of writing long letters and sending post-cards.
‘‘Now don’t forget the post-cards, girls; I
like flowers best, and any nice scenes, but do


not, on any consideration, send me an actress —
I abhor them,” spoke Angela.
“ Send me all actresses —nice ones like
Gabrielle Ray. Oh, and Gibson girls will do,”
Kitty put in.
Before mid-winter holidays came the
martyrdom of quarterly examination, and for
nine or ten days the air was full of grammar,
geography, and all kinds of “ ologies.” Girls
were found mumbling French verbs and grappling
with Latin conjugations at all hours. Bet put
Chardenal under her pillow, and Kitty
carried a list of Greek roots everywhere she
went.
The girls were supposed to observe silence in
the refectory before grace was said, and one
morning Sister Mary Beatrice was sure she
heard whispering from the “ second table.”
Sister loved order and obedience, and as
there were few rules, she considered those few
should be observed strictly.
Yes, there was murmuring somewhere at the
other end of the table.
“ Are you speaking, Angela Carmichael ? ”
(Sister always used full names when she was
annoyed.)


“Yes, Sister/' the poor Angel confessed
blushingly.
Sister was just about to give her a “penance”
when Kitty interposed. “ Excuse me, Sister,
may I explain ? " Sister inclined her head
in the stately way she had, and Kitty continued:
“ Angela was only whispering to herself the
rule for cube root —we have an algebra paper
this morning."
Sister smiled, and advised Angela to rest
from lessons, at least during meal-times, then
she said grace, and the girls fell to talking, as if
they had been in retreat for three months.
The “ quarterly" dragged away, and one
afternoon Kitty and Bet were to be seen
waltzing down the corridor, and Nellie was
poring over The Three Daughters of the United
Kingdom. These were sure signs the examination
was over. The usual half-holiday followed, and
most of the girls employed the time in packing
up. What could be more enjoyable than
writing labels for rt home." Kitty and Bet
were supremely happy all the afternoon, not-
withstanding the fact that the one had secured
only thirty-five, and the other thirty-eight
per cent, for French. But then, as Kitty


remarked, one cannot be good at everything!
The day following the quarterly half holiday,
Nellie was in the midst of a chattering little
group of girls, who all seemed pleased about
something. Bet and Kitty joined the group and
inquired what was in the air, and Angela told
them oxygen, nitrogen, etc.
“You are getting on, Angel mine, but I mean
what is the startling news that has set you all
a-smiling ? ”
“ Oh, it’s Nellie’s news, something she likes
and still she does not like,” cried Alice.
“ Something she likes and still she does not
like,” slowly repeated Bet; “whatever can it
be ! What is it, Full-stop ? ” Bet often referred
to Dot in this happy way, for, she said, if a
full-stop is a Dot, a Dot must be a full-
stop.
* What is it ? Do tell me, some kindly
disposed person,” cried Kitty, “what is it ? ”
I know,” smiled Margaret.
“So do I,” added Elsie.
“And I,” echoed Dot.
“ Oh, please tell us. You are mean to keep it
to yourselves. Here comes Sister Mary Dolores.
I'll give her this riddle. Sister, do you know


any news concerning Nellie, something she likes
and yet she does not like ? ”
“No, dear,” Sister replied, while (to quote
Bet) “ the sweetest little smile played hide-and-
seek round the corners of her lips.”
Nellie's face was very red, and she gave
Bet entreating glances, and that young lady
suddenly burst out, “ Oh, I know, I see;
come back, Sister, I know! ”
Sister looked back, waved her hand play-
fully, and Bet blew half-a-dozen kisses after
her. “Oh can't you see it, Kittay, you are
dense as the fog we had this morning. She
likes it and yet she does not like it. Why
can't you read the riddle ? Fancy Brian
Bom's great-great-great-great-great-great ten
more greats —granddaughter not able to read
that ! Why she is going to be promoted, of
course; her exam.-papers were splendid, and
she likes the promotion, but does not like
leaving Sister Mary Dolores—and no wonder!
Catherine Mary—what's your confirmation
name ? Calico —no Alaco —no Alacoque—
Catherine Mary Alacoque O'Brayn, you are
not the least bit smart, and I once thought you
were,”


“ Oh, Nell, is that the news ? Are you very
sorry, Nell ? " But Nellie refused to answer
and slipped away out of sight.
"I am so glad she is going to be promoted.
I think she is just the best girl out to go into
class with those little ones. You know she could
have studied alone if she wished/'
“ Margaret, Sister said you have been very
kind indeed to help her as you have done.
She said you kept on most faithfully."
Margaret blushed with pleasure, and stam-
meringly said that she had not done much, that
Nellie was so quick, so attentive, and so grateful,
that it was a pleasure to help her.
“Yes, Professor, you were good," Bet said
musingly. “I did not think of it before, but
now a light dawns on me. You have been
really good, dear, and you very often gave
up your own time to help Nellie. I would have
the kindness to commence coaching her, I am
sure, and the good intention of continuing,
but I am quite positive I would have tired of
it in a week or two."
Margaret found it hard to listen to the praise
the girls showered upon her, and she too
slipped away.


The next week Nellie, wearing a medal on a
green ribbon, went up to Sister Mary Loyola’s
class.
The “ University girls ” wore rather worried,
abstracted looks these June days, for their
examination was drawing perilously near.
Margaret, Marion and Angela were “ going ”
for junior, and were seldom seen without a text-
book of some kind.
Every one was making novenas for their
success; even the “babies” were helping to
storm heaven.
“ Don’t you dare come back to St. Mary’s
again unless you each get at least three A’s.
Of course we will not object to seven, but nothing
under three will do,” Kitty told the trio.
“Yes, for the honour of St. Mary’s,” Bet
added proudly.
“ Oh, Saint Aloysius will look after you,”
said Dot. “ I have been praying to him for
you, months and months, and decorating his
picture every day.”
“ And there is my no vena to Our Lady of
the Sacred Heart,” cried some one.
“ And mine to Our Lady Help of Christians,”
Nellie remarked.


“ Don’t forget my prayers to Saint Philomena.”
“ And the little ones’ prayers to the Divine
Infant.”
“ Oh, yes, surely all those prayers will bring
us success; and we have written petitions and
put them in our Lady’s hands in the choir,” said
Marion hopefully.
“ But prayers alone will not do —heaven
helps those who ”
“ Help themselves. Of course we all know
that , Thelma, but we have been working really
hard. Sister said we study most conscientiously.”
“ Ahem! Spell the word, give the root
and meaning,” laughed Bet.
But the three ’Varsity girls—as the others
called them—could spare no more time in idle
conversation, and accompanied by their mutual
friend, “ The Ancient Mariner,” they departed
to seek a shady nook in the garden.
Bet called after them :
“Ah ! well-a-day ! What evil looks
Had I from old and young,
Instead of the cross, the albatross
About my neck was hung.”
And Kitty continued :
‘Ah ! well-a-day ! What looks ye’ll get
If ye bring not home an ‘ A,’


Instead of gold medal, a leather we’ll give
And a ducking in the Bay.”
“ That’s rather clever, isn’t it ? ” she said
gaily. “ A duck is some relation to an alba-
tross, is it not ? Third or fourth cousin I
presume.”
“ Very clever,” Milcie made answer. “ What
a pity we cannot have a lady poet-laureate!
You would fill the post admirably.”
“ And what a shame we don’t have jesters at
court nowadays. You would look charming in a
cap and bells—they would suit you admirably,”
quickly retorted the poetess.
Bet put a stop to this rather heated conversation
by calling to Kitty to come and see all the violets
in their little bed under the refectory windows.


CHAPTER XIV
AN INVITATION
MILCIE was in the seventh heaven of
delight; her father and mother came to
town for the holidays, and were staying at the
Waratah. Mr. Grogan had intended staying
at a less expensive hotel, but when he went to
the Convent his fair daughter coaxed and pleaded,
and almost cried (Milcie could cry any moment
she pleased) for the Waratah, and to the
Waratah they went.
“You know/' Milcie told Kitty in a burst
of confidence, the Waratah will be much
nicer than staying out at aunties as I had to at
Easter time—more stylish, you know. Auntie
is so strict and old-fashioned too. It will be
just lovely at the Waratah, and Thelma has asked
her mother if she may spend some of her holidays
there, and well have such an awfully good
time, Thelma is going to take me over to


‘ Ray ton/ their house on the island, you
know. Oh, it will be much better than out
at auntie’s. Auntie will miss me I know; she
loves music, and has no one to play for her
since my cousin Flora was married, and so
she likes me to go out. But I only go there
when there is no better place to go to.”
Kitty’s face had grown colder and harder
as Milcie rattled on, and at the concluding
words she simply froze. “You are a mean
little creature to speak of your aunt in such
a way. I think it would be much nicer if
you went out to stay with her, and give her
pleasure by playing for her. She is so good to
you, always sending you cakes and chocolates
and all kinds of things. But of course you are
so uncommonly selfish you could not do it.”
Kitty always said out plainly just whatever
she thought—indeed, she was a little too free
with her opinion sometimes.
Milcie tossed her curls. “ Oh, yes, you are
such a saint, you would practise mortification
by amusing a stiff old-fashioned aunt all the
holidays. Why, Kitty O’Brien, you are just
jealous—jealous because I am going to stay at
the Waratah] just realise it, the fashionable


Wav at ah, where only the very best people
stay.”
“ Jealous ! Jealous of you ! ” Kitty breathed
in astonishment. “I am going with Bet to her
cousin’s place, and have not the slightest
wish to stay at the fashionable Waratah. I
would not change with you for all the gold in
Queensland.”
Milcie smiled a sceptical smile and went her
way rejoicing.
The happy breaking-up morning arrived,
and kisses and good-byes were the order of
the day.
Good-bye.”
Pleasant holiday.”
Don’t forget to write.”
Remember my post-card.”
Hope you enjoy yourself.”
Address to the Waratah , Kennedy
Street.”
“ Good-bye. Good-bye. Good-bye.”
The last cab-full of travellers drove away,
and St. Mary’s was strangely quiet—no laughter
on the tennis court, no scales and arpeggi in the
music-rooms, no whispering in the corridors
and dormitories, no vesper hymn, and no


sweet “ Hail Marys ” echoing on the evening
breeze at rosary time. All was still. All was
calm.
When Sister Mary passed through the dor-
mitory at night and saw all the little beds
without occupants, she sighed, for Sister loved
children, and felt lonely without them. When
she said her rosary, she did not forget to ask
Our Lady to take care of all Saint Mary’s girls
and help them to resist any little temptation
they might meet with during their brief sojournf
in “ the world.” The study-bell reposed on the
press, its hard-worked tongue enjoying a nice
long rest. A pile of empty serviette rings
wondered at their long imprisonment in the
sideboard drawer, and the clock in the
corridor stopped ! Indeed it was a strange St.
Mary’s.
Meanwhile the life of the place—girls, big,
little and medium-sized —were all enjoying
themselves in the gay world, with now and then
a loving thought for dear old St. Mary’s, and
perhaps a thrill of joy at going back or perhaps
a shudder of disappointment.
One morning Milcie sat in a stylish room of
the stylish Waratah and read with smiling


eyes a little note written on pretty crested
blue paper.
“ Oh, mother, an invitation to a children’s
ball at the ‘ Bungalow ’ —Dot Lawless’s place
you know. They do things splendidly out
there. I suppose Thelma is invited also. I
think my pale pink evening dress is too shabby
and the white one is too short. You will get
me a nice new one, won’t you, mother darling ?
you know every one will be there.”
“ Mother darling” smiled and patted the
vain, shallow little head with its lovely curls,
and promised a new evening dress of palest
blue (Milcie looked well in pale tints) and pale
blue shoes and stockings to match.
Milcie threw her arms around her mother’s
neck, gave her a hug of gratitude and told her
she was the best and kindest mother in existence.
Mrs. Grogan kissed the pretty red lips and fondly
told herself her daughter was such a warm-
hearted, grateful child, and that she was indeed
a blessed woman to possess such a treasure.
Thelma came in, waving a little blue paper
over her head. “ Did you get one ? ” she
cried.
Milcie brandished hers in return, and they


fell to talking of the coming gaiety and discuss-
ing fans and flowers and jewellery.
Kitty and Bet received their invitations
that same morning, and both went into raptures.
“ My dress is rather shabby, though, and the
Angel spilt coffee over the front after Father
O’Rourke’s concert, so I shan’t be belle. But
never mind, I don’t want to be belle always,
I believe in giving other girls a chance,”
laughed Kitty.
“ My dress is no better than yours, Kit, so
we will be a pair of belles.
“ Convent belles.”
“ Of course Thelma and Milcie will be there;
they won’t go in coffee-stained dresses and
ancient gloves. I suppose they have brand-
new things and will be horrified at our appear-
ance. Milcie will think we are no credit to St.
Mary’s.”
“ What other St. Mary’s girls are in town ?
Alice is, I know. Any one else ? ”
“Yes, Elsie and Margaret.”
“ Quite a number of us.”
“ Won’t we have a splendid time! It will
be worth going out just to watch the airs
Milcie and Thelma will put on.”


“ Nellie and Marion are staying up with Dot,
so they will be there.”
“ That makes ten St. Mary's girls. I hope
we will all be a credit to the dear old school,
and that Milcie and Marion will not be too
stuck-up.”


CHAPTER XV
THE BALL
THE day of the ball was a very busy one
for Dot and her two little guests. They
were decorating the ball-room themselves.
Dot said Nellie had more taste than any pro-
fessional, and begged her mother to let them
do it by themselves. Only the gardener was
pressed into the service, and between the four of
them they managed to make the room look
beautiful. Sometimes Dot, Marion and the old
gardener would stand still and stare at Nellie.
“ However did you know that would look
pretty ? ” Dot gasped.
“ You must have read it somewhere/' Marion
cried, and Tim smiled down on the little bush-
girl and told her “ Twas herself had a wonderful
head on her shoulders."
That evening “The Bungalow ” looked like
a fairy palace. Chinese lanterns hung all around
the verandahs like huge, gorgeous blossoms;


Chinese lanterns glimmered amongst the shrubs
like huge glow-worms, and Chinese lanterns
extended in two straight rows right down the
long avenue of date-palms to the front gate.
The three girls dressed in a fever of excite-
ment (at least two of them did; Marion never
became excited, she was far too placid for such
a proceeding). Nellie was nervously excited
because she felt shy —her first “ ball and Dot
felt nervously excited at the thought of all the
boys and girls she would have to meet and talk
to, for Dot was a timid little person.
Dot, dressed in a pretty, soft, white frock
made a lovely picture; Marion looked stately
and handsome in her cream silk, but poor
Nellie was arrayed in the same old-fashioned
white dress, that looked stiffer and more
unbecoming than ever.
Mrs. Lawless would have been pleased to
give Dot's dear little friend a pretty new
dress, but she knew that Nellie was proud as
well as poor, and Mrs. Lawless would not wound
the sensitive little maiden for all the balls that
ever were or will be.
Carriages and motors began to arrive, and
soon the fairy palace was thronged with pretty
SC
i. i,'- l <A •- Ai A W-’ »


fairies in white, pink, blue, gold and all colours
imaginable.
Thelma and Milcie made a remarkable entrance
by arriving rather late. Milcie looked “ a
dream/' the pale-blue tints showing out the
glossy golden curls and deep-blue eyes. Thelma’s
dress was gorgeous, far too costly-looking for a
schoolgirl, and Milcie looked all the prettier by
the contrast. Every one was asking who the girl
in blue was, and of course the vain little lady
had excellent hearing for things of that kind
and did not miss one remark.
As she made her way across the room, all eyes
were upon her —her cup of happiness was full,
she was the observed of all observers. Nellie
and Marion watched her approach and both
felt proud of her appearance, for she was a
Saint Mary's girl, you know, and they were
pleased that every one was admiring a Saint
Mary's girl.
Milcie smiled at Marion, but when Nellie
looked up Milcie deliberately “cut” her and
passed on. Kitty and Bet were not far away,
and Kitty's face grew red as a poppy and
tears filled Bet's eyes.
Perhaps if Dot had been with Nellie, Milcie


would have been more gracious, but Dot was
not near, and poor Nellie suffered in consequence.
Thelma followed Milcie’s cue, and managed
to look the other way when she passed Nellie
Doran. Poor little Nell slipped away, unob-
served as she thought, but Bet and Kitty fol-
lowed and found her in a corner of the sewing-
room crouching behind the machine.
Of course she was crying.
Bet put her arms round her and kissed and
caressed her, but Kitty did not believe in such
ways.
“ Crying ! ” she exclaimed, and her eyes were
bright with Celtic fire. " Would you cry for her ?
Nellie Doran, I am disappointed in you. I
thought you had more spirit. Dry your eyes
this minute. Milcie Grogan is below notice;
nothing she could say or do would make me cry,
for I despise her foolish pride. Come away,
Nell; don't let Dot find you like this; she would
be so distressed; we must not let little Dot
know."
Nellie indulged in a few more sobs, but
between coaxing and exhorting Bet and Kitty
managed to get her out of the corner.
The evening was spoiled for these two kind-


hearted little girls, and Marion too was quite
depressed. ‘ ‘ Oh, how could she ? How could she
be so unkind ? I felt so ashamed of her, my
face grew burning hot. I have never felt
ashamed of knowing Nellie Doran as Milcie
seems to, but to-night I did feel ashamed of
knowing Milcie Grogan.”
The three girls determined not to tell Dot; they
were sure Nellie would not do it, and thus
kind little Dot would be spared the pain of
knowing that her dearest friend had been
insulted at Dot’s grand “ ball.” Milcie had
scores of partners, and if she noticed Marion’s
look of contempt, Kitty’s glare, and Bet’s
reproachful glance, did not mind them in the
least. Margaret, Alice and Elsie were there,
and wondered why Kitty looked so ferocious.
One would expect her to keep her temper
at a ball at least, but evidently she could not.
Dancing lasted until the “ wee sma’ hours,”
and then carriages and motors rolled up the
avenue, down again, and Dot’s ball was
over.
As Milcie brushed out her hair before her
mirror, and observed how pretty it looked against
her dark red dressing-gown, she yawningly


told her reflection that she had had a glorious
time, and that her dress was the loveliest in
the room. “ Nellie Doran did look a fright—
I am so glad I did not speak to her, because
those Fairley girls and Minna Merton were
laughing at her afterwards. What a blessing
they did not know she belonged to Saint
Mary’s. I’d have to say I knew her if they
did.”
Kitty sat on the edge of her bed and moodily
watched the clouds flitting across the piece of
sky outlined by her window. She could not
go to bed because she could not say her prayers.
Her conscience told her she should not feel so
angry with Milcie, and her guardian angel
suggested softly that she should say a “ Hail,
Mary ! ” for her.
“ Oh, I can’t. I simply can’t! She is too
nasty. I almost hate her.”
A picture of our Lady of the Sacred Heart
hung opposite her bed, and Our Lady seemed
to fix a steadfast gaze on her little angry
child. Kitty closed her eyes tightly. “ I
won’t look at you, Blessed Lady, because I
know you’ll make me give in, and I don’t want
to. Just let me keep on being angry until I meet


her and give her a good scolding. I’ll forgive
her, and pray for her, too —after that.” She
opened her eyes slightly to peep at Our Lady
through her eyelashes.
Yes, Our Lady was still looking at her, and a
smile seemed hovering round her lips. “ Why !
Blessed Mother, you are laughing at me! ”
she cried, and took up the candle to examine
the picture more closely.
Every one knows (if any one does not he is to
be pitied) the sweet compassionate eyes and
the slight smile of perfect, sympathetic
understanding in the picture of “ The Hope of
the Hopeless.” This calmness and sweetness
had a wonderful effect on Kitty; the tight, hot
feeling about her heart died away, and she felt as
if a cool, soft hand had been placed on her
burning forehead.
She fell on her knees, smiling up at the
picture. “ I will forgive her; I always have to
do whatever you tell me, but oh ! I did want
to scold Milcie, she was so horrid to poor
little Nellie. She really deserved a scolding.
But to please you, my sweet Mother, I’ll
be as amiable as a saint when I meet
her.”


She said her prayers, a special one for Milcie,
then went to bed and slept the sleep of the
just, and in the room opposite Bet cried her-
self to sleep.


CHAPTER XVI
THAT GIRL—MY COUSIN !
MILCIE, her father and mother, sat at
morning tea in a luxuriously furnished
room of the Wav at ah, and Milcie was giving
a vivid description of the ball. Sometimes Mr.
Grogan’s face darkened, and he regarded his
pretty daughter sternly, but she rattled on
quite happily without noticing his displeasure.
Her conversation was all of herself, the little pro-
noun “ I ” recurring with irritating frequency.
“You know that girl I told you of, mother—
Nellie Doran —she looked simply hideous, and
Marion Stanley had on the same old cream silk
thing she has had about eighteen months. I
think I ”
“ Doran ? ” Mr. Grogan interrupted, “ Doran ?
Where is she from ? ”
“ Why, papa ? ” Milcie asked in astonish-
ment, and she laughed at the idea that her
papa could be interested in Nellie Doran. “ I


think the name of the place is Boonwoo, some-
thing outlandish like that, 800n —800n —Boon-
wooroo. That’s it.”
She turned to her mother to describe her
triumphal march across the ball-room, but Mr.
Grogan again interrupted. “Do you know her
father’s name ? ”
“ Yes,” laughed Milcie. “ Mat —Mat Doran,
and she has a brother Tim, she is always talking
about him. Thelma and I had such fun over
that.”
Mr. Grogan frowned, but Milcie had turned
again to her mother and so missed the frown.
“ Mary,” Mr. Grogan said, addressing his
wife, “ where did Mat Doran go ? I think it was
this place Milcie mentioned—Boonwooroo.”
“Yes, so it was,” Mrs. Grogan replied and
gazed anxiously at her daughter, who looked
from father to mother, wondering why they
should know such a common person as Mat
Doran of Boonwooroo.
“ This child must be your cousin’s child,
then, he ”
" Oh, no, papa, don’t say so ! ” cried Milcie,
and her cheeks paled and her eyes dilated.
“ Oh, don’t say she is any relation of ours. Dear,


dear papa, don’t say so. Mother, she’s not—
she could not be ! That dreadful bush-girl my
cousin ! ” She burst into a storm of tears, and
Mrs. Grogan flew to her, put her arms around
her, caressing her softly. “ There, there, love,
don’t cry. My precious daughter must not
spoil her pretty blue eyes.”
But the precious daughter sobbed and stam-
mered out broken sentences.
“ P-pa—pa is cr-cruel”—sob—“to s-say
such things”—more sobs. “Oh it cannot be
true ” —forte sobs. “ What would the g-girls
say ? ” —double forte sobs. “ That Kitty OBrien
would j-just d-dance with exultation ”—col-
lapse on mother’s shoulder.
Mr. Grogan impatiently stroked his chin and
almost glared at his wailing daughter.
“ Why do you not want to recognise this child
as your cousin ? She is your cousin, undoubt-
edly. Her father and your mother are first
cousins.”
Milcie sobbed and shuddered, and shuddered
and sobbed, but made no reply.
“ Answer me,” her father said, and there was
a note in his voice that struck unpleasantly on
his daughter’s ears. She had only heard it


once or twice in her life, but each time it meant,
“ I must be obeyed.”
“ Why?”
“ Because Oh, papa ! ”
“ Why ? ”
“ Because —she is—they are —such common
p-poor people, and ”
“ Yes—and ? ”
“ And she always looks so sh-shabby, as if
she just came off a f-f-farm.”
The stern expression left Mr. Grogan’s face
and one of disappointment took its place. ''And
those are the sentiments of my daughter—
my only child. I am disappointed in you,
Milcie.”
Milcie wailed louder, and her mother doubled
her caresses.
“ Oh, John, you have shocked the dear child,
she is so sensitive.”
Mr. Grogan’s forehead gathered into a heavier
frown, and Milcie, taking courage from his
silence (she could not see his face) and her
mother’s championing, said in a muffled, pettish
voice, which she had found effective on other
occasions, “ Oh ! papa, don’t say anything more
about it—don’t tell Nellie Doran that she is


my ” A fresh burst of sobs drowned the end
of the sentence.
Her father threw a withering glance in her
direction, but Milcie’s face was hidden by her
mother’s shoulder. She whispered, “ Ask papa
not to tell, mummie darling.”
“ Yes, love,” cooed the foolish mother. “ John,
dear, there is no need to recognise Mat Doran’s
daughter,” she said aloud. “ I dare say she
will return to her bush home at the end of the
year, and we will never meet her again. If we
were to bring her here, or ask her to visit us
when we return home, it might make her dis-
satisfied with her lot. She would see such a
difference between her life and Milcie’s. Really,
John, it will be kinder to leave things as they are.”
Milcie felt encouraged by this speech and
lifted her head a little to have a peep to see
how father was taking it, but his face wore such
a look of contempt that she instantly covered
her eyes again, and left her mother to finish
the battle alone (as she -usually did). But
the battle was over.
“ I think, Mary,” Mr. Grogan said quietly,
“ your father would not be pleased to hear you
speak that way. Mat Doran was very dear to


him. But let it be as you say. I am sure it
will be much kinder to the child not to introduce
her to our family circle.”
“ Oh, papa,” cried Milcie joyfully.
“ For,” continued her father, “ I am deeply
pained to admit that my daughter —judging by
the sentiments she has expressed this morning
—would not make a very loving cousin or a very
edifying companion. I am very disappointed
in my daughter.” His eyes, if not his lips,
added, “ and in my wife.”
He left the room, and Milcie gradually
revived. “ Oh, mother, darling, what a relief.
Papa will not say anything about it. How
frightened I was! How awful to have to recog-
nise her as my cousin,” and she shuddered. “Is
it really true, mother ? That girl my cousin ! ”
“Yes, sweet, really true. I did not know
Mat Doran as I am the youngest of my family,
but my elder brothers and sisters were his
constant playmates at home in Ireland. Father
and mother loved him dearly. I remember he
called to see us when we lived in Sydney, he
was on his way to Western Queensland then.
I was only a very small child at the time and
scarcely remember him.”


“ Well, there is no need of claiming them as
our cousins, is there ? Oh, lam so delighted!
But papa might tell them ? ”
“ Certainly not, dear,” Mrs. Grogan replied
proudly. “ Your papa never breaks his word.”
“ How lovely,” murmured the now-smiling
Milcie, then, with another shudder, “ That
girl—my cousin.”
After mid-winter holidays, Saint Mary’s woke
to life again—the air was thick with laughter,
bells rang, pianos jingled, girls whispered and
giggled in the corridors ; the clock ticked again,
the serviette rings were no longer imprisoned in
the sideboard drawer, and the soft rising and
falling of girl’s voices repeating over and over
again “ Hail, Mary ! ” and “ Holy Mary! ” once
more made the evening breeze a sweet incense.
Many girls noticed that Milcie Grogan was
“more horrid” than ever to Nellie Doran
after mid-winter. She seemed to make a point
of being as nasty as possible to her. Whenever
Nellie Doran received her home letter on the
western mail-days, Milcie would eye her sus-
piciously as she read it. “I wonder have they
found out ? I wonder does she know ? ”
But Nellie made no sign.


CHAPTER XVII
PAT’S VISIT
ONE wet afternoon all the girls were
gathered in the study, chattering, read-
ing, “ doing ” their fancy-work, or idly watch-
ing the rain splashing down on the thirty
garden.
Sister Mary Beatrice brought out the letters
and was at once besieged.
“ One for me, Sister ? ”
“For me, Sister ? ”
“ And me ? ”
“ Oh, thank you, Sister.”
“ None ! Oh, Sister.”
“ There, that’s two weeks now! I won’t
write home on Sunday ! ”
“ Only a post-card ! And I wanted a nice
long letter.”
“ Oh, lovely—three for me.”
“ Have you found one for—Oh, Deo Gratias! ”


“ It’s a shame, my sister is so mean, she won’t
write to me, and I sent her the loveliest little
tie last ! Oh, Sister, you have one all the
time. I beg my sister’s pardon; she is the best
girl in Australia.”
Nellie Doran received a bulky envelope, but
then Nellie Doran always did; the Dorans
seemed to have a mania for writing long letters
—“ young books ” Bet called them.
Nellie’s face flushed and sparkled as she
read. “ Oh, Dot! ” she breathed excitedly,
“my brother Pat is coming down, he will be
here next week. Oh, how happy lam ! I did
not know till now how I am longing to see
some one from home.”
Kitty noticed that Milcie, who sat next to
Dot, turned very pale, and her eyes grew wide
and staring as if she “ beheld a ghost.” She
quickly recovered and listened with evident
interest while Nellie read parts of her letter to
the girls around.
“ What happened, Mil. ? ” Kitty cried. “ Did
you behold an apparition from the other world ? ”
“No,” stiffly answered Milcie, and Bet told
Kitty to cease being ridiculous.
That week seemed never going to end, Nellie


thought, and she found it hard to be patient.
She counted the days until the longed-for time
was really to-morrow.
The next morning, when the summons, “ Nellie
Doran is to go to the parlour,” came, she flew
along the passage, but tiptoed quietly through
the convent hall —who could rush noisily through
a convent ? The air holds a calmness and peace
that must be respected.
She tapped gently on the door, and the next
moment was in Pat’s arms—Pat, her dear, big
brother Pat! She laughed and cried, and could
not speak for joy. When she did recover her
speech, question upon question slipped from
her tongue, and Pat, with a broad smile on his
sun-brown face, answered every one satis-
factorily.
Sister Peter brought them tea, and then Sister
Mary Beatrice came to show Pat over the
school. Of course he looked rather “ country-
fled ” in his brand-new suit of Nofurther cut,
and Thelma whispered to Milcie, “ What a
bushie ! He looks lonely for a horse and stock-
whip.”
Milcie’s cheeks were red with blushes of
mortification. That girl in the old-fashioned


dress, and that giant with “ bush ” written in
capital letters all over him, were her cousins!
What a blessing no one knew! Certainly the
man had a rather handsome, strong-looking face,
and his eyes and forehead had a “ cleverish ”
look, like Nellie’s, but oh, the dress of the two
of them—old-fashioned, common-looking, not-
the-least-bit-stylish garments!
Nellie was gazing up into her brother’s face
with a light of love and admiration in her eyes.
She did not notice his out-of-fashion suit, or if
she did, did not mind at all.
When they had gone out of the schoolroom
Kitty whispered to Bet, “ Nellie’s brother
reminds me of Brian Boru.”
“ When did you see Brian Boru ? ”
“ Oh, you know what I mean, the pictures of
him. I’m sure Brian was like him when he
was young. If Nellie’s brother were dressed
as an old Irish hero he’d look like Brian’s twin
brother.”
“ But as he is not, he looks just like Patrick
Doran of Boonwooroo, Kit, and doesn’t Nellie
adore him ? She seems to think the sun, moon,
and stars shine out of him.”
“ Oh, she thinks something like that about the


whole family; in fact, you might call the Dorans
the solar system.”
Pat stayed in town a week, and took Nellie
out every day to some pleasure resort. Dot
and Marion accompanied them one day, and
Kitty and Bet another day. The four girls
declared that Nellie’s big brother was “ so nice,”
and seemed to know just what would give plea-
sure to schoolgirls.
Pat explained to Nellie that he had made
another sale of horses, and had been able to
finish paying off a large debt that had long been
hanging over “ Boonwooroo,” and the whole
family had insisted on his taking a trip to the
coast. He had tried to coax his father and
mother to go in his stead, but they said they
were too old for trips. The girls, too, refused
his tempting offer. They said Pat needed a
rest and a change ; and so he had come.
The happy week slipped by all too quickly,
and Pat was to leave “ to-morrow.” What
joys and sorrows are to happen on some “ to-
morrow! ”
The last morning Pat visited St. Mary’s he
held an interesting conversation with Sister
Mary Beatrice, and at its close he opened a


small leather case and took out several gold
pieces, which he pushed across the table
towards the nun. The next morning he was gone,
and Nellie thought she must have dreamt
that Pat had been with her. But, no, there were
the letters he had brought from home, and the
presents he had bought in town for her. She
settled down to school work, remembering with
a thrill of joy that Pat had told her she was
going home for the Christmas holidays.
One morning Mother Ita came into the
refectory just as breakfast was over, her face
wreathed in smiles. At once the girls knew
why she came, and why she smiled so joyously.
“ The results are out.”
“ Our ‘’Varsity girls’ are through ! ”
“ Any A’s ? ”
“Oh, Mother, quick, quick, tell us.”
“ Please, Mother.”
“ Did the three pass ? ”
Mother had meantime given the three heroines
a kiss of congratulation, and shown their names
in the list of successful candidates.
When the hubbub had died down and the
kisses were all given, Mother Ita read out the
marks.


“ Margaret came highest of the three.”
“ Hurrah for our Professor ! ”
“ English —A. History—A. Latin —B.
Arithmetic —B. Geography —C. Music —C.
French —B. Marion comes next. English —A.
History—C. Latin —C. Arithmetic —B.
Music —A. French —C. Then Angela.
English —A. History —C. Arithmetic —C.
Music —C. Geography —C. French —B.
Good girls, we are proud of you.”
“ I thought the Angel would get an A for
French, she loves it so,” laughed Bet.
“ They all got A for English —that’s better,”
Kitty returned.
The girls clapped and clapped, the very cups
and saucers danced, and the knives and forks
jingled for joy.
Kitty and Bet solemnly drank the health of
the “’Varsity” girls —they refilled their cups for
the purpose —and they clinked them so vigour-
ously it was a marvel they did not crack.
That evening a concert was given in honour
of the ’Varsity girls, also a little dance, and of
course Mother Agatha provided supper.
“It’s really worth studying for the Junior
to have such a fuss made about one,” Kitty


remarked when the fun was over. “ I think
I’ll join the Junior class.”
“ Kitty, you ought to be ashamed to say such
things. It is worth studying for, not to be
made a fuss about, but for the honour and
glory of passing,” Bet returned.
“ Oh, deah! ” drawled Kitty in reply/' Hon-ah
and glor-ay ! We are becoming filled with noble
ideahs since we’ve taken to wearing those high
coll-ahs.”
Bet laughed. “ They are not very high,
Kitty. You are always making fun of them.
Sister Mary Dolores told me they are becoming.”
“ Becoming what ? ”
“ Ridiculous,” Bet replied with a smile
and followed the train of girls out the refectory
door.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE RETREAT
POOR Milcie was very vain and very much
“ spoiled,” and we have painted her
character in all its worst lights. But now let
us try to find something good —for there is
good in every one if we would but take the
trouble to find it. Sometimes Milcie’s better
nature awoke, and she felt how meanly she was
acting towards her cousin. At such times she
was really ashamed of her conduct, and would
become silent and abstracted for a day or two.
But then a chance remark of Thelma’s ora song
of praise in Nellie’s favour would make her
again feel all the old enmity against Nellie
Doran.
One morning Mother Ita announced that the
annual Retreat for the girls was to take place the
third week in July. There was a murmur of
delight from most of the girls, but two or three
looked rather troubled. For you know, girls, it
161 L


162 NELLIE DORAN
is sometimes rather heard to commence the
Retreat, and we wish for some excuse to “ get
out ’’ of making it. We sigh for any ailment that
would banish us to the infirmary for three days,
or we wish that mother would wire for us to come
home for a week, or that the priest would find out
he had urgent business in Sydney and depart
hence, leaving us without a Retreat at all. Of
course these desires prove we have been not quite
as pious as we should have been during the half-
year, and the word “ Retreat ” makes us think
a little, and thinking stirs our conscience. Afraid
of the priest ? Oh, no, we are not afraid of the
priest; he is always as kind as kind as can be,
and does not expect us to be saints all in a
day or two. Oh, no, he is not the trouble, it is
just ourselves. We wish there weren’t any
Retreats ; we don’t want to make any good reso-
lutions because we don’t want the trouble of
keeping them. Why can’t the nuns leave us
alone ! Retreats are all very well for them, we
know, but schoolgirls don’t want any !
I suppose very-good-girls don’t have these
naughty thoughts, but the not-very-good-girls
J I I •» -i- ■* r-* A- l-\ r /-v /~» •% ♦-\ /a -t- 4- !•%
do, and, after all, it is they who are in need of the
Retreat, and it is they who always feel so light-


hearted and happy at its close, and who are
strengthened for the coming “half.” The first
day it seems rather hard and depressing, but the
lectures are consoling and comforting, the bene-
diction is sweetly refreshing, and by the second
day the depression has worn off, and after con-
fession these same not-very-good-girls are as
happy as saints, and on the third day sigh regret-
fully because the Retreat is over.
When Milcie heard Mother Ita’s announce-
ment her heart sank. Retreat! Thinking about
one’s self, looking searchingly into one’s heart,
and making resolutions against pet faults, that
is what Retreat means, Milcie did not like
any of these things, and she did not want any
Retreat. But then she must make it with the
others; she could not absent herself from the
exercises without leave, and she had no earthly
reason for obtaining leave. Oh, if mother were
in town, and she could spend a few days with
her. And so this poor little girl, who after all
had only a little girl’s sins to burden her con-
science, wished for any excuse to refuse the
grace God was offering her. Convent girls have
so many graces heaped upon them, but some-
times they do not realise their value, and it is


only when school-days are over that they look
back and see what a rich harvest time they
have wasted.
At breakfast, the morning before the Retreat
opened, there was a greater chatter than usual in
the refectory, for every one was talking —“ mak-
ing hay while the sun shone.”
“Three days!” sighed Kitty. “My poor
tongue, how can I bridle ye for so long.”
“Oh, you will manage to do it; you kept
Retreat last year like a hermitess,” Bet said;
“ you can do anything if once you make up your
mind.”
“Well, I shall not consider it any harm to
speak, in fact I intend to, just whenever it
pleases me,” Thelma remarked, as she stirred
her tea slowly. She had lately taken to copying
Marion’s languid movements.
“ Of course there is no harm in speaking; we
are not bound to silence under pain of sin,
Thelma, but we shall certainty lose merit by so
doing,” Margaret explained. “So you see we
should try to keep silence as much as possible,”
she added, and looked over her gold-rimmed
glasses at Thelma.
“You will have no one to speak to,' Thelma,


for St. Mary’s girls consider it dishonourable
to speak except what is absolutely necessary,”
Bet told her, and smiled somewhat superiorly.
“ Oh, St. Mary’s girls are not all saints,”
laughed Thelma. “ I shall find some one or
two ready for conversation.”
“No you won’t—not even Milcie,” put in
Angela none too politely.
Milcie made no remark, her blue eyes had a
pensive, troubled look in their depths, and she
had not tossed her curls once that morning.
“Has any one seen the priest who is to give
the Retreat ? ”
“Yes, he came yesterday—Father Maher.
I believe he gives lovely lectures.”
“ Half-past eight, girls, only one half-hour
more to talk.”
Just before the bell rang at nine o’clock the
girls were assembled in the corridor ready to go
to the chapel.
“ Pray for me, won’t you, Bet.”
“ Don’t forget me, Dot.”
“ Remember my intention, please.”
“ I’ll pray for sinners generally, that will do
you all.”
“ Good-bye until Sunday morning.”


“ Good-bye.”
The bell rang, and the line of girls moved
away down the chapel walk to the little cross-
crowned porch, now covered in a blaze of bogain-
villia and Chinese honeysuckle.
And a great silence descended on St. Mary’s.
The pewits flew from tree to tree and
wondered at it; a young kukuburra settled on
a bare branch of the jacaranda tree and looked
down quizzically on St. Mary’s garden as if this
quiet were all beyond his comprehension. He
put his head on one side, straightened it again—
and laughed ! How he laughed ! Then he flew
away to tell his mates the wonderful news—St.
Mary’s girls were all quiet.
Between the exercises the girls read pious
books, sewed and thought, Thelma was rest-
less at first, but no one noticed her, and when
she saw every one else in earnest —even that
vain little Milcie Grogan ! —she, too, tried to
enter into the spirit of the time.
The lectures were indeed “ lovely.” Father
Maher seemed to select the very subjects that
were most appealing to schoolgirls, and he told
such interesting stories.
The whole of the first day Milcie looked most


miserable, and she carefully avoided meeting
Nellie Doran. The second day she looked a
little less miserable, and after the morning
lecture wandered away down the side path, and
hid herself in a quiet corner where the bogain-
villia had climbed over a jacaranda tree and
made a little arbour of its own.
“ Of course it’s not a sin not to tell her, but
oh, I know I should,” sighed Milcie. “It
won’t do her any good to know, but still I should
tell her. But how humiliating ! Why should
I ? It is not a sin. I won’t! Mother said I
need not, and I won’t! ” And she sat and
thought and argued and debated with herself.
It was a peaceful spot she had selected, and
gradually she felt soothed and comforted. This
corner of the garden was rather wild; there were
beds of red Saint Joseph’s lilies growing just as
they pleased, at their own sweet will, not prim
and proper like their brethren in the front
garden. Tangled masses of nasturtiums ran
riot amongst the hedges. Petunias of all shades
pushed their trumpets everywhere, and the
paw paw and mango trees were bursting into
blossoms.
Milcie was uneasy. Should she or should she


not acknowledge Nellie as her cousin P Should
she tell her ?
The petunias seemed to answer her thoughts
through their trumpet-like flowers. “Tell her,
tell her.” The bees buzzed among the nastur-
tiums, “Tell her, tell her,” and the St.
Joseph’s lilies waved their red flags and said,
slowly and softly, “ Tell—her, tell—her.”
Milcie sat there, lost in thought, little sentences
from Father Maher’s lectures flashing through
her mind, urging her to do the right thing.
When the choir-bell rang she had decided.
Yes, she would tell Nellie and all the girls, cost
what it might. After confessions were over she
would have a little talk with Father Maher; he
was always to be found in the first parlour in the
afternoon, writing his letters or reading. That
night at tea-time Milcie looked very peaceful and
happy, and Kitty said to herself, “ Milcie must
be making a good Retreat, she looks so happy.”
Yes, Milcie was happy, for her conduct towards
Nellie had hung over her like a cloud, but now the
cloud was lifting. She would first write to her
parents, immediately the Retreat was over, and
tell them she was going to acknowledge her
cousin.


On Sunday morning the convent chapel
presented a most devotional appearance, and as
the long rows of girls, dressed in white and wear-
ing snow-white veils, approached Holy Com-
munion, it looked as if one of the angelic choirs
had come visibly to adore Our Sacramental Lord.
Father Maher honoured the girls by taking
breakfast with them. Afterwards there was
recreation in the garden.
The conversation turned naturally on the
Retreat. “ Which instruction made the greatest
impression on you ? ” asked Kitty of a group
of girls of whom she was the centre.
“ Our personal relation with Our Blessed
Lord and the loyalty we owe Him,” cried Bet.
“ Father Maher put it so beautifully when he
said we were to regard every temptation as a
challenge to the loyalty we owe Our Divine
Master.”
“Yes, and weren’t the examples of the early
martyrs beautiful ? ” said Marion. “ Fancy St.
Agnes only thirteen; what a pure, brave, sweet
girl she must have been ! ”
“ So unlike those who are ready to endanger
their faith to make what the world calls an
advantageous marriage,” chimed in Margaret.


“ Oh, I do think that’s about the worst form
of disloyalty a Catholic girl could be guilty of,”
said Kitty. “ I heard mother tell of one or
two who did such a thing, but they were never
happy afterwards.”
“ People who are not of our faith cannot be
expected to see eye to eye with us, and they will
probably say that we are narrow-minded and
make too much of a fuss over our religion,” said
Marion, “ but then we know that we have no
more precious heritage than the faith for which
martyrs died, and which has in all ages given
myriads of saints to God’s Church. I think,”
she continued, “ the lecture on ‘ Human Re-
spect ’ was very timely. I have no patience
with girls who find their religion a burden because
it forbids them to eat meat on Fridays, or to
read trashy literature dangerous to their souls.”
“ I quite agree with you, Marion,” said Alice
Hayes. “ I think everybody admires the brave
Catholic girl whose greatest glory is to profess
that faith that has the power of ennobling her
life, of keeping her heart pure, and of lifting her
above the petty things of this world. ‘Ye are
the children of saints.’ How beautiful it is to
reflect that we are really and truly ‘ the chil-


dren of saints.’ Let us be worthy of the
title.”
“ Don’t you think the sermon on Our Blessed
Lady was charming ? ” asked Nellie.
“ Oh, yes,” cried Dot; “ I never before heard
that idea expressed. You know what Father
Maher said about the shame we would experi-
ence in meeting Our Immaculate Mother if our
lives had not been holy. While I listened to that
sermon I did feel angry with myself for every
fault I ever committed. When one is stirred by
the grace of a Retreat, how much shame and
sorrow she can feel for even the smallest sins.”
“ When I go home,” said Nellie Doran, “ I
mean to repeat to my people, and the children
round about, those instructions on the sacra-
ment of penance. I think they were beautiful.
Isn’t it a pity all country children cannot have
Retreats or a convent training?”
“Hark!” cried Kitty, “there goes the bell.
I’m going to watch how you all keep your
good resolutions.”
“ And I’ll keep my eye on you,” retorted
Bet.


CHAPTER XIX
“HAVE YOU SEEN HER?”
HAVE you seen her ? ”
“ She looks so nice.
“ See what pretty frocks can do.
“ Where is she ? ”
These and numerous remarks were flying
through the air on a cool August morning.
The girls were having a short recreation before
school time, the more industrious keeping a
lesson book “ handy.”
“ When I saw her I thought she was a new
girl, and wondered however she could have
come,” laughed Kitty.
“Yes, isn’t she changed ? She looks so much
nicer. Oh, Kit, lam as glad, as glad, as glad,
that she has all those nice new things.”
“ She must have found a fairy godmother,”
sneered Thelma, and Milcie blushed hotly
and said nothing. Her letter to her parents
was on its way north and she must wait ten


days for a reply. Meanwhile she did nothing,
but tried to show Nellie that she was not the
Milcie who had delighted in saying nasty cut-
ting things to her, but a different Milcie alto-
gether. Sometimes she almost wished she had
not written that letter, for oh, it would be so
hard to let all the school-world know that
for these long weeks she had been deceitful.
However could she tell them! And then,
the girl she had to acknowledge as her cousin
was the very one she had disliked and almost
despised. However could she do it ? Nellie
was the topic of conversation that August
morning, for at breakfast she had appeared
dressed in the prettiest and neatest of blue
winter dresses, with a dainty white stock, an
adorable little blue tie, and a pair of soft button
shoes.
What a transformation !
The girls actually forgot their manners and
stared; she looked so nice, they really could not
help it.
During her six months’ convent life the sun-
burn and freckles of Boonwooroo had gradually
disappeared, and now that her hair was softened
from its usual “straight-back” style, she


looked as nice as any convent girl in all Austra-
lia. Milcie felt a pang of jealousy and then a
thrill of joy—after all she would not have to
acknowledge a shabbily-dressed girl as her
cousin, but still all the girls would know, and
how they would despise her. No one would
have anything to do with her, she felt sure, but
still she must and she would do it.
When the girls discovered that Nellie had
three more pretty blue dresses and two whites,
as well as many other pretty things, they were
dumbfounded. Whatever had happened ? Dot
was delighted at this change, and her eyes fol-
lowed Nellie’s figure everywhere. Poor Nellie’s
face was in one big red blush the whole morning,
and she almost wished for her old-fashioned
garments again.
What a pity Pat could not see her now!
For it was Pat who had worked the change.
He had noticed the difference between his
sister and all the other dainty-looking St.
Mary’s girls, and that is why he pushed those
sovereigns across the table to Sister Mary
Beatrice the morning he was leaving for home.
What matter that he had meant to buy various
things with those sovereigns—he could do


without them. What was a new bridle or the
latest horse-book compared with Nellie’s appear-
ance ?
Nellie’s first morning in her new raiment
was a very trying one. As she walked into
school she could feel a “ creepy ” sensation
right down to her toes, for she knew every one
was looking at her, or awaiting a favourable
opportunity of doing so. When the day was
over she sighed with relief, and by degrees
the girls grew accustomed to seeing her nicely
dressed and with her hair arranged becomingly,
not in the Puritan-like way she had formerly
adopted.
About this time the girls were preparing for
a concert to be given in Rev. Mother’s honour.
Sister Mary Cecilia helped them a great deal,
and proposed that Nellie Doran should play a
solo.
“ Nellie Doran play ! ” some one exclaimed.
“ What could she play ? ”
Home, sweet home ’ out of the first book,
I suppose,” laughed Thelma.
Sister silenced the girls with an expressive
look, and wrote down Nellie’s name.
“ An * Ave Maria,’ ” Milcie said amazedly.


“ Are you joking, Sister ? She can’t play
that .”
Sister smiled a smile that expressed much,
and assured Milcie that Nellie could play the
piece very well, and the fair maiden went away
with an incredulous look in her pretty blue
eyes.
The day of the concert drew near, and the
girls were greatly excited, as much so as if they
were going to a big public affair. And why not ?
Wasn’t Rev. Mother coming over for it ? And
did not every girl consider it a great privilege
to sing or play for her ? All the Sisters were
coming too, so there would be a large audience.
Just before dusk Kitty and Bet stole out
to the garden, Kitty carrying a basket and
Bet a knife. They cut a quantity of flowers,
and then went down to the summer-house near
the mango trees and settled the blossoms into
a beautiful bouquet. Kitty produced a roll
of blue ribbon from her sleeve where she had
secreted it (you know pockets are out of fashion)
and tied up the bouquet leaving long streamers
of ribbon. Bet carried the treasure away and
placed it in a large bowl in the studio.
Marion and Kitty helped Nellie to dress


that evening, and Bet danced round the three,
giving suggestions and criticisms which no one
heeded. “You know it is your debut, Nellie.
We must make you look lovely.”
Nellie smiled and suffered them to do as they
pleased. She was not nervous at all, although
she had never played beforeany one but Sister
Mary Cecilia.
When the toilette was complete, Kitty stood
back, her head a little on one side, and regarded
her work critically. “ There now, you look
gorgeously beautiful m’dear—quite a picture.”
The girls were called to admire Nellie, and
they lavished compliments upon her until
Kitty declared Milcie would be pale-green with
jealousy. But Milcie was strangely depressed
and said “ not a word.”
Nellie slipped away from the dressing-room
and, securing her violin, stole up the end stair-
case to the top corridor. The corridor was in
darkness save the bluish light from the little
lamp at Our Lady’s feet. Nellie knelt, the
violin in her arms, and bent her head for
Our Lady’s blessing. Then she stole away as
silently as she had come.


CHAPTER XX
NELLIE’S D&BUT
NELLIE’S solo was the last item of the
programme, and quite a buzz of doubtful
comments went through the throng of white-
robed girls. Everything had gone off well;
they were proud of their concert, but now Nellie
Doran’s piece had come, and all —save two —were
sure she was going to “ spoil the whole evening.”
She had only been learning six months, so what
could be expected.
“ What a pity! ” sighed Angela. “It has
been going off so well, but this will spoil all.”
“ I am afraid Sister Mary Cecilia made a
mistake,” murmured some one else.
“ Well, really one would expect Nellie Doran
to have a little more sense; she must know she
can’t play,” was Thelma’s remark.
Milcie felt just a little pleased. True, the
girl was her cousin, and she was going to


acknowledge her when mother’s letter arrived,
still, she was pleased that Nellie Doran was
going to play, for as she was a beginner she
would of course “ scrape ” horribly, and thus
Milcie’s smooth, correct playing would seem
all the bettter by the contrast.
Dot was almost in tears. She feared for
Nellie. Oh, if poor Nell breaks down, or plays
flat, how mortified she will be,” thought kind
little Dot.. But Kitty and Bet smiled happily
at one another, and now and then stole a peep
at a mysterious “ something ” in the corner
behind the palms, and Sister Mary Cecilia seemed
walking on air.
Nellie came out on the stage and made a
graceful little curtesy, first to Rev. Mother
and the Sisters, then to her companions. Such
a different Nellie she appeared from the girl
who arrived six months before. Sister Mary
Cecilia was to play Nellie’s accompaniment.
That, of course, was a great honour, and the
girls wondered why Sister would take the trouble
of playing for a beginner.
Nellie raised her instrument and a smile
seemed hovering round her mouth. She showed
no sign of nervousness; she might have been


in the old-fashioned parlour of Boonwooroo,
so much “at home ” she seemed. The first
notes were “ shaky,” and Dot sighed and looked
away, but then, what happened ?
A low sweet melody stole forth.
“ Ave Maria, Gratia plena,
Dominus tecum, ave.”
The notes were not onty sweet, clear, and full,
they were reverent ; the little bush girl and her
violin were praying. The sound stole through
the lofty room, and then seemed to rise up
through realms of light to the feet of her who
is called Immaculate.
It was all too short.
The last trembling “ amen ” floated away,
and the audience listened until it was lost,
far, far above them.
No one broke the silence.
Angela was weeping on Marion’s shoulder.
Dot’s face was reverent as an angel’s. Milcie
fled through a convenient door, and Kitty and
Bet smiled triumphantly. The rest of the
girls just stared , stared at the girl from the
bush! Little Molly Brennan, “the baby of
the school,” broke the charmed silence. In


a big sobbing voice she cried out, “ I want
to —go—home to my m —mother,” and hid her
face in Margaret’s lap.
Then the applause broke out; the girls
clapped and cried out, “Encore, Encore ,” and
would not be silenced.
“ Again, Nellie.”
“Encore, Nell.”
Nellie came back and bowed her thanks, and
Kitty seizing the mysterious “ thing ” in the
palm-hidden corner, advanced towards Nellie
holding up a large beautiful bouquet with blue
streamers.
The girls clapped again, and still cried out
“ Encore ,” but Sister Mary Cecilia would not
allow Nellie to play again. She proudly pre-
sented her “ discovery ” to Rev. Mother,
and then such congratulations were heaped
upon Nellie by nuns and girls that she hid
her face in the flowers and longed to run
away.
How the girls talked!
“ A wonder ! ”
“ A marvel! ”
“ A star !
“ Just imagine ! ”


“The girl from the bush; who’d have thought
it!”
“ Well we ought to feel rather taken back.”
“ I hide my fead forever. I’ll never judge
again. I can’t distinguish a genius from a
bushie.”
“ I feel inclined to faint.”
a How lovely to have a wonder at St. Mary’s!
What a blessing Nellie Doran did not go to any
other school but ours!”
“Look at Sister Mary Cecilia! She has
smiled for an hour.”
“Wasn’t the playing glorious! Oh, if I
could play like that! ”
“ Nellie must have smiled to herself at the
surprise she had for us.”
“How did Kitty guess she would deserve
a bouquet, I wonder ? ”
“ Oh, Kitty is another genius; she finds out
everything.”
The “ Ave Maria ” Nellie had played was not a
difficult piece, and it was not the least “ showy ”
or brilliant; there was no room for a display
of wonderful bowing or dexterous fingering,
for, of course, Nellie was only a beginner. But
there was room for expression, for soulful


feeling in the sweet little piece, and through it
Nellie showed her audience that she had a
musician’s soul.
“ It is a very easy setting, I notice,” Thelma
remarked; “quite simple; nothing in it at
all.”
“ But the expression ! ” cried Marion.
“ Yes, that is the thing. She plays with such
expression, and of course time and practice will
teach her the other things. Any one whose
playing makes one feel inclined to do something
grand and noble, and makes one know that
God is very near, must be a musician, even if
she can’t play difficult pieces. Any one can see
that Nellie Doran will be a great musician some
day if she perseveres,” poured forth Margaret.
“ I could listen to that little piece all night,”
she added with a sigh.
“ So could I, Peg.”
“ And I.”
“ I think I’d tire of it before morning,”
Thelma said, as she moved away from the group
of enthusiasts.
And that is the way Nellie made her debut.
That night, when every one had retired to


rest, a figure knelt before the statue of Our
Lady Help of Christians, and the bluish light
from the little lamp shone on a clever-looking
forehead and a pair of thoughtful grey eyes.


CHAPTER XXI
MILCIE’S DILEMMA
MILCIE was very thoughtful the morning
after the concert. She had tried hard
since the Retreat to be more amiable with her
companions and to forget self a little. But the
night of the concert all the old selfishness seemed
to wake within her, and she had gloried in the
thought of Nellie’s failure. But Nellie had tri-
umphed again, and poor Milcie felt very crushed
and humbled. Every one was talking of Nellie
Doran and the wonderful“Ave Maria”; Milcie
Grogan and her playing were quite beneath
notice. It was a hard lesson for poor selfish
Milcie, and it did her good. This wonderful
girl musician was her own cousin, but now there
would be no humiliation in claiming relationship,
for the erstwhile badly dressed, insignificant
bush girl was now fashionably clothed and
was the admiration and envy of the whole
school because of that sweet little “ Ave Maria ”


iB6 NELLIE DORAN
—truly Nellie Doran was a cousin to be proud
of.
“ There will be no merit in telling the girls
now/’ poor Milcie sighed to herself. “ I thought
I was going to do something brave. But surely
there will be, for I had the intention of doing
it, I really meant to tell every one as soon as
mother’s letter came. But what changes have
taken place in those few days! First Nellie
got nice dresses like any other girl, and now
we find out she is going to be a grand violinist.
Oh, dear, it will be harder than ever to tell the
girls now, for they might say—Thelma will, I
am sure —that I never would have told them
she is my cousin if she had not turned out to
be such a clever girl. Whatever shall Ido ? ”
and poor Milcie fled away down by the white
paling fence to the side garden, and there she
had a “ good cry ” with no one to see and
pity her save the red lilies, the petunias, and
the rambling nasturtiums.
The following day was “ northern mail ”
day, and Milcie was impatient for the letters to
be delivered. She wanted to know what mother
had to say about her sudden change towards
Nellie Doran. But there was no letter from


her mother, only a note from her aunt, saying
that Mr. and Mrs. Grogan had been spending
a week at the Barron Falls, and that they had
engaged rooms at the Waratah and would be
with Milcie very soon.
“Another delay,” sighed Milcie. “Andeach
day seems to make the task harder. I wonder
did auntie send my letter on to mother? I
cannot write again, for most likely mother would
have left just when the letter would arrive.
I would love to tell Mother Ita everything, and
I would have done so long ago, but I wanted to
tell mother first. I am so miserable. Nellie
Doran has broken my heart, lam sure. How I
wish I had never seen her. Why did she come
here ? I wish she had gone to some other con-
vent. Whatever shall Ido ? ”
On the Feast of the Assumption three girls
were consecrated Children of Mary, and at
their request Nellie played her “Ave Maria ”
during the ceremony. It sounded even more
beautiful in the quiet little chapel, and the
light and flowers seemed to join their mute
voices to the glorious strains.
Milcie Grogan, to every one’s great surprise,
broke down while it was being played, and


iBB NELLIE DORAN
sobbed as if her heart would break. Afterwards
one or two girls tried to console her, and begged
her to tell them her trouble, but Milcie shook
her head and refused to be comforted. Mother
Ita noticed the poor child’s grief, and by-and-by
Kitty saw the kind nun pacing up and down the
verandah with Milcie sobbing beside her.
“ Ah, that is right,” Kitty said to herself.
“ She’s a nasty vain little creature, but I’m glad
some one is consoling her, she seems troubled
about something. Mother Ita is just the right
one, she could cheer any one. Poor old Milcie
has really been so much nicer lately; she is
friendly with Nellie now I notice. I’m afraid
Bet and I did not work the change though, it
was the Retreat. Our methods are not very
Christian-like. I think our reforming society
had better change its ways, and then make
renewed efforts to convert Thelma Ray. Marion
is cured long ago, and Milcie is convalescent —
I rather thank she requires treatment no
longer.”
Just then Bet came along the path. “ Oh,
Kitty, I’ve been searching the highways and
the byways for you. Wasn’t the ceremony
lovely ? There is to be another consecration


in December. I wonder who will be elected
this time. I will not, I Tmow; the president
told me I am too careless about answering bells
and keeping silence.”
“ And I cannot command my temper. Poor
Sister Mary Dolores is disheartened with me
because I got angry when the Angel spilt
ink on my fancy-work.”
“ Oh, Kitty, Fd love to be a Child of Mary.
Do let us try hard from now until December,
and perhaps we’ll be elected. Eve answered
every bell punctually this week, and I spoke
only once after lights were out. Oh, Kitty, we
must try. My mother would be so pleased.”
“ Yes, Bet, I’ll try —I’m always trying. It is
easier for you than for me. Ido not mean to
get into tempers, they just burst forth like
volcanic eruptions.”
“ Well, you pray for me, Kit, and I’ll pray
for you.”
“ Very well, Betsy, but you will have to pray
very hard I can tell you.”
“ I know some one who will be consecrated
in December.”
“ Who ? ”
“ Guess.”


“ Dot ? ”
“ No—she’s too young.”
“ Marion ? ”
“ Perhaps. But I mean some one else.”
“ Oh, of course, I know. Nellie.”
“Yes, Nellie. Oh dear, some girls have
everything. There’s Nellie—a perfect genius
and with it a perfect angel. Kitty, she must
have been born good, she never seems to want
to do anything wrong, she keeps rules without
any trouble, she never quarrels or gets in tem-
pers, she works hard, she is pious, she is just
everything. She must have been born good.”
“ Well, I wasn’t,” Kitty said sadly, as she
played with the petal of a red lily.
“ But, Kitty, there are good people like that,
they fdo not seem to have any temptations
at all, they just go on calmly without any
trouble.”
“ Never mind, Queen Bess, we are only ordin-
ary poor mortals; we don’t go on calmly, we have
lots of trouble trying to be good; but cheer up,
the harder it is the greater reward we’ll get
for trying, eh ? ”
Bet smiled. “ Why, of course we will,” she
said, “ Why ” —and then she caught sight of


Mother Ita and Milcie pacing the verandah.
Kitty read her glance. “ Did you see Milcie
crying in the chapel ? ”
“ No; what’s wrong ? ”
“ I don’t know, she would not confide in
me. But never mind. Mother Ita is such a
dear at cheering people’s dropping spirits, Milcie
will be quite happy presently.”
“ Come away, Kitty, Milcie might not wish
us to see her.”
The two friends hurried away, and the bright
afternoon quickly passed into dusky evening,
but still two dark figures could be seen pacing
up and down the verandah.


CHAPTER XXII
HERR HARTMANN
ONE afternoon a cab drove up the avenue
and stopped at the convent door. A
gentleman alighted and telling the cabman to
wait, walked up the steps and rang the bell.
He was past middle-age, short, thin, and
stooped slightly. His hair was fast turning
grey, his eyes steely-blue, and he wore gold-
rimmed glasses. One could see at a glance that
he was a German and a musician. In fact Bet,
who as he alighted happened to pass through the
Sisters’ garden on her way from Madame’s,
said that he had the five lines and four spaces
all down his coat, and his hair curled round like
a lot of little bass clefs.
This gentleman was Herr Hartmann. He was
at once admitted, and shortly afterwards a
message came over to the school to say that
Nellie Doran was wanted in the parlour. There-
upon Bet disps tched a note to Kitty.


Front desk,
Sept, (forget-the-date).
Dear Catherine, —
A venerable-looking gentleman with curly
grey hair, gold-rimmed glasses, and a German
face, has just come up the avenue in a hansom.
He must be Nellie’s visitor. Don’t tell me she
is going to turn out a long-lost German princess;
she has given us too many surprises already.
I forgot to mention that Herr German has
quavers and semis and demisemis all over him.
Au revoir. I wish Sister would let me back
to my own desk beside you, alanna.
Your exiled Bet.
Meanwhile Nellie had gone over to the par-
lour, and Sister introduced her to Herr Hart-
mann.
“ So. And this is the little one ? Yees, she
haf the face. You vill play for me. Yes ? ”
The violin was ready, and Sister opened the
grand piano that filled one corner of the larg£
room. Herr Hartmann sat over in the shadow
and closed his eyes. Nellie was nervous art
first, but by degrees gained courage and told


what was in her soul through the voice of her
violin.
The old professor opened his eyes and
watched, and closed them again.
When the piece was finished he smiled.
“ That vas goot.”
Then he turned to Sister Mary Cecilia and
bowed jerkily. “ Madame, you I congratulate.
You haf found a musician, and you haf instruct
her very well. Some day this child will be
famous.” He smiled again at Nellie. “So
you are not a German. No ? Ach, but you
should haf been,Jlittle one, you should haf been.
But one day you will go to Germany. God has
gif you a great gift, and it must be cultivated.
You vill blay again once for me? ”
Nellie played on for over an hour, the old
professor smiling and frowning, and waving
his hands in the air, and when she made mistakes
he shuddered and cried out, “ Ach, you must
not! ”
After she had gone back to school, Herr
Hartmann asked Sister many questions about
Nellie’s parents. Were they wealthy ? Would
they send her to Europe to study ? “ She
must go,” he cried excitedly. “It will be sinful


if she does not go. Haf you told her barents ?
You vill write and let them know she must go
home to study, and very soon. I vill write
if you vill kindly tell me where they do now
reside. She must go. I vill send her myself
if they vill allow.” He drank the tea Sister
Peter brought him, and flourished his spoon
in the air now, and then, exclaiming, “ She must
go. You vill persuade madame. Yes ? ”
At last he departed, talking to himself all the
way down the drive.
A few days later Sister Mary Cecilia received
a note from Herr Hartmann. There was to be a
grand concert given in aid of some local charity,
and at the last moment one of the artists had
disappointed the committee. Herr Hartmann
had been deputed to ask the Sisters if they would
allow Miss Nellie Doran to play her simple
violin solo to fill the place of the absent musi-
cian.
Herr Hartmann begged they would allow her
to play, if her parents would not object. Her
first appearance could not be in a better cause,
he urged, and it was right that the people should
hear her and understand what great talent she
possessed.


Rev. Mother and Sister Mary Cecilia held a
conference, and finally Nellie was sent for.
“ Mother and father would be very pleased
if I could help the charity,” she said, and so it
was settled.
When the girls heard the news they were
delighted.
“ How lovely! ”
*“ Our star’s first twinkle.”
“ I wonder will she be nervous ? ”
“ What glory for old St. Mary’s.”
“ Have we all permission to go and hear her ? ”
“ Yes —all and sundry may go.”
“ I must see how I stand financially.”
Purses and bags were ransacked, and there was
much jingling of silver.
“ I have only three-and-two-pence,” cried
Kitty. “ Three shillings for the ticket and
two pence left for myself. Never mind. I’d
give the whole princely sum to hear St. Mary’s
marvel.”
“ How dreadful! I fondly imagined I pos-
sessed five shillings, but now I remember I spent
half-a-crown yesterday,” was Angela’s cry as
she emptied the contents of a pretty kid bag
on the dressing-table.


Mother Ita came in at that moment. ‘ ‘ Count-
ing money, girls ? ”
“Yes, Mother. Scraping up our pennies for
Nellie’s concert.”
Mother smiled. “ Put it away, dears. I have
just come to tell you the Reverend Mother has
taken reserved seats for you all. Keep the
pennies for sweets.”
“ Oh, isn’t Rev. Mother a darling ! ”
“ Thank her for us until we see her, please,
Mother.”
Kitty tossed the three-and-two-pence back
into her purse. “ Rev. Mother is the best Rev.
Mother in all Australia. I’d like to hug her,”
she said.
“ Rev. Mother would not like it, methinks,”
laughed Bet.
“ A drag is coming for you, and madame will
accompany you. See that you all have nice
gloves,” and with this little word of advice
Mother Ita left them.
There was great excitement the next evening
when the girls were dressing for the concert.
They all wanted to help Nellie to dress, and
waited on her as if she were a princess; but Milcie
did not feel even the slightest twinge of jealousy.


Thelma, too, had learnt much of late, and dressed
in perfect silence.
When all were ready and waiting for madame,
they discovered Nellie was not present.
“ Where’s Paganini ? ”
“ We can’t go without her.”
“ The star is lost.”
Kitty went in search of the missing one, and
found her coming down the stairs from the top
corridor, her violin and bow in her hand.
“ Whatever were you doing up there ? ” she
asked, but Nellie smiled and said nothing.
St. Mary’s girls were well pleased when they
heard the storm of applause that followed Nel-
lie’s simple solo. She was encored again and
again, and Herr Hartmann, who played her
accompaniments, was in the seventh heaven of
delight.
“ Don’t you feel proud of her, Bet ? Just
listen to that applause. I wish Sister Mary
Cecilia could hear it.”
“Yes. Isn’t it grand ? And she looks so
nice. What a change from the Nellie we first
knew.”
“So you were right, Bet; Nellie Doran is a
genius, and what we wished for has happened,


the girl from the bush has taken Milcie and
Marion down. In fact, she has taken us all
down, for I think we all imagined ourselves above
her in some way or other. I wonder, Bet, might
any more of the Dorans have been something
wonderful if they had a chance. You see, it
is all chance, or Providence, I should say. If
Nellie had not come here she would never have
had an opportunity, and no one would know
she was a genius.”
“ What a blessing she came ! ” murmured
matter-of-fact Bet.
After the concert a number of ladies and
gentlemen wished to speak with the wonderful
girl-musician but madame had already taken
possession of her and the drag was well on its
way to the convent. Madame thought compli-
ments were not good for girls—especially con-
vent girls.


CHAPTER XXIII
THE DISCLOSURE
NEXT morning Milcie drove down to the
War at ah, for her mother and father
had arrived early that morning.
Mrs. Grogan was buried in the morning paper,
and after she had kissed and welcomed her
daughter, pointed excitedly to the paragraph
she had been reading—it was a glowing account
of Nellie Doran’s playing.
Mrs. Grogan’s face beamed with pleasure.
“ Your cousin ! Isn’t she a cousin to be proud
of, Milcie, darling ? This morning Mrs Thorn—
the judge’s wife, you know—told me about her
playing and what a lovely child she is, but she
could not remember the name. And it is
Mat Doran’s daughter, just fancy! Mrs.
Thorn is quite in love with her—l must let her
know she is a relative of ours. We must ask
Nellie here at once.”
Milcie was silent and her mother continued


talking of Nellie’s playing for several minutes,
then she paused breathless.
“ Did you get a letter from me just before you
went to the Falls, mother ? ”
“ No, love.”
“ Did auntie post it on to you ? ”
“ No, but what matter ? I have you now.
You are better than a letter, my precious.”
Mr. Grogan came in, and his wife scarce gave
him time to greet his daughter so anxious was
she for him to hear about her cousin’s clever
child. After she had read the paragraph twice
(aloud) and told all Mrs. Thorn—the judge’s
wife, you know —had said about Nellie, Mr.
Grogan had time to get in a word. “Is this the
child you were talking of some months back ? ”
“Yes, John, but we never dreamt she was going
to be a genius. Milcie, we must have her here
at once; I shall call to see her this very morning
and bring her home with me. Mrs. Thorn is quite
fascinated with her. Fancy Mat Doran’s daugh-
ter a genius ! I believe she is going to Germany
shortly.”
Mrs. Grogan’s voice was excited. Mr. Gro-
gan’s voice was calm and cold. “Is that the
child you and Milicent refused to acknowledge


because she was poor and badly dressed ? ”
he asked.
“ Oh, John.”
Is she, Mary ? ”
“ Now, John, do not be so horrid; let bygones
be bygones.”
“ Mary, dear, I wish you would have the polite-
ness to answer my question. Is she the same
child ? ”
“ Yes, John.”
Mr. Grogan sternly regarded his wife and
daughter for a moment, then he said very slowly
and deliberately, “You are not to bring the
child here, I forbid it. You would not show her
a little kindness before. Everyone will be kind
to her now, I suppose, and she does not need
it from you. Neither are you to tell Mrs. Thorn
or any one else that she is your cousin. Ido
not consider it just to treat the child so. You
did not want her before, you are not to have her
now. Poor little girl! she would not know that
you recognised her to suit your own purposes.
She must not be deceived.”
" John! ”
“ I am in earnest—l forbid it.”
Poor Mrs. Grogan saw all her castles burning,


crashing down into ruins of ashes. She had
been delighted at the thought of taking Nellie
about with her, introducing her to her own
friends, and perhaps to Mrs. Thorn’s—the judge’s
wife, you know—friends also. “My cousin’s
daughter; such a clever child. You must hear
her play, etc., etc.” She fancied it would throw
an additional charm on herself and Milcie to
have such a clever relative, but ”
John had said “no,” and John was so horribly
determined it was useless for her to say
“ yes.”
She shed a few tears of disappointment, but
Mr. Grogan was accustomed to tears —they had
lost their effect years ago.
Milcie longed to tell her father that she had
determined to humble herself and recognise
Nellie as her cousin before she had known of
her wonderful gift, but he looked so displeased
she had not the courage; besides, it would seem
like making “excuses.”
Where was her letter ? Whatever had auntie
done with it ?
Milcie was a few minutes late at lunch-time,
and when she came in she saw her mother hand-
ing an open letter to her father. An envelope.


re-addressed three or four times, was lying by
her mother’s plate.
The letter ! At last!
Mr. Grogan read to the very last line, and when
he looked up his face was so changed—it seemed
younger and the disappointed expression had
faded from his eyes.
“ I have never read anything that gave me
greater pleasure, Milcie,” he said, and Milcie’s
face flushed with delight. It was worth all the
misery of the past few weeks to hear those few
words and to see that look on her father’s face.
What matter if all the girls did know, she could
bear anything now as long as her father was
pleased.
Mrs. Grogan was silent; she felt injured and
hoped her husband knew it.
“ Well, Milcie, if you still wish to humble
yourself before your companions by letting
them know you have deceived them through
foolish vanity and pride, do so, but remember,
little girl, you are now far higher (through
lowering yourself) in your father’s eyes than
you were before.”
“ I don’t mind what the girls think or say,
papa, if you are pleased with me.”


“I am, dear,” he said, and Milcie, with a
hurried “Excuse me,” put her handkerchief
to her eyes and fled.
That afternoon the Waratah motor-car
whizzed up the convent drive, and Mr. Grogan
and Milcie alighted—Mrs. Grogan had refused
to accompany them.
“Mother Ita knows everything, papa; ask
for Mother Ita after you have seen Rev. Mother,
Milcie whispered as he rang the bell.
Mother Ita smoothed everything out in her
usual kindly way—she was aways smoothing
the creases out of some one’s pillow. She,
herself, would tell the girls, explain everything
to them, and leave it at that. Of course Milcie
had been very much at fault, and perhaps
some of the girls would treat her a little unkindly
at first, but Mother Ita was sure the greater
number of them were too ladylike to be so
uncharitable.
“ Now, Milcie dear, you have permission to
spend the day with your parents, and when you
return to-morrow all the trouble will be over.
But you will both see Nellie now, I suppose.”
Nellie came, and Mother Ita very delicately
explained all. Nellie smiled and welcomed Mr.


Grogan warmly—he had such a nice kind face
—but she gave Milcie a very soft little kiss; she
could not feel any affection for her yet.
“ You do not seem surprised, Nellie, dear,”
Mother It a remarked.
“ No, Mother. I knew. Pat told me long
ago.”
“You knew! And you did not tell the girls 1’ ’
Milcie cried.
Nellie grew painfully red. “ I felt you did
not want the girls to know,” she said, and Mr.
Grogan stroked her hair softly, and Mother Ita
admired the view from the bay window.


CHAPTER XXIV
WHAT THE GIRLS SAID
I ALWAYS thought Milcie Grogan was the
meanest girl living, and this proves it.
If I were Nellie I would not have anything to
do with her,” Kitty O’Brien fiercely said when
the girls were discussing the news Mother Ita
had imparted to them, after Milcie and her
father had gone. “Fd love to give her a good
shaking,” she continued; “ she had no reason to
be ashamed of Nellie Doran, but she should be
ashamed of her own foolish pride. I wish she
were here for a few minutes.”
“ Hush, Kitty,” Bet whispered. “We all
have faults you know.”
“ I know we have—l have dozens —and it
might sound like the Pharisee, but really I
cannot help saying that I am thankful I am
not like Milcie Grogan!”
“ Hush, Kitty, don’t be uncharitable.”
207


“ Poor Milcie, do not be hard on her/’ pleaded
Margaret.
“ Poor Milcie, indeed/’ Kitty scornfully
repeated. “ You have regard for her feelings
—she had none for Nellie Doran’s.”
“ Nellie does not feel any resentment, Kitty,
she is quite forgiving, so you should be too,”
Marion said reprovingly.
“ Kitty, dear, you will not say anything
nasty to her when she comes to-morrow, will
you ? ” coaxed Dot. She was afraid Kitty
would bring Milcie to task for her conduct.
“ I knew Milcie Grogan had something on her
mind, she has been so melancholy for weeks
past. I thought she looked like a person who
was haunted.”
“ Haunted ! Don’t be so ridiculous, Angel,
you are always indulging in foolish romantic
notions,” Bet said sharply, and Angela applied
herself to her latest craze, an autograph cloth,
and said no more.
“ Well, I think Milcie Grogan should not get
off lightly; I’ll let her know what I think of her,”
Thelma put in.
“ You ! ” Kitty cried. “You would do the
very same thing yourself if ”


“ And, Kitty, dear, you must remember that if
you had been Milcie you would have done the
very same thing,” Margaret quietly interposed.
“Yes, that is it —Milcie cannot help being
Milcie,” Bet added.
Catherine Reilly and two other senior girls
came over to the excited group and pleaded
Milcie’s cause. They told Kitty it was her
duty to be kind to her; she would not be acting
in a Christian-like manner if she were not, and
that she must remember she was aspiring to be a
Child of Mary, and charity is one of the particular
virtues Children of Mary must practise.
“ To err is human, to forgive divine,” quoted
Angela, without raising her eyes from the name
she was working in bright red cotton. “ Well, I
am human —not divine,” Kitty returned, but
her eyes were not as fierce-looking as they had
been at first. She turned to Margaret, and her
lower lip trembled slightly. “You forgive Milcie
because she cannot help being Milcie; if any of
you were in my place you would be angry too; I
cannot help my temper, I cannot help being
Kitty O’Brien.”
The girls were silent and Kitty walked away
with her head very high in the air. Bet knew
o


what that meant. Kitty wanted to cry, but
would not let herself because she considered it
“ babyish/' " Bet ran after her, and the group of
girls dispersed. Dot went in search of Nellie,
and told her how angry Kitty was, and begged
her to try and coax Kitty into a treaty of peace
with Milcie Grogan.
Nellie went off as peacemaker, but Kitty was
obdurate. “ I cannot help being angry with her,
I'm trying not to. How strange that you
should be taking Milcie's part, if I were you ”
“You would do just as I am doing,” smiled
Nellie.
Kitty closed her lips firmly and then burst
out, “ Oh, what a mean ”
“ Hush, Kitty, look at the sun —nearly down.
You must not let him set on your anger.”
“Nellie, do you think you will ever love Milcie ?
WiH you ever believe she is your own cousin ? ”
“ I hope so, I am trying to love her.”
“Love her! oh, I am glad she is not my
cousin.”
“ Perhaps she is,” laughed Nellie. “ I did not
know until Pat told me that she was my cousin.
When you go home you had better ask your
mother and father for the names of all their


y
relations, and perhaps you will find that Milcie is
your cousin too.”
“No, we have no relatives in Australia,”
Kitty murmured thankfully.
“ Look at the sun,” Nellie cried warningly,
and then they heard the rattle of rosary beads,
a sound that heralds the approach of a Sister,
and Sister Mary Dolores came by the verandah.
Nellie slipped away. Sister talked with Kitty
for a long long time, and I think Kitty shed a few
tears. No one but Sister knew, however. Kitty
O’Brien had never been known to cry in all her
boarding-school life—a period of three and a
half years.
Next morning Milcie came to school in great
trepidation, but no one made any reference to
the strange story they had heard. Thelma Ray
looked unkind things, but she had been coaxed
into a treaty of peace by means of many devices.
And that is what the girls said —nothing.


CHAPTER XXV
A PICNIC
AUGUST passed by, and then my Ladye
September came and tossed her lap-
ful of flowers down into Saint Mary’s Garden.
Every bed was crowded with them, they ran
wild in the grass and strayed out on to the
paths. Sweet peas of every hue waved their
dainty blossoms airily and smiled at the stately
roses ; petunias and phlox danced a giddy polka
when the wind blew, and the last of the red
lilies nodded approval. The bogainvillia’s purple
made colour in the hedges and brightened the
high wire-netting fence that surrounded the
tennis court. The treaty of peace was not
broken; Milcie was treated with marked kindness
by every one, and was so much improved that Bet
said, “ It is a good thing Milcie got into that
scrape. See what good it has done her. She is
a hundred times nicer than she was before.”
Thelma —false friend—often longed to say


something cutting to Milcie, but she had given
her promise, and a promise is a very sacred
thing amongst convent girls. Kitty found it
hard to bridle her tongue at first, but she, too,
had given her word, and “ an O'Brien never
breaks his word," was her constant boast. By
continual trying she learned to “tolerate"
Milcie Grogan, and even painted a little white
tie for her birthday.
Milcie and Nellie were rather shy of each
other; Milcie felt ashamed to make any overtures
of cousinly friendship and Nellie could not yet
feel any affection for the girl who had treated
her so unkindly.
Before Mr. and Mrs. Grogan went north
again they gave the girls a picnic to the island.
It was given in Nellie's honour, and she was
the “ girl of the hour." Such a picnic ! They
are talking of it yet, at Saint Mary’s. The
boat left the wharf early in the morning, and
the run across the bay was “ deliciously"
cool and fresh. Mr. and Mrs. Grogan accom-
panied the party —Madame was not needed
—and Kitty and Bet danced for joy conse-
quently. Father O’Rourke and Father Bryne
were invited, and came over in Mr. Ray's


motor launch and spent a few hours with the
picnickers. What fun there was ! Mr. Grogan
was the loveliest man to have at a picnic, and
Mrs. Grogan made herself so agreeable that all
the girls fell in love with her before an hour had
passed.
The lunch was “ superb/' Bet said, and when
she discovered that the large square cans con-
tained ice-cream she whispered to Kitty that it
was “ a simply perfect picnic," and that Mr. and
Mrs.Grogan were “ absolutely delightful people,"
But the hours flew by and the sun sank
lower and lower, warning them all that night
was coming.
“ Oh, why can’t we tell the sun to stay up,"
little Mollie cried. “ Picnic days should be twice
as long as school days.
“ Mollie, asthore, be contented," laughed
Kitty, we would have twice as much sunburn
if the day were twice as long."
Kitty’s face was burnt a brilliant red, and
Bet’s was nearly as bright. Many of the girls
had shrouded themselves in gossamers, but
these two said life was too short for minding
complexions, and told the sun to “ do his worst ”
—and he did.


The journey back to the wharf was delightful,
and a party of sunburnt, tired maidens drove
home by the light of the moon. Mr. Grogan
said his arm ached from the children’s hearty
hand-shakes, and his ears echoed with all the
pretty girlish thanks he had received.
That night the dressing-room looked like a
chemist’s shop. Sunburn cures were strewn
on every table —lanoline, glycerine, vaseline,
and “ snows ” and “ creams ” of all descriptions.
The “ intermediates,” who were too young to
bother about complexion, laughed derisively.
“ Well, you are silly. What is the good of a
picnic if you go to all this trouble after it. Why,
the sunburn is the best part —it lasts. It makes
you remember for weeks after that you really
have been at a picnic, and not merely dreaming
it.”
“ I prefer to remember without the aid of
freckles and blisters,” Angela answered as she
smeared her nose gently.
“ When you small people reach our years of
discretion you will realise that it is worth a
little trouble to try not to look hideous,” Mar-
garet said in a “ grown-up ” voice.
Indeed,” cried the “ intermediate ” girl


“You infer, I suppose, that I look hideous.”
“ Not at all, dear —you are a dream of loveli-
ness,” hastily interposed Catherine, and the
small girl, muttering something about vanity,
withdrew.
Down in the little ones’ dressing-room Sister
Peter was bathing sunburnt faces and apply-
ing cooling lotions to little blistered noses.
But such is the end of all picnics.


CHAPTER XXVI
AT BOONWOOROO
WHEN Tim rode out with the mail from
Nofurther one September morning, he
did not guess that wonderful news was contained
in the two letters with the unfamiliar writing—
one a lady’s, the other a gentleman’s hand.
Mary read the letters aloud as the family sat
at their midday meal, and the mother exclaimed
at intervals—
“ Glory be to God ! ”
“ Well, well, now ! ”
“ Look at that! ”
Then her voice changed and took a note of
alarm.
“ What’s that ? Go where, Mary ? ”
“ To Germany, mother.”
“To Germany, that bit of a child ! You won’t
let her go. Mat ? ”
“ Let’s hear it all first; it has me fairly
217


bothered. Read the letters again. Mary —the
Sister’s first.”
Mary read, and the Doran family grasped the
fact that their Nellie was going to be a famous
violinist, and that it was necessary for her to go
to Europe to study.
“ What’s the gentleman’s name, Mary ? ”
asked Mat.
“ Ludwig Hartmann.”
“ A heathenish-sounding name whatever.”
“ You’ll not let her go, Mat,” pleaded the
mother.
“ Why, woman, you seem sorry,” he answered
with a smile, “ ’tis proud you should be.”
“So I am; I’m proud the little girl is so clever,
but if the music is going to send her miles away
from us, I wish she hadn’t a note in her. What
am I saying ? God gave her the gift—God do
as He wills with her.”
“ Amen,” piously added her husband. “ But
I thought these Australians knew everything
and could do everything.”
Mrs. Doran sighed disappointedly. “ Why
can’t she learn enough out here ? ”
Mary explained as well as she could that the
old land is rich with the music of centuries,


and that our young country cannot give the
advantages to be had there. Mrs. Doran sadly
shook her head and wiped her eyes in her
check apron. No dinner was eaten at Boon-
wooroo that day, even the boys had no appetite
for the dish of home-cured bacon and home-
grown cabbage, that would have delighted the
heart of any hungry man.
“ Well, I don’t know,” mused Mat. “ ’Tis
far away certainly and a lot of money.”
“ This Mr. Hartmann seems very kind, Mother.
He offers to pay everything,” Kate said.
“ I wish he weren’t, Kate, I wish he weren’t—
then she could not go. If it were to Ireland
she was going, amongst her own, I would not
mind so much, but to Germany ! ”
“ She hasn’t gone yet. Mother,” Tim cheerily
observed in a voice that implied “ and perhaps
she won’t go either.”
“ It doesn’t seem right that we should stand
in her way, but I feel tempted to refuse this
good man’s offer,” Mat said reflectively.
“Away with black strangers in a strange
land,” continued Mrs. Doran. “ Perhaps the
poor child would lose her faith, or all the praise
and attention might turn her head, and then,


sure, what good is the music here if she won’t
be playing in God’s choir in heaven. Don’t
let her go a step, Mat.”
“ I don’t know; perhaps it is our duty to send
her. How old is she ? ”
“ Sixteen, come Holy Innocent’s Day.”
“ Well, I think we might leave it to herself
to decide, and we won’t say a word for or against
it. She is a sensible girl, let her decide herself,”
Mat said thoughtfully.
“ But there’s this man; won’t he be persuad-
ing her to go ? He will then, but what can we
do ? I can’t bring myself to say No, although
’twould break my heart to let her go so far and
for such a long time—the house is dead since she
left it.”
The other members of the family thought
this a good plan, and then if Nellie decided not
to go to Germany, she could return to St. Mary’s
for the next two years, as previously arranged,
and continue her music lessons there. She
would learn enough in that time for the simple
folk of Boonwooroo.
“ We’ll go down ourselves, Mat,” Mrs. Doran
said. “ But as you say, we wont speak a word
for or against it.”


“ We’ll go; I’m hungering for a sight of her,”
he replied.
“ And let us all pray that God will direct
Nellie in her choice,” the mother added. “ Mat,
say the hymn to the Holy Ghost after rosary
to-night, and while we’re away Pat will say it.”
“I will, Mother.”
“ Every night ? ”
“ Every night, Mother.”


CHAPTER XXVII
THE DECISION
NELLIE, you are wanted in the parlour.
“I ? ”
“ Yes —you, you, you ! Sister Michael told
me to tell you. Don't look so thunderstruck;
run and see who is there."
“ Who can it be ? " Nellie asked herself as
she hurried along the hall “ perhaps Herr
Hartmann, or Mrs. Lawless—or " She could
think of no other likely visitor.
She knocked gently and entered.
“ Mother ! Father," she screamed and tried
to embrace and kiss them both at the same time.
My dear girl-readers, let us steal away softly
—on tiptoe—close the door after us, and leave
Nellie with her parents. St. Mary’s clocks
ticked away, hours flew by, but still the Dorans
talked on in the parlour. Sister Michael brought
them tea, and the delicious confections the girls


called “ convent cakes/’ but the tea grew cold
and the cakes lay all untasted —the sight of
Nellie was refreshment enough for Mat and his
wife. After Nellie’s tongue had tired, she took
her parents through the school and the grounds,
pointing out the beauties of everything.
While they were admiring the huge Celtic
cross down by the grotto, a cab drove up the
avenue, and a little old gentleman with stooped
shoulders and gold-rimmed glasses alighted and
rang the bell.
“So I have come to ask if the Sister haf
heard from the little girl’s barents. My letter
with satisfaction they haf not answer.”
Sister Mary Cecilia was sent for, and when she
saw who the caller was, she exclaimed, “ What-
ever will he say to them ? ”
“So they are nowhere. That is veil.” Mat
and his wife were brought in, and Nellie sat and
listened while the old German again made his
generous offer. When he understood that they
left it all to Nellie to decide, he was delighted.
Of course she would go, he told himself, for
she had the soul of a musician, and that soul
must crave for music, as the body craves for
food. Sister Mary Cecilia looked at Nellie


and wondered which she would choose—Ger-
many and fame ; Boonwooroo and love.
“ What do you say ? ” Herr Hartmann, asked,
and peered through his glasses at the girl who
had such a golden future before her, and need
only say one little word to secure it. Mat and
his wife sat as immovable as statues, but Mat’s
hands clutched his chair tightly, his teeth were
clenched, and Mrs. Doran’s fingers trembled
pitifully. Nellie’s eyes were bright with excite-
ment, and two little frowning lines furrowed the
smoothness of her forehead. “ Germany—
music ! ” How she longed for them ; her heart
cried out for them. Just one word and they
were hers. But that one word. What would it
cost every one at Boonwooroo ? It would be
heartrending to go, she knew; she would
sacrifice her own heart for music, but —there
were mother and all the others.
She had been praying for weeks to know what
to do, and now the moment for her decision had
come. Visions came of fame and fortune. She,
Nellie Doran, to be praised and feted like the
famous artists she read of. Visions came of the
humble selection, no travel, no fame, no for-
tune —buried in the bush, unknown, unnoticed,


her talent wasted. But —she looked over to
the two old-fashioned figures near the window
and found two pairs of aged, tear-dimmed eyes
fastened on her face yearningly. The little
frown vanished from her forehead. Love
crushed down ambition in her heart. Some
day, perhaps, she would go to Germany, but oh,
not now, not now.
She smiled into the Professor’s eager face.
“ Thank you, very, very much indeed, Herr
Hartmann, but I must stay at home, I could not
go to Germany.”
“ Ach Gott! ” he cried out, and waved his
hands distractedly, and Sister Mary Cecilia
sighed and said, “Perhaps it is best —Fiat
voluntas Dei.”
The old people felt a great fear taken from
them, and their hearts grew light with joy as
they breathed a fervent “ Thanks be to God.”
“You will not go ! ” poor, disappointed Herr
Hartmann managed to articulate.
“ No —I cannot,” Nellie replied.
“ Madame, it is a sin—persuade, persuade, I
beg of you,” he cried.
But Sister could not; she had hoped that
Nellie would accept the offering fortune laid at


her feet, but she could say nothing, for she had
seen the light of joy in the faded eyes opposite
her.
Herr Hartmann coaxed and pleaded and
argued, but Nellie smilingly refused. The old
couple would not help to persuade her; they
told him they were glad she had decided not to
go-
“ Glad ! Ach ! There should be a law com-
pelling the parents of clever children to send them
to suitable colleges and schools when they have
such a chance as this little one has.”
He could not understand. He, a stranger,
was prepared to spend every penny he had to
bring out the music that was in this girl’s soul,
and they, her own parents, would not sacrifice
a little feeling and tell her she must go. All
their affection, all hers, should be gladly laid
on the altar of music.
“ Ach, if you were German, she would go.
Oh, lam this day a most unhappy man. Ever
since I find this child I have thought of her
grand future. I have heard in fancy the wonder-
ful things she will blay one day, and now it is
all gone —my dream is shattered.”
He was inconsolable, and poor Nellie could


have wept for him. He was so kind, and she
was causing him such keen disappointment.
Oh, if she could only do both—go to Germany
and stay at Boonwooroo too.
Poor Herr Hartmann dropped a few bitter
tears into his huge silk handkerchief and went
his way.
“So the dream is gone. I have nothing
now. My life has been all disappointment, but
I vill dream no more—for the waking is so hard
and so cruel.”
“ Oh, what a silly ! ” cried Angela when she
heard Nellie’s decision. “ Not go to Germany !
Not make a name for herself ! She hasn’t a
grain of sense.”
“ Would you go, Angel mine ? ”
“ Yes, I only wish I could.”
I’ll write to Herr German for you,” cried
Bet.
“ But I’m not a genius,” sadly replied “The
Angel.”
“ I would not go—not for all the fame in the
world,” cried Dot, “ unless mother and father
went too, and promised to bring me straight back
to Australia afterwards.”
“ Wouldn’t you like to take Australia with


you ? ” laughed Kitty. “ I’m glad Nellie is not
going, because all the Dorans would never smile
again if she went.”
"Ld love to go,” Thelma said. “ Just think,
she might be a renowned player, and be pre-
sented to kings and queens, and have lovely
jewels and beautiful dresses. She is foolish.”
“ Home is better than all those,” Dot said
softly.
“ Mid pleasures and palaces
Though we may roam,
Be it ever so humble
There's no place like home,”
sang Kitty, and the girls joined in the chorus—
“ Home, home, sweet, sweet home.
There’s no place like home,
There's no place like home.”


CHAPTER XXVIII
MOSTLY EDITORIAL
OLD Peter had four beds of white St. Joseph’s
lilies, and just as October drew near a
few white buds burst into bloom. These flow-
ers were Peter's pets, he liked them better than
any others, for Saint Joseph always carries a
spray of them, and they are generally to be
found in the pictures of Our Lady.
“ Every flower is beautiful," Peter was wont
to remark, “ but them lilies beats all."
The garden was looking very brilliant those
October days, all the jacaranda trees that for
so long had spread out naked branches against
the sky, were now covered with mauve-coloured
blossoms, no green leaves, just one mass of soft
tinted mauve, as if a big mauve-coloured cloud
had floated down from some gorgeous sunset
and settled on the branches of the jacarandas.
By and by, when all the pretty blossoms were


dead, the green leaves would come forth. Then
there were oleanders, pink and white, such
delicate shades, and a few purple patches of
late bogainvillia still shone in the hedges. In
the beds, chrysanthemums—not as beautiful as
the May ones —lilies, roses, phlox, geraniums
and snapdragons opened their petals and made
what Bet called a poppy show. The tamarind
trees down near Peter's whitewashed cottage
were loaded with their fruit, and many a raiding
excursion the girls made down there. " Tam-
arinds are awfully tart," they would say, “ but
we like them all the same, Peter "
Peter had paw-paw trees too, and if a nice
ripe yellow paw-paw mysteriously disappeared
sometimes, he only winked his eye and said
the flying foxes took it.
“ But flying foxes could not carry a large
paw-paw away, Peter," Sister Michael innocently
remarked one day when Peter failed to bring
the three beauties he had told her of the day
previously. He brought two, and blamed the
flying foxes for misappropriating the third one.
“ They could destroy the fruit, but they could
not carry it off bodily, Peter."
“ Ah, then they might. Sister, some of them


are mighty powerful creatures/ ’ was Peter’s
reply, and Sister smilingly changed the subject.
Rosary month passed, and then came the
quiet Advent time ; but in the distance loomed
the light of the joyous breaking-up day. The
weeks went by, slow, slowly, ten, nine, eight.
“ Just imagine, Marion, only five weeks until
break-up day,” Angela cried joyously as she
tripped out on the verandah one warm Novem-
ber afternoon.
“Yes,” Marion replied politely but rather
absently, as she looked up from the papers on
her knee.
“ Oh, are you writing, too ? I can’t find a
soul to talk to. Everywhere Igo I find budding
poets and blossoming journalists. I think the
annual will be the size of the big Bible if every-
thing is published.”
“Are you not writing anything, Angela?”
“No, but I’ve sketched some headings.
Sister kindly said they were good, and that she
will utilize them.”
“ How nice! lam trying to write an essay on
the ‘Resources of Queensland.’”
“ Kitty O’Brien is writing some clever thing
about ‘ Ancient Ireland,’ and will hardly speak


a word to any one. Bet and Milcie are doing up
the amusements of the year, and nothing can
drag them from the study; Dot is writing a sweet
little thing about flowers, and wanders round the
garden with a paper and a pencil every spare
moment she has. There's not any one to talk
to except the babies. All the seniors are
working hard, too."
Marion smiled. “ Well, Angela, you had better
commence something, then you will not feel
lonely."
“ No, I really could not. As a last resource
I'll go and talk to Thelma Ray—l see no one
else about. Good-bye, so sorry for disturbing
you."
Every one was busily employed these days
writing “ something for the annual," and the
“ editors," Catherine Reilly and Margaret Kelly
wore harassed expressions.
When Kitty had finished her article on
“ Ancient Ireland," she spent the spare time
composing verse. In the garden, on the veran-
dahs, about the rooms, she went, murmuring her
lines and marking off “ the feet " by a jerky
little nodding of her head. “ Scanning is such
a bother, but I leave a little extra syllable in


now and then, because you see I am only a young
poet —I should take plenty licence." And she
did.
Nellie wrote two charming little sketches
entitled “ The Beauties of the Bush " and “ My
Violin/' The girls pronounced them lovely,
and said that Nellie Doran was undoubtedly a
very clever girl. The senior girls wrote all the
“ good " articles —“ grown-up," serious and
“ pious ” things, according to Bet.
This is one of Kitty's pieces :
Our Bay
A broad blue stretch of water
With sun-diamonds sprinkled o’er.
With here and there a wide white sail
And a stretch of sandy shore.
A high green isle in the centre
Of this vast expanse of blue.
A hilly cape in the distance.
And a lighthouse, firm and true.
Mountains near and more afar
Guarding this blue sunny bay :
The flags and masts of the harbour
Bright with the light of day.
Thus it is—so pleasant and quiet—
When storms are far, far away.


Sweet to dream and think about—
The blue waters of Cleveland Bay.
Despite its many faults, Kitty was proud of
this masterpiece, and her friends gave her such
praise that she wrote another one :
“ Breaking Up.”
When the setting sun is shining
On the jacaranda trees,
And their lovely blooms are blowing,
In the gentle evening breeze;
When the waves are softly sighing,
As they steal up to the shore,
Then my thoughts away go flying,
And my heart is feeling sore.
For the year away is dying,
And we soon shall have to part,
That’s why my thoughts are straying,
And there’s soreness in my heart.
For the girls will all be going,
Some not coming back again,
And the parting brings us sorrow,
Yes, the parting brings us pain.
Though the New Year very pleasant be,
I know I’ll often sigh
For the old times and the old girls,
That now are passing by.>


This last piece found even greater popularity
than the first. Bet sang it to the air of “ Home,
sweet Home,” and Angela said it was so sweetly
sympathetic it went straight to her heart.


CHAPTER XXIX
AU REVOIR
ON the Feast of the Immaculate Conception
the chapel was beautifully decorated.
At mass time the white-veiled figures assembled
round Our Lady's statue made a pleasing pic-
ture, the blue cloaks of the Children of Mary and
the red cloaks of the “ Angels " making bright
splashes of colour. As the girls approached
the altar rails, one seemed to hear the rustle
of guardian angels' wings. That afternoon
there was a reception of Children of Mary, and
Nellie Doran was one of the happy few. Kitty
and Bet watched the ceremony with wistful
eyes; they longed to be kneeling there beside
Nellie, they wanted to be one of Our Lady’s own
particular children, to wear her medal, and have
the blue cloak over their shoulders.
After warmly congratulating Nellie and the
other chosen ones, they sympathised with each
other, “ I felt so much in the cold," Bet said.


“It seemed as if Our Lady had those six girls
right under her own mantle, and you and I,
Kitty, were left out. But never mind, next year
we'll try harder. We are improving, the presi-
dent said, so did Sister M. Dolores. Perhaps in
May we shall be elected."
“ Oh, I hope so, Bet; I have been trying, but
every time I see a Child of Mary sign ‘ E de M ’
after her name I feel so jealous and almost want
to cry."
“So do I," Bet agreed sympathetically.
The remaining school-days flew by and at
last exhibition day arrived. Visitors crowded
the halls, viewing the year’s work; a short
musical programme was gone through, and then
the prizes distributed. Such talk afterwards,
such an orchestra of girlish voices as each showed
proudly her own particular prize to a group
of admiring girl friends.
“ Nellie Doran is the luckiest girl I know. A
gold cross for good conduct, a gold medal for
music, and that beautiful set of books for com-
position."
“ Don’t say luckiest, there is no luck about it;
she worked hard for those prizes."
“ What is your book, Margaret ? "


“ My new Curate”
“ Oh, that is lovely.”
“ Fabiola .”
“ Three Daughters of the United Kingdom .”
“ I’ve read that over and over again.”
“ Kitty has a History of Ireland and a big
volume of Moore ; she is waltzing about hugging
them.”
“ Tennyson ? ”
“ Thelma, what is your book ? Show it to me,
please.”
“ Longfellow. I shan’t open it.”
“ Oh, Thelma, Longfellow is delightful; you
must read ‘ Evangeline.’ ”
“ I won’t read 'Evangeline,’ I hate poetry; I
don’t want books, I’d love a little cross like
Nellie and Margaret got.”
“ Indeed, I suppose you would. Why didn’t
you work for one ? ”
“ Work ! I never worked so much in my life.
Doesn’t this old book prove it, would I have got
it for nothing ? I did work, but only because
I had to. Sister made me,” Thelma grumbled
as she threw her despised Longfellow into her
desk.
“And the school year is nearly over; lam


almost sorry/' Bet mused; " the old year is an
old friend and we don't know the new one at
all."
“ Don't wax sentimental, Betty," Kitty
laughed, “ you will be as bad as Angela soon."
“I am always sorry when breaking-up day
comes," Margaret put in. “It does seem
lonely —some girls leaving for good, some Sis-
ters going to other schools. There are three
seniors finishing this year. Their class gave
them such sweet little farewell gifts, and the
three of them, for all their age and learning,
broke down and couldn't speak."
“ Glad I'm not leaving," smiled Kitty.
“ So am I," Bet chimed in.
“ Wish I were," Thelma mumbled with a
shrug of her shoulders. “Too much work here,
and too many rules." The others smiled and
told her work was good for her.
More packing up ! Oh, the joy of it. Seven
weeks of holidays ! The girls compared their
vacations like this :
Easter . . good!
Midwinter . . better ! !
Christmas . . best! ! !
Such bustling about, such bumping of boxes


and baskets, such leave-taking. Then cabs
came and went, taking St. Mary’s girls to trains
and boats, to be carried away north or south or
west. Kitty and Bet saw the western mail off ;
there were ten girls bound westwards, Nellie
Doran to go west of the westerners —her jour-
ney was the longest.
“ Good-bye,” she said, her lips smiling, her
eyes filled with tears.
“ Oh, not good-bye, Nell—only au revoir.
You are coming back to St. Mary’s, and so are
we, Deo volente.”
“ Now, Kitty, you are copying Sister M.
Dolores; she always says ‘ Deo volente,”’ Bet
said teasingly.
“ A very good model,” one of the westerners
remarked, and then a bell rang. The train
moved off amid the fluttering of schoolgirls’
handkerchiefs, and the “ Au revoir ” of a school-
girls’ chorus.
We shall say “ Au revoir ” too, kind reader.
Perhaps some day we shall meet Nellie Doran
again. Until then, “Au revoir.”
Printed and Bound by the St. Winifred Pres*. London




1508
00136038




]| Iwnf-vS'! sir SsM^iiBraji!
&■ 1 "%\ tcttr.
