

NESSY
HEYWOOD
BY THE LATE
A. W. MOORE, C.V.O.,
Speaker of the House of keys.




The late A. W. MOORE, Esq., M.A., C.V.O., J.P.,
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF KEYS
(THE AUTHOR).


Nessy
Heywood
BY THE LATE
A. W. MOORE, C.V.O.,
Speaker of the House of Keys.
Douglas, Uls of Man:
Brown & Sons, Ltd., “The Isis of Man Times,”
Athol Street.
1913.




CONTENTS.
PACE
Preface vii
CHAP.
I. Introductory 1
11. Nbssy’s Life in Douglas 14
111. Her Brother Peter and the Mutiny of the
Bounty 32
IV. Her Letters and Peter’s Trial and Pardon . 51
V. Last Days 88
List of Subscribers 105




ILLUSTRATIONS.
A. W. MOORE, M.A. (Author) . . . Frontispiece
NESSY HEY WOOD Facing p. 1
NUNNERY MANSION „ 5
PETER HEYWOOD ~ 32
OLD DOUGLAS „ 50
DOUGLAS PIER „ 88


PREFACE.
To edit the “Letters of Nessy Heywood” and present the
story of her life, —her devotion and loyalty —was the last
literary effort, —effort rather than occupation—of the late
Mr. A. \V. Moore. These letters incidentally give glimpses
of Manx life in the 18th century—the “long ago,” in one
sense; but in another sense the recent ; definitely, the days
of our great grandparents. These letters bear witness to the
existence here of refinement and literary tastes, a gentle class,
an heroic spirit. These things appealed to him as things
that, for the little Manx world at least, ought not to pass into
oblivion. The pathos of Nessy Heywood’s indomitable spirit,
the added pathos of her early death, appealed to the imagina-
tive part of his nature: these letters and the story were to
him like faded! rose petals still faintly sweet; not artificial
things. And consequently, in his last illness, in weakness and
suffering, he struggled to give arrangement and form to the
material —knowing well that it was to be the last of his
“ Manx books ” !
Arthur William Moore was the eldest son of William Fine
Moore of Oronkboume, near Douglas; hie mother, of the
family of the Christians of Milntown. The first of the Christian
family of whom there is definite record was John McCristen,
Deemster in 1408, when Sir John Stanley the Elder received,
from Henry IV. of England, the Kingdom and Lordship of
Man. The first of the Moore family of whom there is definite
record was Jenken Moore —Deemster in 1504, and owner of
that part of Castle Ward now called Cronkbourne.
He was born Feb. 6, 1853; received the earliest part of his
education at private schools in Douglas, and at a preparatory
school at Weyhridge, Surrey. In 1867, at the age of 14, he
went to* Rugby, when Dr. Temple was then Head Master ; and
in 1872 he passed to Trinity College, Cambridge.
At 14 he was a delicate hoy, backward in school, but a
“reader.” He had read Macaulay’s History, Alison’s His-
tory of Europe, a ten volume History of the Indian Mutiny,
the whole of the Waverley Novels, a considerable quantity
of the then standard novels, and much other reading not usual
for a hoy at that age.


One of ids enthusiasms was the Isle of Man Steam Packet
Company —of which his father was a Director; and, in after
years, when himself a Director, he wrote a short history of
the Company—one of those minor compilations contributed
by him to the history of the Island.
His home environment was singularly fortunate, in view
of the part afterwards to he taken by him in the public life
of the Island. His father was in the House of Keys ; his
uncle, the Yen. J. C. Moore, was Archdeacon of Man. When
the Archdeacon visited Cronkhourne, the clergy of the district
were invariably there as guests invited' to meet him. The
men most prominent in the Legislature were also frequent
guests at Cronkhourne. No other young Manxman bad so
advantageous an environment, preparatory to insular public-
life.
With the larger -world there was also relation and inter-
course. His uncle, Henry Christian, was a well-known archi-
tect. John Pearson, architect, was married to his maternal
aunt. John Pearson’s house in Harley Street, from the age
of 14, became to him a “second home” in London—where,
in later years, he had endless opportunities of meeting men
of distinction in the artistic world.
The Rugby period, 1867-72, after a somewhat dismal experi-
ence of preparatory schools, was to him a new and wholly
congenial life. He was backward to begin with; but passed
through Rugby with enough distinction to occasionally secure
class prizes. In retrospect he has said that he acquired “ no
real scholarship” there: he meant that “real scholarship”
in the strict sense he never acquired—not even at Cambridge.
At Rugby he, in fact, devoted himself to games —not with
the simple enthusiasm of the athlete, hut with a singular
earnestness and conviction with regard to their value. In
this he was not a Manxman. It was rather a case of the bent
of his disposition, viz., to set the fullest value on distinction :
and he achieved' distinction as an athlete far beyond the
warrant of his physical fitness.
The record of the Rugby days was of football, paperchases,
boating, five®, and house-washing—which consisted in leaping
across the Avon, till, more downstream, one ended by leaping
into the river. For the school sports he trained’ for the mile;
and as a result was laid up with inflammation of the lungs.
Cricket he did not care for: much to his regret afterwards,
when he established a cricket club at Cronkhourne for the
youths employed in bis father’s sail-cloth factory. What he
found most congenial, however, was volunteering. He joined


the school corps in his first term; went for battalion drills to
Coventry, Warwick, Stratford, Nuneaton, etc.; won several
shooting prizes; was sergeant of his company in a summer
camp at Stoneleigh; was in the Rugby team shooting in the
Public Schools Competition at Wimbledon; and, in his last
year at Rugby, as senior officer, accompanied the team to
Wimbledon, but, as he had shot badly the previous year, not
in this case to shoot. The Volunteer movement had reached
the Isle of Man: and that summer he and G. Drinkwater,
who had shot in the Eton team at Wimbledon, challenged
any two Manx Volunteers to shoot, and in fact won the
match!
His environment as a Rugby boy had one circumstance of
considerable advantage; be was in the house of James
Wilson, who afterwards married Annie Moore, his cousin!
When in camp at Wimbledon he found his uncle, Henry
Christian, there in the “Artists’ Corps” ; and by him ho was
taken to F. Leighton’s tent (afterwards Lord Leighton): this
sort of introduction an instance of what he afterwards enjoyed
ad libitum in the Christian and Pearson circles. On the
occasion of the Thanksgiving for the recovery of the Prince
of Wales (Feb,, 1872), he was one of the 15 Rugby boys for
whom seats were provided at St, Paul’s. He “ was surprised
at the small size of the Queen” ; saw Disraeli, Gladstone, and
everybody of distinction and of consequence; and stayed with
very wealthy Greek people at Kensington.
Easter holidays spent at John Pearson’s house in Harley
Street had made London familiar to him, since the age of 14,
when he had explored it far and wide by the assistance of a
map. And his visits to Harley Street had given him his first
experiences of theatre®, when such pieces as “Caste,”
“ School,” etc., had their vogue; and Robertson, Buckstone,
Phelps, J as. Thorne, etc., were at the height of their
popularity.
One side of A. W. Moore’s life, bis love of travel, should
be mentioned here: because in the summer holidays between
leaving Rugby and going to Cambridge, he had his first excur-
sion outside England. We all recollect our first considerable
journey—especially, perhaps, our first sea voyage. His first
sea trip was to Llandudno in. 1859: he was only six;
and the memories of it, “winkles,” and the climb to the
Great Orme. In 1870 he spent the summer holidays at a
moorland farm near Gatehouse in Galloway, with a taste of
grouse shooting; then in the Lake District, when he made
the climb from Wast Water to the summit of Soawfell. In
1871 he spent his holidays in the Cheviots, with another
experience of grouse and black game. In the summer of 1872


he was one of a party of eight, including James Wilson, his
House Master at Rugby, and Dakyns, afterwards of Clifton
and the friend of T. E. Brown, to whom is inscribed the
“ Epistola ad 1 Dakyns.” They carried knapsacks, and
roughed it in the hinterland of the Stavanger and Sogne
fiords. On his return he visited Lincoln, where John Pear-
son was then restoring the cathedral; and —though in the
motives and spirit of architecture he never came to have
what might be called esoteric interests—“ Lincoln” seen thns,
with its restorer, quickened 1 his interest in architecture
generally. In after years the great world examples, seen by
him in England, France, Spain, and Italy, were seen with
attention, and the pleasure that comes from discrimination
that much farther than the mere identification of
period and style.
He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October, 1872:
no work to begin with; but boating and football, and the
forming of acquaintanceships. The first year at the Univer-
sity, especially the first summer term, is oftenest the illimit-
able joy of existence —for the time being all sufficient. And
of this he afterwards in memory pictures himself “ in hie first
summer term, mainly watching cricket on the Trinity
ground.”
In hie first Long Vacation, with Arthur Sedgwick, his old
Rugby master, who was staying at Cronkbourne, he visited
the Calf of Man; both of them risking the dangerous
exploit of bathing in the turbulent waters of the Sound. That
same vacation, with an old Rugby boy, he tramped through
Devon and Cornwall; and on this occasion it was that he
called at the Palace, Exeter, to see Dr. Temple.
In his second year, boating again; and reading for the
Modern History Tripos, with lectures by Hammond and
Seeley. His next “Long” included a holiday with “Ball,
who cam© out after-wards as 2nd Wrangler,” at Loch Inver,
in Invernesshire; and a trip to the Orkneys. At Stromness
he found a stranger named Armstrong, who had crossed the
Pentland Firth in a canoe; and now invited him to join him
on the passage back. It was a risky adventure. The canoe
was caught in a squall in the Race of Pentland; and his
career, then and there, at the age of 21, all but ended. They
returned to the West of Scotland by way of the Caledonian
Canal; and parted at Ardri&haig.
In hie third year, steadily reading for the Tripos, ho gave
up boating and took to football. He was a member of the
Richmond team ; and, in a match against the ’Varsity, played
so well that it resulted in his being selected for the ’Varsity


team. He played for Cambridge in all tome matches; and
against Oxford at the Oval.
In 1875, the Long Vacation, at the Scotch Lakes and in
Edinburgh; afterwards the History Tripos; and (Dec., 1875)
the splendid distinction of First Class Honours. He says
that he was an “industrious” student. This is hardly full
justice: because in his work there was “ industry ” certainly;
but also real energy, fixedness of purpose, and acute con-
scientiousness—amply proved in his subsequent research
work and in his published books. What he felt and acknow-
ledged was the unfortunate fact that he possessed no style.
There was nothing of the artistic or the creative in his intel-
lect; or rather, perhaps, there was the barest minimum of
the imaginative gift. He made no claim to any such thing;
frankly admitted that to him Wordsworth was a sealed book;
he might have added even Gibbon—not to speak of Livy. To
make the past, or any epoch or incident of it, march again
was for him quite impossible. But, if for that reason some-
what lacking in charm, his historical work by virtue of the
sterling quality of conscientiousness, is and will remain
invaluable.
Straight from Cambridge and the Tripos (Dee., 1875), he
set out for Cannes, to stay with his friend Close, at “Close-
brooks,” a villa on Cap d’Antibes, with gardens by the sea.
Two delightful months there, with new acquaintanceships
formed, that often brought him to Cannes again in after
years. In February, 1876, with two Cambridge friends, he
set out on a tour through Italy—ending in April with a fare-
well banquet at Vefour’s, in Paris.
An incident of this Italian tour illustrates the spirit which
characterized him through life. He had been fortunate
enough, before leaving England, to get a letter of introduc-
tion to Cardinal Antonelli; and when in Rome took opportu-
nity to call at the Cardinal’s residence. The Cardinal could
not see him; but, in reply to a note, was good enough to send
him an order for a private audience with the Pope. Accord-
ingly, he presented himself at the Vatican; was duly ushered
into the Pope’s presence; and, with the due etiquette,
answered in French the question His Holiness addressed to
him in that language: the brief interview concluding with a
paternal blessing, and the hope expressed for his conversion
to the Faith of the Catholic Church.
This venture might be thought a presumption. It is evi-
dence, at least, that at 23 he possessed a singular confidence
in encountering personages in exalted place. Though in later
life he never acquired, probably never attempted to acquire


conversational facility as a fine art, he did acquire by the
cultivation of social experience an absolute freedom from that
diffidence which men too commonly find an impediment in
their interview with their social superiors
By the time he left Italy he had acquired a fair conversa-
tional acquaintance with Italian; and after parting with his
friends at Baris, he went to stay at Caen, to acquire a more
complete acquaintance with French.
In June, 1876, he left Caen, took his degree at Cambridge,
and was at Cronkhourne again : and at once “went into har-
ness a® his father’s clerk.” He picked up the details and the
routine of the business with a rapidity rather surprising to
the factory staff. His work included visiting Armagh and
the flax markets, to learn flax-buying; and he had to acquaint
himself with the work of the branch factory at Monkstown,
near Belfast. In the following year, already bearing the
main burden of the business, he became his father’s partner.
At Cronkhourne Village the men and hoys had no outdoor
games; and this, in contrast to the strenuous and healthy out-
door activities of undergraduate life, struck him as “lazi-
ness”; their circumstances, however, mainly accountable for
their apathy. He established a cricket club, which flourished
there for quarter of a century; but the game was never taken
up elsewhere by the youth of the Island.
As his after career was to be, for 33 years, largely identified
with Manx public life, a digression is here in place. It was
an epoch period, a transition from old conditions to new, a
beginning of changes—inevitable, if not always admirable.
In 1866 the Manx Constitution had been “reformed”: and
the House of Keys, from being a cooptativo oligarchy, was
now an elected body. Meanwhile, the Island was becoming
a great seaside resort. Meanwhile, too, steam was rapidly
ousting sail ; and the Cronkhourne sail-cloth factory was a
doomed industry. The changes came gradually; but there
was something of class impatience in the tone and spirit of
the community. In 1877, at the age of 24, he was made a
magistrate: and over the appointment of so young a man
the Insular Press uttered vigorous protests. He had lived
quite outside the general life of the Island: and now, coming
in contact with it for the first time, he encountered that
jealousy which is a characteristic of the Manx people,—who
are keenly resentful of any superiority in one of their own
countrymen; though, without demur, they allow any preten-
sion, however spurious, to he imposed on them, provided only
it be by an alien of whom nothing is known. Uninfluenced 1 by
this display of feeling, he sought to identify himself with


every phase of local public life; and ended by becoming what
is called a Liberal. He was not a stalwart; not of the
adamant; intellectually not an idealist.
For the next ten years he was occupied with experiments.
The business in which he was a partner —to which, in the
natural course of things, he would succeed I —could not in-
crease. A born man of business, with the acquisitiveness that
makes him in deadly earnest about acquiring a great fortune,
would have sought another arena : but he had not this incen-
tive. He accepted l the situation; andl out of it evolved his
two-fold vocation, —of local politics; and literary work, de-
voted' to the history and lore of the Island. His experiments
were in the direction of tastes. He took to breeding fox
terriers; and won prizes, so long as the fancy lasted. Along
with a few others, he formed a hunt club, to take over the
northern pack of harriers which Mr. Tarrant, of Ballakil-
lingan, had decided' to give up; but the hunt, for lack of
support, was finally abandoned after a struggling existence of
six years. More important, his starting to keep weather
records, in connection with the London Meteorological Office:
his own observatory at Cronkbourne; and sub-stations in
other parts of the Island. More important still, from its out-
come, the idea he formed, in 1879, of going through the parish
registers: it led to his “ Manx Names,” published in 1890;
to his “ History of the Isle of Man,” published in 1900; and,
incidentally, to the “ Manx Note Book ” (1885-87), and other
minor publications.
In 1882 he tried 1 the experiment of a dairy farm and cheese-
making at Lanjaghan, an upland farm of his father’s, in the
neighbourhood of Cronkbourne. Choice Ayrshire® were
brought over, and) Scotch hands for the work. He visited
model dairy farms in Galloway to learn all about their system.
His daily routine was, to ride up to Lanjagban in the evening,
sleep there, start the men to work at 6 a.m., and return to
Cronkbourne for breakfast. They made excellent cheese; but
had no chance with “American” in the market: so, after
three years, the attempt was abandoned. Meanwhile, also,
he was engaged; in sheep-farming on the mountain tract of
Slieu Losht and Park Llewellyn.
In other directions he was busily occupied. He became a
member of Braddan School Board; a Churchwarden of Brad-
dan ; President of the Horticultural Society; President of the
Southern Agricultural Society, and again President of the
united Northern' and Southern Societies, and, with seme mea-
sure of success, exhibited at their Shows. A visit to the
Electric Light Exhibtion in London, in 1882, resulted in his
introducing electric light at Cronkbourne. He acted as


Trustee of a Lodge of Oddfellows. He was a Freemason; and
took office as Master of Ills Lodge (the Athole), and subse-
quently Senior Warden of the Masonic Province of the Isle
of Man.
In 1883 he was, for the first time, invited to stand for the
House of Keys, for Garff Sheading. In Garff there had been
a succession of animated 1 contests: and, to a man who always
took men altogether too seriously, a contest there promised
to be anything but amusing: accordingly, though it would be
pleasanter to have to record that he welcomed the adventure,
he declined' the honour and duet of it. Two years later he
was elected quietly enough for hie home sheading of Middle. —
which he continued 1 to represent for nearly a quarter of a
century, with a seat so secure that his re-election took place
in his absence. In 1885, soon after entering the Keys, he
was appointed: Captain of the Parish of Onchan.
In those years he often walked 1 across the mountains from
Cronkhourne to Andreas, to visit his uncle the Archdeacon, —
who was Rector of Andreas from 1844 to his death in 1886.
The Archdeacon was a bachelor; with considerable private
means, and open-handed in his charity; quaint of speech, and
naively frank with regard to things “new, and, therefore,
rot true.” It was Arthur Moore’s intention to walk back
from Andreas one Sunday forenoon : hut to this the Arch-
deacon demurred l , as a desecration of the Sabbath. As it was
June, be set out at 3 a.m., and reached Cronkhourne in time
for breakfast. Such strict Sabbatarianism, however, was not
characteristically Manx; it is rather a record of the individual
man. The Archdeacon was neither High, Low, nor Broad:
he was a strict Churchman, not on the points of a particular
school; hut, all the more for that, on points he made import-
ant to himself by unvarying observance.
In the spring of 1887, the year of the Queen’s Jubilee,
Arthur Moore was married to Louisa Hughee-Games, daugh-
ter of the then Archdeacon of Man. Their wedding tour was
in northern Italy, going by way of the South of France, and
returning through Switzerland. On their return they settled
down in Woodbourne House, on the outskirts of Douglas, and
within a short mile of Cronkhourne: and Woodbourne
remained their residence for the remaining 23 years of his life.
Meanwhile, also, Andreas Rectory, which had been to him a
second home during the time of hie uncle, Archdeacon Moore,
was still to be a kind of second home till the removal of Arch-
deacon Hughes-Games. seven years later, to the Vicarage
of Hull.
In his absence in Italy he had been reelected to the Keys.
The year was marked by such incidents as the death of the


old Vicar of Braddan, th© death of the insular Bishop, and
the arrival of his successor. A contingent of the British
Association came to the Island : “ I have seldom seen a more
uninviting set of persons,” he says. Professor Vigfusson
visited the Island in the autumn, and got involved in a con-
troversy with Mr Kermode, author of “ Manx Crosses,” in
which the Icelander got much the worst of the affair. How-
ever, he had taken an interest in the ‘‘Manx Note Book,”
the last number of which came out that same year; and people
forgave his rashness in controversy, from kindly feeling to
him as an ‘‘lcelander,” claiming kin with the Manx. Pro-
fessor Rhys also visited 1 the Island that year: and whoever he
might be that visited the Island, Arthur Moore had always
the good fortune to meet him.
Next year hie spring holiday was in London, —pictures and
plays; at home, Poor Relief legislation and his election to the
Board of Education-; in the autumn, a delightful holiday in
Oxford, where he stayed with Prof. Rhys, and made the
acquaintance of Thorold Rogers, Dr. Tylor, Dr. Murray and
the staff engaged with him on. dictionary work. Prof. Rhys
and Mr. Moor© were just then editing the Manx Prayer Book
of Bishop Phillips, and arranging for its publication by the
Clarendon Press.
In 1889 he published his “Climate of the Isle of Man”;
and worked on “ Place Names and Surnames of the Isle of
Man,” which came out in the following year. In the autumn
he travelled with Mrs. Moore, making an extensive round
through Norway, Denmark, and Germany. Among visitors
to Manxland that year were Mrs Green, wife of th© historian;
and Prof. Browne, of Cambridge, afterwards Bishop of
Bristol.
In 1891, after a dissolution of the Keys, he was again
reelected in his absence. He accompanied the Royal Society
of Antiquaries of Ireland on a set of excursions in Munster;
had a holiday in Hampshire; and 1 attended the Folklore
Congress at Burlington House, where he read a paper on
“Tynwald Hill,” and made the acquaintance of A. Lang, A.
Goname, and others of like fame. Then, at home, the insular
Bishop translated' to Carlisle, and a successor arriving in his
place. In the spring of 1892 he had a holiday in Portugal,
and in the autumn, at the English Lakes. This year Arthur
Moore published his ‘ ‘ Diocesan History of Sodor and
Mann,” brought out by the S.P.C.K.; and saw the somewhat
delayed publication of the Manx Prayer Book.
In the following year (1893) he attended Convocation at
York as a Lay Representative of the Manx Diocese. He was


“not particularly interested in the questions discussed: tlie
“whole affair had such an air of unreality.” Later ho
attended a Welsh Church Defence demonstration at the
Albert Hall; and attended a reception at Lambeth, “ shaking
hands with Archbishop and Mrs Benson, and passing on.” To
visit London was for him to see the “Academy,” to go a round
of the theatres —“ Becket ” and “Charley’s Aunt,” which he
found equally important, as, in fact, they doubtless were. At
the same time he heard the preachers: in this case, “Canon
Ainger and Scott Holland.”
The summer visitors to Manxlaud were Rhys and Sturzen-
Becker, of Stockholm; the latter studying the “vocalization
of Anglo-Manx.” Then, the incident of the departure of
Sir Spencer Walpole, the Lieutenant-Governor, and the
arrival of Sir West Ridgeway.
In 1894 came his first acute sorrow, the loss of a little boy.
At this period the Rev. T. E. Brown was a frequent guest at
Woodbourne House: he had retired from scholastic work at
Clifton, and taken a house at Ramsey, where he continued to
reside till his death in 1897. Among other matters enlisting
Arthur Moore’s interest and furtherance w r ere the formation
of a Sustentation Fund to augment the incomes of the Manx
Clergy; and the completion of the Legislative Chambers, for
which he selected the stained glass. The gam© of golf had
been introduced into the Island in 1891: he had become an
enthusiastic golfer, -with the Port-e-Chee links mid-way
between Woodbourne and Cronkhonrne. In 1895 ho tools
to cycling; and made his first cycling tour during his spring
holiday in the Warwickshire country; and next year a like
tour in North Wales In: March, 1896, be made an extended
tour in Spain—Cadiz, Seville, Granada, Madrid; in autumn
he attended the British Association’s meeting in Liverpool,
reading a paper on the ‘ ‘ Physical Anthropology of the Isle
of Man.” On this occasion lie made the acquaintance of the
Earl of Derby, who received the members of the British
Association at Knowsley; and obtained permission to look
through such papers as remain at Knowsley relating to the
Island. Many members of the British Association came over
to the Island on an excursion; and “ a queer dishevelled look-
ing set most of them were!” There were agreeable excep-
tions, of course; for Mrs. Gomrae, of folklore fame, and Prof,
and Mrs Haddon, of Cambridge, were guests at Woodbourne.
In the December of this year (1896) Arthur Moore published
his “ Manx Tunes and Ballads,”
Sir West Ridgeway had been promoted to the Governorship
of Ceylon; and Lord Henniker, a most amiable man, in whom
kindness took that large place occupied by selfishness in the


generality of men, was now Governor. The year 1897, Queen
Victoria’s “Diamond Jubilee,” began in the Island with a
general election: and Arthur Moore was at home electioneer-
ing. After this, quite delightful to think that he took a ten
days’ trip through Touraine —Blois, Amhoise, Tours (where
St. Martin had died exactly 1,600 years before, and a little
church dedicated to him in Arthur Moore’s Manx constitu-
ency), Loches, Plessis le Tours, Chinon, Angers, Orleans 1 On
his return he read his paper on the “Physical Anthropology
of the Isle of Man ” at a meeting of the Anthropological
Society, in London.
In June he was in London again for the Jubilee —one of
three representatives of the Manx House of Keys, for whom
were provided “excellent seats between Buckingham Palace
and Hyde Park Corner.” Of course, he saw the “Academy,”
and, at the theatres, “Madame Sans Gene” (Lyceum) and
Irving as “Napoleon.” Thence to Southampton, to the
Naval Review. Before returning home, he paid a visit to his
brother-in-law, the Rev. Stephen Hughes-Games, Vicar of
Doddington; and naturally took the opportunity to see
Canterbury.
In the autumn of this year he was at Knowsley, examining
papera relating to the Island: hie “History of the lele of
Man ” already in progress. Later came two breaks with the
past,—the death of the Rev. T. B. Brown, quite suddenly, at
Clifton College; and of John Pearson, an uncle by marriage,
whose funeral he attended in Westminster Abbey: the grave,
“between Scott and Street.” In his notes of minor activi-
ties this year he mentions that he opened a bazaar at St.
Matthew’s Church in Douglas; and that the papers credited
him with having made a “witty speech.” He notes it in
the sense that one must not mind the well-disposed reporters
if they occasionally nod!
There is a Caledonian Association in the Isle of Man; and
they meet at a banquet on the birthday of Robert Burns.
On January 25th, 1898, Arthur Moore was their guest; and
proposed the toast of the “immortal memory.” One could
hardly imagine anyone, that is to say, anyone with no pre-
tension whatever to the poetic or imaginative temperament,
that could speak in a way better than Arthur Moore on an
occasion of this kind.
Among the minor matters of this year, a cycling tour in
East Anglia; a visit to Ripon, Fountains, and the West
Ryding dales; a look at Lancaster and its Castle; a meeting
with Madame Albani at Government House; a visit to Oxford,
to stay with Professor Rhys, meeting Mrs. Gomme, Dr.


Morfil, the Sclavonic scholar; pictures and plays in London.
The prinioipal matter of the year was his election to the
Speakership of the House of Keys, as successor of Sir John
Goldde-Taubman! He continued to hold the Speakership in
successive Parliaments of the Island for 12 years, viz,, till his
death in 1909.
In the Isle of Man, as in all communities, such a man as
Arthur Moore plays many parts. He became a member of
the Insular Harbour Board, a director of the Isle of Man
Banking Company, a director of the Isle of Man Steam Packet
Company, and, after 22 years’ service on the Bench of Licens-
ing Magistrates, was appointed a member of the Licensing
Appeal Court.
Hie 1899 excursions were to Bath and the West of England,
including a detour to the Saxon Church at Bradford-on-
Avon; London, devoted to “ Burne Jones,” the New
Gallery, and the current plays. In June he had a cycling
tour in Britanny, through the Carnac district, to see the
prehistoric monuments, devoting a fortnight to the Conne-
mara of France. On his return he was presented at a levee;
and ended with an Eisteddfod at Cardiff.
At Cardiff he was the guest of Lord Windsor at St. Fagan's
Castle, meeting Herkomer and Alma Tadema there. Arthur
Moore was the official representative of the Isle of Man, or
of the Manx branch of the Celtic race. He received' a Druid
decoration, a white ribbon tied round his arm; and made a
speech in Manx to acknowledge the honour. He seems, in
his description of it, to acknowledge the whole affair to have
been an amazingly stupid and puerile show. He had the
good fortune to, at least, appear to take such things seriously ;
this arose from an idea he had of a duty to the Island, viz.,
that since there was this institution, however artificial and
idiotic it might be, the Island should at least be represented.
The Boer War (1899) implied a demonstration and a ‘‘War
Fund” effort in the Isle of Man, —parade of Societies, tab-
leaux, etc. His impression was that a “ Day of Humiliation
would have been more in place!” To the best of his friends
it was possible for him to be exasperating, viz., when he said
things of this sort.
In 1900 things were in a dismal state in the Island, through
the failure of a local Bank. He had a short holiday in
Sussex; went off in June to represent the Island at the
funeral of Lord Loch. In September he bad a trip to South-
west Ireland; and was in London in October: “History of
the Isle of Man” just out. This work, in two volumes, was


hie most important literary effort. Though wholly without
imaginative qualities or any grace of style, he was conscien-
tious in writing and in what he wrote, and had a compre-
hensive view of hie subject. To this volume one turns as to
the standard work of reference: but one does not read it for
any pleasure in the perusal.
The following year he prepared a small volume, “ Story of
the Isle of Man,” based on his larger history, to be used as a
reading book in Manx schools; and brought out a little
volume, “ Manx Worthies.” He took his spring holiday in
Belgium; and, having occasion to go to Southampton in July,
as a director of the Steam Packet Company, on the business
of purchasing a steamer, he seized the opportunity of
acquainting himself with the New Forest country. Then, in
autumn, to the Pan-Celtic Congress, in Dublin, as representa-
tive of the Isle of Man. On this occasion he stayed with Lord
Castletown at Doneraile Court: Lord 1 Castletown was Presi-
dent of the Celtic gathering; and seems to have picked out
the most agreeable and the most picturesque guests to take
off with him to his home in the West, There were some Bre-
tons: and, if the Manx representative had also been himself
a Celt, the meeting surely would have betrayed him into the
folly of tears and sentiment. But, as a practical fact, Arthur
Moore, though not a Celt, was justified in being where he
was: not a soul' in the Isle of Man but cordially approved of
his being there, among those enthusiasts of natures and dis-
position alien to his own. Those Congresses gave him the
opportunity of meeting, if only for a brief hour, many inter-
esting people: e.g., at Dublin, Prof. Zimmer and Kuno Mayer,
Graves the song-writer, Lord Howth, the Hon. Horace Plun-
kett, the Hon. Stuart Erskine, and the charming Lord Castle-
town himself.
At Doneraile Court, near Bullevant, he saw the scenes
associated' with Raleigh and Spencer; and, on his return to
the Island, made a detour by way of Waterford, Lismore, Kil-
kenny, with a look at “Ormonde’s Castle,” and Carlow.
In 1902 (Jan.), he attended a Manx Gathering in Liverpool.
This affair is a tea-party with speeches, honoured by the pat-
ronage of some distinguished chairman: in this case it was
Lord Lathom. In June he was in London with Mrs Moore
for the Coronation —unhappily interfered with by the King’s
illness. Lord Henniker, the then Lieutenant-Governor of the
Island, had recommended Arthur Moore for a knighthood: hut
his short length of service as Speaker of the Keys probably
accounted for the honour not being conferred on him. The
Governor died in June. It is certain that Arthur Moore felt
the effects of the public business, in which he had to take the


most prominent part, on occasions such as this: he invariably
took the course of having a holiday, e.g., in this case a short
cycling tour in Galloway.
In August h© saw the Coronation in Westminster Abbey;
and within a few weeks had' the honour of being received by
the King and Queen on board their yacht in Ramsey Bay,
and of accompanying them on their drive to Peel Castle and
to Cronkbourne. where the Royal l party did Mrs W. F. Moor©
the honour of drinking tea with her. Following on this
Royal visit to the Island, Arthur Moore received 1 the C.V.O.
decoration.
The successor to Lord Henniker as Lieut.-Governor was
Lord Raglan, who was installed in the autumn, but did not
take up hie residence till the summer of 1903. That autumn,
in London, Arthur Moore was among the guests at a dinner
at the Hotel Cecil, given by Sir Donald Wallace, to meet the
contributors to his “Encyclopaedia Britannica.” In May he
attended a levee at Buckingham Palace; “I rather think, ’
he says, “that the King recognised me; but I did not feel
sure!” He was on his way to Switzerland; for nearly three
weeks, incessant moving about; afterwards, a week in London.
In August he had business at tb© branch works in Belfast;
and took the opportunity of a few days’ golf at Newcastle,
under Sliev© Donard, and a few days’ cycling in County
Down, September, business again, lie was in North-west
England—Hartlepool, Middlesborougli, and Sunderland —“ all
more or less ghastly places”—and business no longer satis-
factory : the “ tramps, which use the vilest shoddy in the way
of canvass,” not needing the good' quality canvas for which
the Moore firm had made its reputation. Thence to Dover,
as a Steam Packet director, to inspect a new turbine steamer
on the Calais station. Before returning he spent a few days
at Dunkirk, Boulogne, and Calais. The question was being
discussed by the group of directors whether they would order
a turbine steamer for the Douglas and Liverpool station; the
result was the new boat which was on the station by Mid-
summer, 1906.
In 1904 his spring holiday was limited to a week, at Fon-
tainebleau, Rheims, Troyes! He cycled, viz., hired 1 a cycle
in ordfer to save time, wherever, as at Fontainebleau, there
was much to be seen and it was worth while to traverse the
forest roads. His notes are such as would form a guide-book
condensed to the requirements of an experienced traveller,
e.g., “Troyes,—of the quaintest, —ancient timber houses, —
remarkable churches, rather decayed—St. Urbain —Oath. St.
Pierre, very fine—St. Nizier —La Madeleine —St. Jean—St.
Nicholas—stained glass, lovely everywhere!” Again, of


Fontainebleau; “Palace, vast, externally dull, interior gor-
geous —Francis 1., Hen. IV., Nap. 1., each, seems to have
made apartments for himself—not used those of predecessor! ’ ’
It is rather pathetic to remember that he was there in the
last week of the month of May; it is characteristic of him
that he notes what he might have seen equally well in Novem-
ber: the splendour of May at Fontainebleau, in effect,
unnoted!
In September, another Pan-Celtic Congress,—this time at
Caernarvon. He stayed with Sir Wm. Preece, at Penrhos;
Prof. Rhys also a guest. Lord Castletown was a prominent
figure, representing the Irish branch. At a reception in the
Castle some of the enthusiasts wore Breton and other Celtic-
race costumes. Arthur Moore was called on for a speech;
and advocated Home Rule all round. At these gatherings it
really does not matter what anybody says: for, of course,
people are not there to take or be taken seriously. Later, he
presided at a lecture on Celtic music; went out into the
country to see a bi-lingual inscription; and fulfilled his duty
of representing the Island. But, of course, he stood quite
outside the enthusiasms.
At Christmas this year comes a significant note; “the carol
nuisance in Douglas more persistent than ever this year ’':
ft was probably the beginnings of ill-health.
With 1906 came the Reform agitation in the House of Key's;
he notes, ‘ ‘ reform discussed in the Keys; the House did not
agree with me; and almost unanimously voted for the ; aboli-
tion ’of one of the Deemsters.” This agitation was destined
to increase; nor was it his affair to oppose it: to some extent
he favoured the re-arrangement of things; and, at least from
a sens© of duty, assisted in the arrangement of the pro-
gramme. June saw him on a cycling trip in the Thames
Valley, after the steam trials of the new turbine steamer off
the Tyne, where he met the Hon . C. A. Parsons and the Earl
of Rosse. Before starting on his cycle trip he saw the Aus-
tralians play cricket. His tour began at Maidenhead, and by
way of Oxford and Woodstock to the West; then back, on a
zigzag parallel track, touching at Famham Castle, Waverley
Abbey, Guildford, Dorking, Reigate: “all this a lovely
country!” He averaged 60 miles a day.
A month later he was in London again, interviewing the
Home Office on the subject of reform; saw the Lancashire
and Middlesex match at Lords; and went to stay with Prof.
Rhys at Oxford.
In September he was in the West of Scotland; saw Iona;
mad© excursions by rail and steamer in various directions from


Oban; then north as far as Gairloch, and across by way of
Loch Mare© to Inverness, to join the Highland Railway to
Perth and St. Andrews. H© played golf on the St. Andrew’s
links; and saw the colleges, where the great attraction for
him was the fine old silver. Speaking of the ruins of the
Abbey and Castle, he thought the tower was “the finest thing
he had seen outside of Italy.”
A sad tone now and then becomes audible in his notes; and
it was, on© cannot but believe, the consciousness of failing
health. He was elected Chairman of the Hospital Committee,
“unwillingly,” he says: “but in view of important negotia-
tions with Noble’s Trustees, I suppose it is my duty.” The
Trustees in question were on the point of endowing the hos-
pital ; and ended 1 by giving the whole cost of a more adequate
building. Again, at Christmas, he notes: “Choirs singing at
night, not only at Christmas, but for at least a fortnight
beforehand, have mad© this time of the year even more un-
pleasant than it generally is.”
There were bereavements also- —the deaths of hie brother-
in-law, the Rev. Joshua Hughee-Gamee at Cheltenham, and
of the Rev. Dr. Hughes-Games, Vicar of Hull, formerly Arch-
deacon of Man, in 1904; and of his uncle, Henry Christian,
the architect, whose house had been, as John Pearson’s house
had been, an ever delightful place of re-union to him when in
London. His connection with those circles was becoming a
thing of memories,—delightful, but of the past.
His eminent fairness, the strictly impersonal spirit in which
he fulfilled the office of Speaker of the Keys, had already
secured for him the entire confidence of the House. He re-
signed his seat in the Council of Education, when he found
his policy not supported l by the Legislature; but, on the
request of the Keys and an expression of their confidence in
his action apart from any consideration of policy, he again
consented to act.
It is possible that the question of health had a place in hie
decision, in 1906, to sell the business carried on at Tromode
near Cronkbourne, by three generations of Moores. The
main reason, however, must have been the fact that every-
where steam was ousting sail; and the manufacture of sail-
canvas an arduous fight against an ebbing tide.
His holiday excursions in 1906 were, nevertheless, delight-
ful experiences to him, —©specially the month of April with
three weeks in the South of France. Lord Raglan had been
restoring Castle Rushen. and the whole subject of mediseval
military architecture, English and Continental, gave special


in tercet to this excursion. He visited Toulouse, Oarcassone,
Narhonme, Argues Mortes, Arles, Nismes, with many detours
into placets of interest in that region; and ended with
Bourges.
In June he cycled through the Severn Valley and to and
fro through mid-Wales; everywhere the architectural ves-
tiges hie main interest; hut, for the most part, a hasty glance
and hurrying on.
In September, from Moffatt as centre, he traversed the
region east and l west, the haunts of Scott on tho Tweed, and
Nithsdale,
He was present at the Manx Gathering in Liverpool in
January, 1907; and took occasion to propose that an expres-
sion of the appreciation of Manx people for the work of the
Rev. T. E. Brown should take some tangible form. T. E.
Brown had 1 died in 1897: but the Manx people to whom
Arthur Moore appealed made a sorry response, and the only
outcome of his proposal was a bust of Mr Brown, now in the
Public Library in Douglas.
In March he was in St. DeinioTs Library, at Hawardem,
with literary projects still in mind. On the way there he
cycled through Wirral, noting the Scandinavian place-names,
all of which appear in Doomsday Book. A book which made
a sensation at that period was “In His Steps,” by Dr.
Sheldon, an American. This author visited the Isle of Man,
and lectured at the Grand Theatre: “Monotonous and full
of repetition ”is Arthur Moore’s note on the lecture. In the
previous year Dr. Clark, also an American, originator of the
“Christian Endeavour” movement, lectured in Douglas;
and him Arthur Moore found “ a very attractive man.”
In June he made a cycling round in Dorsetshire and Somer-
setshire : his chief interest the prehistoric earthworks and the
vestiges of Roman occupation. In August, staying as tho
guest of Lord 1 Raglan at Monmouth Castle, the headquarters
of the Monmouth Militia, of which His Excellency was
Colonel, they motored all round that region : the special inter-
est, to envisage the position of the old Norman lords settled
on the Welsh Marches. In September he attended yet ano-
ther Pan-Celtic Congress, this time in Edinburgh. His friend
Lord Castletown was there, Sir William Preece, the young
Marquis of Bute, Sir Thos. and Lady Esmonde, Sir Robert
Cranston, and the Celtic enthusiasts. The incident of the
Congress was the singing of Manx songs by a quartette of
brilliant Manx vocalists. Arthur Moore’s particular happi-
ness, a visit to Roslyn Chapel. In October he passed through


London, on his way to Berlin, where he was placing his
daughter at school. He had some work to do at the British
Museum; and, as always, made a round of the theatres; and,
as always,—for pictures rvere a necessity of life to him —gave
of his leisure to the galleries, in this case the National and the
National Portrait Galleries. By the end of the year, having
reason to he seriously concerned) about his health, he visited
the West Indies.
He sailed 1 from Bristol on Dec. 14th, and landed'there again
on Feb. 11th, 1908. Tire holiday had been spent mainly in
Jamaica. He ascertained that the negro children are bright
and intelligent up to the age of 12 or 13; but beyond that
point are generally capable of no further mental development.
He realised the idea of the scope and limit of their minds as
being definitely fixed. It was the principle that all students
of education are acquainted with as true in varying degrees
for white people, and wdiere this principle is not grasped no
educational system can claim to have a scientific basis.
After Jamaica he found England “ghastly.” He went
from Bristol to London to meet the Home Secretary, Mr H.
Gladstone, in a Conference on the subject of Constitutional
Reform for the Isle of Man. Illness during the spring en-
forced on him the abandonment of his meteorological records;
and he presented his outfit of instruments to the Borough of
Douglas.
Of the decay of the Manx language he makes a note in this
year. None of the Sheading Coroners knew enough Manx to
read out the mere titles of the Acts promulgated at Tynwald;
and, loth perhaps to see the language officially expire, he
undertook the duty.
A trial trip of the new turbine steamer “ Ben-my-Chree ”
took him to the Clyde. There was an exhibition in Edin-
burgh : and ho took the opportunity to make a flying visit
there, —devoting his attention to the only thing that inter-
ested him, i.e., a “collection of Highland claymores and
dirks.” The summer visitors to the Island included the Duke
of Wellington, Admiral Ourzon-Howe in command of the
Fleet, and Prince Francis of Teck; and, as usual, he makes
a brief not© of his impressions of the men and their conver-
sation, and always of some salient good feature.
At the Frauco-British Exhibition, in London, in autumn
he is interested in the pictures and statuary; and devotes the
rest of his time to listening to the Grenadier Guards’ Band.
There are at home little field excursions of the Antiquarian
Society; elsewhere visits to Grayshott Hall, the home of an


old Cambridge friend, and. to Whittington Hall, the home
of a married sister: excursions if possible; in this case to Lich-
field and Elton. In November, 1908, after a general election,
the House of Keys assembled; and re-elected him Speaker.
Then illness; and an indomitable spirit struggling against the
malady that sapped his vitality
His last excursion, this time a forlorn hope effort after
health, was in April, 1909 —to the Canaries. He stayed first
at Las Palmas over Easter, saw the processions, and attended
services at the Cathedral. Later, he went up to Monte, to
the ‘‘ Hotel Bellavista ” ; had a bad attack of Canary fever;
for the rest, drive® and even walks in the neighbourhood. On
his return to London he saw his specialist, and' the same day
attended a matinee.. When he returned to the Island, we
saw plainly that he had come back to die. Whatever literary
projects he abandoned, he desired to complete one, —the little
collection of letters and a brief memoir of Nessy Hey wood.
Nevertheless, worn out in body but indomitable in spirit, he
resumed his legislative duties during the autumn session. It
was absolutely pathetic to see business transacted by the
House, where every member felt for him an intense personal
regard, in some cases an: intense affection —as intense as was
possible, where it was centred on a man so undemonstrative.
Finally, a rapid collapse, the end, and’ —unexampled in
memory —the whole Island in representative presence; and
the whole community of Douglas, at the funeral.
A not© on the books he read is marked hy the frankest of
admissions. “Milton, Wordsworth, and Browning, I cannot
read. . . I do not care for obscurity in writing: hence
both Browning and George Meredith irritate me. . . With
the exception of Tom Brown and Oalverley, no poetry since
Tennyson interests me at all. . . I have always cared for
Tennyson much more than any other poet. . . Byron
comes next in my estimation. . . George Elliot’s books,
read! as they cam© out, produced the most marked effect on
my mind. . . Metaphysical studies never interested me;
and even Political Economy was read with some effort. .
History has always had a great fascination for me; and I have
read more of it than of any other subject! . . My great
delight is travelling, having as its more especial objects the
study of architecture and of pictures!”
It has been the privilege and the duty of many Manxmen
to express a personal and embody a public acknowledgement
of the honour due to Arthur Moore’s memory. One would
fain select the choicest of these-—perhaps, therefore, the utter-
ance of Lord Raglan, the Lieutenant-Governor, on the occa


sion of hie unveiling the bust of Arthur Moore in the Legis-
lative Chamber of the House of Key*: “I loved Arthur
Moore!” Brief, comprehensive, and, sufficient tribute, tremu-
lous with truth: no man need say more, since it avows the
stirring within us of the noblest thought, by every memory of
him of whom this was said. No man who knew Arthur
Moore well, would, for his part, say lees!
JOHN QUINE.
Lonau Vicarage, Isle of Man, August, 1912.


A PORTRAIT OF NESSY HEYWOOD
(From a Miniature in possession of S. Heywood Wilson, Esq.,
of Farm Hill, Braddan, Isle of Man).


NESSY HEYWOOD.
CHAPTER I.—INTRODUCTORY.
HESTER, or, as she was invariably called, Nessy
Heywood, the second daughter of Deemster
Peter John Heywood and Elizabeth Spedding, was
born at the Nunnery, near Douglas, Isle of Man, in
1768.
What little is known of her brief life is, we think,
worth telling.
Before doing so, with the view of showing what
her environment was, we will give some particulars
of her family, of Douglas, her native town, as it
then existed, and of the friends by whom she was
probably surrounded.
The Manx Heywoods are descended from the
well-known family of that name, who lived at Hey-
wood, in Lancashire, where one Piers Heywood was


seated as early as 1164. The first member of the
family to be connected with the Isle of Man was
Peter, sixteenth in descent from the aforesaid Piers.
Peter was a nephew of the famous “Powder Plot”
Heywood, so called from his having apprehended
Guy Fawkes. At the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford,
there is to be seen a lantern, bearing the following
inscription:—“The very lantern that was taken
from Guy Fawkes by Peter Heywood, when he
attempted to blow up the Parliament House.”
Peter’s nephew, who married Alice, daughter of
John Greenhalgh, Governor of the Isle of Man from
1640 to 1651, was a strong Royalist. In conse-
quence of this all his estates were sequestered.
Being a devoted friend of the seventh Earl of Derby,
he then (1643) sought refuge in the Isle of Man, and
only left it to take part in the battle of Worcester,
at which a Manx contingent fought in 1651.
His eldest son, Robert Heywood, was Governor of
the Isle of Maq from 1678 till his death in 1690. We
know but little of him, except that he probably had
sporting tendencies, as we find him winning the
Manx “Derby,” with his bay gelding “Loggerhead/
in 1678. This race, which took place annually on
Langness, near Castletown, had been instituted by
Lord Strange in 1628, with a view of encouraging
the Manx farmers to breed good horses.
Robert’s son, Peter, who was Attorney-General
of the Isle of Man, married Leonora, only child of
Hugh Cannell, Water Bailiff, and Margaret Calcott.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


of the Nunnery. It was through her that he became
possessed of that property.
Their eldest son, also Peter, sold the Heywood
estates in Lancashire, which had been restored to
them after 1660, and, having incurred his mother's
displeasure, he lost the Nunnery, which she left to
his younger brother Thomas.
Thomas Heywood was Speaker of the House of
Keys, Captain of the Fort at Douglas, and a friend
of Bishop Wilson’s. By his wife, Hester, daughter
of Robert Reeves, of Cork, he had eight sons and
four daughters.
The eldest of the sons, Peter John, the father of
our heroine, should be remembered as one of the
few Manxmen in the eighteenth century who, so
far as we know, took an interest in the language and
literature of his native country. It is to him that
we owe the preservation of “Fin as Oshin,” prob-
ably the oldest Manx ballad in existence. He sent
a copy of it to Professor Thorketin, of Copenhagen,
by whom it was deposited in the British Museum
In 1764, at the early age of twenty-five, he was
appointed Deemster, this being the last official
appointment before the end of the Atholl regime.
Nessy’s mother was one of the Speddings, of
Cumberland.* They had ten children besides Nessy,
•Apropos of this, it is interesting to note how intimate
the connexion between the Isle of Man and Cumberland was
during the latter part of the eighteenth century. During
NESSY HEYWOOD.


who was the third child. The eldest was Thomas,
who died in 1770. Then came Mary, born in 1766;
Nessy, in 1768 ; Elizabeth, in 1770 ; Peter, in 1772 ;
James, in 1774 ; Isabella, in 1775 ; Jane, in 1777;
Henry, in 1779 ; Robert John, in 1781 ; and Edwin
Holwell, in 1782.
Robert, Nessy’s uncle, the second son of Thomas
Heywood and Hester Reeves, was born in 1740. He
held the office of Water-Bailiff. By his first wife,
Margaret Joiner, he had Thomas, born in 1765;
Calcott, in 1766; Richard and Robert (twins), in 1769;
Hester, in 1771; and Margaret, in 1773. By his
second wife, Elizabeth Bacon, he had two daughters
and a son, John Joseph (died 1855), who became
Deemster.
the Derby regime Liverpool was the chief port for the Island,
but in Atholl days it was Whitehaven, which had the advan-
tage of being much nearer. There was a regular Government
packet between Whitehaven and Douglas, which started in
1767, and continued till 1825, though by the end of the
century Liverpool was again beginning to attract the greater
part of the Manx traffic. This connexion showed itself not
only in trade, but in the frequent inter-marriages between
Manx and Cumberland and Westmorland families. Thus
the Christians, of Milntown, the Stevensons and the Taub-
mans and the Wilsons were all connected with the Senhousea
of Netherhall; the Quayles, of Bridge House, with the
Speddings and the Le Flemings of Rydal Hall; and the Moores,
of the Hills and of Pulrose, with the Birketts. We would
bear in mind, too, that the Christians were owners of
Ewanrigg, in Cumberland; and that in 1782 John Christian
married his first cousin, Isabella Curwen, the heiress of
Workington Hall, and so became a large landed proprietor
in that country.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


THE NUNNERY MANSION
(From "Ashe’s Manx Sketch Book.” —Published in 1815)


Of the daughters of Thomas and his wife, three
reached maturity (being, of course, Nessy’s aunts),
viz., Leonora, married to Daniel Mylrea; Hester, to
Colonel James Holwell; and Mary, to Commodore,
afterwards Admiral Sir Thomas P'asley. Hester
and Mary first met their future husbands, then mid-
shipmen, at a ball, given by Captain Elliot, on board
the iEolus, then lying in Ramsey Bay, after his
defeat of Thurot, in February, 1760.
James Holwell (Nessy’s uncle by marriage), after
eight years’ service in the Navy, joined the Army.
We shall hear of him and Thomas Pasley in connec-
tion with Peter’s trial. Of all the numerous issue of
Peter John and Robert Heywood there is not one
descendant left in the male line ; and, in the female
line, the only one left in the Isle of Man is Mr.
Senhouse Heywood Wilson, J.P., of Farm Hill.*
When Nessy was born, her father and mother
were living at The Nunnery, in the quaint old house,
an illustration of which, as it appeared in 1825, we
give on the opposite page. It is probable that it
had not altered much in the interval.
When she was five years old, in 1773, her father
sold The Nunnery to John Taubman, of the “Bowling
Green,” Castletown; resigned the Deemstership,
and went to live in Whitehaven with his family. We
have no idea what led him to take these steps, not
do we know anything of the life of the family in
*For a full account of the family see “The Mans Note
Book,” Vol. 11., pp. 66-67.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Whitehaven. The only glimpse we get of them there
is by means of a letter from Peter Heywood’s old
friend, the Rev. Philip Moore, Rector of Bride, and
Chaplain of St. Matthew’s, who was staying with the
Heywoods in July, 1779.
In this letter, which is addressed to his nephew,
Edward, in Douglas, he says :—“Though the ‘Royal
Gazette’ takes no notice of it, for reasons of State,
best known to the Ministers of State and the Privy
Council, you may, notwithstanding, be assured that
a certain itinerant of no great note, nor of any
consequence, but to himself and his friends, who arc
not a few, is now here, corporally, personally, and
identically, well-lodged and kindly entertained at the
house of Peter John Heywood, Esquire, who, by
virtue of the power in him vested, and by writ of
habeas corpus, seized this rambler and secured him
bag and baggage Miss Nessy Heywood,
etc., give their compliments to Betsey” (Edward’s
wife).
In the following year Peter Heywood (Nessy’s
father) received the appointment of Seneschal from
the Duke of Atholl, and returned to the Isle of Man.
He took up his residence on the “Parade,” in
Douglas, which was then the newest and most
fashionable part of the town. To enable our readers
to appreciate Nessy’s environment, we will give a
brief description of the Douglas of that time.
The “Parade” was on the site of the present
Parade-street. There were then no houses on the
NESSY HEYWOOD.


south side of it, but only a road and a pebbly beach,
on which the herring boats were drawn up in winter.
Beyond the beach were the Pollock rocks, with the
old round fort at their south-western corner. Further
seaward was Conister Rock, barely visible at high-
water, and not yet surmounted by the Tower of
Refuge.
On the site of the Royal Hotel stood two red-
herring houses, then the sole buildings at the root of
the Old Pier, which was shorter and narrower than
the Red Pier, its successor on the same site. The
Court House, which was close to the site now
occupied by the Isle of Man Steam Packet buildings,
had not yet been erected.
Behind the “Parade” was the little town, which
stretched along the North Quay much as at present,
though there is scarcely a single house which was
there in 1780, still existing. It was bounded on the
west by Cambrian Place, Muckle’s Gate, and Chapel
Lane, and did not extend further north than the
present line of Lord-street, Hanover-street, and
Bigwell-street. There was no South Quay, merely
a rocky and gravelly beach, and the Tongue was a
sand bank.
On this side of the harbour, just about opposite
to the “Parade,” there was a small ship-yard. To
the west of the ship-yard was a herring-house and a
brewery. The row of houses at present on the South
Quay, to the west of those we named, was not built
till the beginning of the nineteenth century, and
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Duke-street and Sand (now Strand) street date from
about the same period. There were two churches,
St. Matthew’s and St. George’s, though the latter
was not completed till 1781.
The little town had, in fact, scarcely begun to
climb the hill, and its then new church was as far
outside of it as the new church of St. Ninian’s is
beyond the town of to-day. Most of these details
are gleaned from an excellent map by one Peter
Fannin, a "master in his Majesty’s Navy,’’ who
sailed in that capacity with Captain Cook, the famous
navigator.
There were practically no suburbs at the date we
are speaking of, the whole area to the north-west of
the town being occupied by one large estate, that
of the “Hills.” The farm, part of this property,
was bounded by the river up as far as the Quarter
Bridge, and by the line of Athol-street, St. George’s-
street, and the new road from Circular-road past
the New Hospital, and a continuation of it north-
wards to the present town boundary.
The garden part of the estate had the house,
which is still in existence, in its western angle. It
extended to Buck’s-road on the north, and to its
junction with what is now Finch-road, then by the
sites of Athol-street and St. George’s-street. The
church and churchyard of St. George’s had been part
of the farm land.
To the north of the Hills Estate there was a small
property, then known as Kermeen’s land, which
NESSY HEYWOOD.


afterwards came into the possession of Christian
“Bucks.” To the north-east of the Hills garden
was another small property belonging to one Finch.
Such was the topography of Douglas and its
neighbourhood in 1780. Its population was rapidly
increasing. In 1736 it was 1,814; in 1784, 2,850;
and in 1792, 3,625.
Let us now see who were the contemporaries of
Nessy and her parents, living in or near the town.
We have already referred to her uncles and aunts
and cousins. In addition to these, among the friends
of her father and mother, there would be John
Joseph Bacon and his wife, Hugh Cosnahan and his
wife, the Rev. Philip Moore, Vicar of St. Matthew’s,
already mentioned, and his successor, his nephew,
Edward, and his wife, Elizabeth Fine; old Philip
Moore, of the Hills; Captain Robert Brown (father
of the Rev. Robert, and grandfather of the Rev. T.
E. and Hugh Stowell Brown), who married Jane
Drumgold, from whose family Drumgold-street was
named; Thomas Stowell; Dr. Patrick Scott, said to
have been a relation of Sir Walter’s, who married
Ann, daughter of Major Caesar Tobin, of Middle. It
was he who supplied Sir Walter with the Manx
material for “Peveril of the Peak”; and, finally, the
Rev. Charles Crebbin, the new Vicar of St. George’s.
In the neighbourhood there were the Taubmans, at
The Nunnery; the Moores, at Pulrose; the Tobins, at
Middle; the Oates’s, of Bemahague ; and the
Banckes’s, of Howstrake.
NESSY HEYWOOD


As regards people outside of Douglas, Peter
Heywood would, doubtless, be brought in contact
with the genial Governor-in-Chief, General Edward
Smith, the Lieutenant-Governor, Richard Dawson,
Bishop Mason (1780-3), and his successor, Claudius
Crigan; John Quayle, Clerk of the Rolls; Sir Wads-
worth Basle, Attorney-General; Daniel Mylrea and
Thomas Moore, Deemsters; Sir George Moore,
Speaker of the House of Keys ; John Christian
Curwen, who was both a member of Parliament and
of the House of Keys ; and many others.
Among Nessy’s contemporaries were Isabella,
Jane, Elizabeth, and John Joseph Bacon; the
numerous children of Hugh Cosnahan; Edward,
James, and Elizabeth, the children of Edward Moore ;
Isabella, Philip, and Margaret Moore, of Pulrose; and
John and Joseph Stowell, who were educated at the
Grammar School, in Douglas, by Philip Moore. As
Thomas Stowell and his wife, with their sixteen
children, then lived in Douglas, it is probable that
Nessy also knew Hugh Stowell, afterwards the
saintly clergyman of that name, though he was
educated in Ramsey; and Thomas Stowell, the future
Clerk of the Rolls.* It is probable that of all these
young people John and Joseph Stowell were the most
congenial to Nessy, as they shared in her literary
tastes. John Stowell, who was afterwards on the
*The children at The Nunnery, John (b. 1775), Margaret
(b. 1777), Isabella (b. 1779), who married General Goldie, and
Dorothy (b. 1781), who married Col. Mark Wilks, were all
younger than those we have named above.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


staff of the “Manks Mercury and Briscoe’s Douglas
Advertiser,” the first Manx newspaper, was a satiri-
cal poet of some ability, and Joseph was remarkable
for his scholarship.
Thus we see that the Heywoods were provided
with a numerous circle of friends, and Nessy, in
particular, with many companions, chiefly girls, as
is usual in the Isle of Man at the present day. Let
us get some idea of what the folks were like by
quoting the opinion of Colonel Townley, an English
officer, who resided in the Isle of Man a few years
after this date. In regard to the Manx gentry,
Townley writes :—“As to the higher ranks, the men
are, in general, very civil, attentive, and very
hospitable to strangers. The ladies are exceedingly
civil, affable, and polite; very sprightly in conversa-
tion, and uncommonly neat and smart in their dress.
There are many very pretty women in the Island,
and some very accomplished. As to the middle
ranks, they are decently civil and attentive even to
strangers; but the lowest classes are rude, ungovern-
able, and uncivilized.”*
But it may be remembered that, in addition to
the natives, Society in Douglas was, after the Peace
of Versailles, in 1783,. recruited by a number of half-
pay officers and their families. To these people,
says a contemporary writer, “Douglas Society is
considerably indebted, as they have given life and
*“Townley’s Journal,” Vol. 11., pp. 193-4.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


geniality to the town, and have contributed to polish
the manners of the natives.”
And another writer says : —“Many of the English
gentlemen, resident here, are more acquainted with
convivial enjoyments than with the pleasures of
retirement. They are more Bon Vivants than
Penserosos. Accordingly, the festive entertain-
ments of the English are numerous and splendid;
while each studies to emulate the other by the
sumptuousness or delicacy of his table.”*
But, whether English or Manx, they seem, at this
time, to have indulged in quite a gay life, whieh had
not yet, as between 1793 and 1814, been degraded
by licence and excess. Public assemblies for dances
and card parties, dinner parties, etc., were frequent.
Such was the little world into which Nessy
Heywood was introduced at the age of twelve. But,
in the absence of any contemporary records, save
the very meagre notes which we have quoted (there
was not even a local newspaper till November, 1792),
it is impossible to give anything—and of Nessy
herself, till 1786, there is no record at all—but the
scantiest account of what went on. It is quite
certain that Nessy and her brothers and sisters must
have had an excellent education, but from whom they
received it, either in Whitehaven or in Douglas, we
do not know.
Douglas, it must be remembered, was quite a
lively place at this period. There was a number of
♦“Robertson’s Tour,” p. 25.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


English soldiers quartered in the town; and sailors,
English and Manx, of the Royal Navy and of the
Merchant Service, swarmed on its quay; men of war
hovered about, privateers brought in their prizes,
the sailing packets and merchant ships came to and
fro. Smuggling had by no means ceased. Recruit-
ing parties and the press-gang were active. Riots
were not unknown.
Probably one of the greatest interests to the
young folk of the town in 1780 was the formation of
the first regiment of the Royal Manx Fencibles in
that year. In May of the following year, John
Wesley preached in Douglas Market-place, and,
perhaps, Nessy had the privilege of seeing and hear-
ing him; and, in the same year, St. George’s was
consecrated.
Such, then, was the place in which, and such were
the people among whom, Nessy lived from her twelfth
year till just before her death.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


CHAPTER II—NESSY’S LIFE IN DOUGLAS.
Our information about Nessy Heywood is derived
from three sources:—(i) a MS., dated Douglas,
Jan. 31, 1798, seemingly copied in that year, which
contains Poems and Letters, mainly by Nessy and
Peter Heywood. This MS. is in the possession of
Mr. A. R. Allinson, M.A., a connexion of the
Heywoods; (2) the Memoir of Peter Heywood, by
Edward Taggart, published in 1832 ; (3) “Pitcairn,”
being an account of the Mutineers of the Bounty,
and their descendants, published by the S.P.C.K.
Both the “Memoir” and “Pitcairn” give letters and
poems, which are not in the 1798 MS. These
letters were copied from a MS. formerly in the
possession of Peter Heywood's wife, which has now
disappeared. The MS. first referred to opens in
1786 with a little poem which shows the pleasant
relations that existed between Nessy and her uncle,
Thomas Pasley:
Lines by Capt. Pasley to his Niece,
Miss Hester Heywood,
With a present to her of some pairs of gloves,
on her having stolen a kiss from him when he
was asleep in his chair. She was then staying
with her aunt and him at their seat at Hexton,
in Bedfordshire.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Accept, my dear Nessy, the tribute that’s due
For the kiss that so sweetly was given by you.
But be cautious, my fair one; for had I been single
A kiss such as that would have made my heart gingle.
Then take my advice, and search well around;
And a man to your taste when you’ve certainly found—
Then, then, my dear girl, such a treasure impart,
And instead of the gloves, he will offer his heart.
Heston, 1786.
THOS. PASLEY.
This is succeeded by an
ACROSTICK.
H ow sweet is every feature in thy face—
Each look is fraught with dignity and grace.
8 urprising gentleness plays in thine eyes,
To catch the unwary heart in sweet surprize;
E ’en as the voice of Heav’n thine accents flow,
R aising a sweet delight where’er they go.
H eav’n sure in thee has center’d ev’ry art
B ach lovely charm to captivate the heart.
Y outh, Beauty, Grace, in thee are all combin’d
W ith every charming elegance of mind,
O pen and generous, sincere and kind.
0h I may the pow’r above continual show’r
D own on thy virtues blessings ev’ry hour.
London, 1786.
GEO. PASLEY.
The poems, which follow, are not dated, but
they were probably written between 1786 and 1790.
The first is “On receiving a Ticket for a Ball from
a Gentleman, with a Poetical Card extremely witty,
but not quite so delicate”:
Southcote has wit at will I own,
But yet he might he modest;
Of all the men I e’er have known
His thoughts are sure the oddest.
NESSY HEYWOOD


I thank you for the Ticket too,
And with much pleasure take it,
Th’ idea that it came from you
More welcome still will make it.
Excuse improprieties—’tis my first essay, and ever
believe me, sincerely yours,
NESSY.
Nessy was now just eighteen, and so would be
“ coming out.” This ball took place in January or
February, 1786, and was, perhaps, one of those
advertised as follows :
‘ ‘ T. Munday begs to inform his Friends and the Public
that his first Public Ball will be on Wednesday, the 4th of
December, at the Assembly Room, when nis Pupils will dance
an entirely new ballet, such as he flatters himself has not
been seen on the Island before ; in the course of which will
be introduced a great variety of the Newest Dances : Parisot’s
favourite Pas Seul, Minuet Dauphin, Vestris’s New Gavot,
and Peregourdin, besides many others too numerous to insert.
The Ballet to commence at half-past seven, and at. ten Ladies
will draw for Places, when Mr. Munday, by using his utmost
exertions, hopes to make it as agreeable as a regular assembly
to those Ladies and Gentlemen who may honour him with
their Presence.—Tickets, 3s. each, to be had at Mr. Munday’*,
corner of John Street.”
The next in order is ‘‘To a young Lady who
requested the authoress would make an Enigma
upon ” :
Since you did me the honour to beg I would make
An Enigma, accept it with Hopes
That tho’ poor the attempt, since ’twas done for your sake.
You will not expect verses like Pope’s.
Unused to such rhyming I took up my pen,
With willingness, if not with ease,
Rejoiced I shall be, when I see you again,
To find I’m so happy to please.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


ENIGMA.
I’m fairer than Beauty, I’m sweeter than Love,
More happy than ever were Angels above,
More gentle than Mercy, than True *
The scorn of the Meek, of Despair * *
Than Lovers more sorrowful * * * *
More tender when meeting the * * * *
More noble than Honour, than * * * *
In short, I’m more charming * * * *
*Tom away in MS.
This poetical effort was evidently popular, as it
was presented to “A Gentleman who, upon going
away, requested a copy,” together with the follow-
ing:—
The verses which you ask’d to-night,
I’ve written out for you,
And tho’ they’re nothing very bright,
Yet take them, and Adieu.
May gentle breezes fill your sails,
And waft you safe to shore,
And may you ever happy be,
Tho’ I ne’er see you more.
THE ANSWER.
Farewell, dear Girl I My heart’s with you,
Tho’ I should distant be,
And swelling billows foam around,
Yet still I’ll think on thee.
And tho’ on Earth no more we meet,
Our souls above shall soar.
And recollect tho happy days'
We spent on Mona’s shore.
ROBERT STEWART.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“Lines extempore, on the departure of some
lamented friends for Gibraltar,” evidently refers to
some young officers, of whom Robert Stewart was
one:
May Heav’n on you its choicest favour pour,
And gentle breezes waft you safe to shore.
Remember Us, we oft shall think on You.
A thousand blessings on you all. Adieu !
It is possible that this Robert Stewart was the
Colonel of the same name who was afterwards
Receiver-General, and lived at Villa Marina. The
road along the shore, which passes that house, is
still called “The Colonel’s Road,” after him.
In 1786, Nessy’s cousins, the twins Robert and
Richard, boys of 17, were drowned off Jamaica;
about the same time a great easterly gale destroyed
eighty-four yards of the old pier, which was within
a few yards of the Hey wood’s house. The light-
house, at the end of the pier, was swept away, and
its place was taken, temporarily, by a lantern slung
on a pole. Thus, when the terrible disaster of the
destruction of a large part of the herring fleet, with
the loss of many lives, took place on the 21st of
September, in the following year, the confusion and
terror was greatly augmented by this feeble light
being knocked over by the sea. The dashing to
pieces of the vessels, and the drowning of so many
of their crews on the rocks, just in front of the
Parade, must have been witnessed by Nessy.
In the summer of 1787 her brother, Peter, was at
home for a brief time, before his fatal voyage in the
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“Bounty.” How little must his family have thought
that more than five years would elapse before they
saw him again !
In 1788 her uncle, Robert Heywood, married
Elizabeth Hacon, the sister of Nessy’s particular
friend, Margaret. In the same year a theatre was
opened in Douglas for the first time. It had been
built by a Captain Tennison, "With the benevolent
desire of contributing to the relief of the poor.”*
As regards the nature of the entertainments there,
an English visitor tells us that he went to see “some
gentlemen of the place upon the stage, where there
was a very extraordinary bill of fare given out, viz.,
Three Pieces ; Love-a-la-Mode; Lettie and the
Citizen; besides occasional prologues, spoutings,
dissertations, readings, rantings, singing, etc.” On
this “Bill of Fare” he remarks that “If it had not
been for considerable merit in the pleasings of Mrs.
Blanchard, Captain Tennison, and Mrs. Bibby, the
patience of many would have been exhausted long
before the conclusion of the .first piece; for, to speak
of the whole truly, and in general terms, it was
acting without stage abilities, and singing without
voices.” Let us hope that, if Nessy witnessed any
performances, they were superior to this.
In 1789, her grandmother, Hester Heywood,
died, and was followed on the 6th of February, 1790,
by her father. In March came the bad news of the
mutiny of the “Bounty,” and of the alleged partici-
pation of Peter in it. There ensued, no doubt, a
*“ Townley’s Journal,” Vol. 1., p 149.
NESSY HEYWOOD


period of great sorrow and apprehension, especially
for the poor mother ; but, as regards the children,
it could scarcely be expected that during the perkxs
which must elapse before their brother could arrive
in England, a period which must be nearly two
years, and was actually more, they would seek no
relaxation or pleasure. Moreover, as we see by
Nessy’s letter of the 3rd of June, 1792, she, and,
doubtless, her brothers and sisters, were so con-
vinced of Peter’s integrity and innocence that they
could, so long at least as the time of his arrival and
trial was remote, view the future with reasonable
tranquility. Nessy’s letters of March and April,
1790, and her strenuous efforts to enlist every
possible influence in Peter’s favour, will oe referred
to in the next chapter.
Later on in this year (1790) there was published
a satirical poem by Nessy’s friend, John Stowell,
entitled “Salad for the young Ladies and Gentlemen
of Douglas, in the Isle of Mann, raised by Tom, the
Gardener (price sixpence a bunch).” In it he makes
bitter fun of the foibles and faults of the rising
generation in that town, chiefly of the fair sex,
though he admits that
escaped from folly’s flood
There still are virgins lovely, fair, and good;
Some worthy youths.
Typical of these is his friend, Nessy Heywood,
to whom, under the guise of “Amanda,” it is not,
perhaps, too fanciful to conjecture, that he
addressed the following stanzas :
To paint the bloom on young Amanda’s cheeks;
To seize the tuneful accents as she speaks
NESSY HEYWOOD.


With all the graces emulous to please.
Her youthful blushes, her expressive oyes,
Her modest mien, which ’hove description rise,
Her lips, like rose buds blushing on the thorn,
Just moistened with the early dew of mom;
Let no bold youth their sweetness dare to prove ;
For all around there lurks the power .if Love.
But how can I set forth her mind to view?
Vain the attempt I For what can language do ?
Can words describe the pure harmonious soul,
Where no mean passions Reason’s will control ?
That artless innocence so sure to charm.
Pale envy of her rancour might disarm.
Though faultless, she would others’ failings hide;
The’ great, above the littleness of pride;
Tho’ reared in affluence, devoid of spleen,
Nor thinks herself a goddess or a queen.
How much unlike those apes who would be great,
In spite of fortune, breeding, or of fate;
Her lively wit, her smiles devoid of art,
Too easy wind a passage to the heart.
But wit and beauty trifles I would deem,
It is Amanda’s goodness I esteem.
Nessy’s next poem evidently celebrated an event
that took place early in August, 1791. Lord Henry
Murray, the Duke of Atholl’s brother, was, at a
later date, in command of the Manx Fencibles.
His son, Mungo, afterwards married Nessy’s sister,
Elizabeth.
SONG.
Extempore, at a party given by Lord Henry
Murray, in his pleasure boat:
Come sing, Miss Ness, Belinda cries,
And sing whate’er you please,
But let us hear that warbling voice,
NESSY HEYWOOD


While we invoke the breeze.
Since thus she bids attempt the strain,
I surely must obey;
Then let me not attempt in vain
To please this party, gay.
11.
While here we sit, with hearts elate,
Retir’d from pomp and noise,
Who envies now the pride of State?
How vain are all its joys.
Here harmony and love shall reign,
And friendship ever true,
While peace, with all her smiling train,
Shall bless this chosen few.
111.
To Lord Henry—
With joy and health may you be crown’d,
And blest your friends among,
Be all your cares in pleasure drown’d,
And now I’ll end my song.
IV.
To the Party—
Presumption vain tho’ ’ tis in me
My thoughts in rhyme to dress,
Indulgent hear my verses three,
And smile on little Ness.
Fifth verse—Carried on board the “Langrishe,”
commanded by Sir James Bristow —
Success the “Langrishe” still attend,
May prizes never fail,
May joy and health, to bless our friend.
Still float in ev’ry gale.
Presumption vain, &c.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Then follows an amusing poetical correspondence
between the aforesaid Sir James Bristow, a Liver-
pool friend, who had visited Douglas in his yacht,
and Nessy:
LETTER
TO
Miss Hevwood, Miss Ness,
Miss Bell, and Miss Bess.
My Dearest Miss Heywood, and sweetest Miss Bess,
My charming Miss Bell and delightful Miss Ness,
With these lines I send you the things which were wanted;
As favours demanded shall always be granted
By me with great pleasure, so drop all your fears
Of giving me trouble, my charming sweet dears.
The chain is for Bell, a key for Miss Ness,
The bracelets for Mary, a key for Miss Bess,
Which is all that was mention’d when last that we met.
If more, be assured I should never forget.
I humbly beg pardon for making so free
In taking this method of writing to ye.
I hope that your goodness will it overlook,
And pardon the liberty which I have took.
I know that’s bad English, but what can I say,
As I’m quite a stranger to writing this way;
For this is the first time and extempore.
You’ll laugh at my folly, indeed and I know it,
Because that I wrote in the stile of a poet.
As I’m but a bad one, I hope you’ll excuse me,
I know your good nature will never abuse me
For what I can’t help, as in this appears.
But now I must end, so adieu, my sweet dears—
May God bless you all, and make each a good wife;
May each of you live all the days of your life;
May those days be happy and pleasant to ve,
And ever be crown’d with sweet felicity.
And I’ll ever remain with the greatest regard
NESSY HEYWOOD


Your sincere humble servant without a reward.
The first time we meet ye must each spare a kiss
To your ever affectionate, faithful
JAMES BEISTOW.
Temple Court, Liverpool,
Number three, near a school,
Friday come, Thursday gone,
August twelfth, Ninety one.
THE ANSWER.
A million of thanks to our excellent friend
For the articles he had the goodness to send;
All which we received very safe by the “Surry”
Last night, and to answer I’m set in a hurry
By sisters, who all three cry out at a time
I must absolutely attempt it in rhyme.
“Lord, what an attempt,” you will certainly say,
But, pardon me, since their commands I obey,
And tho’ neither Genius, Wit, nor Poetess,
Your example to prompt me, what could 1 do less.
Since you are poetical, why should not I,
Above vulgar prose my ideas shall fly?
I scorn to do things in a manner so common,
Ah, variety (now you’ll say) thy name is Woman.
Well, well, be it so—in our sex ’tis allowed,
Tho’ I humbly confess I’ve no right to be proud.
Pray, when shall we see you ? I hope a short while
Will bring Lady Langrishe to visit our Isle;
And when you arrive let me beg you to stay
Rather longer than usual, and not run away
The moment you’re landed—’tis very provoking
We see you so seldom—without any joking.
This goes by the “Mary”*—l wish it may And you
In Liverpool, where I beg leave to remind you
Of some music you promised, my stock is grown old.
’Tis like a good story too frequently told—
* A vessel plying between Douglas and Liverpool.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


So pray don’t forget it the next time you come.
But enough of the subject to you, therefore mum.
Only, as my good friend I should wish to amuse.
Let the music be good that your worship may chuse.
The trinkets are charming, are gaz’d on all day,
And to thank you sufficiently what can we say ?
A few words are best, and I’ll now bid adieu.
The kisses you ask shall be certainly granted
By ns, your fair friends, who ne’er gratitude warted.
’Tie the least we can do, you are always so good,
And l am your much obliged Nessy Heywood.
P.B.—Twenty second of August, on Douglas parade,
At twelve by the time-piece the doggrel I made.
’Tis not worth the reading I honestly own,
But for pardon I trust your good nature alone.
Apropos—could I but such liberty take—
I would beg by the “Surry”* next time a plum cake.
We all long to taste one, and can’t get a bit
In the Island that’s good, or our palates to hit.
In this I’m most heartily joined by Bell
Who you perfectly know loves good things very well.
You’ll send it by Quayle, as we’re in such a hurry,
Provided he’s quicker next time than the “Surry" ;
His vessel the “Nelly and Betsey” is named—
She's perfectly safe, tho’ the “Surry” 's more fam’d.
In poetical strain,
I’m set down again,
To thank you a thousand times o’er.
For the music by Brew,t
Which I got but just now,
Or I’d certainly told yon before
I wrote t’other day,
And sent it away,
♦The “Earl of Surrey,” a regular trader between Douglas
and Liverpool.
fCaptain of the “Earl of Surrey.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


In a Whitehaven brig that was going,
And the cutter is bound
(Prom Peel Bay coming round)
For Liverpool—every sail flowing.
Captain Gunter takes this,
And I’m sure will not miss
To deliver it into your hand:
May Heaven befriend you,
And blessings attend you,
Till in little Mona you land.
Adieu once again,
My poetical vein
Will fail if I scribble too long.
In the post my last letter
(Than this not much better)
You’ll find your epistles among.
And now how to date
I must rack my poor pate
To finish it as I began.
At length I conclude
Little Nessy Heywood,
August twenty and fourth, ninety-one.
This was the year in which the Royal Commis-
sion, which had been appointed to consider certain
questions at issue between the Duke of Atholl and
the Manx people, held its sittings in Douglas. Its
members were Mr. John Spranger, Mr. Grant, M.P.,
attorney ; Mr. Osgoode, attorney ; Mr. Roe, Com-
missioner of the Customs at London ; and Mr. Reid,
Commissioner of the Customs at Edinburgh.
It is probable that some of them, at least, made
the acquaintance of the Heywoods, as we find Lieu-
NESSY HEYWOOD.


tenant Spranger, a son of the President, visiting
Peter when he was a prisoner on board the
“Hector,” in 1792.
Later on, in 1791, we find
A SONNET.
Love, thou sweet tormenting pow'r,
Fertile source of grief and joy.
Pleasures springing every hour,
Joys which in possession die:
Fled are now thy gay delights,
Fled with Damon far away;
Now in sighs I waste my nights,
And in tears each joyless day.
Happy moments, all adieu !
Joys I ne’er must prove,
Scenes of bliss no more I view,
Damon’s gone—Adieu to Love!
And a stanza “On having lost a wager of a pair of
gloves with a gentleman, who contended that it
would not rain between ten at night and eight in
the morning”:
Alas, poor me, no drop of rain
Last night came down my bet to gain;
Then take the gloves (excuse the pun)
I own they’re very fairly won.
Early in 1792, we have these stanzas, which
were “Sung extempore in a large party given by
a gentleman in consequence of his having lost a
NESSY HEYWOOD.


wager to the authoress, who, at his desire, pre-
sided” :
I.
Tho’ here at the head of your table I sit,
And to welcome those guests I must own I’m unfit,
Yet since you requested it, what con’d I say,
Contradiction was vain, I was forced to obey.
Indulgent, I hope, you’ll a novice excuse,
Such a post I’ll fill better by practice and use,
And now be so kind in my chorus to join.
My tune is an old one, and ’tis but one line.
11.
Since you beg, I’ll a sentiment give or a song,
Accept an impromptu—nor think it too long;
Tho’ doggrel my verses, I mean not to tease,
No merit I boast, but a wish still to please.
May you ne’er lose a wager will give you more pain
Thau where by that loss such a party you gain,
And may peace, unanimity, friendship most true.
And love be our lot in the year ninety two.
But sorrow was not far off. In February, one
of Nessy’s dearest friends died.
Lines written on the Evening before the
Interment of my dear and lamented Margaret
Bacon, and sent to her Sister :
Accept this mournful tribute of my tears,
Thou dear companion of my early years,
Those tears which flow at friendship’s sacred shrine,
Those sighs which heave for worth so great as thine.
Thy youth, thy innocence, thy native ease,
Thy sweet simplicity so form’d to please,
Thy lovely form, where every grace combined
To make that form as charming as thy mind;
Thy gentleness which ever won each heart.
Insinuation soft, unmixt with art.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


For ever lost, from lore and friendship torn,
Bereft of life e’er life was past its morn.
Ah I Tyrant Death! How could’st thou seize
A form so fair, with virtues such as these ?
Sure ’twas too soon with life and youth to part,
Too soon to fall beneath thy fatal dart.
But thou art deaf to pity’s gentle prayer,
Nor youth nor beauty wilt thou ever spare!
Weep, my loved Fanny, nor thy tears restrain,
Those tears, alas I which now must flow in vain.
In vain must thou the pangs of sorrow feel,
Which Time alone with lenient hand can heal.
Her worth demands and merits all thy grief,
And tears may give a kind tho’ short relief.
A sister lost is ample cause for woe,
But thou, alas! more poignant grief must know;
The ties of blood ’tis friendship must refine,
And oh, my Fanny, such a loss is thine!
Yet let not sorrow fortitude destroy,
While she in Heaven doth happiness enjoy.
Thy parent sinks beneath the load of grief—
Calm thy own sorrow and give him relief.
Assist him this great trial to sustain,
Watch o’er his anguish—mitigate his pain;
And thou, dear spirit, from thy kindred sky,
Where with fhe angels now thou sit’st on high,
On these who lov’d thee look with pity down
Till happiness like thine their days shall crown I
Then may we meet again in that abode
Where now thou art—the bosom of thy God l
The long absence of her brother, Peter, and the
dread, notwithstanding her belief in him, of his
fate, was hanging over her all the time. At the
end of the same month we find her writing “on the
tedious and mournful absence of a most beloved
Brother, who was in the Bounty with Captain
Bligh at the time of the FATAL MUTINY, which
NESSY HEYWOOD.


happened April 28th, i/Sg, in the South Seas, and
who, instead of returning with the boat when she
left the ship, stayed behind :
Tell me, thou busy, flutt’ring Telltale, why—
Why flow these tears—why heaves this deep-felt sighP
Why is all joy from my sad bosom flown,
Why lost that cheerfulness I thought my own ?
Why seek I now in solitude for ease,
Which once was centered in a wish to please,
When ev’ry hour in joy and gladness passed,
And each new day shone brighter than the last;
When in society I loved to join;
When to enjoy, and give delight was mine!
Now—sad reverse! in sorrow wakes each da\,
And grief’s sad tones inspire each plaintive lay.
Alas 1 too plain these mournful tears can tell
The pangs of woe my lab’ring bosom swell!
The best of brothers—friend, companion, guide,
Joy of my youth, my honour, and my pride!
Lost is all peace—-all happiness to me,
And fled all comfort, since deprived of thee 1
In vain, my Lycidas, thy loss I mourn,
In vain indulge a hope of thy return;
Still years roll on and still I vainly sigh.
Till tears of anguish drown each gushing eye.
Ah! cruel Time! how slow thy ling’ring pace,
Which keeps me from his tender, lov’d embrace!
* » « *
Though guiltless thou of mutiny or blame.
And, free from aught which could disgrace thy name;
Though thy pure soul, in honour’s footsteps train’d,
Was never yet by disobedience stain’d;
Yet is thy fame exposed to slander’s wound,
And fell suspicion whispering around.
In vain— to those who knew thy worth and truth,
Who watch’d each op’ning virtue of thy youth;
When noblest principles inform’d thy mind.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Where sense and sensibility were join’d;
Love to inspire, to charm, to win each heart,
And ev’ry tender sentiment impart;
Thy outward form adorn’d with ev’ry grace;
With beauty’s softest charms thy heav’nly face,
Where sweet expression beaming ever proved
The index of that soul, by all beloved;
Thy wit so keen, thy genius form’d to soar,
By fancy wing’d new science to explore;
Thy temper, ever gentle, good and kind,
Where all but guilt an advocate could find:
To those who know' this character was thine,
(And in this truth assenting numbers join,)
How vain th’ attempt to fix a crime on thee,
Which thou disdain’st—from which each thought is free I
No, iny loved brother, ne’er will I believe
Thy seeming worth was meant but to deceive;
Still will I think (each circumstance tho’ strange)
That thy firm principles could never change;
That hopes of preservation urg’d thy stay,
Or force, which thou resistless must obey.
If this is error, let me still remain
In error wrapp’d—nor wake to truth again 1
Come then, sweet Hope, with all thy train of joy,
Nor let Despair each rapt’rous thought destroy;
Indulgent Heaven, in pity to our tears,
At length will bless a parent’s sinking fears;
Again shall I behold thy lovely face,
By manhood form’d, and ripen’d ev’ry grace;
Again I’ll press thee to my anxious breast,
And ev’ry sorrow shall be hush’d to rest!
With the next entry in the MS., that in June,
1792, begins the period at which Peter’s arrival in
England was imminent, and during which Nessy
was absorbed in him to the exclusion of any other
interest. We deal with this phase in our next two
chapters.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


CHAPTER III.—HER BROTHER PETER, AND
THE MUTINY OF THE BOUNTY.
Peter Hey wood joined the Navy in October, 1786,
when he was fourteen years old. Nothing is known
of his early life, except that he was educated by a
clergyman at Nantwich, in Cheshire. He made his
first voyage as a midshipman in the "Bounty,” a
vessel of 215 tons burthen, which had been fitted
up for the purpose of conveying the bread-fruit and
other plants from Otaheite to the West Indies.
The "Bounty,” under the command of Lieutenant
William Bligh, sailed from Spithead in December,
1787, and arrived at Otaheite In the following
October. After staying there for six months, she
was on her way home, when, on the 20th of April,
1789, the mutiny broke out. Bligh was a martinet,
and was, therefore, unpopular.
But the immediate cause of the mutiny was
some insulting words which he had spoken to
Fletcher Christian, the master’s mate, who, owing
to his superior knowledge of navigation, had been
acting as lieutenant. Christian, a Manxman, and
a member of the family of that name then seated
at Milntown, in the Isle of Man, was a man of
violent temper, and he determined on revenge.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


PETER HEYWOOD, R.N.
(The Hero of this Book),
(From a Drawing in the possession of S. Heywood Wilson, Esq.,
of Farm Hill, Braddan, Isle of Man).


Our object being to give an account of Peter
Heywood, we will not enter into the details of the
mutiny,* in which he took no part, being aroused
from sleep to find the vessel in the possession of
the mutineers.
We will give his statement as to what occurred
on board the “Bounty,” and of his adventures till
his arrival in Batavia. But let us first follow the
fortunes of Lieutenant Bligh. He, with eighteen
companions and a meagre supply of provisions, was
thrust into the “Bounty’s” launch, and, finally, after
undergoing terrible hardships, arrived in England
on the 14th of March, 1790. He, of course, at once
informed the Admiralty of the mutiny, and the
“Pandora” frigate was consequently sent to search
for the “Bounty” and the mutineers.
It was not till June, 1792, two years and three
months later, that the survivors of them were to
arrive in England, so that during all this long period
their relatives had to wait in an agony of suspense,
not knowing whether they would ever see them
again or not, and, if they did, what their fate would
be. In the meantime, their only information was
obtainable through Bligh, who, exasperated by the
treatment he had received, did not discriminate
between the ringleaders and their unwilling fol-
lowers, and declared that all were mutineers, and,
therefore, worthy of death.
*Bee “Pitcairn,” S.P.C.K.; or, “Memoirs of Peter
Heywood,” by Edward Taggart.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Such was the terrible position of the Heywood
family. Their beloved eldest son and brother was
branded as a mutineer, and, until they heard from
him, two days only before he landed in England, the
only consolation they received was in learning of
some circumstances which appeared to mitigate his
offence from some of Bligh’s companions.
The first report of the mutiny reached them
before the end of March, 1790, when Peter’s uncle,
Colonel Holwell, wrote to Bligh for particulars,
receiving the following reply:
“With much concern I inform you that your nephew,
Peter Heywood, is among the mutineers. His ingratitude to
me is of the blackest dye, for I was a father to him in every
respect, and he never once had an angry word from me
through the whole course of the voyage, as his conduct
gave me much pleasure and satisfaction. I very much regret
that so much baseness formed the character of a young man
I had a real regard for, and it will give me much pleasure to
hear that his friends can bear the loss of him without much
concern.”
Colonel Holwell communicated the sad news to
Mrs. Heywood. She at once wrote to Bligh, who
replied;
“I received your letter this day, and feel for you very
much, being perfectly sensible of the extreme distress you
must suffer from the conduct of your son Peter. His base-
ness is beyond all description ”
This brutal letter was fortunately intercepted by
the family, as they knew that it might prove a death
blow to their mother, who was already prostrate with
grief at the loss of her husband two months before.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


It was at this time that Nessy wrote to Mr. J.
W. Heywood, a distant connexion, and to T. Hallet,
with a view to ascertaining further particulars.
She, no doubt, hoped that she would, at the same
time, obtain some comforting assurances, but, in
this respect, she had but scant success. The
former correspondent, after an interview with
Lieutenant Bligh, reported that Peter’s "general
good conduct and character, previous to this unhappy
business, may, with some allowance for the unbridled
passions of youth, plead for his pardon while the
latter stated his belief that Peter had deliberately
sided with the mutineers.
But a letter from another quarter displayed a
more kindly and hopeful spirit. Its writer suggested
"the possibility that young Heywood may have had
little to do with the mutiny, but had been kept on
board on account of his youth.” This suggestion,
as we shall see, camte very near to being a correct
anticipation of the facts.
And now there followed a long and dreary period
of waiting for the arrival of the mutineers. This, by
May, 1792, appeared to be imminent, and there had,
therefore, evidently been some correspondence dur-
ing that month in relation to it, as, on the 3rd of
June, Nessy replied to a letter from Mr. J. M.
Heywood:
“I will not attempt, my dear sir, to express the gratitude
at this moment felt by myself and every one of our family for
your most friendly letter, and the generous promise it con-
tains of support and protection to my most dear and unfortu-
NESSY HEYWOOD.


nate brother. The occasion of my again troubling you on
the subject is a letter I yesterday received from the father of
Mr. Thomas Hayward (one of the midshipmen who came with
Mr Bligh in the boat after the fatal mutiny). He informs
me that on his arrival at Batavia, after great sufferings,
Captain Edwards agreed for three Dutch ships to convey the
crew of the “Pandora” to Europe, giving a lieutenant to each
division, the first of which had arrived at the Cape of Good
Hope before the “Thomas” frigate sailed thence on the 18th
of February. The “Crown” man-of-war has since arrived in
England, and, as far as I can learn, without bringing any
account of the “Pandora’s” people, though she must have
remained some time at the Cape, where she arrived only two
days before the “Thomas” sailed. It is certainly a little
surprising that the two other divisions of the “Pandora’s”
people, which were then hourly expected, had not arrived at
the Cape before the “Crown” sailed.
“A paragraph in the ‘Gazeteer’ of 24th last month, says
several of the crew of the “Pandora” are brought to Dover
by the “Swan,” a Dutch ship, from Batavia, but I have not
seen the account confirmed. I fear it is a premature report.
We have, therefore, in addition to our former anxiety, ten
thousand distracting apprehensions for my dear brother’s
safety. Permit me, dear sir, to trespass a little longer on
your patience by transcribing a paragraph from Mr. Hay-
ward’s letter;—‘l will, therefore, take the liberty, my dear
young lady, of requesting you to make all possible interest
with your friends, that application be made to his Majesty,
so as to be prepared against the most fearful consequences
of the impending trial, as I well know that Mr. Bligh’s
representations to the Admiralty are by no means favourable.'
“This paragraph, my dear sir, you will readily believe,
has alarmed me beyond expression, as we find that, notwith-
standing my brother’s extreme youth and perfect innocence
(which no one who knows him will for a moment doubt) he
must when the trial takes place be in the most imminent
danger. Forgive me, my dear sir, for troubling you with
this long letter, as it is the subject in which of all others my
heart is most deeply interested.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


It was shortly after this that Nessy had a letter
from her uncle, Thomas Pasley. He seems to have
thought it judicious to discourage the poor girl’s
hopes in every way, evidently with a view of making
what he regarded as her certain disappointment in
the future less crushing:
“Sheerness, June 8, 1792.
"Would to God, my dearest Nessy, that I could rejoice
with you on the early prospect of your brother’s arrival in
England! One division of tho “Pandora’s” people are
arrived, and now on board the “Vengeance” (my ahipi.
Captain Edwards, with the remainder, and all the prisoners
late of the “Bounty” .... are daily expected. Your
intelligence of his swimming off on the “Pandora’s” arrival
is not founded. A man of the name of Coleman came off
ere she anchored; your brother and Mr. Stewart next day.*
I cannot conceal it from you, my dearest Nessy, neither is
is it proper I should, your brother appears by all accounts
to be the greatest culprit of all, Christian alone excepted.
Every exertion, you may rest assured, I shall use to save his
life; but, on trial, I have no hope of his not being condemned.
Believe me always, with the warmest affection, your uncle,
“THOMAS PASLEY.”
Fortunately, for Nessy’s peace of mind, it was
only a few days after this dismal, and, as it turned
out, mistaken epistle had been received, that her
brother’s letter from Batavia arrived.
It enabled her to write to her uncle in a much
more cheerful strain than would otherwise have been
the case:—
“Isle of Man, 22nd June, 1792.
“Harassed by the most torturing suspense, and miser-
ably wretched as I have been, my dearest uncle, since yom
♦This is not correct. See p. 47.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


last, conceive, if it is possible, the heartfelt joy and satisfao.
tion we experienced yesterday morning, when, on the arrival
of the Packet, the dear, delightful letter from our beloved
Peter (a copy of which I send you enclosed) was brought to
us. Surely, my excellent friend, you will agree with me in
thinking there could not be a stronger proof of his innocence
and worth, and that it must prejudice every person who reads
it most powerfully in his favour.
“Such a letter, in less distressful circumstances than those
in which he writes, would, I am persuaded, reflect honour on
the pen of a person much older than my poor brother. But
when we consider his extreme youth (only sixteen at the time
of the mutiny, and now but nineteen) his fortitude, patience,
and manly resignation, under the pressure of sufferings and
misfortunes almost unheard of, and scarcely to be supported
at any age, without the assistance of that which seems to be
my dear brother’s greatest comfort—a quiet conscience, and
a thorough conviction of his own innocence.
“When I add, at the same time, with real pleasure and
satisfaction, that his relation corresponds in many particulars
with the accounts we have hitherto heard of the fatal mutiny,
and, when I also add, that my beloved Peter never was known
to breathe a syllable inconsistent with truth and honour;
when these circumstances, my dear uncle, are all united,
what man on earth can doubt of the innocence which could
dictate such a letter ? In short, let it speak for him ; the
perusal of his artless and pathetic story will, I am persuaded,
be a stronger recommendation in his favour than anything
I can do.
“I need not tire your patience, my ever-loved uncle, by
dwelling longer on this subject; let me conjure you only, my
kind friend, to read it, and consider the innocence and
defenceless station of its unfortunate author, which calls for,
and I am sure deserves, all the pity and assistance his friends
can afford him, and which, I am sure also, the goodness and
benevolence of your heart will prompt you to exert on his
behalf. It is perfectly unnecessary for me to add, after the
NESSY HEY WOOD.


anxiety I feel, and cannot but express, that no benefit con-
ferred npon myself will be acknowledged with half the grati-
tude I must ever feel for the smallest instance of kindness
shown to my loved Peter ”
Some time before this she had written to her
brother a letter to await his arrival:
“Isle of Man, 3rd June, 1792.
“In a situation of mind only rendered supportable by
the long and painful state of misery and suspense we have
suffered on his account, how shall I address my dear, my
fondly-beloved brother!—how describe the anguish we have
felt at the idea of this long and painful separation, rendered
still more distressing by the terrible circumstances attending
it! Oh! my ever-dearest boy! When I look back to the
dreadful moment which brought us the fatal intelligence
that you had remained in the “Bounty” after Mr. Bligh
had quitted her, and were looked upon by him as a mutineer I
When I contrast that day of horror with my present hopes of
again beholding you, such as my most sanguine wishes could
expect, I know not which is the most predominant sensa-
tion—pity, compassion, and sorrow for your sufferings, oi
joy and satisfaction at the prospect of there being near a
termination, and of once more embracing the dearest object
of our affections.
“1 will not ask you, my beloved brother, whether you
are innocent of the dreadful crime of mutiny; if the trans-
actions of that day were as Mr. Bligh has represented them,
such is my conviction of your worth and honour, that I will,
without hesitation, stake my life on your innocence. If, on
the contrary, yon were concerned in such a conspiracy against
your commander, I shall be as firmly persuaded his conduct
was the occasion of it. But, alas! could any occasion
justify so atrocious an attempt to destroy a number of our
fellow-creatures? No, my ever dearest brother, nothing but
conviction from your own mouth can possibly persuade me
that you would commit an action in the smallest degree
inconsistent with honour and duty; and the circumstance
NESSY HEYWOOD


of your having swam* off to the “Pandora,” on her arrival at
Otaheito (which filled us with joy to which no words can do
justice), is sufficient to convince all who know you that you
certainly stayed behind either by force or from views of
preservation.
“How strange does it seem to me that I am now engaged
in the delightful task of writing to you 1 Alas! my beloved
brother, two years ago I never expected again to enjoy such
a felicity, and even yet I aip in the most painful uncertainty
whether you arc alive. Gracious God, grant that we may be
at length blessed by your return I But, alas! the “Pandora’s”
people have been long expected, and are not even yet arrived.
Should any accident have happened, after all the miseries
you have already suffered, the poor gleam of hope with
which we have been lately indulged will render our situation
ten thousand times more insupportable than if time had
inured us to your loss.
*******
“Let me conjure you, my dearest Peter, to write to us
the very first moment; do not lose a post; ’tis of no conse-
quence how short your letter may be, if it only informs us
you are well. I need not tell you that you are the first and
dearest object of our affections. Think, then, my adored boy,
of the anxiety we must feel on your account; for my own part,
I know no real joy or happiness independent of you, and if
any misfortune should now deprive us of you, my hopes of
felicity are fled for ever.
“We are at present making all possible interest with every
friend and connection we have, to insure you a sufficient
support and protection at your approaching trial; for a trial
you must unavoidably undergo, in order to convince the world
of that innocence which those who know' you will not for a
moment doubt. But, alas 1 While circumstances are against
you, the generality of mankind will judge severely. Bligh’s
representations to the Admiralty are, I am told, very
*See Peter Heywood’s own account of this.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


unfavourable, and hitherto the tide of public opinion has
been greatly in his favour.
“It is now time, dear Peter, to give you some account of
our family. If you have not already heard it, be not too much
shocked when 1 tell you that we have no longer the blessing
of a father. Alas !my beloved Peter, he did not live to hear
(and, fortunately for himself he did not, for it would have
broken his heart) the fatal account of that horrid mutiny which
has deprived us of you so long. His severe fits of the gout,
and distress of mind from the repeated disappointments ha
met with, put an end to his existence on the 6th of February,
1790. He died blessing you, and incessantly talked of the
pleasure he should feel if he lived till your return.
“My mamma is at present well, considering the distress
she has suffered since you left us; for, my dearest brother,
we have experienced a complicated scene of misery from a
variety of causes, which, however, when compared with the
sorrow we felt on your account was trifling and insignificant;
that misfortune made all others light, and to see you once
more returned and safely restored to us will be the summit
of all earthly happiness.
“Farewell, my most beloved brother I God grant that this
may soon be put into your hands! Perhaps at this moment
you are arrived in England, and I may soon have the dear
delight of again beholding you. My mamma, brothers, and
sisters join with me in every sentiment of love and tender-
ness. Write us immediately, my ever-loved Peter, and may
the Almighty preserve you until you bless with your presence
your fondly affectionate family, and particularly your unalter-
ably faithful friend and sister,
“NESSY HEYWOOD.”
This charming letter must have afforded the
unfortunate prisoner much consolation. We left him
at the moment when he was aroused from sleep in
his berth on board the “Bounty,” by the noise of the
mutiny. From this time till his arrival in Batavia
NESSY HEYWOOD.


We will let him tell his own tale, as, not only is it
most graphic, but the result of the evidence at the
trial showed that it was substantially correct:
“Batavia, November 20th, 1781.
“My Ever Honoured and Dearest Mother, —
“At length the time has arrived when you are once
more to hear from your ill-fated son, whose conduct, at the
capture of that ship in which it was my ill fortune to embark,
has, I fear, from what has since happened to me, been grossly
misrepresented to you by Lieutenant Bligh, who, by not
knowing the real cause of my remaining on board, naturally
suspected me, unhappily for me, to be a coadjutor in the
mutiny; but I never, to my knowledge, whilst under his
command, behaved myself in a manner unbecoming the
station I occupied, nor so much as even entertained a thought
derogatory to his honour, so as to give him the least grounds
for entertaining an opinion of me so ungenerous and unde-
served ; for I flatter myself he cannot give a character of my
conduct, whilst I was under his tuition, that could merit the
slightest scrutiny.
“Oh! my dearest mother, I hope you have not so easily
credited such an account of me; do but let me vindicate my
conduct, and declare to you the true cause of my remaining
in the ship, and you will then see how little I deserve censure,
and how I have been injured by so gross an aspersion. I
shall then give you a short and cursory account of what has
happened to me since
“How I came to remain on board was thus: The morn-
ing the ship was taken, it being my watch below, happening
to awake just after day-light, and looking out of my hammock,
I saw a man sitting upon the arm-chest in the main hatch-
way, with a drawn sword in his hand, the reason of which I
could not divine; so I got out of bed and inquired of him what
was the cause of it. He told me that Mr. Christian, assisted
by some of the ship’s company, had seized the captain and
put him in confinement; had taken the command of the ship,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


and meant to carry Bligh home a prisoner, in order to try
him by court-martial for his long tyrannical and oppressive
conduct to his people. I was quite thunder-struck; and,
hurrying into my berth again, told one of my mess-mates,
whom I awakened out of his sleep, what had happened. Then
dressing myself I went up the fore hatchway, and saw what
he told me was but too true; and again I asked some of the
people, who were under arms, what was going to be done with
the captain, who was then on the larboard side of the quarter-
deck, with his hands tied behind his back, and Mr. Christian
alongside of him with a pistol and drawn sword.
“I now heard a very different story, that the captain
was to be sent ashore to Tofoa in the launch, and that those
who would not join Mr. Christian might either accompany the
captain, or would be taken in irons to Otaheite, and left
there.
“The relation of two stories so different left me unable
to judge which could be the true one; but, seeing them hoist-
ing the boats out, it seemed to prove the latter. In this
trying situation, young and inexperienced as I was, and with-
out an adviser (every person being as it were infatuated, and
not knowing what to do), I remained for a while a silent
spectator of what is going on ; and after revolving the matter
in my mind, I determined to choose, what I thought, the
lesser of two evils, and stay by the ship ; for I knew that those
who went ashore in the launch would be put to death by the
savage natives; whereas the Otaheitans, being a humane and
generous race, one might have a hope of being kindly
received, and remain there until the arrival of some ship,
which seemed, to silly me, the most consistent with reason
and rectitude.
“While this resolution possessed my mind, at the same
time lending my assistance to hoist out the boats, the hurry
and confusion affairs were in, and thinking my intention
just, I never thought of going to Mr. Bligh for advice;
besides, what confirmed me in it was my seeing two experi-
enced officers, when ordered into the boat by Mr. Christian,
desire his permission to remain in the ship (one of whom my
NESSY HEYWOOD.


own mess-mate, Mr. Hayward), and I being assisting to
clear the launch, he asked me what I intended to do?
I told him, to remain in the ship. Now, this answer, I imagine,
he has told Mr. Bligh I made to him; from which, together
with my not speaking to him that morning, his suspicions of
me have arisen, construing my conduct into what is foreign
to my nature.
“Thus, my dearest mother, it was all owing to my youth
and unadvised inexperience, but it has been interpreted into
villainy and disregard for my country’s laws, the ill effects
of which I am at present, and still am to labour under for
some months longer. . . . . However, to continue my
relation—
“l was not undeceived in my erroneous decision till too
late, which was after the Captain was in the launch ; for,
while 1 w'as talking to the Master-at-Arms, one of the ring-
leaders in the affair, my other mess-mate (Mr. Stewart) whom
I had left in his hammock in the berth, came up to me and
asked me if I was going in the launch p I replied, ‘No,’ upon
which he told me not to think of such a thing as remaining
behind, but take his advice and go down below with him to
get a few necessary things, and make haste to go with him
into the launch ; adding, that by remaining in the ship, 1
should incur an equal share of guilt with the mutineers them-
selves ; upon which he and the Master-at-Arms had some
altercation about my mess-mate’s intention of going into the
boat.
“I reluctantly followed his advice—l say reluctatMy,
because I knew no better, and was foolish; and the boat
swimming very deep in the water—the land being far distant
—the thoughts of being sacrificed by the natives—and the
self-consciousness of my first intentions being just—all these
considerations almost staggered my resolution; however, I
preferred my companion’s judgment to my own, and we both
jumped down the main hatchway to prepare ourselves for the
boat, but no sooner were we in the berth than the Master-at-
Arms ordered the sentry to keep us both in the berth till he
NESSY HEYWOOD.


should receive orders to release us. We desired the Master-
at-Arms to acquaint Mr. Bligh of our detention, which we had
reason to think he never did, nor were we permitted to come
on deck until the launch was a long way astern. 1 1 now,
when too late, saw my error.
“At the latter end of May we got to an island to the
southward of Taheite, called Toobocai, where they intended
to make a settlement; but, finding no stock there of any kind,
they agreed to go to Taheite, and, after procuring hogs and
fowle, to return to Toobocai and remain. So, on the 6th
of June, we arrived at Taheite, where I was in hopes I might
find an opportunity of running away, and remaining on shore ;
but 1 could not effect it, as there was always too good a
look-out kept to prevent any such steps being taken ; and,
besides, they had all sworn that, should any one make his
escape, they would force the natives to restore him, and
would then shoot him as an example to the rest, well-knowing
that any one by remaining there might be the means (should
a ship arrive) of discovering their place of abode. Finding it
therefore impracticable, I saw no other alternative but to rest
as content as possible, and return to Toobocai, and there wait
till the masts of the “Bounty” should be taken out, and then
take the boat, which might take me* to Taheite, and disable
those remaining from pursuit. But Providence so ordered it
that we had no occasion to try our fortune at such a hazard,
for, upon returning there and remaining till the latter end
of August, in which time a fort was almost built, but nothing
could be effected; and, as the natives could not be brought
to friendly terras, and with whom we had many skirmishes,
and narrow escapes from being cut off by them, and, what
was still worse, internal broils and discontent—these things
determined part of the people to leave the island and go to
Taheite, which was carried by a majority of votes, this being
carried into execution on the 22nd of September, and, having
anchored in Matawai Bay, the next morning my mess-mate
(Mr. Stewart) and I went on shore, to the house of an old
landed proprietor, our former friend; and, being now set free
*With Stewart and Morrison.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


from a lawless crew, determined to remain as much apart
from them as possible, and wait patiently for the arrival of
a ship.
“Fourteen more of the “Bounty’s” people came likewise
on shore, and Mr. Christian and eight men went away with
the ship, hut God knows whither.* Whilst we remained here
we were treated by our kind and friendly natives with a
generosity and humanity almost unparalleled, and such as
we could hardly have expected from the most civilized
people.”
We learn what Peter Heywood was like at this
time from an official description drawn up by Bligh ;
“Midshipman, 5 feet 7 in. height, fair complexion,
light brown hair, very much tattooed; on his right
leg tattooed the three legs of the Isle of Man, as
upon the coin. At this time he has not done grow-
ing”; and it concludes with the interesting remark
that “he speaks with the Manks, or Isle of Man,
accent.” It is evident that his English education had
not obliterated it. All that we know of his life in
Otaheite is derived from another letter to his mother.
After telling her that the “Pandora’s” people thought
that he was a native because he was dressed in their
manner, tanned as brown as themselves and tattooed
like them, he continued : “I was tattooed, not at my
own desire, but at theirs; for it was my constant
endeavour to acquiesce in any little! custom which I
thought would be agreeable to them, though painful
in the process, provided I gained by it their friend-
*Nothing was heard of their fate till 1808, when the sole
survivor, John Adams, was discovered at Pitcairn’s Island.
For a very interesting account of this see “Pitcairn,” pub-
lished by the S.P.C.K.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


ship and esteem The more a man or
woman there is tattooed the more respect is paid
them; and a person who has none of these marks is
looked upon as ... a mere outcast of society. . . .
By this means I was the greatest favourite of any
Englishman on shore.” To resume his letter:
“To be brief—having remained here till the latter end
of March, 1791, on the 26th of that month his Majesty’s ship
“Pandora” arrived, and had scarcely anchored when my mess-
mate (Stewart) and I went on board, and made ourselves
known; and, having learnt from one of the natives, who had
been off in a canoe, that our former mess-mate, Mr. Hayward,
now promoted to the rank of lieutenant, was on board, we
asked for him, supposing he might prove the assertions of our
innocence. But he received us very coolly, and pretended
ignorance of our affairs; yet formerly he and I were bound
in brotherly love and friendship. Appearances being so much
against us, we were ordered to be put in irons Had
my confinement been my only misfortune, I would patiently
have resigned myself to it. But one evil seldom comes
unaccompanied. Alas I I was informed of the death of the
most indulgent of fathers.
‘ ‘Twelve more of the people who were at Otaheite, having
delivered themselves up, there was a sort of prison built on
the after-part of the quarter-deck into which we were all put
in close confinement, with both legs and both hands in irons,
and were treated with great rigour, not being allowed to get
out of this den; and, being obliged to eat, drink, sleep, and
obey the calls of Nature here, you may form some idea of the
disagreeable situation I must have been in ... .
“On the 9th of May we left Otaheite, and proceeded to
the neighbourhood of the Friendly Islands, where we cruised
about six weeks in search of the ‘Bounty,’ but without
success About the beginning of August we got
in among the reefs of New Holland, to endeavour to discover
a passage through them, but it was not effected; for the
NESSY HEYWOOD.


'Pandora,’ ever unlucky, and as if devoted by heaven to
destruction, was driven by a current upon the patch of a reef,
and on which, there being a heavy surf, she was soon almost
bulged to pieces; but, having thrown all the guns on one side
overboard, the tide flowing at the same tinny she beat over
the reef into a basin and brought up in fourteen or fifteen
fathoms; but she was so much damaged while on the reef,
that, imagining she would go to pieces every moment, we had
contrived to wrench ourselves out of the irons, and applied
to the Captain to have mercy on us, and suffer us to take our
chance for the preservation of our lives. But it was all in
vain—he was even so inhuman as to order us to he put in
irons again, though the ship was expected to go down every
moment, being scarcely able to keep her under with all the
pumps at work.
“In this miserable condition, with an expected death
before our eyes, without the least hope of relief, and in the
most trying state of suspense, we spent the night . . .
The boats by this time had all been prepared ; and as the
Captain and officers were coming on the poop or roof of our
prison, to abandon the ship, the water being up to the comb-
ing of the hatchways, we again implored his mercy ; upon
which he sent a corporal and an armourer down to let some of
us out. of irons, but three only were suffered to go up, and
the scuttle being then clapped on, and the Master-at-Arms
upon it, the armourer had only time to let two persons out of
irons, the rest, except three, letting themselves out; two of
these three went down with them on their hands, and the
third was picked up.
“She now began to heel over to port so very much that
the Master-at-Arms, sliding overboard, and leaving the scuttle
vacant, we all tried to get up, 'and I was the last out but
three. The water was then pouring in at the bulk-head
scuttles, yet I succeeded in getting out, and was scarcely in
the sea when I could see nothing above it but the cross
trees, and nothing around me but a scene of the greatest
distress. I took a plank (being stark naked) and swam
towards an island about three miles off, but was picked up on
NESSY HEYWOOD.


my passage by one of the boats. When we got ashore to the
email sandy key, we found there were thirty-four men
drowned, four of whom were prisoners, and among these was
my unfortunate mess-mate (Mr. Stewart); ten of us, and
eighty-nine of the ‘Pandora’s’ crew were saved.
“When a survey was made of what provisions had been
saved, they were found to consist of two or three bags of
bread, two or three breakers of water, and a little wine; so
we subsisted three days upon two wine-glasses of water, and
two ounces of bread per day.
“On the Ist of September we left the island, and on the
16th arrived at Coupang, in the Island of Timor, having been
on short allowance eighteen days. We were put in confine-
ment in the Castle, where we remained till October, and on
the sth of that month were sent on board a Dutch ship bound
for Batavia. After a very tedious and dangerous passage,
the ship being twice near drove ashore, and so very leaky as
to be scarce kept above water with both pumps constantly
going, on the 30th we anchored at Samasang, in the Isle of
Java, and on Monday, the 7th of November, anchored here at
Batavia. I send this by the first ship, which is to sail in
about a week, by one of the ‘Pandora’s’ men. We are to
follow in a week after, and expect to be in England in about
seven months.
“Though I have been eight months in close confinement
in a hot climate, I have kept my health in a most surprising
maimer, without the least indisposition, and am still per-
fectly well in every respect, in mind as well as in body; but
without a friend, and only a shirt and pair of trousers to put
on, and carry me home. Yet with all this I have a contented
mind, entirely resigned to the will of Providence, which
conduct alone enables me to soar above the reach of unhappi-
ness. You will most probably hear of my arrival in England
before 1 can write to you, which I most earnestly long for,
that I may explain things which I cannot now mention; yet
I hope this will be sufficient to undeceive those who have been
so ungenerous as to express, and those who have been so
credulous as to believe, all that is laid to my charge. . . .”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


We insert here some “lines” composed by Peter
Heywood, while a prisoner and suffering the most
cruel hardships and treatment on board His
Majesty’s ship "Pandora”:
Lest I shou’d bend beneath this weighty load,
And ne’er enjoy thy promis’d blest abode,
Attend thou, Hope, on me, and be my guide
Through all my sorrows, walking by my side.
Keep in my eye that distant, happy spot,
Where sweet content shall be my future lot;
Free from ambition or desire of gain,
Living in peace, exempt from mental pain;
My food the fruits with my own culture grown,
The world forgetting, by the world unknown ;
There tasting pleasure void of care’s alloy,
Crowning afflictions past with present joy I
His letter was forwarded by the first of the two
Dutch ships which left Batavia for the Cape. It
went from thence by H.M.S. “Vengeance,” arriving
in England on the Bth of June, and in the Isle of
Man on the 21st. Peter himself followed in the
second ship, which got to Capetown in March. He
was then transferred to H.M.S. “Gorgon,” which
reached Spithead on the 19th of June.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


COPY OF AN OLD ENGRAVING OF DOUGLAS
(From an Engraving in the Public Library, Douglas).


CHAPTER IV.—HER LETTERS AND PETER'S
TRIAL AND PARDON.
Two days after Peter’s arrival, he was trans-
ferred to H.M.S. "Hector.” On the 20th he wrote
to his mother and Nessy ; and again on the 22nd,
with these lines written by him "while a prisoner on
board His Majesty’s ship ‘Hector,’ before his trial
for the supposed crime of mutiny on board the
‘Bounty,’ ” addressed to ‘Hope,’ in a letter to his
sister, N. Heywood :
Oh, Hope, thou firm support against despair,
Assist me now stern adverse Fate to bear;
And teach me, when by troubles sore opprest
To think they happen to me for the best;
To waft from off my soul the clouds of woe,
And make the big swollen tear forget to flow ;
And oh, remind me that the time draws near
When from these chains once more I shall be clear;
My long-felt troubles then perhaps will oease,
And past distress be crown’d by future peace.
The letters, which have not been preserved, were
received on the 20th. On the 29th, his mother
replied:
“All your letters have come safe to me, and to my dear,
good Nessy. Ah I Peter, with what real joy did wo receive
them, and how happy we are that you are now safe in
NESSY HEYWOOD


England! I will endeavour, my dearest lad, to make your
present situation as comfortable as possible, for so affec-
tionate and good a son deserves my utmost attention. Nessy
has written to our faithful and kind friend, Mr. Heywood,
of Plymouth, for his advice, whether it would be proper for
her to come up to you ; if he consents to her so doing, not a
moment shall be lost, and how happy shall I be when she is
with you! Such a sister as she is! Oh! Peter, she is a
most valuable girl. What comfort she will give you, and
how will she lessen the many tedious hours you must, I fear,
pass in your confinement ”
Nessy wrote by the same post:
“My Dearest and Most Beloved Brother,—
“Thanks to that Almighty Providence which has so
miraculously preserved you. Your fond, anxious, and, till
now, miserable Nessy, is at last permitted to address the
object of her tenderest affection in England ! Oh! my admir-
able, my heroic boy, w'hat have we felt on your account!
Yet how small, how infinitely trifling was the misery of our
situation when compared with the horrors of yours! Let
me now, however, with confidence hope that the God of all
mercies has not so long protected you in vain, but will at
length crown your fortitude and pious resignation to His
Will with that peace and happiness you so richly merit.
“How blest did your delightful, and yet dreadful, letter
from Batavia make us all! Surely, my beloved boy, you
could not for a moment imagine we ever supposed you guilty
of the crime of mutiny. No, no; believe me, no earthly
power could have persuaded us that it was possible for you
to do anything inconsistent with strict honour and duty.
So well did we know your amiable, steady principles, that
we were assured your reasons for staying behind would turn
out such as you represent them; and I firmly trust that
Providence will at length restore you to those dear and
affectionate friends who can know no happiness until they
are blest with your loved society.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“Take care of your precious health, ray beloved boy. I
shall soon be with you. I have written to Mr. Heywood*
(your and our excellent friend and protector) for his permis-
sion to go to you immediately, which my uncle Heywood,
without first obtaining it would not allow, fearing lest any
precipitate step might injure you at present; and I only
await the arrival of his next letter to fly into your arms.
Oh! my best beloved Peter, how I anticipate the rapture of
that moment I For, alas! I have no joy, no happiness, but
in your beloved society, and no hopes, no fears, no wishes,
but for you.
"I hope you have, ere this time, received a letter from
me, which I wrote before we had your letter from Batavia,
and sent to the care of Mr. Hayward,t of Hackney; but, as
he infoimcd me he could not get it transmitted to you from
the difficulty of transmission, I took the liberty of requesting
Mr. Heywood would send for it, and, after reading it, forward
it to you. I sent him also your last two letters, scarcely
allowing ourselves time to read, much less (oh I how great
would have been the satisfaction I) to keep them. I have
ten thousand things to tell you, my dear Peter, that have
happened since our mournful separation, but my mind is at
present occupied solely with your idea, and my brothers and
sisters desire to add a few words. Farewell, for a little
while. Recommending you to the care of that kind Provi-
dence who has hitherto, in His merciful goodness, protected
your innocence ”
P.S.—“Poor Birket, the most faithful and worthiest of
servants, desires me to tell you that she almost dies with
joy at the thought of your safe arrival in England ”
The poor prisoner replied to his beloved sisters
all:
*Mr. J. M. Heywood, already referred to.
tFather of one of the midshipmen in the “Bounty,” who
wont home with Bligh.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“H.M.S. Hector, July 12, 1792.
“This day I had the supreme happiness of your long-
expected letters, and I am not able to express the pleasure
and joy they afforded me; at the sight of them my spirits,
low and dejected, were at once exhilarated; my heart had
long and greatly suffered from my impatience to hear of
those dear to me, and was tossed and tormented by the
storms of fearful conjecture; but they are now subsided,
and my bosom has at length attained that long-lost serenity
of calmness it once enjoyed; for you may believe me when I
say it never yet has suffered any disquiet from my own
misfortunes, but from a truly anxious solicitude for, and
desire to hear of your welfare.
“God be thanked, you still entertain such an opinion of
me as I will flatter myself I have deserved Oh I my
Nessy, it grieves me to think I must be under the necessity,
however heart-breaking to myself, of desiring you will
relinquish your most affectionate design of coming to see
me; it is too long and tedious a journey; and even on your
arrival you would not be allowed the wished-for happiness,
both to you and myself, of seeing, much less conversing
with, your unfortunate brother; the rules of the Service are
so strict, that prisoners are not permitted to have any com-
munications with female relations .... I am very happy
to hear that poor old Birket is still alive; please remember
me to her, and tell her not to heave aback until God grants
me the pleasure of seeing her. And now, my dear Nessy,
cease to anticipate the happiness of personal communication
with your poor but resigned brother, until wished-for freedom
removes the indignant (sic) shackles I now bear from the
feet of your fond and most affectionate brother.”
Peter had received much kindness from Mr. and
Mrs. J. M. Heywood, of Maristow, near Plymouth,
and from Mrs. Bertie, their daughter, who resided
at Portsmouth. She was the wife of Captain Bertie,
R.N. Mr. Heywood was, as we have seen, a corres-
NESSY HEYWOOD.


pondent of Nessy’s. She wrote to Mrs. Hey wood,
of Maristow, to thank her:
‘ 'Overwhelmed with sensations of gratitude and plea-
sure, which she is too agitated to express, permit me, dearest
madam, at my mamma’s request, to offer you her and our
most sincere acknowledgments for your invaluable letter,
which, from the detention of the Packet, she did not receive
till yesterday. By a letter from my beloved brother, of the
same date, we are informed that Mr. Larkham (whom I
suppose to be the gentleman you mention having sent to see
him) has been on board the “Hector,” and has kindly offered
him the most salutary advice relative to his present situation,
for which allow me to request you will present him our best
thanks. He also speaks with every expression a grateful
heart can dictate of your excellent father’s goodness in pro-
viding for all his wants, even before he could have received
any letters from us to that purpose.
“Ah! my dear madam, how truly characteristic is this
«f the kind friendship with which he has ever honoured our
family I But my beloved Peter does not know that Mr.
Heywood has a daughter,* whose generosity is equal to bis
own, and whose amiable compassion for his sufferings it will
be as impossible for us to forget as it is to express the
admiration and gratitude it has inspired. It would, I am
convinced, be unnecessary, as well as a very bad compliment
to you, madam, were I to presume to point out any thing
particular to be done for our poor boy, as I have not the
least doubt your goodness and kind intention have long ago
rendered every care of that sort on our part unnecessary.
I shall only add, that my mamma begs every wish he forma
may be granted, and sure I am he will not desire a single
gratification that can be deemed in the smallest degree
improper.
*Mrs. Bertie.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“In one of my brother’s letters, dated the 23rd [June],
he hints he shall not be permitted to see any of his relations
till his trial is over, and that he, therefore, does not expect
us. I have, however, written to Mr. Heywood (without whose
approbation I would by no means take any step) for permis-
sion to go to him. If it is absolutely impossible for me to
gee him (though in the presence of witnesses), yet even that
prohibition, cruel as it is, I could bear with patience, pro-
vided I might be near him, to see the ship in which he at
present exists—to behold those objects which, perhaps, at
the same moment attract his attention—to breathe the same
air which he breathes. Ah! my dearest madam, these are
inestimable gratifications, and would convey sensations of
rapture and delight to the fond bosom of a sister, which it is
far, very far, beyond my power to describe.
“Besides, the anxiety and impatience produced by the
immense distance which now separates us from him, and the
uncertainty attending the Packet, render it difficult and
sometimes impossible to hear of him so often as we would
wish; and, may I not add (though Heaven in its mercy forbid
it—for, alas! the bare idea is too dreadful, yet it is in the
scale of possibility), that some accident might happen to
deprive us of our dearest brother. How insupportftbly bitter
would then be our reflections for having omitted the oppor-
tunity, when it was in our power, of administering comfort
and consolation to him in person !
“For these reasons I earnestly hope Mr. Heywood will
not judge it improper to comply with my request, and I shall
wait with eager impatience the arrival of his next letter.
Think not, my dear madam, that it is want of confidence in
your care and attention which makes me so solicitous to be
with my beloved brother. Be assured we are all as perfectly
easy in that respect as if we were on the spot; but I am con-
vinced that you will pardon the dictates of our affection
which an absence of five years, rendered still more painful
by his sufferings, has heightened almost to a degree of
adoration.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“1 shall, with your permission, take the liberty of
inclosing a letter to my brother, which I leave open for
perusal, and, at the same time, request your pardon for
mentioning you to him in such terms, as I am apprehensive
will wound the delicacy which ever accompanies generosity
like yours; but, indeed, my dearest madam, I cannot, must
not, suffer my beloved boy to remain in ignorance of that
worth and excellence which has prompted you to become his
kind protectress.”
The result of her letter to Mr. Heywood, asking
if she would be allowed to see Peter, was a reply to
the effect that she probably would not, and she,
therefore, wrote to her brother:—
“Mr. Heywood has, in his last letter to me,* rather
disapproved of my intention to go to you; the reason he
urged against it was, that as you will now be taken every care
of, and will receive the utmost attention from your friends,
among whom the excellent Mr. Bertie is first, I could do
you no essential service, and that he feared I might, by seeing
you in your present situation, agitate and perhaps injure
both you and myself.
“With respect to you, my love, that reason has great
weight with me, because your mind ought for the present '.o
be kept cool and composed; and I would not lessen that
composure even by affording you all I could, a painful plea-
sure in seeing me; hut, as for myself, no danger, no fatigue,
no difficulties would deter me. I have youth, health, and
excellent spirits—these, and the strength of my affection,
would support me through it all.
“If I were not allowed to see you, yet being in the same
place with you, would be to me joy inexpressible. However,
♦Dates are given in all cases when they appear in the
originals. This was probably written on the 17th of July.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


that very circumstance would be distressing to you, and
would only be a source of mortification. I will not, therefore,
any longer desire it, but will learn to imitate your fortitude
and patience.
"Do you know, I envy you exceedingly? To have borne
with such heroism your dreadful misfortunes—to become the
idol of your relations and friends, and to be held up as an
example of worth and suffering virtue, —tell me, my love, is
not such a triumph worth the purchase? Thus speaks my
little bravery of spirit. Yet how does my fond affection for
my dear brother shrink with horror at the bare recollection
of his dangers I The sweet and pious resignation which has
hitherto happily conducted you through them, is, I freely
own, just what I expected from you; for such is my idea of
your character, that I should have been disappointed had you
acted less nobly.
"With respect to the event of your trial, I am sure we
ought to banish every sentiment of fear, and rest securely
on the assistance of a kind Providence, and your own virtue.
If there be justice for the innocent on this earth, you will
assuredly be restored to us with honour. Ah! my dear Peter,
how the idea transports me 1 May the Giver of all good in
mercy grant that such may soon be cur happy lot, and that
I may at length enjoy the felicity of pressing the best of
brothers to the bosom of his ever faithfully affectionate
sister.”
Her next letter was in reply to one from her
brother of Aug. 16th :
“Isle of Man, July 22nd, 1792.
"Yes, my ever-dearest Peter, I am still in Douglas, and
shall not, without your express permission, leave it till I
have the inconceivable happiness of know mg you are once
more restored to liberty. My last letter would, I hope, make
you quite easy respecting my intended jouney.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“A thousand thanks for the sketches of the ‘Pandora,’
which pleased, but yet pained, us exceedingly. I will not say
the sight of them brought your past sufferings to our minds;
for alas I the recollection of them is ever present with us;
and yet how indescribably happy are we to think our beloved
Peter has escaped such dangers, and will, at length, meet
the reward of his virtues in the bosom of friendly and
domestic felicity 1
"1 have another request to make, my dear Peter; don’t
you think you could accomplish a sketch of something else
for your Nessy F I mean of that dear face I have so long and
so ardently wished to see. It is impossible for me to procure
a miniature of you at present, but perhaps you oould draw
a likeness strong enough to give me an idea of the alteration
in your face and person since we parted. Oh 1 how happy
should 1 be to gaze on your portrait, were it even the most
distant resemblance 1 Suppose you try ? Perhaps it will
amuse you in a leisure hour, and how would the possession
of it delight me!”
Her brother replied on the 31st:
“I had this morning the pleasure of your last (22nd), and
am glad to find that you liked the sketches I sent you of the
‘Pandora.’ I oould not help laughing heartily at the request
you made, to draw my own picture. With what pleasure
would 1 do anything in my power to afford my Nessy even a
momentary happiness! but that is a part of the art which I
never attempted, and am conscious that my insignificant
abilities are by no means equal to the most distant likeness
of a face. And, in fact, I have not one pencil, nor any
colours, they being all lost in the Endeavour Straits, with
about 80 drawings, besides my little all of property. But
wait awhile, and with God’s assistance I will present you with
the original.”
Notwithstanding this disavowal of his powers,
he sent a portrait of himself a few days later, which
NESSY HEYWOOD.


was drawn from recollection, as he had not seen his
face in a looking-glass for twelve months, and he
writes: —■
“If the face is not like, the dress is just what I now
wear, and the position such as I generally sit in, either
reading, writing, or drawing. The straw hat I made myself
in the Dutch Indiaman from Mataira to the Cape, and to
pass away the tedious hours of confinement.”
Nessy had written to him on the same day:
“Isle of Man, 31st July, 1798.
“We had the happiness, my beloved brother, of your
three letters on Sunday last, by a boat from Whitehaven, as
the packet is not repair’d. Mr. Wood continues to send over
our letters by any safe opportunity, and fortunatly we have
received them with great regularity. You will, by this post,
receive a number of letters. Mama, Mary, Eliza, and myself
are all scribbling at this moment, and James desires me to
say he would do so too, but he has hurt his right hand, and
cannot hold a pen.
“You mention in some of your letters an apprehension
{which I assure you, my love, is unnecessary) of displeasing
my uncle Heywood* by not writing to him. He sees every
letter we receive from you, and is entirely satisfied with your
whole conduct; not a single step has been taken respecting
you without his express concurrence and approbation, and he
interests himself strongly in your welfare, which, believe me,
is no inconsiderable proof of your great merit. His natural
prudence and cool reason will never suffer mm to bestow his
attention on any but a worthy object. That object he has
with pleasure found in my dearest Peter.
“Why, my ever-loved brother, did you make any apology
to me for the uneasiness you felt on receipt of my letter to
*Thc Water-Bailiff.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Mr. Heywood’s care? How very unnecessary was that to
me, and how sincerely am I grieved it was ever sent you I
Yet, thank Heaven, you will not, cannot, suffer much longer
those unpleasant sensations which a situation of undeserv’d
confinement must produce, for soon, very soon, I hope, will
everything terminate to our most sanguine wishes. ’Tis I,
my love, who ought to apologise for having suffer’d even a
•ingle word to escape me that cou’d give you a moment’s pain.
Alas I how studiously, on the contrary, won’d I seek to give
you pleasure.
“Mr. Bligh most certainly brands my amiable brother
with the vile appellation of ‘Mutineer,’ but he has not dared
to charge you with any crime that cou’d nave authoriz’d such
an epithet; on the contrary, he has declar’d, under his own
hand, that he had the highest esteem for you till the fatal
moment of the Mutiny, and that your conduct during the
whole course of the voyage was such as gave him the greatest
pleasure and satisfaction. So high, indeed, was the opinion
he had of your character and attachment to him, that he told
Mr. Wilson, in conversation, his greatest hopes of assistance
in suppressing the Mutiny were from his dependence on your
forming a party in his favour. And here, 1 must observe,
that his confidence in his other officers must have been very
small when (without making any effort himself, except by-
words, even when he was in the boat and his hands at liberty)
he depended on a boy of seventeen to be his defender. His
cruelty and barbarity in loading you with so opprobrious an
epithet is, therefore, the more unpardonable, and will, so far
from injuring you, ray dearest Peter, recoil upon himself; and,
if he has any feeling, must distress him much.
“The report you have heard respecting my grandfather
Spedding’s death is very true. He died in August, 1788, and,
wou’d you believe it, notwithstanding he confess’d, and even
boasted to the latest moment of his existence, that my Mama
(once his only and belov’d child, and chat for a period of
thirty-six years) had never during her whole life, in the most
trifling instance, offend’d him, he had the cruelty not even
to mention her name in his will! He died immensely rich,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


and left his whole fortune (except £40,000 for his eldest son)
to his present wife and her heirs for ever. Even this was
surely unkind to his then children, independent of my Mama,
for it was possible Mrs. Spedding might marry again and
have other heirs besides his children. The event has verified
the conjecture, for, two years ago, she marri’d Doctor
Hamilton, who, however, insisted that her fortune shou’d
first be settled upon the children. Thus, by a fatal second
marriage, was a worthy woman, with a large family, depriv’d
not only of a parent’s affection, but of the inheritance to
which by the law of nature, and by her own exemplary con-
duct, she was justly intitled.
“Adieu, my best, my dearest, brother! May the
Almighty God guard and preserve you till you are again
restor’d to both the joy and happiness of j'our most faithful
and fondly affectionate sister.”
Mary is impatient to scribble a little.
“My Dearest and most Beloved Brother,
“Nessy has left a small portion of hei letter for us to
fill up, and has wrote you so many long letters that she leaves
nothing for us to say; but, for Heaven’s sake, take care of
yourself now you are so near us, and trust in God w© shall
soon embrace you in the Island, the thought of which is
almost too much to bear. Adieu, my ever dearest boy; may
that Providence, who has protected you so far, restore you
to your anxious Family, is the constant prayer
“Of your Affectionate Sister,
“MARY HEYWOOD.”
“My Dearly-beloved Peter,
“Never did I sit down with such Heartfelt satisfaction
as to write these few lines. How long and anxiously have
we waited for this period I But, thank God, it has at length
arrived, and you will be restor’d to us innocent—indeed, we
never had a thought of your being guilty. No, my dear
brother, we all know you too well; we envy Nessy the
NESSY HEYWOOD.


pleasure she will have in being with you, but I hope things
will turn out to our wishes, and we shall once more enjoy
your society at home. What an addition will you be to our
domestic fireside! Adieu, my dear boy, take care of yourself.
Yours while she exists,
“ELIZA HEYWOOD.”
(Aged 22).
“My Dearest Brother,
“In what terms can I express myself in writing to you?
Oh I may you, my belov’d Peter, meet the reward you deserve
—my only wish is that I may be worthy of such a brother.
For God’s sake take care of your health, for you don’t know
how dear you are to us. Adieu, my dearest brother; Heav’n
preserve you to
Your most Affectionate Sister,
“ISABELLA HEYWOOD.”
''Aged 17).
“My Dearest Brother,
“How can I speak the pleasure I have in writing to you.
My sister Nessy has permitted me to express my joy in your
arrival. Take care of yourself, and love me as you will ever
be lov’d
“By your most Affectionate Sister,
“JANE HEYWOOD.”
(Aged 15).
“John and Edwin desire Nessy will take up the pen for
them, and tell their dearest brother Peter that they are over-
joy’d at his escape from that terrible and far distant Otaheite,
and hope they may yet be able to assure him how much they
have wished for his return; and they add that, if he will only
take care of himself for their sakes, he may teach them by
his example to be dutiful and good, that they will behave
well, and be the best children, in the world till he comes home
to his two loving and affectionate little boys
“ ROBERT JOHN HEYWOOD( aged 11).
“ EDWIN HOLWELL HEYWOOD (aged 10).”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Nessy’s next communication, on the sth of
Augu st, took the form of a poem: “On the Arrival
of my dearly-beloved brother, Peter Heywood, in
England, written while he is a Prisoner, and waiting
the Event of his Trial on board his Majesty’s ship
Hector”:
Come, gentle Muse, I woo thee once again,
Nor woo thee now in melancholy strain;
Assist my verse in cheerful mood to flow,
Nor let this tender bosom Anguish know ;
Pill all my soul with notes of Love and Joy,
No more let Grief each anxious thought employ I
* * * *
Returne’d with every charm, accomplish'd youth 1
Adorn’d with Virtue, Innocence, and Truth!
Wrapp’d in thy conscious merit still remain,
Till I behold thy lovely form again.
Protect him, Heav’n! from dangers and alarms,
And oh I restore him to a sister’s arms;
Support his fortitude in that dread hour
When he must brave Suspicion’s cruel pow’r;
Grant him to plead with Eloquence divine,
In ev’ry word let Truth and Honour snine;
Through each sweet accent let Persuasion flew.
With manly firmness let his bosom glow,
Till strong Conviction, in each face exprest,
Grants a reward by Honour’s self contest 1
Let Thy Omnipotence preserve him still,
And all his future days with Pleasure fill;
And oh! kind Heav’n, though now in chains he be,
Restore him soon to Friendship, Love, and me I
This must have travelled with unusual speed,
since her brother is able to thank her for it in a
letter written on the 9th August, in which he, in his
turn, sends her a lengthy poem, entitled “A Dream,”
which was composed on the 6th of February, i/go,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


at Otaheite. This was, as he state'd, “rather
remarkably” the same day on which his father died .
and he remarked “The dream which occasioned this
poetical attempt I shall never forget, so powerful
was its effect on my mind. I owe to it all my present
serenity, and it was this alone which enabled me to
bear the many troubles I have had to encounter. 1
hammered at it while at Otaheite, and, after writing
it, I learnt it by heart, and now you have it from
recollection.”
Nessy replied on the 17th :
“How shall I thank yon. my best-beloved brother, for
your last dear let-ter and charming poem? How has the
perusal of it delighted us all? How have I wept over it,
while my attention was divided between admiration at the
mysterious interposition of Providence, which I am convinced
was the case on that remarkable and lamented day when we
were for ever deprived of our beloved parent, and gratitude
to a beneficent Being, who has so graciously preserved, and
will, at length, with confidence I speak it, restore you to our
wishes, the amiable, the truly perfect character your opening
virtues promised I
"1 have a letter from my uncle Pasley, by the packet,
full of the most favourable accounts. Is not this delightful ?
I cannot help contrasting our present stiuation with what : t
has been these five years past, when each dreaded arrival of
the packet brought us some distressing intelligence. Now,
how different 1 Its return is impatiently wished for, and every
letter is replete wth comfort, satisfaction, and happiness I
"You make me blush, ray dear brother, by your
encomiums. I dare not flatter myself with any merit but
that of endeavouring to deserve them. If I have studied to
acquire any new accomplishments, in your absence, believe
me my first pleasure in the attainment of them was the hope
of approving myself in some degree worthy of such a brother.’’
NESSY HEYWOOD.


To her again, Peter, on the 23rd —
“My dearest Nessy’s of the 17th I have, this morning,
received, and have also information from Mr. Beardsworth
that Mr. Erskine and Mr. Mingay are not retained for me,
but a Mr. Const. The contrast, as my dear girl observes,
betwixt the past and the present is great, and, let us hope,
ere many weeks, it will be much greater. lam glad you like
my piece of poetry, I was going to say, and which your
partiality dignifies with the name of poem; but don’t imagine
I am to believe all you say. . .
“I have had as yet no authentic intelligence when the
trial will be. Lord Hood returned from London last night,
and his flag was hoisted this morning, so that I daily expect
to receive certain information. When I do, I shall not, I
think, inform you of the exact day on which my fate is to be
decided, as it would turn you into the most painful state of
anxious suspense.”
The next communication was early in Septem-
ber. The latter part of the letter only has been
preserved:
“Adieu, my inestimable brother. My mamma sends her
most tender love and anxious maternal wishes for your liberty
and safety, and my brothers and sisters desire me to say
everything that is most expressive of boundless affection.
May that Almighty Providence, whose tender oar© has
hitherto preserved you, be still your bountiful Protector 1
May He instil into the hearts of your judges every sentiment
of justice, generosity, and compassion! May hope, innocence,
and integrity be your firm support, and liberty, glory, and
honour, your just reward I May all good angels guard you
from even the appearance of danger! And may you at
length be restored to us, the delight, the pride of your
adoring friends, and the sole happiness and felicity of that
fond heart which animates the bosom )f my dear Peter’s
most faithful and truly affectionate sister.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


The following may probably be dated from this
period:
Oh t gentle Hope t with eyes serene,
And aspect ever sweetly mild;
Who deck’st with gayest flowers each scene
In sportive, rich luxuriance wild I
Thou, soother of corroding care,
When sharp afflictions’s pangs we feel,
Teachest us with fortitude to bear,
And know’st deep sorrow’s wounds to heal.
Thy timid vot’ry now inspire,
Thy influence in pity lend;
With confidence this bosom fire,
Till anxious, dread suspense shall end.
Oh 1 let not fear invade my breast;
My Lycidas no terror knows;
With conscious innocence he’s blest,
And soon will triumph o’er his foes
Watch him, sweet Pow’r, with looks benign,
Possession of his bosom keep;
While waking, make each moment shine.
With fancy gild his hours of sleep.
Protect him still, nor let him dread
The awful, the approaching hour,
When on his poor devoted head
Fell slander falls with cruel power.
Yet, gentle Hope, deceive me not,
Nor with deluding smiles betray;
Be honour’s recompense his lot,
And glory crown each future day I
And oh! support this fainting heart
With courage, till that hour is past,
When, free’d from envy’s fatal dart,
His innocence shines forth at last.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Then as the trial drew near—it began oe the
12th—came—
“ANXIETY.”
Doubting, dreading, fretful guest,
Quit, oh 1 quit this mortal breast.
Why wilt thou my peace invade,
And each brighter prospect shade P
Pain me not with needless Fear,
But let Hope my bosom cheer;
While I court her gentle charms,
Woo the flatt’rer to my arms;
While each moment she beguiles
With her sweet enliv’ning smiles,
While she softly whispers me,
“Lycidas again is free,”
While I gaze on Pleasure’s gleam,
Say not thou, “It’s all a dream.”
Hence, nor darken Joy’s soft bloom
With thy pale and sickly gloom;
Nought have I to do with thee—
Hence—begone—Anxiety I
Towards the end of the month, her young brother,
Henry, who had just joined the Merchant Service,
sailed on his first voyage, which was to Jamaica.
Nessy’s gift to him was a letter-case with these
lines:
Oh, may this case, my Henry, ne’er contain
One line, one sentence that can give thee pain,
But ever be replete with love and joy
To bless thy absent hours, my darling boy;
And in thy generous bosom may it prove
The sweet remembrance of a sister’s love.
The Court Martial began on the 12th of Septem-
ber. Peter’s counsel were Mr. Graham and Mr.
Const. Of Mr. Graham, Captain Pasley said: “A
NESSY HEY WOOD.


friend of mine, Mr. Graham, who has been secretary
to the different admirals on the Newfoundland
Station for these twelve years, and consequently has
acted as judge-advocate at Courts Martial all that
time, has offered me to attend you ; he has a
thorough knowledge of the service, uncommon
abilities, and is a very good lawyer.” And again:
“Your counsel (Mr. Coust) seems a sensible, clever
young man, but my dependence is on Graham.” Mr.
Graham was to prove himself, not only an able
advocate, but a devoted friend. He was at that
time a police magistrate in London.
The Court Martial was over by the morning of
the 18th. But no news of it, owing to strong con-
trary winds, was received in the Isle of Man till
Monday, the 24th, and it then came in a very unfor-
tunate way from a little boy, who ran into the room
where the Heywoods were sitting, and told them in
the most abrupt manner that Peter had been con-
demned, but was recommended to mercy; and, he
added, that a man, whose name he mentioned, had
informed him of it. The man was sent for, and
questioned, and he replied that he had seen it in a
newspaper at Liverpool, whence he had arrived in a
fishing boat, but that he had forgotten to bring the
newspaper with him.
On the 27th Nessy received a letter from her
brother James, who had arrived in Liverpool, with
Henry, on the 24th. He sent her a copy of the
paragraph referred to, and said that, as she would
NESSY HEYWOOD.


probably want to go to Portsmouth, he would wait
for her till he saw her or heard from her. On the
29th Nessy replied :
"There is a vessel going to Liverpool this instant, and 1
have hut a moment to tell you that I received yours on
Thursday night; till then we had heard nothing but by
report. The packet is not yet arrived, and our friends will
not let me go from hence till she brings some certain news.
We are in an agony of suspense, and I can scarcely support
my own misery, much less keep up mamma’s dejected spirits.
"If there is the least apprehension entertained by the
people of Liverpool for his life—go, for heaven’s sake, to
Portsmouth, without waiting for me. ’Tis true your being
there cah do him no essential service, nor will his friends
leave anything undone for him; but ’tis natural to suppose
he must wish to see some of his own family. It is, however,
some comfort that I am able to assure you that every person
here to whom we have spoken on the subject agrees in the
opinion that there is not the smallest danger—that his being
found guilty is not because any thing has been proved against
him, but because he, poor fellow, was not able to bring
evidence sufficiently strong of his innocence—that a recom-
mendation from a court martial to mercy is exactly the same
as an acquittal in another court; for the martial law is so
strict and severe that there is no medium between acquittal
and death—that there is no instance upon which a pardon
from that recommendation has been refused, and that it is
asked not as a matter of favour merely, but of justice from
the executive power, which is the only way of mitigating too
severe a law.
"This is the opinion here; but we nave hoped too long,
and have too much at stake, to be satisfied with conjectures,
however well founded, nor can anything but a certainty, from
his own letters, still our violent apprehensions.
"This is a calm day, and I hope that the packet will at
length make her appearance. If she brings not a certainty
NESSY HEYWOOD.


of his safety, I shall set off for Liverpool immediately—but
if you have a doubt of that. I again repeat, do not wait for
me. I can go alone. Fear, and even despair, will, in that
case, support mo through the journey. Yet, if I could listen
to reason, which is at present indeed difficult, it is not likely
that anything serious has taken place or will do so, as we
should them certainly have an express. But, my dear James,
act as your affection and judgment shall dictate, and think
only of our poor unfortunate and adored boy.”
But better news was at hand. The packet
referred to arrived at midnight, and it brought with
it a letter from Mrs. Bertie to Mrs. Heywood:
“Portsmouth, September 18, 1792.
“I have the happiness of telling you that the court-
martial is this moment over, and that 1 think your son’s
life is more safe now than it was before his trial. As there
was not sufficient proof of his innocence, the Court could not
avoid condemning him; but he is so strongly recommended
to mbrcy that, I am desired to assure you, by those who
are judges, that his life is safe ; all the principal officers of
the “Bounty,” who were called as evidence, gave him the
highest character imaginable; therefore, for Clod’s sake, believe
nothing but what you hear from hence My dear
madam, keep yourself up as well as you can. Rely on it
that God, who has preserved him through all his dangers and
sufferings to this day, will not forsake him. Adieu, my dear
madam. Depend on it, I have told you the honest truth, and
hope everything.”
Further news was received by the Hey woods the
next morning through Dr. Scott* who had a letter,
by the same packet, from Mr. Graham, who appeared
for Peter, dated “Portsmouth, ißth of September” :
*See Ohap. I. p. 9.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“I have attended and given my assistance at Mr. Hey-
wood’s trial, which was finished and "he sentence passed
about half an hour ago. Before I tell you what that sentence
is, I must inform you that his life is safe, notwithstanding it
is at present at the mercy of the King, to which he is in the
strongest terms recommended by the Oourt. That any
unnecessary fears may not be productive of misery to the
family, I must add, that the King’s Attorney-General desired
me to make myself perfectly easy, for that n.y friend was as
safe as if he had not been condemned. ... To prevent
its being improperly communicated to Mrs or the Misses
Heywood, whose distress first engaged me in the business,
and could not fail to call forth my best exertions upon the
occasion, I send you this by express. The mode of communi-
cation I must leave to your discretion; and shall only add
that everybody who attended the trial is perfectly satisfied
in his own mind that he was hardly guilty in appearance, in
intention he was perfectly innocent.”
On the following day, Mr. Graham again wrote
to Dr. Scott:
“It will be a great satisfaction to his family to learn that
the declarations of some of the other prisoners, since the
trial, put it past all doubt that the evidence upon which he
was convicted must have been (to say nothing worse of it) an
unfortunate belief, on the part of the witness, of circum-
stances which either never had existence, or were applicable
to one of the other gentlemen who remained in the ship, and
not to Mr. Heywood.”
This probably alludes to the evidence given by
Hallet, to which we have already referred. Two
days later, on the 20th, Peter himself wrote to Dr.
Scott, taking a very gloomy view of his probable
fate. It would seem that the result of the doubtless
severe strain of the trial, combined with all that had
NESSY HEYWOOD.


gone before it, had been to crush out all hope from
his heart. Peter writes :
“On Tuesday morning, the 18th, the deadful sentence
of death was pronounced upon me, to which 1 bow my devoted
head, with that fortitude, cheerfulness and resignation,
which is the duty of every member of the Church of our
Blessed Saviour and Redeemer Christ. ... I have not
been found guilty of the slightest act connected with that
detestable crime of mutiny, but am doomed to die for not
being active in my endeavours to suppress it. . . . For,
though the very strong recommendation I have had to his
Majesty’s mercy by all the members of the Court may meet
with his approbation, jet that is but the balance of a straw,
a mere uncertainty, upon which no hope can be built
Endeavour to mitigate mj T distressed mother’s sorrows, give
mj T everlasting duty to her, and unabated love to my dis-
consolate brothers and sisters, and all other relations ’’
On the 20th he also wrote to his dearly-beloved
Nessy:
“Had I not a strong idea that, ere this mournful epistle
from your ill-fated brother can reach the trembling hand of
my ever-dear and much afflicted Nessy, she must have been
informed of the final issue of my trial on Wednesday morning,
by my honoured friend, Dr. Scott, I would not now add
trouble to the afflicted by a confirmation of it. Conscious of
having done my duty to God and man, I feel not one moment’s
anxiety on my own account, but cherish a full and sanguine
hope that perhaps a few more days will free me from the
load of misfortune which has ever been my portion in this
transient period of existence; and that I shall find an ever-
lasting asylum in those blessed regions of eternal bliss where
the galling yoke of tyranny and oppression is felt no more.”
“I have had all my dear Neesy’s letters; the one of the
17th this morning ; but alas I what do they now avail P Their
contents only serve to prove the instability of all human
NESSY HEYWOOD.


hopes and expectations. . . . For Heaven’s sake, let not
despair touch the soul of my dear mother—for then all would
be over. Let Janies also employ all his efforts to cheer her
spirits under her weight of woe. I will write no more.
Adieu, my dearest love! Write but little to mo. and pray
for your ever affectionate but ill-fated brother,”
“P.S.—I am in perfect spirits, therefore let not your
sympathising feelings for my sufferings hurt your own
precious health, which is dearer to me than Ufa itself.
Adieu!”
It would seem that these various letters from
Portsmouth, on the 17th and 20th, all arrived on the
29th, and by the same packet. There also came a
letter from Mr. Graham, in which he renewed a
formejr invitation to Nessy that she and one of her
sisters should come and stay with him in London.
It was at once decided that Nessy should go without
delay. On Monday, the Ist of October, therefore,
while at breakfast, she was informed that a small
fishing vessel would sail for Liverpool in half an
hour, and, notwithstanding this brief notice, and a
strong contrary wind, she promptly embarked. On
the 3rd of October she wrote to her mother from
Liverpool:
‘‘We did not arrive here till noon this day, after a most
tempestuous passage of forty-nine hours, with the. wind
directly contrary the whole way. Yet, notwithstanding that
vexatious circumstance, hard boards, aching bones in conse-
quence, together with passing two nights almost without
closing my eyes, let me but be blessed v.ith the cheering
influence of Hope, and I have spirits to undertake anything.
The plaid was a most comfortable thing to me. I wrapped
it round my head. At the mouth of the river, this morning,
NESSY HEYWODD.


we met a small open fishing-boat, into which I got, as I was
told I should, by that means, arrive two hours sooner than
I should otherwise have done; and, as the sea was very high,
every wave washed over me, and I had a complete wetting.
On my arrival, I found poor Henry had sailed two days ago.
I regret I did not come in time to see Him, but I rejoice to
find he went off in good spirits, and his last words mentioned
Peter 1 1 I have been myself to secure a place in the mail-
coach, and hope to be, by ten o’clock to-night, on my road to
(may I not hope?) the completion of all my earthly happiness.
Mr. Southcote, whom I passed at sea, will inform you that
the pardon went down to the King, at Weymouth, some days
ago. When I was tempted to repine at the winds, I remem-
bered that they were favourable for Henry; I reflected
on Peter’s sufferings, and was content. Adieu, my dearest
mamma, and sisters I God bless you all! In your prayers
for our beloved and exemplary sufferer, add a word or two for
your most dutiful and affectionate Nessy.”
On the sth, she and her brother, Tames, arrived
at Mr. Graham’s residence, in Great Russell-street,
and she at once wrote to her mother:
“Well, my dear mamma, I have had a long conversation
with Mr. Graham ; and, to my utmost satisfaction, he says
‘I look upon him,’ speaking of Peter, ‘to be the most amiable
young man that can possibly exist. Ido not scruple to say
that I should not entirely believe you, as you may be partial;
but I speak from my own observation. He conducts himself
in such a manner as will reflect the highest and most lasting
honour on himself, and produce the strongest sensations of
pleasure and satisfaction to his friends. Mr. Graham
assures me that there is not a doubt existing in the mind of
any person who has seen the minutes of the Court Martial
respecting Peter’s innocence.”
It is interesting to find that so gentle and affec-
tionate a soul as Nessy is capable of anger. We
NESSY HEYWOOD


find her at this time writing to her sister Mary in
reference to Hallet’s evidence at the trial:
“With respect to that little wretch, Hallet, his intrepidity
in Court was astonishing; and after every evidence had
spoken strongly in Peter’s favour, and given testimony of his
innocence, so strong that not a doubt was entertained of his
acquittal, he declared, unasked, that while Bligh was upon
deck, he (Hallet) saw him look at and speak to Peter. What
he said to him Hallet could not hear, being at the distance of
twenty feet from Bligh, and Peter was twenty feet further
off (consequently a distance of forty feet separated Mr. Bligh
and my brother), but he added that Peter, on hearing what
Mr. Bligh said to him, laughed, and turned contemptuously
away.* No other witness saw Peter laugh hut Hallet; on the
contrary, all agreed he wore a countenance on that day
remarkably sorrowful; yet the effect of this cruel evidence
was wonderful on the minds of the Court, and they concluded
by pronouncing the dreadful sentence, though, at the same
time, accompanied by the strongest recommendation to mercy.
“Assure yourselves (I have it from Mr. Graham’s own
mouth) that Peter’s honour is, and will be, as secure as liis
own ; that ©very professional man, as well as every man of
sense, of whatever denomination, does and will esteem him
highly ; that my dear uncle Pasley is delighted with his worth ;
and that, in short, we shall at length be happy.”
While Nessy remained with the Grahams, in
London, James went to Portsmouth to see Peter,
who wrote to her on the 7th October :
“The date of ray dearest Nessy’s letter, yesterday, sur-
prised me very much indeed, yet I must own I had some idea
that either you or James would take a trip to town on receipt
of Mr. Graham’s letters.”
’“Hallet aftenvards expressed regret for this evidence,
and stated that he thought he must have been mistaken.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


He proceeded to tell her that the reason for his
having desired her not to write much was, lest she
might injure herself by it, and he hinted that, as
seemingly letters to him were opened, under such
circumstances, she should refrain from expressing
her “exalted sentiments” so freely.
To this she replied :
"Ves! my ever dearest brother, I will write to you, and
I know I need not add that, in that employment, consists my
only happiness. But why not express my sentiments to
yourself? I have nothing to say which i should blush to
have known to all the world; nothing to express in ray letter
to you but love and affection; and shall I blush for this? Or
can I have a wish to conceal sentiments of such a nature for
an object who, I am certain, merits all ray regard ?
I shall not, therefore, write to you, my dearest brother, in a
private manner,* for it is unnecessary ; and I abhor all deceit ;
in which I know you agree with me.”
From this date there was an almost daily corres-
pondence between Peter and Nessy, but the only
letter which has been preserved is one of Peter’s, on
the 16th October, in which, inter alia, he said “Cheer
up, my dear Nessy! Cherish your hope, and I will
exercise my patience ; both I know, by experience,
to be productive of the same fruits of present con-
tentment. James is gone to dine with Mr. Spranger,
and I am employing my leisure hour in making a
vocabulary of the Otaheitan language.” But Nessy
was also busy on behalf of her brother in other
directions. She had received from him a memoran-
through James, as intermediary
NESSY HEYWOOD.


dum upon some material points of the evidence given
at his trial, and this she forwarded to the Earl of
Chatham, then First Lord of the Admiralty, with the
following letter, on the nth of October:
“My Lord,
“To a nobleman of your Lordship’s known humanity
and excellence of heart, I dare hope that the unfortunate
cannot plead in vain. Deeply impressed, as I therefore am,
w ith sentiments of the most profound respect for a character
which I have been ever taught to revere, and, alas I nearly
interested as I must be in the subject of these lines, may I
request your Lordship will generously pardon a sorrowful and
mourning sister for presuming to offer the enclosed remarks
for your candid perusal. It contains a few observations made
by my most unfortunate and tenderly-beloved brother, Peter
Heywood, endeavouring to elucidate some parts of the evidence
given at the Court Martial, lately held at Pcrtsmouth, upon
himself and other prisoners of his Majesty’s ship Bounty.
When 1 assure you, my lord, that ho is dearer and more
precious to me than any object on earth—nay, infinitely more
valuable than life itself —-that, deprived of him, the word
misery would but ill express my complicated wretchedness,
and that, on his fate, my own, and that cf a tender, fond,
and, alas! widowed mother, depends, I am persuaded you
will not wonder, nor be offended, that I am thus bold in
conjuring your Lordship will consider, with your usual can-
dour and benevolence, the “observations” 1 now offer you,
as well as the painful situation of my dear and unhappy
brother.”
No answer was given for more than a fortnight;
yet this unfortunate family had to remain in sus-
pense, and, indeed, it was not for nearly a month
that Mrs. Heywood and her daughters, who were in
the Isle of Man, were delivered from it.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


On the 22nd of October, Mr. Graham wrote to
Mrs. Heywood, who had thanked him for all his
kindness to her son, saying that He was prompted
to help, in the first place, by "a remembrance of the
many obligations” he owed to Commodore Pasley,
and he begged her to ‘‘recollect that, by sending to
me your charming Nessy, you would have overpaid
me if my trouble had been ten times, and my uneasi-
sess ten thousand times greater than they were,
upon what I once thought the melancholy, but now
deem the fortunate, occasion which has given me the
happiness of her acquaintance.” He then con-
tiued:
“Thus far, my dear madam, I have written to please
myself. Now for what must please you—and in which, too,
I have my share of satisfaction. The business, though not
publicly known, is most certainly finished, and what I had my
doubts about yesterday, I am satisfied of to-day, and that
your beloved son, Peter, will soon be restored to your bosom.”
At the foot of this letter Nessy wrote :
“Now, my dearest mamma, did you ever in all your life
read so charming a letter? Be assured : t is exactly charac-
teristic of the benevolent writer. What would I give to be
transported to your elbow, that I might see you read it!
What will you feel, when you know assuredly that you may,
with certainty, believe its contents ? ... . Don’t expect
connected sentences from me at present, for this joy makes
me almost delirious. Adieu I love to all—l need not say be
happy and blessed as I am at this hour, my beloved mother.”
But cold prose could not express her rapturous
feelings;
“ O blissful hour I 0 moment of delight!
Replete with happiness, with rapture bright.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


All age of pain is sure repaid by tin's ;
’Tis joy too great—’tis ecstacy of bliss.
My beating heart, oppressed with woe and care,
Has yet to learn such happiness to bear.
From grief, distracting grief, thus high to soar,
To know dull pain and misery no more.
To hail each op’ning morn with new delight,
To rest in peace and joy each happy night.
To see my Lycidas from bondage free.
Restored to life, to pleasure, and to me;
To see him thus, adorn’d with virtue’s charms,
To give him to a loving mother’s arms,
To know him by surrounding friends caress’d.
Of honour, fame, of life’s best gifts possess’d;
Oh ! my full heart! ’tis joy, ’tis bliss; supreme.
And though ’tis real—yet, how like a dream !
Then teach me, Heaven, to bear it as I ought;
Inspire each rapt’rous, each transporting thought.
Teach me to bend beneath Thy bounteous hand,
With gratitude my willing heart expand;
To Thy Omnipotence I humbly bow,
Afflicted once—but, ah ! so happy now !*
On the 24th, the King’s warrant was despatched
from the Admiralty, granting a full and free pardon
to Peter Heywood. This happy intelligence was
communicated to Nessy on the 26th, and she at once
conveyed it to her mother and sisters:
“Friday, 26th October, 4 o’clock.—Oh, blessed hour! how
little did I think, my beloved friends, when I closed my letter
this morning, that before night I should h i out of my senses
with joy!—this moment, this ecstatic moment brought the
*Headed: “On receiving certain intelligence that ray
most amiable and beloved brother, Peter Heywood, would
soon be restored to freedom.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


enclosed.* I cannot speak my happiness; let it be sufficient
to say, that in a very few hours our angel Peter will be Fbbb 1
Mr. Graham goes this night to Portsmouth, and to-morrow,
or next day at furthest, I shall be—oh, neavens 1 what shall
I be! lam already transported, even to pain; then how
shall I bear to clasp him to the bosom of your happy, ah! how
very happy and affectionate Nessy Hey wood. I am too mad
to write sense, but it’s a pleasure I would not forego to be
the most reasonable being on earth.”
Nessy next wrote to Mr. Const, her brother’s
counsel:
‘‘l should think myself ill-deserving of the kind attention
you have paid to the interest of my beloved brother, if I
omitted a moment to inform you that I am now very near to
the completion of my wishes with respect to his fate. Mr.
Graham has, this moment, received a letter assuring him that
my brother’s pardon went down to Portsmouth by a messenger
from the Admiralty Office this morning. I flatter myself you
will partake in the joy which, notwithstanding it is so exces-
sive at this moment as almost to deprive me of my faculties,
leaves me, however, sufficiently collected to assure you of the
eternal gratitude and esteem with which I am, dear sir, your
most obliged.”
Peter did not receive the good news till late on
the 26th, as this composition, written on that day,
shows:
Silence then
The whispers of complaint; low in the dust
Dissatisfaction’s demons growl unheard.
All—all is good, all excellent below:
Pain is a blessing—sorrow leads to joy—
Joy, permanent and solid; every ill.
Grim Death itself, in all its horrors clad,
♦The information that the pardon had been sent to
Portsmouth.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Ii Man’s supremest privilege; it frees
The soul from prison, from foul sin, irom woe,
And gives it back to glory, rest, and (tod.
Cheerily, my friends, oh! cheerily I look not thus
With pity’s melting softness; that alone
Can shake my fortitude—all is not lost
Lo 1 I have gained, on this important day,
A victory consummate o’er myself,
And o’er this life a victory; on this day
My birthday to Eternity, I’ve gain’d
Dismission from a world where for a while,
Like you, like all, a pilgrim passing poor
A traveller, a stranger, I have met
Still stranger treatment rude and harsh! so much
The dearer, more desir’d, the home I seek
Eternal of my Father, and my God.
Then pious resignation, meek-ey’d pow’r,
Sustain me still. Composure still be mine.
Where rests it? Oh mysterious Providence,
Silence the wild idea, I have found
No Mercy yet—no mild humanity :
With cruel unrelenting rigor torn,
And lost in prison—lost to all below.
Oh, deem it not
Presumptuous that my soul grateful thus rates
The present high deliv’rance it hath found;
Solo effort of Thy wisdom, sov’reign Power,
Without whose knowledge not a sparrow falls.
Oh, may I cease to live, e’er cease to bless
That interposing Hand, which turn’d aside—
Nay, to my life and preservation turn’d
Tho fatal blow precipitate, ordain’d
To level all my little hopes in dust.
And give me to the grave.
On the 27th he was released, and at once
addressed a letter to Nessy, of which only what
follows has been preserved;
NESSY HEYWOOD.


“Once more with heartfelt pleasure I can say,
My life’s prolong’d to see another day.
Then, hence, ye Fiends 1 thou Sorrow, and Despair,
No longer now can ye my bosom tear
With those fell pangs which no relief oou’d find
But from self-conscious Innocence of mind.
From me forever now ye shall depart,
Nor e’er again invade my tranquil heart!
How oft have I with streaming eyes implor’d
That gracious Pow’r by heaven and earth ador’d
To liberate my feet, and pensive mind—
And what I prayed for, now, with joy I find!
Then, ’tis to Him my prior thanks are due,
My next to my dear mother and to you ;
To those kind friends whose interest and aid,
In my behalf, can never be repaid.
Alas! 1 fear (so large a debt) to find
My pow’r unequal to my willing mind.
For to repay such kindnesses as these
My efforts ne’er can gratitude appease.
Again, I say, from durance vile I’m free,
And hope ere long our little Isle to see ;
Then to my anxious bosom I shall press
Friends, mother, brothers, sisters, all—
But—first—my little Ness.”
This evoked a poem from Nessy. “On receiving
some lines from my dear brother, Peter Heywood,
on his restoration to liberty” :
Ye tardy hours, fly swift away.
No more I feel alarms,
Let nothing now prolong his stay.
But give him to my arms.
No, Lycidas, from bondage free,
A prison now no more—
Impatient waits with joy to see
His long-left native shore.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Let expectation’s promis’d joy
Each tedious hour beguile,
No sprightly thought let care destroy,
But hope benignant smile.
With friendship’s charm our souls to cheer,
Swift shall each moment fly,
Till little Mona’s shores appear,
To each delightful eye.
Then lost in rapturous ecstaoy,
What bliss our hearts shall prove,
Each joyful day shall sacred be
To friendship, peace, and love.
Thus shelter’d from affliction’s blast,
New pleasures still in view,
We’ll smiling talk of sorrows past,
And bid Old Care Adieu!
On arrival at Portsmouth on the 27th, Mr. Graham
wrote:
“My Dearest Nessy,
“If you expect me to enter into particulars as to how
I got him, when I got him, and where I leave him, you will be
disappointed ; for that is not in my power at present. Suffice
it to say that he is now with me, not on board the Hector,
but at the house of a very worthy man. To-day we dine with
Mr. Delators; to-morrow we sha'l, perhaps, sleep on the
London road; and on Monday—oh, my dear little girl! Kiss
Maria (his daughter) for me, and tell her I love her dearly;
and am,
“Yours, most affectionately.”
The following postcript was added by Peter : “Be
patient, my dearest Nessy. A few more hours, and
you will embrace your long-lost and most affectionate
brother.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Mr. Graham, with Peter and James, duly arrived
in London on Monday morning. We can imagine
their reception.
Nessy had a gift ready, with the inevitable
“lines,” which were written on a watch paper, given
with a watch, “To my dear brother, Peter Heywood,
on our meeting after his restoration to life and
liberty”:
Oh, Time, thy rapid eourse arrest,
No longer swiftly move,
Since I’m at length supremely blest
With Lycidas and Love.
She at once wrote to her mother:
“Great Russell Street, Monday Morning
29th October, half-past ten o’clock—
“ The brightest moment of my existence!
“My Dearest Mamma,
“1 have seen him, clasped him to my bosom, and my
felicity is beyond expression! In person, he is almost even
now as I could wish ; in mind you know him an angel. I can
write no more, but to tell you that the three happiest beings
at this moment on earth are your most dutiful and affectionate
children,
“Nessy Heywood.
“Peter Heywood.
“James Heywood.
“Love to all, ten thousand times!”
To this Mr. Graham added:
“If, my dearest madam, it were ever given for mortals
to be supremely blest on earth, mine, to be sure, must be the
NESSY HEYWOOD.


happy family. Heavens! with what unbounded extravagance
have we been forming our wishes! And yet how far beyond
our unbounded wishes ! We are blest! Nessy, Maria,* Peter,
and James, I see, have all been endeavouring to express their
feelings. I will not fail in anj’ such attempt, for I will not
attempt anything beyond an assurance that the scene I have
been witness of, and in which I am happily so great a sharer,
beggars all description. Permit me, however, to offer my
most sincere congratulations upon the joyftil occasion.”
We append an outline of the remainder of Peter’s
career:—
On the express recommendation of Lord Hood,
who had presided at his trial, he was permitted to
re-enter the Navy, going on board the ‘Bellerophon.’
He took part in the battle of the Ist June, 1794, and
in several other actions against the French. In
1797, Lord Spencer, after considering the evidence
given at Heywood’s trial, wrote to his Captain, Sir
Thomas Pasley, to say that there was nothing in it
to stand in the way of his promotion, “more
especially when the gallantry and propriety of his
conduct in his subsequent service are taken into
consideration.”
He became a post-captain in 1803 ; and, after a
career of important and responsible service, includ-
ing two diplomatic missions to South America, he
was, 1813, appointed to the command of the
“Montagu,” of 74 guns, in which he served in the
*lt is evident that Mr. Graham completely identified
himself with the Hcywoods; and Mr. Graham’s daughter, it
would seem, had also written to Mrs. Hey wood.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


North Sea, and afterwards in the Mediterranean,
under Lord Exmouth. He returned to England in
1816, when the “Montagu” was paid off. He was
greatly beloved by his officers and crew, by one of
whom the following lines were written :
Farewell to thee, Heywood! a truer one never
Hath exercised rule o’er the sons of the sea;
The seamen who served thee would for ever serve time,
Who swayed, but ne’er fettered, the hearts of the brave !
He married in the same year, and, as he was in
a weak state of health, having never really recovered
from his sufferings after the Mutiny, he declined a
Commodore’s command in the Canadian lakes, which
was offered to him by Lord Melville in 1818. He
lived in London, where he died in 1831. "We do not
hesitate,” says Marshall in his “Naval Biography,”
“to say that his King and country never had a more
faithful servant, nor the Naval Service a more worthy
and respectable member.”
NESSY HEYWOOD.


CHAPTER V.—LAST DAYS.
Shortly after the joyful meeting recorded in our
last chapter, Peter and James went to the Isle of
Man, while Nessy remained with the Grahams. She
had, as will be seen, an invitation from Lady
Tempest, which she declined.
“Letter to Lady Tempest, on being invited to
stay at her house in Herefordshire’’:
Accept, my dear madam, the tribute that's due
To kind hospitality, friendship, and you;
Accept my best thanks for your kind invitation,
Which conveys to my bosom so sweet a sensation.
Tho’ flatter’d am I by such friendship’s excess—
What words can my gratitude ever express P
But—
Forgive, if at present, I cannot comply—
My Mamma is impatient, and home I must hie :
I wait but to see a good aunt, whom I love,
That duty perform’d, I immediately move.
To part with my friends I shall feel much regret,
I almost con’d wish we never had met.
How then cou’d I bear—had I gone to Hope-End,
Where, with such a party, such hours I should spend—
To know you—to love you—yet quit you m haste,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


COPY OF AN OLD ENGRAVING OF DOUGLAS BAY AND PIER
(From “Robertson’s Tour.”—Published in 1797).


Too painful the trial such pleasure to r.aste;
Too great my vexation in leaving you so,
Too heavy my loss, when I homeward shou’d go.
Mrs. Graham, with goodness that’s truly her own,
Since now it is not in my pow’r to go down,
To oblige me still more has most kindly requested
My consent to a plan she herself has suggested.
To you she’ll impart it, and shou’d it succeed,
My wishes will then be complied with indeed.
I then shall acknowledge your goodness excessive,
Yet to tell you my feelings what words are expressive?
Believe me, dear madam, I ne’er can forget
Your attention and friendship which early I’ve met;
In person I’ll thank you, and tell you that never
Shall time from my bosom true gratitude sever.
To your fair friend, Miss Harriett, I beg. my best love,
Which I hope she’ll return, if deserving I prove;
Shou’d she e’er know me better I hope she will like me,
At present her wit is sufficient to strike me.
My respects to Sir Harry, and compliments due,
With all my affectionate wishes, to you.
My brother is well, and sincerely he joins
His grateful expressions with mine in these lines.
Believe me, I ever shall think you too good,
And am ever your much oblig’d
NESSY HEYWOOD.
Her time, till the end of the year, was spent,
partly with the Grahams, and partly with her uncle
and aunt Holwell, at Tunbridge Wells. Her next
effusion was:
“To Mr. Graham—on His Birthday.”
Oh, be this day for ever blest to thee,
From care exempt, from pain and sorrow free;
May each succeeding year with joy abound,
And ev’ry birthday be with pleasure crown’d.
Bach bliss be thine, that bounteous heav’n can give,
While life remains and thon shalt wish to live;
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Be all thy days with sweet contentment blest
Till full of years thou gently sink’st to rest.
But may I ne’er that fatal moment see,
Nor weep the friendship I should lose in thee.
The 30th of December found her at Liverpool,
where she composed some lines:
“On a Pocket Mirror.’’
Thou pleasing little gift to me
Of gentle Anna’s love.
Oft, for her sake, I’ll gaze on thee,
While distant far I rove.
Smooth, like thy surface, be ner life,
Her days with pleasure glide.
Exempt from sorrow, care, and strife —
Nor be one wish deny’d.
May each succeeding year be blest,
May joy her steps attend,
Misfortune ne’er invade her breast.
But peace which knows no end.
It is probable that she crossed to Douglas on the
next day. The New Year opened with an
“Impromptu, on being teased by my lively sister
Bell to make some verses on her birthday” ;
Propitious be this day to thee, my Bell,
May’st thou live long, live happy, and live well.
May sorrow ne’er assail thy tranquil breast,
But be thy life with balmy comfort blest.
May sweet vivacity be ever thine,
And pleasure’s beams thro’ all thy moments shine.
But may good sense still on thy steps attend,
And guide thine actions like a faithful friend.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Nessy’s brief period of happiness was to be inter-
rupted by the death, in the following month
(February), of Maria Graham;
“On the death of my lovely and most regretted
friend, Maria Graham, who fell a sacrifice to a rapid
consumption at the early age of fifteen.”
Oh, gloomy sorrow, foe to peace and rest,
Invader cruel of my wretched breast,
When wilt thou cease thy pointed darts to throw,
When cease to load me with excessive woe f
Thon ever lov’d and ever deeply mourn’d,
Whose heavenly form ten thousand charms adorn’d,
In whose sweet face, by beauty’s hand pourtray’d,
Unnumbered smiles, and winning graces play’d.
Dear lost Maria—sister of ray heart,
So known—so loved—but oh, how soon to part;
Snatch’d from our hopes, in all thy infant bloom,
An early victim to the silent tomb.
How shall I bear, with anguish to deplore,
And weep that friendship which is mine no more
How bear to lose that love which made me bloat,
And charm’d with smiles a heart by woe opprest;
In all my cares how sweetly dids’t thou join,
In all my pleasures mix’d and made them thine ;
Encourag’d me to hope that bliss was near,
And gently banish’d ev’ry rising tear;
Shar’d all my happiness when grief was o’er,
And said, alas, that I shou’d sigh no more;
To bless my hours did every thought employ,
Alike partaker of my grief and joy.
No more shall I those eyes expressive see
Which oft so tenderly wou’d gaze on me,
No more those eyes shall for my sorrow weep,
For ever clos’d, alas, in endless sleep.
No more that voice delighted shall I hear,
With plaintive softness trembling on my ear,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Those accents mild and innocently sweet.
Which faithful memory will oft repeat.
Clos’d are those lips, on which persuasion hung,
Mute is that voice and silent is that tongue.
Insatiate spoiler of domestic joys—
Relentless Death, why seek so fair a prize?
Why plunge a father’s heart in endless grief?
Why mourns a mother, hopeless of relief?
Why weeps a sister at thy stern decree ?
Why snatch her thus from friendship and from me ?
Yet oh, pure spirit, dear lamented shade,
Why shou’d we grieve that thou art happy made?
Assur’d of that, let plaintive murmurs cease,
Nor let us envy thy eternal peace;
Hush our complaints, no longer thus repine,
Nor mourn our loss, while perfect bliss is thine.
Then come thou, Resignation, meek-ey’d guest,
Shed thy soft influence o’er each sad breast:
Teach us submission to th’ Almighty will,
With patient fortitude our bosoms fill,
Teach us to hope that we shall meet again,
Exempt from sorrow, misery, and pain ;
Tbo’ her dear form is mingled with the dust, ■
Teach us to think that Heav’n’s decrees are just;
Yet oh, forgive, if still our tears will flow.
If sighs will heave, and speak our weighty woo,
If mem’ry on her virtues loves to dwell,
If friendship grieves that soon, alas, she fell.
How thou wert lov’d, Maria, nought can say,
How art thou mourn’d thus early snatched away.
To please, delight and charm each heart was thine,
To weep thy loss, must now, alas, be mine.
Remember’d still, till memory is no more,
And deeply mourn’d, till life itself is o’er.
These are followed by “Lines intended to be
work’d with my hair in a pocket-book for my amiable
lost friend, Maria Graham, when I received the
account of her untimely death” :
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Accept this trifle, gentle fair,
The gift of love and truth,
And let me still thy friendship share
When age succeeds to youth.
Let me, when absent from thy sight,
Still dwell in that dear mind.
Still to that bosom give delight.
And thou be ever kind.
May Health and Peace and Joy be thine,
May Pleasure dwell with thee,
May all thy days unclouded shine,
Yet oh, remember me!
Another friend passed away at the end of March :
"On the sudden and melancholy death of my very
charming friend, Michael Southcote, Esq., who was
deservedly the delight of all that knew him.”
Oh, thou whose smile cou’d once e’en grief disarm.
Whose presence cou’d each sprightly thought inspire,
Who gave Society its greatest charm,
Whom but to know was ever to inspire,—
To thee I consecrate my simple strain,
A strain attun’d to plaintive notes of woe;
For thee must each sad friend now mourn in vain,
With sighs that heave and trickling tears that flow.
Not all the gay attractions which were thine,
Not all thy charms, alas! thy life could save,
Not all thy sprightly wit so form’d to shine,
Not all cou’d snatch thee from the gloomy grave
Of each gay circle once the chief delight,
With thee festivity and mirth appear’d;
Hilarity and fancy ever bright,
Shone in thine eyes and ev’ry bosom cheer’d.
NESSY HEYWOOD


At home, the tender husband, father, friend,
Serenely cheerful still thine equal mind,
Delightful there the social hour to spend,
And meet a welcome uniformly kind.
Oh 1 what avails thy virtues rare to boast,
Thus on thy worth and excellence to dwell,
To paint those charms by weeping friendship lost,
To sing thy praise or of thy wit to tell!
Torn from the bosom of a faithful wife
In one short hour! She lives thy loss to mount
Of thee bereft to drag her load of life,
And shed new tears with each new day’s return.
How oft shall friendship heave a mournful sigh,
How oft regret the gay companion fled,
How oft shall mem’ry fill with tears each eye,
For thou, alas! art numbered with the dead!
For me, on whom thou still didst kindly smile.
What now remains but ceaseless to deplore,
Thy lov’d esteem did many a care beguile,
But oh! I know thy lov’d esteem no more!
Forever gone I by cruel Fate’s decree,
When least expected was the dreadful stroke.
One day beheld thee cheerful, gay and free.
The next the ties of love and friendship broket
Alas! how short our date of pleasure here,
How few the moments spent in mirth and joy,
How small the bliss this transient life to cheer,
How many cares our little bliss destroy 1
Farewell, dear spirit, ever now at rest,
Thine ashes moulder in the peaceful grave;
Be ever green the turf upon thy breast,
And o’er thy head the mournful cypress wave
NESSY HEYWOOD.


In April she left the Isle of Man for the last time,
going to stay with the Grahams. When there she
paid a further tribute to her lost friend.
SONNET
On My Dear Maria Graham.
Ye happy days of gay delight,
Which once, alas, were mine,
Ye scenes of peace serenely bright.
Where joys were wont to shine 1
Whither ah ! whither are ye fled—
Fled never to return?
These weeping eyes new tears mmt shed
And I must ever mourn.
How switly flew each hour away,
By love and friendship blest;
In joy and gladness pass’d each day,
Each night brought peace and rest.
Sad Mem’ry, with her piercing eye,
Looks back to scenes like these,
Delights to trace with many a sigh,
What once so much cou’d please.
Yet why thus add new pangs of grief?
Why rend my tortur’d mind P
Can no reflection bring relief,
Nor sorrow comfort find?
Ah! no—too deep my bosom’s wound,
Too keen the woe I feel;
Nor time with never-ending round,
My anguish e’er can heal.
Dear lov'd Maria—gentle friend,
To death an early prey.
With misery that knows no end,
I mourn thee snatch’d away I
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Why, why, ye powers, have I a heart
With feeling so replete—
Why still with agonising smart
Must this poor bosom beat?
Had I ne’er known the worth I weep,
How happy might I be—
Then should I not, with sighs so deep,
Bewail my loss in thee 1
What charms were late in this abode,
Gay pleasure ceaseless smil’d—
’Twas she, alas! those charms bestow’d,
And ev’ry care beguiled !
Now, as I wander thro’ each room,
How sad the scene to me,
O’erspread with universal gloom,
For oh ! I meet not thee !
Oh, recollection, nurse of pain,
In pity quit my breast—
No more revisit me again,
To rob me thus of rest!
But come, Oblivion, balm of woe,
Thou soother of each grief,
W’ho can alone on me bestow
A calm, to give relief!
And oh, Indifference bring with thee,
To her I yield my heart;
Exempt from anguish let me be
And sorrow’s deadly dart.
Then shall I not with endless pain,
Some loss each day deplore;
Then shall my bosom peace regain,
And know distress no more!
NESSY HEYWOOD.


A month later, on the 20th of May, she was still
in Great Russell Street, from whence she wrote a
“Letter to Mrs. Holwell, on being invited to a very
pleasant party at Tunbridge Wells, but prevent’d
attending it” :
Your party next Tuesday, my very dear Aunt,
Will be most delightful, I readily grant:
How much I regret that I cannot be there,
Your mirth to enjoy, your amusement to share;
I often shall think of you all on that day
And myself deem unlucky in being away;
To my mind represent how each moment will fly,
And lament my own absence with many a sigh;
Yet what can I do? All my wishes are vain,
And by wishing, alas! ’tis but little we gain;
Shou’d I wish till my heart aches ’twou’d still be the samo.
No nearer I’d be to the point where I aim.
Till Peter’s arrival, you know I’m fixed here,
1 ne’er can lose sight of an object so dear ;
My heart to affection and him ever true,
I can’t till he quits me see Tunbridge or you.
With eager impatience I long to embrace him,
And then with my kind uncle Pasley to place him ;
He there will be happy, and my heart at ease,
Of his welfare I’m sure from his efforts to please.
1 then shall leave London (with sorrow I own
Unless Mr. Graham consents to go down).
With a friend so belov’d, alas! how shall I part!
The thought is distressing, and rends my poor heart.
With various sensations my bosom is torn—
The conflict is almost too great to be borne :
Affection for you prompts my wishes that way,
W T hile gratitude here asks a longer delay;
You know I to him all my happiness owe,
That his goodness alone sav’d my heart from a blow—
A blow so tremendous, severe and unjust,
’Twou’d have levell’d my prospects of peace in the dust!
To him I owe Peter, and Peter’s my bliss,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


BJOMBUB Uliq 9AOJ O} iwtf; J la|3uQ
You will not be angry, that this I confess,
Tho’ him I love much, I don’t love you the less :
My heart form’d for tenderness ever will prove,
That it wants neither friendship, affection nor lore.
Shou’d I (most absurdly) attempt to pretend,
I shall feel no regret, when I quit my kind friend,
I shou’d be most ungrateful, and you might reject me,
Because without feeling you’d justly suspect me ;
I neither should merit his friendship nor yours,
For mutual affection such friendship ensures ;
You know with what pleasure to you I shall fly,
Notwithstanding I leave Mr. G. with a sigh!
His merit and worth deserve all I cou’d give,
Had 1 worlds to bestow, and forever shou’d lire;
But your kindness must soothe me, and sorrow beguile,
With one eye I’ll weep—with the other I’ll smile.
This morning is Sunday—l’d nothing to do.
So thought I wou’d scribble a little to you;
And feeling my wit most unusually bright,
I determin’d to take a poetical flight;
Perhaps you will laugh at me—do if you chuse,
I care not so much, so I only amuse:
In the meantime, I wish you much sport in your fishing,
While myself I’ll no longer distress by vain wishing.
Best love to my uncle, to Zeph, Jem and Will,
And believe me, dear Aunt, I sincerely am still,
With affection and truth (praying Hear’n to bless ya)
Your highly oblig’d and most grateful niece,
Nbssy.
That’s not a good rhyme, but I can’t find a better,
And ’tis time to conclude my nonsensical letter.
Monday—
Thus far had I written, dear Aunt, yesterday,
But this morning I’ve got something further to say;
Harriet Graham arriv’d from the country last night,
And her presence affords me much real delight.
She’s a sweet, lovely girl, and perhaps she may stay
NESSY HEYWOOD.


In town a good while—but, dear Aunt, a good day,
My paper is finish’d, and I must conclude,
Again your affectionate Nessy Hbtwood.
She must have gone to stay with her aunt at
some period between the end of May and the begin-
ning of August, as on the 3rd of the latter month
she composed a
“SONNET TO CONTENTMENT—A PARODY,”
Which was written at their house, “Southbro,” near
Tunbridge Wells:
Sweet Contentment, tell me why
Still thou dost my bosom fly;
When I of sorrow’s wounds complain,
Stay, oh I stay, and soothe my pain !
Gentle Comfort, night and day,
Go not from me far away.
Me and my cares, oh I do not leave
Deign to hear me while I grieve.
Horrid War! with loud alarms
Draws ray Lycid from my arms—
While with fears my heart shall beat,
Come, Content, with accents sweet I
Oft repeat thy chearful strain,
Whisper “He shall laurels gain,
Care shall not his breast assail,
Joy shall float on ev’ry gale.”
But a tender mother weeps—
Then, alas! Contentment sleeps,
Loud I call with suppliant strain—
Still she sleeps—l call in vain!
Tom with complicated woes,
Bursting sighs and tears that flow ;
Where’s Content while thus I mourn P
Fled—oh 1 never to return!
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Also a "CATCH (for Three Voices.)”
While our rural sports enjoying,
Far from pomp and Court parade,
Hence dull sorrow, care, and sighing,
Nor this calm retreat invade.
Sacred he this day to pleasure,
Mirth and Music shall combine,
Life is short—we’ll grasp the treasure,
Peace shall make our moments shine.
Spritely strains each hour beguiling,
Ev’ry voice shall bear a part;
Friendship on her vot’ries smiling,
Speaks delight to every heart!
On the 4th she went for a visit to Major York,
at Bishop’s Grove, near Tunbridge Wells, where, on
the following day, she wrote a "CARD to Miss Birch
and Miss Holwell, on being prevented by some very
unpleasant circumstances from joining a most
charming party of friends on a Naval Excursion:
I cannot be with you, dear lasses, to-day,
My cares shall not sadden a party so gay ;
But tho’ I’m absent my efforts I’ll join
To heighten your mirth while at Hamsill* you dine.
’Tis a feeble attempt, which I make at great haste
This morning, while dressing, but why should I waste
A moment in framing apologies trite,
My intention, at least, was to give you delight.
And tho’ so unfortunate not to succeed,
Yet kindly accept the good-will for the deed.
The “catch” I have sent you is for voices just three;
With Warrent to aid you, you cannot want me.
*A beautiful place where the party dined.
tA gentleman who sang well, and was to he there.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


May social good humour enliven your party,
Be cheerfulness your’s, while with wishes most hearty,
That ev’ry new day you may pleasantly spend,
I remain, my dear girls, your affectionate friend.
Nessy Hbywood.
It was called a “Naval Excursion,’’ seemingly,
because there were naval officers present. It cer-
tainly did not take place at the sea-side, as Hamsill
is close to Tunbridge Wells. This “card” extracted
an “Answer, impromptu,” by the Rev. Dr. Jackson ;
Your absence must preclude the pray’r,
Which you disinterested give;
Tasteless the viands you don’t share,
And dull the life where Nessy cannot live 1
Hamshill, 7th August, 1793.
We do not know who he was, but it is evident he
became attached to Nessy, whose end, alas ! was not
far off. It is possible that one of the “unpleasant
circumstances” she alluded to may have been illness.
It is evident from her likeness that she was very-
delicate ; and we gather that this was so, too,
from certain remarks in the letters of her brother
Peter. It is probable that her terrible voyage
from England, in the previous October when she
was so long exposed to the elements, and got wet
through, had injured her. However this may have
been, all that we know is that when she was at
Major York’s she was seized “with a most violent
cold, and, not taking proper care of herself, it soon
turned to an inflammation of the lungs on the fatal
sth of September.”*
♦Letter from her mother, Mrs. Elizabeth Heywood,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


Some days later her uncle, Colonel Holwell, took
her to Hastings, which, under the circumstances,
seems an extraordinary thing to have done, "to try
if change of air and being near the sea would recover
her ; but, alas! it was too late for her to receive the
wished-for benefit, and she died there on the 25th of
the same month, "and,” her mother’s letter con-
cluded, "has left me, her only surviving parent, a
disconsolate mother, ever to lament while I live,
with the most sincere affection, the irreparable loss
of my most valuable, affectionate and darling
daughter.”
Nessy was buried at Hastings. We may be
sure that she was deeply regretted by her family
and relations, but nothing remains to show this
except the following tributes from three friends :
On the Accomplished Miss Nessy Heywood,
by the Rev. Doctor Jackson.
Peace to the mind we ever must revere,
And o’er her ashes shed one gen’ral tear;
Yet not for her we grieve! in blissful state
Her soul, secure, defies the hand of fate;
Whilst on the waves of fickle fortune tost
We mourn the daughter, friend, and sister lost!
Tunbridge Wells, 1793.
T. J.
The writer of the next is unknown :
To Mrs. Heywood, Parade, Isle of Man.
The author hopes he presumes not impertinently in offer-
ing the enclos’d small tribute, which is but the promise of
one more equal to the subject and his respect.
Wednesday Evening, Douglas.
NESSY HEYWOOD.


An Elegiac Invocation of the Muses occasion’d
by the Death of the Amiable Miss Nessy
Heywood.
Now weave the Cypress wreath, Celestial Nine 1
Now all in eloquence of grief combine,
To tell the world its loss. For you alone,
In strains accordant, can that loss bemoan.
The sprightly wit and captivating sense.
That Envy, e’en denied malign Pretence,
The Hand whose touch cou’d animate tne clod,
Or lift, in solemn stroke, the soul to God l
The voice seraphic I ever heard to raise,
Exstatic transport, in melodious lays!
The sympathetic breast, whose plaintive strain
Could melt afflictions—to Compassion’s pain,
All, all were her’s!—and many a beauty more,
Which you alone, with justice, may deplore.
For me, the humble wish is all remains,
Ye magic soothers of distraction’s pains 1
That by your aid, she in her death may live,
While e’en one blessing Fame may have to give 1
And through persuasion of her present bliss
Her weeping friends the cross of Fate may kiss 1
JUVENIS.
October Bth, 1793.
But the “lines, occasioned by reading an account
of the death of Miss Nessy Heywood in the last
paper,” are by Nessy’s old friend, John Stowell:
How soon! sweet maid, how like a fleeting dream,
Thy winning graces, all thy virtues seem 1
How soon, arrested in thy early bloom,
Has Fate decreed thee to the joyless tomb!
Nor Beauty, Genius, nor the Muses’ care.
Nor ought could move the Tyrant Death to spare.
Ah I could their pow’r revoke the stern decree,
NESSY HEYWOOD.


The fatal shaft had past unfelt by thee;
But vain thy wit, thy sentiment refin’d,
Thy charms external, and accomplish’d mind;
Thy artless smiles that seiz’d the willing heart,
Thy converse, that con’d pure delight impart;
The melting music of thy skilful tongue,
While judgment listen’d, ravish’d with thy song;
Not all the gifts that art and nature gave,
Could save thee, lovely Nessy, from the gravel
Too early lost! from friendship’s bosom tom,
0 might I tune thy lyre, and sweetly mourn
In strains like thine, when beauteous Margaret’s fate
Oppress’d thy friendly heart with sorrow’s weight;
Then shou’d my numbers flow, and laurels bloom
In endless spring around fair Nessy’s tomb I
CANDIDUS.
Isle of Man, 1793.
So ended, at the early age of twenty-five, the
brief life of one who was evidently not only good and
amiable, but talented and charming.
HD
NESSY HEYWOOD.


LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Agnew, Mre. P. L., 18, Gloucester Square, Hyde
Park, London, W 1
Aylen, Thos. S The Hydro, Douglas I
Backwell, M. J Castletown 1
Bean, D 5, Hilary Park, Douglas 1
Bell, Miss 1, Swiss Villa, Onchan 1
Bell, Miss Tudlor House, Stafford I
Black, Mis® 8, Castle Mona Avenue, Douglas I
Blaker, W. H Harbour Commissioners’ Office 1
Bridson, Gerald 1 Haroroft I
Broadbent, S. K., and Co., Ltd., Publishers,
Victoria Street, Douglas 12
Broughton, Miss 7, Eastfield, Douglas 2
Burnet, Jno. G. F., Northbrook, Eleanora Drive
(off Brunswick Bead, Douglas) 1
Cain, P 14, Christian Road, Douglas 1
Canned, J Rolls Office, Douglas 1
Oannell, Miss I BaMafogeen, Peel 1
Canned, J. Q., C.P Michael 1
Canning, M. (the late), Cronkbonrne Road, Douglas 1
Carine, Mark Grindlewald, Douglas 1
Christian, Mrs Milntown, Ramsey 2
Christian, A. M King Orry House, Laxey I
Christian, Mrs J. H 18, Devonshire Place,
Portland Place, London, W 1
Clague, Mrs. (the late) Crofton, Castletown 2
Olague, A 3, James Street, Portobello, N.B. 1
Clay, Mrs Alfred 1 Darley Hall, Matlock 2
Clucas, Mrs... Gotham Lodge, Gotham Park, Bristol 12
Olucas, G. F Gotham Lodge, Gotham Park,
Bristol T


Gorki!!, T Brookdale, Flookersbrook, Chester 1
Oorkill, T. B 200, Oriental Parade, Wellington!,
New Zealand 1
Oookson, G. R Douglas 2
Corlett, Mrs. J. B Woodbourne Road, Douglas 1
Oorlett, W. J., H.K Nelson Street, Douglas 2
Corlett, J. E 2, George’s Terrace, Douglas 1
Oorlett, Jlolhln Clanagh, Lezayre 1
Oollister, Miss Agnes Glanfaba Road, Peel 1
Corrin, Henry 37, Strand Street, Douglas 1
Cosnahan, Mr 14, Albion Terrace, Douglas 1
Cowley, C. H 10, Atholl Place, Peel 1
Craigie, Athole Oarnaween, Peel 1
Craine, W. A Northcliffe, Onchan 1
OreUin, J. O. (the late) Ballachurry, Andreas 1
Orellin, Mrs Strand Street, Douglas 1
OreUin, Miss Redleaf, Guernsey 1
Creer, Miss 2, Esplanade, Douglas 1
Oregeen, Miss...Mayland, Laureston Road, Douglas 1
Oubbon, Miss 17, Stanley Terrace, Douglas 1
Oubbon, W Albany Road, Douglas 1
Oubbon, T Me of Man Bank 1
Ourphey, Miss Victoria Street, Douglas 1
Daly, J. J. H Knowlton, Montana, U.S.A. 1
Dawson, W. J 3, Woodside Terrace, Douglas 1
Dick, Mrs BUerslie, Promenade, Douglas 1
Dickson, E. H 44, Bolton Road, Pendleton,
Manchester 1
Dickinson, Mr Hillcrest, Alexander Drive 1
Dodd, Mrs Oronk-e-Chree, Castletown 1
Douglas Public Library 2
Drdnkwiater, G Kirby 1
Ellison, J Birch House, Manchester Road,
Ashton-unddr-Lyne 1
Earrant, Mrs R Knottfieldi, Douglas 1
Farrant, Mrs. E. O Ballakillinghan, Ramsey 1
Ferguson, Rev. R Port St. Mary 2


Foote, A. J., ex-Mayor and' Alderman of the
County Borough of St. Helens, “The Change,”
Denton’s Green, St. Helens 1
Franzini, V. L Marathon Terrace, Douglas 1
Frowde, J. ...Central Public Library, Bermondsey,
London, S.E 1
Gale, Frank Windsor Road', Douglas 1
Gell, Mies Castletown I
Gell, James S High-Bailiff 1
Gelling, Miss 4, West View, Douglas 1
Girling, J. A Beaumont, Victoria, B.C. 1
Green, J. Albert Public Library, Moss Side,
Manchester 1
Gordon, J. 8., 7, Park Hill Rise, B. Croydon, Surrey 2
Greenwood, T. A Thorny Road, Douglas 1
Greenop, J 8, William Street, Workington 1
Grindley, Miss...Faarleigh, Brunswick Road, Douglas 1
Hamilton, Miss Annie 1
Hampton, Dr. P. W., 5, Woodbourne Road', Douglas 1
Harris, Mias Marathon 1
Harris, Mies Whinyeat House, Rottingtou,
near St. Bees 1
Harrison, Rev. S. N Ramsey 1
Hill, C. E Allan Bank, Douglas 1
Hill, A Isle of Man Bank 1
Hollis, William 8, Havelock Street, Ilkeston,
Nottingham 1
Hughes-Games, C. T. W Douglas 2
Hughes-Games, Mrs Holmfleld I
Hughes-Games, Harold Tower Road, E. Cowes,
Isle of Wight 1
Jackson, S. D 61, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow 1
Joughin, T. P Galveston, Texas 1
Kaye, W. R Douglas 1
Kelly, W. A Custodian, Peel Castle 1
Kenyon, A Onchan I


Kermode, Rev. R. D., M.A. ...St. George’s Vicarage 1
Kewley, Thos 3, Windsor Road, Douglas 1
Kewley, S Queen’s Terrace, Douglas 1
Kewley, Mrs. E....Tatley House, Crescent, Douglas 1
King, H., 113, Princes Road, Moss Side, Manchester 1
Kissack, Ed. T Eyreton, Douglas 3
Kissack, C Ellesmere, Ballure Mount, Ramsey 1
Kneale, L. S Douglas 1
Kneale, Daniel Balnelheaney, Lonan 1
Kneen, E. C. (advocate) Douglas 2
Laughton, Mrs Ballaquane, Peel 1
Leach, C Castletown Road, Douglas 1
Leece, J. E St. Thomas’ School, Douglas 1
Leece, J. S 7, Royal Avenue, Onchan 1
Lewin, W West Hill, Victoria Road, Douglas 1
Lewin, Miss 11, Stanley Terrace, Douglas 1
Lewis, Hester Cowley Box 273, Walkerville,
Ontario, Canada 1
Lovibond, Rev. G. M Chaplain, The Nunnery 1
Mason, Miss.... Port Sodteriok 1
Matthieson, J 14, Queen’s Avenue, Douglas 1
Mawby, W. J., 1, Sandlwich Road, Ellesmere Park,
Eccles 1
Meyer, L. G Alexander Terrace, Douglas 1
Moore, Mrs Cronkbourne 2
Moore, Miss M. R Cronkbourne 1
Moore, Miss E. E Cronkbourne 1
Moore, T. W Frances Villa, Douglas 1
Moore, J. R., 93, Kermode Street, Ashburton, N.Z. 1
Morrison, Miss S Athol Street, Peel 2
Morrison, Mrs 15, Victoria Terrace, Douglas 1
Newson, G. S. (the late) ..4, Castle Street, Douglas 1
Oates, Mrs J. C 7, Lifton Place, Leeds 1
Oates, J. N., Sunny Bank, Princes Road, Douglas 1
Oxford, T 21, Water Street, Liverpool 1
Page, J Victoria Street, Douglas 1


Patterson, G The Sycamores, Ballasalla 2
Potterton, Mies M. E Kildal'key, co. Meath 1
Qualtrough, H. J Port St. Mary 1
Quayle, Miss, Holly House, Demesne Road, Douglas 1
Quayle, Councillor, T. M. L.... Peel Road, Douglas 1
Quine, T. F Silverdale, Ballasalla 2
Quine, Rev. J., M.A Lonan 1
Quine, R., 41, Tadmor Street, Shepherd’s Bush,
London 1
Quinney, Mrs W., “South Dene,” Park Road, Bolton 1
Quirk, J. J Toronto Vale, Peel 1
Ramsden, Mrs Fort Anne 3
Rogers, Mrs “Greenfield,” Onchan 1
Sargeaunt, B. E Government Office 1
Seville, T., 131, Liverpool Road, Patrieroft, Man-
chester 1
Skelton, George South Street, Epsom 1
Snailham, Mrs, “Louisville,” Whitestake, Preston 1
Spenoe, Mrs The Marlborough, Douglas 1
Stevenson., W. A West hill, Castletown 1
Taggart, J. J Quiggin’s Lake Yard 2
Taylor, Mrs T “Braeside,” Howstrake, Onchan 1
Teare, G. L 4, White Road, Sutton Coldfield 1
Tomlin, Mrs L., Dane Court, St. Peter’s-in-Tbanet,
Kent 1
Tuton, Mrs 1, Stanley Terrace, Douglas 1
Veyeey, Mrs Porton Vicarage, Wilts 1
Wharmby, J. H. ... Moss View, St. Mary’s Road,
Mostyn 1
Wilkin, Mrs 4, Duke Street, Douglas 2


Wilson, S. H Farm Hill, Braddan 3
Woods, Mrs Dr Bose Lodge, Douglas 1
Wood l , Miss M. L Albert Terrace, Douglas 3
Woodhead, Mrs. C Thursday Island, Torres
Straits, North Queensland, Australia 1
Woods, Mrs A “Arbory,” Parkstone, Dorset 1
Woods’ Library, Fairfax Bead 1 , Hampstead, London 1
Wortley, Mrs B Bailaspet House, St. John’s 1
Zair, G Ardfen Grange, Solihull 13
