

■s


; > • ju-


fl/yez* t
“He that saves a fallen fellow creature is greater
than the Hero that conquers the world/'
C*ARV
A
NOV 1992 «")j
*




NEURASTHENIA,
NERVOUS & VITAL DEBILITY
ASSOCIATED EVILS.
Wm. LANGSTON, M.R.C.S., Eng., &c„
Late Surgeon in Imperial Forces, Army Medical Staff, Royal Engineers.
REGISTERED IN ENGLAND Sr AUSTRALIA,
AND AUTHORISED BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT TO PRACTISE IN ALL THE
BRANCHES OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY.
121 COLLINS STREET,
MELBOURNE.
Surgeon LANGSTON is the Only Qualified Specialist practising in
Australia who has held Government Appointments.
F Ltf o


TO THE READER.
It is with great pleasure that I send you a copy of this, the
tenth edition of my brochure on Sexual and Urinary Diseases.
The success of my method, since its first introduction, has been
almost unparalleled in medical history, and I feel that the time
has come for replacing the brief pamphlet, containing a mere
outline of the method, with a work somewhat more full and
exhaustive.
Although some of the subjects here treated upon may seem
out of place in a work designed for indiscriminate circulation,
yet they are presented in a style which cannot offend the most
fastidious and with the studied avoidance of all language that
could possibly displease the chaste or disturbe the delicate sus-
ceptibilities of persons of either sex. While instruction is
imparted for the care of the body, those diseases (alas how
prevalent) are investigated which are sure to follow as a conse-
quence of certain abuses usually committed through ignorance.
That these ills do exist is evident from the fact that the author
is consulted by multitudes of unfortunate men and women who
are desirous of procuring relief from the weaknesses and de-
rangements incurred by having unwittingly violated physiologi-
cal laws. This book should not be excluded from the young,
for it is eminently adapted to their wants and imparts informa-
tion, without which millions will suffer untold misery. It is
false modesty which debars the youth of our land from obtaining
such information. In no other science is more rapid and real


progress being made at the present time than that of medicine.
Thus it so often happens that the general practitioner pursues
old methods of treatment which science has long since replaced
by others acknowledged to be superior both in theory and
practice. The Specialist, on the contrary, by confining his
studies and researches to one class of diseases only, is enabled
to inform himself thoroughly and accurately of all the improve-
ments made in the methods and means of practice in his special
department. Medical science offers a vast field for investiga-
tion, and no physician, within the limit of a single life-time, can
achieve the highest degree of success in the treatment of every
malady incident to humanity. A distinguished professor once
made the remark “ that he who falls into the error of studying
everything will be certain to know nothing well.”
Aware of the number of worthless and often times actually in-
jurious remedies that are being advertised and recommended for
the cure of these affections, and the bogus doctors and worthless
firms that infest every large city, I have endeavoured to give
inquiring patients every proof and assurance of the efficacy of
my treatment, every facility for investigating my methods, and
proving to their entire satisfaction, my medical ability, honour,
honesty and fair dealing. I court the fullest and freest investi-
gation, either by patients themselves, or any friends of theirs in
this city, either of whom I shall be happy to see and satisfy at
any time at my Consulting Rooms.
Repeated trials in some of the most severe cases of Spermatorrhoea,
and Impotency have proven my remedies to be safe, speedy, and
most satisfactory in their results, and I feel justly proud of having
in my hands so excellent and efficient a means for a radical cure of
so obstinate, serious, and often dangerous a disease. JI take pride in
having saved many a young and promising life, in having often
stayed the hand bent upon self-destruction, and in having many
times cheated the grave or the insane asylum of its expected prey


Nor do I feel less proud in having been able, in cases of not so
serious, though often of a more embarrassing nature, to restore to
full sexual power and vigor, middle-aged and older men, whose
desire had out-lived their power, or who, through early abuse, had
become so weakened as to he totally impotent, incapable of per-
petuating their species—ashamed, discomforted and disappointed
at being somewhat less than a man. As every case cured is the
very best advertisement that I can have, it is hardly necessary for
me to say that I endeavour to exercise the utmost care, skill and
discretion in both diagnosing and treating these cases, and assid-
uity and scientific accuracy in preparing and compounding these
remedies, of which lam the fortunate possessor. Indeed, Ido
everything in my power to make success an absolute certainty.
I have a reputation throughout Australia as a Specialist in the
treatment of all Sexual Diseases. For Private Diseases lam con-
sulted on all sides with, I may say, unvarying success; but it is
more especially in the treatment of that troublesome affection,
Nervous Debility, that my advise and counsel is sought by the
afflicted thousands ; and sufferers may rely on every attention in
this distressing disease. Should, happily, the reader of this small
brochure have no present use for it, still he will do well to put it
away where he can easily place his hand upon it. He cannot tell
how soon himself or some of his friends may require it. An incal-
culable amount of good can be done by sending a copy to any
friend who it may be thought will profit by a perusal of the
same.
To Invalids.
Among the bodily evils that the frail system of man is heir to,
there are some so interwoven with painful associations that add
mental misery to the anguish of the frame, that many delicate
minds resort to concealment rather than own the cause of their


affliction, and so fall into the grave before their time. This is an
evil which calls for the most energetic action of charitable spirits
to effect its eradication. The science of medicine has mastered
nearly all the evils that flesh is heir to, and, let men suffer how
they will, there is hardly any ramification of disease that may not
be relieved at least, if not entirely eradicated by a timely appeal to
those whose lives are spent in the study of healing. The conse-
quence of concealment, or want of necessary information, entail
blind desperation, despair and death upon many, while yet
merciful 0 mnipotence has given us the entire power of cure. It
is, then, the duty of all whom education has endowed with skill
to promulgate the knowledge of their curative power among the
unfortunate, and manifest themselves, against all obstacles, as
men who can emancipate their fellow creatures from torture.
Surely the curse of a frightful complaint is punishment enough
without sentencing the unhappy victim to ignorance of the
natural and proper mode of relief. If there are sunny slopes,
shaded nooks and beautiful places upon the earth, it is not less
true that there are yawning chasms, terrible and darkest
seclusions of danger, all formed, the beautiful and the terrible, by
the same great hand, the works of whom the mind of man may
never call in question. Shall the sufferer in the dark not be told
the way out of this labyrinth of affliction because he sits in a
pleasant spot, happy himself, dislikes to hear of pain ? Oh ! it is
a false and most cruel philosophy. Let us teach the wretched
how to grow pure and enjoy the atmosphere which heaven has
made free for all. Christianity can give no other lesson.
Humanity demands it as the first law of its nature. Charity
must droop if it is denied. Pity will grow blind with tears when
ill-judged severity flies to any opposite course. Observing all
delicacy, while pursuing a broad principle of philanthropy that
will freely cast all minor considerations aside Surgeon Langston
still offers his services to the public.


Forms of the Disease, Symptoms*
Causes, Dangers, Etc.
It has been the custom of late years in Australia especially for
careless, ignora nt, or designing physicians to class all forms of
sexual disea so under two main heads, viz., Seminal Weakness
(spermatorrhoea), or Physical Decay (impotency).
It was found by many designing and mercenary physicians, wha
had descended from the high standard of their honorable profession
to the most glaring quackery, that such a rough classification
“took” better, and was more readily understood by their non-
medical patients, who were thus flattered into the belief that
they fully understood there own cases, and after glancing over
a printed list of symptoms under each head, could choose the
remedies best suited to their trouble.
How wrong, how fallacious this idea was, is conclusively proved
by the hundreds, nay, even thousands, of poor, miserable, broken-
down wretches who have spent their last penny for such specious
remedies, and are yet as far, even further, from a cure than they
were before.
I am daily reading and listening to the pitiful tales and bitter
experiences of just such patients.
While I do not consider that either the present space or place
either demands or permits of a minute description of the various
forms, causes, nice and delicate distinctions in diagnosis, such as can
only be understood and appreciated by a highly educated physician
of a cute mind, and special education in this important branch of
medicine, I desire to briefly outline some of the main distinctions,
and dwell briefly upon the principal symptoms, causes, results,
etc,, of the various forms of sexual, physical, and mental decay.
In every form of sexual decay (with or without evil effect on
brain or mind), there exists a “ point of lesion,” or in other words,
a central diseased spot from which all evil symptoms radiate, to
which they are due, and which will never fully disappear until this


diseased spot is cured. In some cases there is more than one point
of lesion, and it is just such cases that are so seldom cured by
ordinary treatment.
To summarise; the “diseased point” may be
(A). In the Urethra or Urine Channel , and consists of a
stricture, granulations, inflammation or ulceration at
the mouths of the seminal ducts, enlarged prostate
gland, chronic congestion and inflammation due to
masturbation or self-abuse-
(B). In the Seminal Vesicles , which lie at the back of the
bladder just in front of the lowermost bowel (rectum),,
these hollow and elastic vesicles being the storehouses
of the seminal fluid. They are often found ulcerated,
inflamed, thickened, contracted, etc.
(C). In the Sensory Nerves of the organ a condition of
either partial or total paralysis, or deadening as in
impotency, or over-sensitiveness (excessive irri-
tability), as in spermatorrhoea, emissions, etc.
(D). In the Ganglionic ( Sympathetic ), Nerves at the base of
the Bladder and the Sexual Centres in the lower part of
the Spinal Cord.
(E). In the Testicles , where the seminal fluid is made,
whether accompanied by varicocele or not.
(F). In the Brain and Spinal Cord, as in cases caused by
confinement, overwork, hot rooms, worry and care; and
congestion of the brain and spine from masturbation.
Now, how is any person, even if he be a physician,
unless he has had a special and peculiar training, and
a large experience in such cases, going to be able to
properly discriminate between these various forms of
disease, and nicely and accurately adjust the treat-
ment to each, especially in mixed or complicated
cases.


Why I Succeed.
It is for precisely such reasons as follow that my treatment
•is so wonderfully rapid in its action, so almost certainly curative
•in so many serious and complicated cases.
1. No medicines are used until a case has been diagnosed
with the most absolute accuracy and precision.
2. I fully understand every phase of these diseases, having
40 years’ experience in other cases to go by, and
understand what medicines to apply and what to with-
hold, and, above all, when any treatment is hopeless.
3. The various remedies I use, properly applied, attack the
diseased parts at every point, and the inevitable
consequence is, that improvement commences almost
from the first day, is simultaneous from all points
and is accompanied by rapid improvement of the
general health and nervous tone at the same time,
Symptoms.
I shall now briefly detail the more prominent symptoms of
spermatorrhoea and impotency, requesting my readers, however, to
bear in mind constantly that no two cases are exactly alike, and
that there are several distinct as well as several mixed or com-
plicated forms of both spermatorrhoea and impotency, varying
according to the seat of the disease, the “ point of lesion,” and
from many other causes, each phase of which requires treatment
peculiar to itself.
The More Prominent Symptoms of
Sexual Weakness and Decayed
Vigour.
So much has been written and said upon the subject of the
causes, results, and symptoms of premature decay and nervous


debility that it seems hardly necessary to go very extensively
into the subject; a subject more properly belonging to the lecture-
room of a medical college, or a treatise intended solely for
physicians or medical students. I shall, therefore, simply call
attention to the more prominent points and most salient features.
Self-abuse, that vile and pernicious practice so common amongst
the youth of our land, is daily growing more common, and daily
the large number of those whose health and strength of body and
mind have been sapped and destroyed by it are increasing.
This is the principal feeder of our mad-houses: the great pro-
ducer of nine-tenths of all nervous diseases, the fruitful cause of
idiocy, insanity in men, and hysteria in women. That gaunt,
ghastly, and fell destroyer, Consumption, has its seeds but too
often sown by this habit, as many and many a hopeless victim
will reluctantly admit.
Constant, yet unknown Losses. —The very worst feature of this
vampire of disease is that its effects are liable to break out at any
time of life, and that the terrible drains and losses of vital fluid
may be going on for months and even years, without the victim
being aware of it until too late.
Losses at night, accompanied by lascivious dreams, are not
the worst form. It is the silent , constant and unseen losses that
do their work so surely and terribly. A careful study of many
thousand cases proves only too certainly that day after day
men and boys are walking the streets, weak, miserable, ema-
ciated, dyspeptic, consumptive, in all of whom the real trouble
is the secret drain of vital fluid entirely unknown to them.
The ordinary doctor, if he is consulted, hurriedly listens to the
most prominent symptoms, calls it dyspepsia, debility, or what not,
gives a prescription (more than useless), and calls the next one
into his office. These physicians have neither the time, the know-
ledge, nor the experience to diagnose, much less to treat these
cases. It is just here that My Treatment finds its special field of


usefulness, and half my work lies in discovering the errors of others-
and setting them right.
Premature Decay.
Early decay or lost manhood may be roughly divided into two-
prominent classes :
(1), The over-excitable , in which there are all the symptoms of
excessive irritability, marked by premature dis-
charges, imperfect erections, emissions at night,.
with or without lewd dreams, &c.
(2). The paralytic , in which there is a deadening and dulling
of sensibility, delay in ejaculation, impotent
symptoms, delay in making water, inability to pro-
duce erections at proper times, &c.
Each of these classes has its own peculiar train of symptoms affect-
ing the brain and nerves; and each form of the disease is devisable into
stages. Three different and distinct set of nerves are affected in
these diseases, and each has its own peculiarities.
u Well Physically , Dead Sexually .”—The last fifty years has
brought to the notice of physicians a peculiar condition of the
sexual organs, confined chiefly to men past the age of thirty, and
most common at from forty to fifty. This consists in a peculiar form
of impotency, producing partial or total loss of power and sensi-
bility in the organs, but accompanied by no very bad effects upon
the general system. There seems to be a blight upon the sexual
organs, while the general health remains good. There is oftentimes
some little dyspepsia, and often great prostration during
hot weather. These cases, although not threatening life or reason,
as do the other forms in advanced stages, are peculiarly obstinate
and stubborn to cure, and many of these people have unsuccessfully
run the gamut of all remedies, both genuine and quack. In such
cases My System has succeeded with peculiar rapidity and certainty,
for the reason that the remedies are applied directly to the nerves


that are affected , and soon restore them to sensibility and power, and
with such restoration comes strengthing of the erectile muscles,
increase in size and power, and a full restoration to the sensitiveness
■of the nerve-ends or nerve-tips.
Widowers and Middle Aged Men , and men who have lived too
fast, are peculiarly liable to this form of Sexual Apathy (Loss of
Power), more especially if they are at all troubled with
varicocele , or knotty, soft and wormy veins of the testicles.
In some of these cases there also exists a secret and unknown
draining away of Vital Fluid in the urine, usually but a few
drops each time, but enough, week by week, to undermine after a
few years, the health and strength of the individual, and render
him peculiarly liable to Softening of the Brain, Apoplexy and
Paralysis.
Losses of Vital Fluid, no matter how little at a time, if con
tinued for any length of time, are certain to undermine health and
vitality, and render the person liable to nervous and paralytic
attacks. Losses of this nature can never be allowed to go on
•with impunity. The evil result may not come this month or
next, but it will come some time, unless proper means are taken
of checking it, and supplying to the system the ingredients that
have been wasted, as has been proved by the experience of
thousands in the past.
Sexual Paralysis , which means loss or decay of the erectile
power, sensibility and size of the organs, is really a very advanced
stage of Impotency , and is usually the result of blows or injuries
to the spine , softening of the brain , neglect of ordinary impotency ,
etc. It is more often found in men well advanced in years, but
sometimes in young men, and men of middle age.
Enlargement of the Prostrate Gland at the neck of the bladder,
by pressure on the Sexual Nerves sometimes produces it. So also
does Varicocle by destroying the testicles.


spermatorrhcea.
SEXUAL DECLINE.
Spermatorrhoea
Spermatorrhoea is the most common of all forms of Seminal
Weakness. It is more usual in young and middle-aged men. It
is usually, but not always, the result of Self-Abuse, neglected
discharges, losses in the urine, and usually ends in Complete Im-
potency, shrinking or wasting of the organs, coldness of the
parts, stringiness and flabbiness of the testicles, and sooner or
later, Nervous Weakness, Brain Exhaustion, Spinal Irritability,
and still later, if neglected, Paralysis, St. Yitus’ Dance,
Insanity, Brain Softening, etc.
Its most commom symptoms in its simplest forms are: Deranged
Digestion, Loss of Appetite, Loss of Flesh, Loss of Memory,
Flushes of Heat and Slashings, Constipated Bowels, Fitful and
Nervous or Heavy Sleep with Dreams, Nightly or Daily Losses
either while asleep or while straining at stool, Premature Dis-
charge of the Fluid, Loss of Fluid from the slightest excitement.
Genital or Urinary Irritation, Diabetes, Deposits in the Urine,
Inflammation or Weakness of the Kidneys, Troubled Breathing,
Irregular Action of the Heart, Eruptions of the Face and Neck,
Headache, Affection of the Eyes, General Weakness and Indo-


lence, Aversion to Society, Relaxed condition or diminished size
of the Genital Organs, Frequent Desire to Pass Water, with
peculiar attending sensations, Melancholy, a feeling as though
the Bowels would fall out, accompanied sometimes by Neuralgia,
Indecision of Character, Loss of Will Power, Timidity, Abnor-
mal Desire, etc., etc.
Spermatorrhoea, or Seminal Weakness, Impotence and General
Debility are different stages of the same disease, and, unless
reliable treatment is resorted to at once, the victim soon passes
into the latter stage of the disease. But, if we examine into their
symptoms, we discover that the action of the heart is slow and
sluggish,sometimes almost imperceptible; sometimes it intermits
or skips a beat; they are easily startled, undecided or timid, fear-
ful of making ventures ; there are at times great despondency and
loss of energy, a gloomy, hypochondriac state of mind, a feeling
that recovery is impossible, and a morbid fear of sudden death.
They complain of wakefulness, startling sensations in the sleep,
frightful dreams, nervous trembling, sudden concussions in the
head, and more or less of the symptoms already enumerated. The
digestion is weak, and the power of assimilation or the nutritive
functions impaired; flatulence, or wind in the stomach, and
various dyspeptic symptoms are complained of ; the complexion
is sometimes noticed to be sallow and sickly, and the patient has
an anxious, downcast, melancholy cast of features ; he is unable
to endure much exertion of any kind, and his mind is in no con-
dition for mental labour, business or pleasure. His physical
stamina seems bankrupt, and for the time his muscles are weak
and flabby, and there is a notable loss of flesh and strength. This
results from overwork of any kind, neglect of the laws of health,
intemperance, great mental strains, grief and anxiety, and, above
all, from excessive sexual indulgence, especially self-abuse, or
from that loss of tone in the sexual system (resulting from abuse)
which causes frequent involuntary seminal losses; and the victim.


of it is plunged into probably tbe most miserable and unsatis-
factory condition in which it is possible for a man to exist. In.
fact, many sufferers, after despairing of permanent relief, prefer
the alternative of death to such a life.
Prof. Charcot, in commenting on these cases, says :
“ The symptoms of Spermatorrhoea are divided into Local
and Constitutional.”
“ Of the Local Symptoms, the chief are discharge of semen
at night whether attended or not by venereal dreams ; and dis-
charge of semen during the day, which sometimes takes place
visibly, in profuse emissions, but most frequently imperceptibly,
whilst emptying the bladder or the bowels. The appearance of
spermatozoa in the urine is, as we have more than once mentioned,
an unmistakable token of dangerous disease; but this appearance is
wholly unnoticed by the patient himself. Another local symptom,
which sometimes becomes distressing, is an intermittent succession
of ‘priapisms ’ or violent erection of the organ, without any pleas-
urable sensation ; the erections often being followed by great ex-
haustion and a sense of weariness and prostration. Accompanying
these there is sometimes an almost invisible trickling from or
rather, to the sight, mere humidity at the extreme of the organ ;
a kind of oozing, like unwholesome perspiration, which, in reality,
in its slow but sure effect, is no less debilitating than the perceptible
emissions. At the same time there is apt to take place, on the oc-
currence of a voluptuous thought, or when in the society of females,
or even by the accidental friction of the clothes, &c., a thin mucous-
like discharge, sometimes so very small in quantity that the orifice
of the organ is no more moistened than if a single drop of urine
had escaped. The drop that does escape, however, is the habita-
tion of living beings; it is a particle of the living seed , perhaps
deteriorated by disease, but the gradual loss of which is tanta-
mount to the destruction of the frame. ”


Sterility as Connected with Impotency.
Impotency is a total incapacity for sexual intercourse. By
partial impotency is implied an inability for the proper perfor-
mance of the sexual act.
Sterility is a want of power to procreate, from any cause.
These may be grouped together. Then, again, a development
entirely too small may sometimes be remedied. Partial im-
potency is characterised by several stages, and the causes are
very various, while it must be acknowledged that self-abuse in
youth, though not perceived in its deleterious consequences, and
the severer form of Spermatorrhoea, often cause the disease to
develop itself as the prime of manhood passes away, say between
thirty-five and forty-five years of age, or later. Then Sperma-
torrhoea, unless cured, is certain, sooner or later, to produce it.
I have known cases to be caused by sexual excesses, meaning
thereby too frequent intercourse ; also, by intercourse at too
•early an age, and many more by the Bible-forbidden practice of
withdrawing. Probably nine-tenths of all the cases are de-
pendent upon some one of these; the rest will be chargeable to
many and very diverse causes ; pure nervousness in some, extreme
weakness in others ; also, syphilitic poison in the system.
Impotency , meaning loss, impairment, or blunting of sexual sen-
sation and erectile power, is more common amongst middle-aged
and older men than among the young men, but is sometimes met
with in cases where Spermatorrhoea, either from neglect or bad
treatment, has made very rapid advances, and where the losses and
drains constantly taking place have robbed the sexual or genei’a-
tive nerves and centres of almost ever-y trace of strength or feeling.
Iu middle-aged and older men Impotency is usually a disease in
itself, coming direct and outright, and not preceded by or due to
losses, drains, emissions, etc. In other cases it follows Sperma-
torrhoea, as in younger men, and in still others it exists with Sper-
matorrhoea, the one disease complicating the other, Sexual weak-


ness and nothing else. In some cases, as we have already said,
certain men find their sexual power rapidly failing, or entirely
lost, and as yet have no other disease or weakness as a complication.
General Symptoms.
The general symptoms are literally legion. Connected, indeed,
as they are, with every part of the human organisation, it would
be difficult to mention any one feeling of functional, mental, or
constitutional uneasiness, which may not be referable to this
depraved condition of the system. By a curious misclassification,
some writers have accounted impotence as among the symptoms,
whereas it ought more properly to be referred to the effects of
the malady. Uneasiness in the stomach , accompanied by flatu-
lence, giddiness in the head, pain or weakness in the eyes (which
sometimes cannot endure a strong light) indolence, dislike of
exertion, nervousness, dejection, excessive craving for food, followed
by intervals? during which every description of nutriment is
loathed, irregularity in the bowels, constipation, alternating with
diarrhoea, headache, and pains in the ears, whimsicality of
appetite, troubled sleep dui’ing the night, succeeded by days of
gloomy apathy, uneasiness in the liver, fluttering and palpitation
in the region of the heart, and great sensitiveness to, heat and cold,
are among the derangements which often accompany morbid
spermatic discharges. It is a curious pathological fact that
during the progress of Spermatorrhoea, difficulty of breathing,
cough, and tightness of the chest, arising in many constitutions
from the seminal disorder, have sometimes been actually mis-
taken for pulmonary consumption. The cough is often distress-
ing ; occasionally dry, occasionally attended by an expectoration
of an offensive kind. I have no doubt that many patients have
been maltreated for consumption when Spermatorrhoea was the
real malady. That the latter leads to the former' is certain
enough, but the stages and connections of the respective diseases
have been grossly misunderstood by practitioners, who have not


had sufficient personal acquaintance with the indications of
seminal emission.
The Snake in the Grass.
UNSUSPECTED SPERMATORRHOEA. This terrible
affliction is simply an unnatural emission of the seminal fluid ;
and is well described as excessive spermatic evacuation, from
whatever cause produced, and whether occurring by night or by
day. For nothing should be more constantly remembered by
the pathologist than that, whilst Spermatorrhoea or seminal
weakness is more evident to ordinary perception, when occurring
in profuse discharge by night, it is still more insidious, still
more destructive in its effects, when it occurs inperceptibly
during the day, at stool, at the emptying of the bladder, and in
a variety of other modes never suspected by a patient, and
seldom, until too late, by any medical adviser unpossessed of
consummate experience and habits of vigilant observation.
Daily losses are, if possible, even more dangerous than those
which occur at night, though the latter have almost exclusively
attracted the entire attention of careless practitioners, many of
whom are, in fact, ignorant of the very existence and nature of that
which is the developed and most obstinate stage of Sperma-
torrhoea. The consequence is, that the cessation of the nightly
emissions, or rather their passage into the next and malignant
and diurnal stage, is frequently unnoticed; the disorder itself
is declared to be cured at the moment when it is producing mortal
ravages; and as it becomes evident, after a while, that some
secret malady is still hurrying the patient to his grave, some
new “ treatment ”is adopted—a treatment which perhaps is the
very reverse of that which should be applied. Thus mis-
managed, misunderstood, misled by those who undertake to cure
him, the unhappy sufferer is hurried forward, even sometimes
when in comparatively good health, towards debility, impotence,
paralysis, .madness, despair and death.


Such is the fate of uncounted myriads, young and old, whose
bodily disarrangement is aggravated by ignorance as to its real
nature, and such, it must be added, is also the fate of multitudes
who, from the insidiousness of the disease and the mildness of
its first beginnings, never suppose that they are ailing at all.
It is essential to take notice that the cause which leads to the
distressing and fatal symptoms, mental and bodily, described, is
sympathetic with the presence of the morbid spermatic discharge ,
which continues involuntarily, sometimes imperceptibly, but
continuously and persistently, long after the vice which origin-
ally induced it has been abandoned, and hurries the victim to
an untimely grave, unless, by a fortunate discovery of the
precipice on the brink of which he totters, the helping hand of
skill is invoked to his relief and rescue.
Why the Best Physicians Praise and
Indorse My Method.
(BEAD LETTER FROM DB. JOYCE)
As I have once before explained, My Method succeeds in even
the worst of these cases, for the following reasons, apparent to
any man of sense and intelligence, and even more to the educated
and skilful physician, who can appreciate fully the nicer medical
points and finer distinctions of both diagnosis and treatment: —
(1) It combines all the good points of the most successful
treatments, of both the past and present, in Europe
and America.
(2) Be the cause simple or complex, and the “ point of
lesion ” single, double, or triple, and be the general
health and nerve-tone either very poor or good, the
proper remedies Will Strike The Evil At All Points
At One And The Same Time , and it is building up
the health and strength from the first day.


(3) It is absolutely painless in every detail, never causes
any irritation, contains no depressing or poisonous
drugs, and is certain in result.
Varicocele.
By varicocele is understood a dilated and tortuous state of the
Spermatic Cord. It generally occurs in the young, and is almost
always confined to the left side, because the left vein is longer
than the right vein, and more indirect in its course ; but mainly
because the left is unprovided with a valve where it enters the
vena cava, or large vein, so that the blood is apt to accumulate
in it and distent it, especially when it is brought to the parts
by any excitement. Whatever may be the cause, the facts is
that the walls of these veins do give away, become relaxed, as
it were, and distend, bulging out in places into little pouches,
giving the vessel, when full of blood, a knotty appearance. The
whole vein, in old cases, is dilated, enlarged, tortuous, cordy,
and knotty. The disease is one very prevalent, and although
it has been known to exist for years without any serious results,
my observation has convinced me that these are exceptional
cases, and that in the majority of instances the disease results
in impotency and wasting of the testicles; and sooner or latter
im'pairs the general health by constant nervous irritation, in
ducing Dyspepsia, dragging sensations in the Groin, Lumbago,
or pain in the back, and a general depression of the system,
despondency, hypochondria, gloomy forbodings, etc. All the
uneasy sensations in and about the Generative Organs demand
immediate and careful attention, or disastrous and irremediable
results may follow. The disease comes on slowly, with a dull
heavy aching pain, sometimes extending up the Cord to the
Groin and Back. There is sometimes a sense of weight on the
affected side which is frequently flabby and elongated. The
deceased side is very prone to sweat; the veins are doubled,


knotted, harder and larger in places than others and irregularly
dilated, some of them being six times their natural bulk. When
taken in the hand, the affected scrotum feels as if filled with a
bunch of earth worms or a cluster of cords.
It sometimes, if neglected, exists to such a degree as to
resemble a rupture, the left side of the bag hanging down four
to six inches. In advanced stages of the disease, or disorgan-
isation, the epididymis becomes detached from the body of the
testicle, and is plainly distinguished by the finger.
The sequel of all this is, that a considerable diminution of the
sexual power takes place, and if means are not adopted to arrest
a further break-up of the structure, total loss of the power, etc.
will result.
Surgeon Langston’s Electric Quadrant, with double compress
and support combined, the only safe and rational treatment for
varicocle.
Price (4 or
6 Batteries), £2


This unique and elegant piece of mechanism, which plays so
important a part as an auxiliary to My Treatment, is mainly
remarkable for its immediate beneficial action on the weak and
enervated system (in those cases where a necessity exists for
Electric elements), and, by its exercise of exquisite delicate,
compressive and astringent powers on the weakened or diseased
seminal vessels, it removes irritation, soothes and gives tone
and strength to the nervous organisation, which also receives a
continuous current of mild electricity, mainly directed to the
Spine and Genito-TJrinary Organs, thus supplying thereto vitality
and life. The immediate action is astringent, and tends to close
the relaxed seminal vessels, so as to prevent the morbid escape of
the spermatic substance, from which the disease Spermatorrhoea
derives its name. By the adapation of this unique appliance
the testicles are upheld and supported, which the Sper-
matorrhoea and Seminal Weakness usually collapse into a
pendant and relaxed state, perniciously favoring the progress of
the disease, and the morbid dribbling of semen, a natural and
healthy habit of retention is thus secured, so that the dangerous
and evil tendency to eject or admit the vital essence is subdued,
and the natural functions of life takes place of debility and disease.
It is in cases of
VARICOCELE,
however, that the Electric Quadrant finds its chief field of use-
fullness, having proved in this annoying difficulty a real bless-
ing to humanity.
As stated elsewhere, there is not a case of Varicocele (either
single or double), which cannot be permanently and painlessly
cured by the use of proper means, and this appliance I confiden-
recommend as a positive, painless and radical cure, therefore,
in that it perfectly supports and rests the testicles, thereby empty-
ing them of their unhealthy and stagnated blood, and allowing
them to gain health, strength and contractibility. It avoids the


necessity for cutting and tying operations, which always entails
a partial, if not a total loss of sexual power , and so skilfully have
the ligatures of the supporter been constructed and located that
it may be adjusted to the exact amount of compression or ex-
pansion required. The appliance is suited and adapted to meet
the requirements of any case (no matter how severe or of how
long standing), and it will be forwarded with explicit instructions
for use upon receipt of price, viz., £2.
Its chief advantages over all other instruments and operations
are the facts :
1. That it is harmless.
2. Absolutely painless, no matter what position is assumed
or what labour undertaken.
3. Will at all times support and give strength and elasticity
to the parts, and, by means of the Electric Current
maintain a perfect and healthy circulation of the
blood throughout the testicles.
4. Never gets out of order.
5. Gives a pleasant sense of support and perfect relief to
all pain, ache or dragging.
6. Puts a stop to all wasting of the testicles and increases
their size and tone.
7. Can be adjusted so as to keep pace with the daily im-
provement until a perfect cure results.
8. The Electric Current, besides being an aid to the cure of
the Varicocele, also acts as a revitaliser to the whole
system.
9. Will succeed where everything else has failed, and even
in cases where the disease has returned after one or
more operations have been performed.


Undeveloped.
Stunted, Shrunken, Deformed and Weak Organs.
“ With the progress of the habit (self abuse) the organ
becomes small and relaxed, the erections feeble, the corpora
cavernosa either waste away or their vessels lose their tenacity,
whereby an apparent shrinkage takes place; the corpus
spongiosum and the glans also shrink, so that the prepuce
appears considerably elongated. The testes may increase in
size, become tender and irritable, or they may waste away to
nothing but little strings ; the latter is the more usual result.”
This extract from the writings of Dr. Bartholow indicates the
common cause of lack of proper development of the genital
organs. Some are congenital or from birth. From whatever
cause the condition is unnatural and inconsistent with a perfectly
healthy state. In order to have a perfect understanding of the
theory of development of various parts and organs of the system
by my method, it seems expedient to briefly discuss two directly
opposite conditions, namely—Hypertrophy and Atrophy.
When an organ has acquired an increased size and weight, in
consequence of an augmentation in its-nutrition, or the deposit
of plastic organisable matter in its interstices, it is said to be
hypertrophied.
This condition essentially consists in an augmentation of the
nutritive function ; its vessels receive more blood than naturally,
it assumes a deeper colour, its structure is more dense, and its
cells are multiplied and augmented in size.
Atrophy is the reverse of Hypertrophy, consisting in the
wasting of the substance of an organ with a diminution of its
weight and bulk. This may appear at any period of life, and
effect a whole organ, or may be limited to a part, or even to
some of its constituent elements. Atrophy is sometimes ap-


parently of congenital or inherited character, and at others the
result of disease or abuse of the natural functions of an organ.
It may also be produced by the cessation of the natural functions
of an organ, loss of nervous influence, deficient supply of blood
or nutritive matter, or inflammatory irritation.
Atrophy may sometimes be found in the arms of children,
■caused from the sudden suspension of nervous influences, and
terminating in complete wasting of the affected parts, or a
retarded development that remains a permanent trouble unless
relieved by the proper treatment. The most commonly observed
deficiency of this kind is, however, one or both of the lower
limbs, and while other parts of the body grow in strength and
size, these affected parts remain small and shrivelled.
Atrophy of one or both breasts of females is very commonly
met with in physicians’ practice; or a species of non-develop-
ment may be a more proper term to use in those cases where,
at the time when the form generally rounds out and the breasts
enlarge, this change does not take place, and the mammae remain
undeveloped. This same condition often follows nursing or
unskilful attention to the mother after the loss of an infant, or
a miscarriage; also from tight-lacing or padding.
Atrophy may attack the male generative organs, and it is not
uncommon to find them preternaturally small and wasted, totally
unfit to perform their proper functions.
If Atrophy or non-development had no effect upon the natural
and proper uses of the affected portions, it would be a subject of
minor imporance, but, unfortunately it is always accompanied
by partial or total loss of the strength and vitality which is called
for in the proper performance of the duties of life. Can this
condition of Atrophy or non-development of the limbs, parts, or
organs, be overcome, and they be made to assume their proper
size, shape, and function was for many years the questio vexata
with medical men, until after a thorough study of Ihe conditions


exactly opposite, Hypertrophy and Atrophy, and long, tedious
and exhaustive experiments the question was solved.
By my method of treating the organs, the blood is drawn in a
generous current to the parts, the cells are distended as in
vigorous exercise, the blood deposites its vitalising particles, the
interstices fills rapidly, the tissues grow and solidify. Develop-
ment is secured.
During the preparation of this volume a letter was received
from a minister, encouraging me to give all possible publicity
to my method of development of the organs.
From this letter I make the following extract *
“I am sure that you are a national benefactor. The idea you
are working at needs to be promoted, for it fills national want.
The Indians, the Germans, the Romans, and the Greeks cast
out men who were ill-sexed and whose organs were diminutive.
Not only are men inclined to despise a man who has childish
organs, but they hate and abhor themselves when they are
sexually weak and small. It is a philosophical fact of immense
value to human life ; men have no confidence in themselves, or
in anybody else, if their sexual condition allows of no satisfac-
tion.
When they cannot be satisfied because of this failing, they
become more and more sensual and longing every day. They
cannot overcome it, it is a natural and holy need of the human
being to love and to express love bodily ; it is the means of re-
producing mankind.
Instead of proper development rendering man sensual, I am
sure it can be proved scientifically that it renders him quiet
and satisfied, less sensual, more self-respecting and confident,
better able to perform his work, especially high literary and art
work, and more religious and grateful to God and man.
# The name of this minister, and his address will be made known to
interested persons.


Contemplating Marriage.
I am constantly in receipt of letters from patients saying, “ I
am thinking of getting married, but am conscious of a weak-
ness.” To such I say you do a wrong to your wife, yourself and
nature by entering into a contract you cannot fulfil. If you
would save yourself and wife untold misery, be sure you are in
a condition to fill all the requirements of a man and husband
before you undertake it.
The object contemplated by the Great Author of the institu-
tion of marriage is the increase and perpetuation of the sum of
human happiness. This object cannot be attained save by
individual virtue and prudence, acting concomitantly with the
diffusion of enlightenment and the banishment of popular ignor-
ance. Ignorance of a density unequalled, of an obstinacy un-
paralled, long prevailed, on the topics which conti-ol most
completely the fitness of men and women for wedlock. There
are certain states of injured health, capable, by early and skil-
ful treatment, of thorough and speedy cure ; but which, if
neglected or injudiciously dealt with, render aught but disgust
and misery in marriage a thing humanly impossible. It very
often happens, too, that these morbid stages are, in their present
and apparent effects, so insignificant, so slightly discommoding
and so connected with early imprudences long since relinquished,
or humiliating in description, that they are allowed to gain
ground insidiously through the delusive idea, that the disease
will cure itself; that wedlock can work an improvement in a
morbid condition, of which wedlock, in some circumstances is in
truth the most active promoter.
The consequence of such misapprehension is that a contract
of the most solemn kind is frequently entered into under circum-
stances which cannot fail to produce unhappiness in a variety of
shapes, —unhappiness which does not terminate with the lives of
the individual parties to the contract, but throws its gloomy


shadow across the path of posterity. The diseases thus en-
gendered, circulated, and perpetuated in society form only one
section —though a most important one —in the chapter of
disasters referable to misconceptions of the true objects of
marriage, and of the steps which must be taken by all who
would completely attain those objects.
A leading and indispensable step in the work of self-knowledge
and self-preservation is that of ascertaining, in the fii’st place,
upon authority which cannot deceive, that in no part of the
organisation lurk even the most remote admonitoxy symptoms of
the past, present, or prospective existence of any infirmities by
which fuxxctional and general vigor can be impaired. In this
task of self-examination the memory and conscience, not less
than the reason, must be consulted. It will be necessary to
institute a rigid review of every habit, whether relinquished or
xxot, or every incidexxt and circumstance which impartial candor
can suggest, as bearing in any degree on the point to be elicited ;
and reference must be made to the faithful counsel of a physician
whose practice is chiefly devoted to that particular branch of
pathological science, more immediately connected with the
subject of inquiry.
As an “ unfortunate marriage ” is, of all earthly calamities,
the most overwhelming and irremediable, and as it so frequently
occurs that persons enter ignorantly into the solemn contract,
to find, when too late, that they are unfitted to realise its
principal ends, and under circumstances which make dissension
and misery its inevitable attendant, no prudent man should take
the irretrievable step without assuring himself, through com-
petent advice, that he is in all respects in a condition to do so.
But consultation with the physician is a mere mockery and
delusion unless there be perfect openness and sincerity on the
part of the individual seeking his counsel. Every question
which experience may put should be answered with truthfulness,


as rigorous as if the eye of the questioner could read the heart
of the client. If the latter fail in his duty, he is deceiving him-
self, and, haply, laying the foundation of a life of anguish and
remorse, from which one moment’s manly frankness would have
rescued him. He may rely on it, that if he has unpleasant
secrets to reveal, he can tell nothing worse than his well-practised
adviser has listened to and soothed. If, on the other hand, his
conscience acquit him of any self-incurred affliction, he can feel
equally certain of faithful information as to the existence of any
latent or semi-latent symptoms which may require to be sup-
pressed and extirpated before the matrimonial compact be
entered into.
And here care should be exercised as to the class of practi-
tioner who is applied to. If, on the one hand, he be an
empiric, blindly adhering to an imaginary rule of uniformity in
cases each of which requires its separate variety of treatment;
or if, on the other hand, he be one who has so “diffused” his
studies as to have acquired only a superficial acquaintance with
any one branch of his profession, the chances are that he is
unable to apply to the case before him such a searching test as
may eliminate the whole facts. The physiology of the repro-
ductive organs is a subject so intricate, so extended, embracing
so many complications and seeming contradictions, calling into
requisition such an amount of minute research, observation, and
comparison, as to demand the exclusive, unwearied energies of
the practitioner who applies himself to it. It is a thing passing
human capacity to master it in its manifold details, unless the
whole mind (prepared, of course, by a careful education in
medical science generally) be devoted to it. Hence it follows
that the physician who distracts his faculties by avariciously
endeavouring to grasp too many branches of practice, is apt,
through mere ignorance, to treat with presumptuous levity,
complaints or applications in which an indefinite series of human
misery or happiness is involved. Above all things, therefore,


the character and perfect qualifications of the adviser should be
ascertained ; and then the applicant may freely unbosom himselt.
It may be well to apprise the reader that absolute secrecy as to
the identity of patients is the inviolable rule of the medical pro-
fession (excluding, of course, the loathsome vermin who, under
assumed titles and fictitious qualifications, usurp and disgrace
its name). Setting out with the resolution to speak frankly and
truthfully, the applicant may await the result with confidence..
If he have ills or infirmities to be healed, they will be healed
speedily and radically; whilst if “ all be right ” with him, he
will have the comfort of knowing that it is so.
Sufferers living at a distance from Melbourne, and unable to
consult me in person, can, by forwarding a true history of their
case and £l, receive a course of treatment by return of Post.
Every patient during and after treatment has the benefit of
free consultation regarding the care and preservation of his.
general health, the regulation of his habits, diet, etc.
Personal Treatment Unnecessary.
Be Cured at Home.
To those who fear that proper attention cannot be given
people at a distance by correspondence, I respectfully invite
attention to the following facts :
Most cases can be treated by me at a distance just as well as
if they were here in person. Such is my experience that lam
enabled to judge of the nature and extent of the disease from a
written description of the symptoms. I can, therefore, adapt
remedies to suit each individual case. Not one out of five
hundred of those whom I have cured have I ever seen.
If, in course of treatment, the patient desires consultation or
advice, a personal interview is not absolutely necessary ; in fact,,
in most cases it would be a useless expenditure of money.


Our present post facilities are so perfect and rapid that an in-
terchange of thought, and every want can be communicated and
•every trouble told. The advantage thus accruing to individuals
remote from each other by distance can scarcely he estimated.
Few appreciate this more than the individual in need of the
advice and services of a scientific physician; through the facilities
of the post a correspondence may be established between physician
and patient, and delicate questions discussed ; although thousands
of miles apart, it is no barrier to the patient fully solving some
qnestion concerning their organisation, of which, perhaps, they
have long been in doubt; anxious, perhaps, to confess or make
known some infirmity, or solicitous to ascertain who to remove
one, and one, it may be, that no power could induce them to
mention verbally to the physician. Thousands there are who
have infirmities, ailments, or impediments to their forming
matrimonial alliances, trifling perhaps in themselves, and easily
removed by a skilful and experienced physician ; yet all the
world could not induce these persons to speak of them to their
nearest and dearest friend, much less to their resident physician,
although he may be a friend. Very many there are who would
rather go down into the grave than to be recognised by their
friends, even their professional, as afflicted by the diseases
discussed and treated upon in this work; but, in the form of a
letter, every minute suffering maybe portrayed, every fact made
known and the history of the case fully detailed, and yet the
writer, if he choose, remain incognito. In my experience, which
extends over 40 years, I have found that patients, many
of them, could sit down in their closets and delineate their case
minutely in every particular, while in the presence of a physician
they were diffident, agitated, and could make little or no state-
ment. Then the advantage financially to those at a distance
by the post facilities are great. I have had patients visit me
for some ailment where the distance was so great, that the fare


and expenses while in the city amounted to a considerable sum ;
cases that, had they given me a written statement, I could have
done just as well for them at their homes, and not incurred the
large travelling expense. True, a personal interview is sometimes
preferred, where patients can state the facts without hesitation or
flurry, and afford the expense of coming to the city, and in some
few cases it is absolutely necessary.
While I would be pleased to see those who desire a personal in-
terview, and explain to their full satisfaction the peculiarities in
their special case, yet I ha ve not a personal acquaintance with one
in five hundred that I have cured.
Hundreds of cases which I have cured were given up as hopeless
by the resident physician. This fact is no particular discredit to
the latter, for the reason that I give my whole attention to chronic
diseases, while the family practitioner has his attention divided
between a great variety of acute maladies, many of which re-
quire prompt and active treatment or the patient dies ; hence he
gets into the habit of expecting immediate results and uses the
remedies entirely too active for cases which must be patiently
and ingeniously dealt with.
By my system of diagnosis by post I am enabled to discover
unmistakable signs or symptoms, thereby determining with
great accuracy the nature of the disease without seeing or
personally examining the patient. I treat annually thousands
of such cases. Can any intelligent person underrate or make
light of the value such experience, extending as it does over
40 years of practical experience ?
I disclaim any miraculous power ; on the contrary, my system is
the simple application of well-established principles of medical
science, perfecting myself by long continued practical experience^
The unsolicited spontaneous expressions of those who have been
and are now being benefited by my treatment is convincing;
yes, overwhelmingly convincing of the grand success attained by me
in my system of the treatment by post.


Consultation
Is free to all, but when <£l is enclosed a careful diagnosis of the
case will be made, and appropiate medicines sent.
Whenever it is convenient for a patient to enclose his photo-
graph, in his letter of consultation, or accompanying it by the
same post, and in every case with the patient’s name and
address written plainly on the back, it will materially assist me
in diagnosing and treating the case. These pictures are at once
returned to the original.
Urine should always be sent, as it is often needed to com-
plete or verify the diagnosis of a complex case.
All communications should be addressed :
SURGEON LANGSTON,
121 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
Strictures.
Strictures of the Urethra are of three different kinds. 1. That
which arises from an alteration in the structure of the lining mem-
brane of the passage. 2, That arising partly from altered structure,
partly from spasm, 3. That arising from spasm. In all these
cases the stream of urine becomes small in proportion to the obstruc-
tion. As the disease advances the urine is voided more frequently,
with considerable effort and pain, and a straining sensation remains
after the bladder is emptied. Cold is very apt to increase the
symptoms which occur when a part is strictured, and to obstruct the
flow of urine altogether for a time. If the stricture be not relieved,
a swelling may take place from the lodging of the urine behind it,
by its pressure and acridity, may give rise to inflammation and
ulceration, and the formation of fistulous openings in the perineum.
Strictures are, in nearly every instance, the result of chronic in-


flammation of the lining membrane of the Urethra, from whatever
cause produced. They are most commonly the result of neglected
or mismanaged gonorrhoea.
Leucorrhoea or Whites.
Is one of the most common and annoying diseases of females.
Hundreds suffer on in silence, and hundreds of others apply vainly
to drugs or doctors, who either merely tantalise them with a hope
of a cure, or apply remedies which make them worse. It is analogous
to spermatorrhoea of the male. It is a white discharge from the
vagina, and sometimes from the womb itself. I would not wish to
»ssert anything that would do an injustice to the afflicted, but I am
obliged to say that, although it may be produced from excessive
exhaustion of the powers of life, by laborious employment, unwhole-
someness of food, profuse menstruation, the use of tea and coffee,
and frequent child birth, it is far oftener caused -by direct irritation
applied to the mucous membrane of the vagina itself. Many of
■the symptoms of leucorrhoea are occasionally identified with
gonorrhoea. The reader will remember that gonorrhoea
in the male occasionally originated in this disease even
In virtuous and married life. From its causes it is peculiar
to adult life, although children are often affected with transient
inflammation of the vagina, from atmospheric and other causes,
vicious practices, and examples of servants and schoolmates;
and unless decisive measures are instituted, affections of the
womb and dropsy supervene.
Dr. Langston cures Female Weakness and Debility, Whites, or
Leucorrhoea, too Profuse, Exhausting, too Long Continued
Periods, Prolapsus and Bearing Down, or Prolapsus Uteri in
the shortest possible time; as during a practice of many years
he has discovered remedies which are at once powerful and
speedy.


Gonorrhoea
Gonorrhoea, or Clap, is a discharge of yellow fluid from the
Urethra. The disease begins with an itghing and soreness about
the private parts, especially about the Urethra. Soon after a
slight discharge of matter takes place, and there is heat and
pain in making water. In a few days the discharge of matter
is increased, and becomes more highly coloured. There is red-
ness and inflammation about the parts, and the attempts to pass
water is attended with more scalding.
It sometimes happens, when there is much inflammation, there
is a slight discharge of blood. The prepuce, or foreskin, often
swells so much that it cannot be drawn back, which symptom is
called “ Phymosis,” or being drawn backward cannot he
brought forward again. This occurrence is termed Paraphy-
mosis. The neighbouring parts suffer; the bladder becomes
irritable. There is a frequent desire to make water. One or
both the testicles frequently swell, occasioning great pain, and
some degree of fever. Ohordee is not an unusual symptom. If
the patient is guilty of no excesses, sensuality or irregular living.,
I generally effect a perfect cure in from three to seven days.
If wines and other stimulating drinks still be indulged in, the
symptoms will increase in severity, continue for a long time, ano
be followed by very painful and disagreeable consequences, a?
gleet, warts and strictures in the Urethra.
Among females similar symptoms are present, but usually of
less severity ; heat and soreness in urinating, a discharge of
coloured matter, slight pain in walking, and uneasiness in sit-
ting. Stricture is uncommon among them, being seldom, if ever,
met with. Instances have occurred where the husband has con-
tracted an inflammation of the Urethra from his wife, who was
suffering only from leucorrhcea, or some inflammatory affection


of the vagina. Great care is therefore necessary before pronounc-
ing upon the disease, as the health and reputation of the parties,
as well as the character of the physician, may be jeopardised by
too premature or hasty conclusions. Still, 1 have good reasons for
■considering, in many instances, the inflammation thus produced
as infectious as that ordinarily termed gonorrhoea. I can see no
reason why an acrid discharge from vaginal inflammation, or an
acrid leucorrhoea, when it does develop urethritis in the male,
may not be of an infectious nature. Indeed, consider these
conditions, together witn uncleanliness of the parts, as the true
and original structure of gonorrhoea.
Gleet.
Gleet is a continued discharge after the inflammatory symptoms
of a Clap have subsided. The discharge, commonly thin and clear,
like the white of an egg. No pain or scalding in making water.
It produces relaxation of the parts. Another cause of gleet is
strictures of the Urethra. In such cases our attention is to be
directed to the cure of strictures.
Swelled Testicles.
This is a very common symptom attending gonorrhoea ] at the
same time it has nothing venereal in it, but is produced by
sympathy with the Urethra. Suppuration seldom occurs, and
when it does the matter is not venereal, the swelling and in-
flammation appear suddenly, and as suddenly disappear. The
first appearance of this swelling is generally of a red, soft, pulpy
fullness of the body of the testicle, which is tender to the touch ;
this increases to a hard swelling, accompanied with considerable
pain ; hardness, and swelling often pervade the other ap-
pendages of the organs of generation. The swelling of the testicles
coming on, either removes the pain in making water, or suspends


the discharge, which do not return until the swelling begins to
subside. Excessive purging, strong acrid injections, walking or
riding during the inflammatory stage of gonorrhoea, excess of
venery, drinking freely of liquors, Ac., &c., will bring on swelling
of the testicles, and as this disease is so liable to happen from
gonorrhoea, the patient will do well to support the testicles with
a suspensory, or with a handkerchief, &c.
Cliordee.
When inflammation is not confined to the surface of the
Urethra, but affects the corpus spongiosum, or spongy body of
the penis, it produces a curvature of the penis at the time of
erection, which is called Chordee. When the Chordee is violent,
the inner membrane of the Urethra is put so much on the stretch
fhat it may cause a profuse bleeding from the Urethra that often,
relieves the patient, and sometimes proves a cure.
Syphilis, commonly called Pox.
This loathsome disease is generally the consequence of impure
sexual intercourse. The primary symptoms are shown in the
form of chancre, by which is meant an ulcer, considerably
inflamed and painful, unequal at the bottom, with prominent
edges of an ash colour, having little tendency to heal, but rather
continuing to spread if left to itself. Simple chancre presents an
excavated sore, surrounding parts red and swollen, and more or
ess painful. Finally, the granulations are raised to a level of
the surrounding parts, and bleed freely. The indurated chancre
has a hardened base; sometimes its edges are also hard and
elevated. The Phagedoenic chancre presents a sharp, irregular
margin, or eneven surface, of an ash color, with a thin, ichorous
discharge, and no granulations. The sloughing chancre is


usually the result of uncleanliness, &c. Surface of the ulcer
dark black color, surrounding parts inflamed, pain, swelling, and
a rapid destruction of the parts. Phymosis, or swelling of the
foreskin, so that it cannot be drawn back, is sometimes present,
concealing the chancre from view, but which may be known to
exist by the offensive discharge which takes place from the
opening of the foreskin.
Secondary Syphilis is known by painful sensations in the
throat, difficulty in swallowing, &c., &c. The throat being
examined, ulcers are observed, which sometimes quickly spread.
Sometimes, when neglected, the ulceration spreads beyond the
soft parts, and attack and destroy the bones of the palate and
back parts of the nose. Ulcers are frequently found in the
mouth and on the tongue ; on the skin appear blotches of a pale
red color, and sometims disappear for a time, and again appear
in the same parts or others. The hair sometimes falls off;
blindness attacks the patient, and a variety of maladies assail
him, which finally destroy life in misery and putrefaction.
Persons affected with syphilitic diseases must be careful not to
permit any of the virus to come in contact with the eyes, mouth, or
parts which are slightly cut or scratched. When you consider that
authors devote works of 500 pages to the consideration of Syphilis,
how little can I say in this place. It affects the whole body more
or less. Eruptions appear in various stages more or less marked.
Sometimes the only indication of the poison is certain red spots or
redness at the end of the penis, coming or going at no regular
intervals. Bone pains as of rheumatism are sometimes present.
Occasionally the hair falls off in places, scalp tender or eruptive,
hard spots or lumps form in the flesh, generally near the joints ; in
some cases the testicles diminish in size, or waste away. Again,
the unhappy patient is restless, inclined to be feverish, fretful,
throat slightly sore, or mouth or tongue occasionally ulcerated.


Strange as it may seem, many oases are recorded where true
secondary syphilis appeared, and the primary affection was so
slight as not to have been observed. I have met persons where the
only clue to the nature of the poison was disclosed by a livid color
on one side of the end of the nose and a hollowness of the voice.
It seems hardly worth while to enlarge. Syphilis, in the third
stage, affects the bones—they decay and fall in pieces. This is only
after the disease has existed for years, and has been inadequately
treated, and, I am sorry to say it, in this stage medical skill is often
baffled, few recovering ; while to our credit, I must say, such
cases are rare to what they were one hundred years ago.
In the days of Sir Astley Cooper, above half the cases of true
Syphilis proved fatal before the end of the first year. Now, no case
should so terminate if proper medical advice be had in time.
If you, or anyone, can afford to trifle with this disease by the use
of patent preparations, cure-alls, etc., etc., you surely hazard health,
life, and all that mankind usually hold dear to them, and that very
practice is a fruitful source of the worst forms of the disease. .If you
will write out your case fully, I will give you my opinion and terms;
but if convenient visit me at my office.
Buboes.
The syphilitic virus, being taken up by the absorbents, is
carried by them to the nearest glands. These glands are irri-
tated, become inflamed, swelled, and painful, and go on to
suppuration. When in the groin, these swellings are termed
buboes. Patients should guard against any of the matter from
a chancre or buboe coming in contact with a cut, bruise, &c.
Is Syphilis Communicable to the
Offspring ?
Having enumerated the consequences of contracting the
poison syphilis, one other question is often asked, of great im-


portance to the patient, and that is—Whether the disease is
communicated to the offspring 1 My answer is emphatically in
the affirmative. It is communicated by means of the semen to
the child begotten by a syphilitic person, and may not affect
the mother in the least. The reader will observe it is only
known to exist in the father by his past history—for he has no
eruption, or, perhaps, no other apparent symptoms existing at
the time the child is begotten. He does not communicate it to
the mother—and does not this conclusively prove that the
poison can only be developed when it finds a congenial and
co-operative agent, and that, too, of a fluid character, to assist
its progress ? The child is born with a constitutional eruption,
and, unless some blood-purifying medicine is given, will die of
syphilis. Why do not these symptoms appear in th’e father in
all cases ? Because the co operative agent is not there in a
degree sufficient to cause its development. The same agent
may subsequently exist, and cover the father with constitutional
eruption.
But are we to suspect the father only ? I fear not. Con-
cealment, either from ignorance or design, is often found in the
other sex. The bodies of children born prematurely are often
covered with eruptions ; indeed, it is usually the cause of miscar-
riage with prostitutes.
It is, indeed, often the case that a disease of this very char-
acter is found in the bosom of the domestic life, where all
around gives evidence of happiness.
Alas !
“ That lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed,
And prey on garbage.”
As before remarked, it is communicated to the infant by the
father. It cannot be communicated to the mother without
ulceration of the genital organs of the father, or the direct appli-
cation of the virus.


While this is one of the many pages of life presented to usy.
and we cannot prevent the melancholy fact, we have applied our
best effort for the removal of the consequences.
Surgeon Langston entirely eradicates all traces of syphilis from
the system. Uses no mercury—all his medicines are
vegetable.
TO ALL MEN
WTio need medical treatment and yet, from any cause what-
ever, hesitate, I say write me freely. I may meet your objection
or aid to overcome the obstacles.
You must consider that medical advice or assistance is required;
in your case, else you would not have applied to me. I think,
and so do thousands of disinterested and intelligent persons, that
medical science to-day offers nothing so universally successful as*
my treatment, in the special classes of trouble herein described.
I deem its merits self-evident to every intelligent person. X
shall therefore expect to hear further from you.
I try to feel as if I had a personal acquaintance with every
correspondent, and treat him as a valued friend ; and whether
you ever order or not, I shall be glad to hear from you and know
your conclusions on this subject. Of course every letter is
sacredly private. As a further assurance to my correspondents, I
destroy all letters, or return them to the writers, whichever they
prefer.
If now you conclude to place your case in my hands I shall bo
pleased to hear from you, and promise you the most careful
attention. My patrons, while quite numerous, are not such a
multitude but that I can and do give each of them individually
close consideration.
W. LANGSTON, M.E.C.S., Eng., etc.,
121 Collins St.,
Melbourne.


Important Notice.
During my vast and extended practice as a specialist (over
40 years), I have treated and cured nearly fifty thousand patients,
many of whom applied to me for relief only after being pro-
nounced incurable by other physicians. My record for cures, as
my case-books will prove, is unparalleled in Australia, conse-
quently I have no hesitation in guaranteeing a positive cure in
every case I accept for treatment. I observe the utmost secrecy
with my patients, and only exhibit testimonials and letters of
gratitude from cured patients, when I have the full consent of
the writer.
My references as to experience, qualification, honesty and in-
tegrity are abundant, and I respectfully refer intending patients
to any old colonist, clergymen, M’s.P., business firms, etc. in
any of the colonies, being as well known in N.Z., Q,., and
N.S.W. as lam in Victoria. My diplomas, registration papers,
etc., may be inspected together with thousands of testimonials
from cured patients at my consulting rooms.
In conclusion, I may say that I have more new patients from
the kind recommendation of old patients cured, than of all the
advertising people in Australia put together.
passages from a few testimonials
Received during the Tear, 1890.
Thousands received yearly. For fuller lists see other works
and the originals.)
DEBILITY.
Gawler, February 9th, 1890.
Dear Doctor,—l am pleased to say I have found nothing of
my old weakness and debility, nor seen anything of the disease
since taking your medicine. I should have written you before
but I have been waiting to see if the loss or any bad symptoms
returned; but, as I said before, I have found nothing of it. Very
many thanks to you.


SEMINAL WEAKNESS.
Perth., 2 | 4 ( 1890.
Dear Sir, —I take great pleasure in recommending your treat-
ment wherever I can, and my situation is such that many
chances present themselves. The cure has been of the most
satisfactory character.
EXTREME SEMINAL DEBILITY.
Ballarat, February 2, 1890.
Dear Sir, —The remedies I ordered some six week’s ago came
duly to hand, and I am now able to judge of their great curative
qualities. The predominating symptoms of my disease were, as
you know, passing away of the vital fluids while straining at
stool, followed by great weakness and nervousness. These
despondent symptoms have been entirely overcome by the use of
your treatment, and I am gaining very rapidly in health and
strength, and expect to report a thorough cure in a few days. I
shall always speak a good word for your most valuable remedies,
Anyone 'doubting your skill, you’re at perfect liberty to refer
them to me.
LOST VIGOR.
Newcastle, April 9th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —It is over a year since I finished taking your
medicines, so I thought I should like to write to you again.
I seem alright in myself, lam glad to say. Eat and sleep well,
I keep in good spirits, and have gained much flesh. I now
weigh 11 stone. I often think about you as my best friend, for
I shall never be able to repay you for your kindness and atten-
tion to me.
IMPOTENCY.
Geelong, March 10th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —This is to certify that eight years ago, when I
applied to you for treatment, I was broken down in health, both


in mind and body, and what was worse I was almost without
hope of ever finding relief. But, thanks to your wonderful
remedies, after the lapse of seven or eight years of married life,
I am still a man, sexually and otherwise, and consequently
bappy. I pen these few lines with a sincere desire to benefit
poor fellow-mortals, and will gladly answer by letter.
NERVOUS DEBILITY.
Wodonga, June 4th, 1890.
Dear sir,—l have much pleasure in writing to say how much
better I am to-day than last week, and hope in a week or two to
be quite well.
I begin to feel quite my old self again, feel much more in-
terest in my work, and enjoy myself when I have done.
Accept my heartiest thanks for your kindness.—l remain,
Yours faithfully,
GENERAL DEBILITY.
Christchurch, May 11th, 1890.
Dear Dr. Langston,—l am very much pleased with the treat-
ment 1 had from you two months since ; it has far exceeded
my expectations.
I have no pain in my back or any inconvenience whatever in
taking it.
It has been a great boon to me, I,can assure you. It is quite
a pleasure to take long walks now, which before it was a misery
to me
1 will recommend you too all my friends.—Yours very truly,


DYSPEPSIA AND GENERAL DEBILITY,
Sandhurst, March sth, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —Your letter to hand. I should have replied
before, but that I wished to give the remedies a fair trial, and I
am most pleased and happy to say that I have received great
benefit from them. I have given the treatment a fair trial, and
find it quite successful. It has removed all the aching pain
from between my shoulders, and instead of a slight stoop that I
had lam perfectly upright. I am, indeed, pleased that I saw
your advertisement and sent to you for advice, and consider it
the best day’s work I ever done. I shall not fail to tell anyone
with whom I meet that it is owing solely to your skill that I am
free from all pain.—Yours faithfully,
Bourke, 3 [ 5 | 1890.
Dear sir,—l am glad to say that I have derived great benefit
from your medicine. Wishing you every success. —I remain,
yours truly.
SEMINAL WEAKNESS.
Condobolin, February 22nd, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —Having used your treatment 1 am happy to
say that it has resulted in a complete cure. Hoping that others
may be benefited by your valuable remedies. —I remain, yours
faithfully.
Eidsvold, February 4th, 1899.
Dear Sir, —I am happy to state for the benefit of others that
I have received great benefit from your hands. My case was one
of lost manhood with emissions, but now the emissions have
stopped and my health is much better. You are at liberty to
use this letter if you wish, omitting the name.


APOPLEXY, NERVOUS PROSTRATION, &c.
Leeston, N.Z., February 6 | 90.
Dear Sir, —I take pleasure in recommending your treatment as
perfect, thorough, and complete panacea for all diseases,
resulting from derangements of the nervous system, I have
not the language with which to express my appreciation of its
beneficial results. Ponce de Leon vainly searched for the fountain
of perennial youth—you discovered it. Three years ago I had an
attack of apoplexy (the doctors termed it); my whole nervous
economy, so to speak, was rapidly tending to disruption and ruin.
I adopted your treatment, and to-day 1 am well—very well—
sound, hearty, healthy ; could walk thirty miles in a day if necessary.
SPERMATORRHOEA.
Grafton, February 21st, 1890,
Dear Doctor, —I have been using your remedies for spermatorr-
hoea, nervous prostration and general debility, and can say have
derived much benefit therefrom. Would heartily recommend your
treatment to all persons similarly affected.
Lisraore, N.S.W., June 10th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —Just a few lines to say I feel much better since I
began taking your medicine. My appetite has improved, my rest
is befter at nights, and I have not had a discharge since I came to
you.
Mackay, Q., March 4th, 1890,
Dear Sir, —I now take the opportunity of thanking you for your
wonderful case of medicine, which I received in January. I am
very sorry I did not write sooner to let you know how I was getting
on. I finished my medicine about three weeks ago, and I am quite


a new man. My friends are all astonished at the wonderful change
in me. Not only do I look better, but I have increased in weight a
stone. I have not had a discharge at night for some time now, and
have a good appetite, and can sleep well. In fact, I feel better in
every way. Your medicine has done me so much good that I think
I shall not require any more, but if ever I feel my health failing I
shall write to you at once. I wish you every success, and will do
all in my power for your advancement. Thanking you sincerely for
your kindness to me, —lam, yours sincerely,
Palmerston, N.Z., January 9th, 1890.
I beg to say I finished your of medicine about a month
before Christmas, and I am glad to say I keep perfectly well now,,
and a very much better man in every way than I was six months
ago. I have increased a stone in weight, and am altogether a
different person. My friends remark on my improved appearance.
VARICOCELE.
Taree, N.S.W., October 20th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I can now say with pleasure that all symptoms of
Varicocele have disappeared, and I can recommend your treatment
to all who are affected as I have been. You are at liberty to use
this as you please.
GENERAL DEBILITY, &c.
Masterton, N.Z., March 30, 1890.
Dr. Langston. Dear Sir, —Your remedies proved a great
success in my case, and have entirely cured me. I can attend
to my work now, as well as I ever could. Have lived here for


35 years, and am ready to testify that your treati does all
that you recommend it to do. I take a great interest in suffer-
ing humanity, and will do all I can to encourage people to
consult you.
WEAKNESS, LOST VIGOUR, Ac.
Gore, N.Z., March 10th, 1891.
Dear Doctor, —Since taking your medicine I have grown a
hundred per cent, better. lam gaining in flesh and am looking
a great deal better. The night losses have ceased altogether,
and my lost vigour is again returning. Words are not capable
of expressing the thanks I owe you.
SPERMATORRHOEA.
Brisbane, Q., August 29th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —I send you my testimonial. Excuse me for not
sending sooner. This is to certify that I have been cured of all
my troubles by Doctor Langston. My disease was Sperma-
torrhoea of the worst type.
Roxburgh, May 10th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I can truly recommend any sufferer to apply to
you for help. My case was given up as incurable, but your
wonderful skill and patience has effected a cure. The enclosed
is a small token of gratitude from } 7 our ever grateful patient.


SEXUAL DEBILITY.
Napier, Feb. 20th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —With feelings of gratefulness I beg to report a
complete cure of an aggravated case of nervous debility and
sexual impairment by your treatment. It has done for me in
two months what other physicians have failed to accomplish in
five years. I earnestly recommend your remedies to the-
afflicted, and deem them second to none for curative purposes.
Murruraburrah, March 9th, 1890.
Dear Doctor Langston,—l commenced your treatment on the
stb of September, and am happy to say that in six weeks’ time
I was cured. I followed your instructions as well as I could,
and waited six months to see if the symptoms would return, but
lam pleased to say such is not the case. Now, Doctor, to
verify the above I am willing to make oath under God that you
have cured me of a disease of ten years’ standing, and I recom-
mend everyone so afflicted to go under your care if they want
to be cured.
WTiangarei, N.Z., February 3rd, 1890.
Kindly send me another case as last. lam glad to tell you
lam ever so much improved. I shall always be indebted
to you.
Napier, January 3rd, 1890.
In commencing I wish you the compliments of the season, if
it is not too late, and Ido so heartily because under,your kind


care and treatment I feel much better now than I have done for
a long time. The chronic trouble is being slowly but surely
remedied, and I am in other ways much improved, physically
and mentally.
Cairns, Q., May 4th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —It is with gratitude that I this day testify to the
efficacy of your treatment. You have effected a cure, although
I did not follow your directions. The emissions ceased after
the second day, and I have no losses now whatever. I have
recommended others to apply to you.
VARICOCELE AND LOSSES.
St. Leonard’s, June 11th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —I commenced taking your medicines and wear-
ing your Electric Quadrant with Double Compress on March
4th, and continued till May 2nd, when I finished the medicines
and gave the Quadrant to a friend who had a slight Varicocele ;
he intends writing to you. I had very little hope of ever being
cured when I applied to you, as I had paid away over £lOO
without receiving the slightest benefit. lam now, however,
happy and grateful to you, as I am now able to marry, which I
intend doing next month. The Varicocele is cured, the parts are
stronger and better than before. I have no losses whatever,
day or night, and I can honestly say I never felt better.
Parkes, N.S.W., June 14th, 1890,
Dear Doctor, —In reply to your letter I am happy to say that
I am cured, although two doctors in Sydney failed to cure me.


after taking their rubbish for over seven months. You did as
you promised, made a complete cure in two months. If you
wish, and think it will be of any advantage to the afflicted, I will
make a statement o my case and send it to you.
Picton, April sth, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I have finished the medicines, and believe lam
thoroughly cured, as all the old symptoms have left me, and I
feel a new man.
NERVOUS DEBILITY.
Adelaide, April lltb, 1890.
Dear Sir, —Last week I commenced taking the medicines you
sent me for the relief of Nervous Debility, and I am pleased to
tell you I feel very much better already.
Geraldton, W.A., May 16th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I take pleasure in informing you that your treat-
ment has done me more good than all the medicines, etc., pre-
scribed by other doctors during the past two years. I do not
wish my name made public, but anyone you refer to me will
receive satisfaction as far as it is in my power to satisfy them.
New Plymouth, May 7th, 1890.
Dear Doctor Langston, —I have thought many times about
writing you as to my health after finishing your course of
medicine. My general health never was better; have done very
heavy work the last six months, and felt no ill effects or even


fatigue. That troublesome cough has left me. lam not troubled
with losses or bad dreams ; the parts are enlarged, which I did
not expect, and my friends all speak of my improved looks, and
congratulate me on my regained health. I have gained nearly
two stone since f consulted you. I shall always feel grateful to
you, and you are at liberty to use this as another testimonial to
your deserved merit.
NERVOUS DEBILITY.
Waipawa, June 20th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, — I take the opportunity of bearing my willing and
grateful testimony to tbe good received by the use of your treat-
ment. Since 1872, which was the date of my illness, caused by
various excesses, I have gone the round of the medical profession
in search of health, at a cost of something like £2OO, most, if
not all, of whom promising a cure. All failed. By a merciful
Providence I have been guided to you, and am happy in stating
that 1 have received more benefit by your treatment than all the
others put together during the last 18 years.
Forbes, June 28th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —Shall I continue the treatment? I have nearly
half of the medicine left. lam cured and don’t think I need take
any more medicine, but will continue until I hear from you.—
Yours gratefully,
Goulburn, April 9th, 1890.
I am pleased to tell you that in general health I am much
better. There is a marked difference in my memory, and I do


not feel nearly so fatigued as I did with exertion. My eyes look
better, and the darkness underneath has quite disappeared. My
nearest friends remark how much I have improved in looks.
Even now, if all further medicine to me were of no avail, I can
speak conscientiously and say that your treatment has worked
a wonder in my general health. —With kind regards,
GENERAL DEBILITY.
Dunedin, April 28th, 1890,
Dear Doctor, —I cannot speak in high enough terms of the
services you have rendered me; in fact, you have saved my life,
and it was the merest accident that I saw your advertise-
ment. I have advised a friend, Mr. ,to place his case in your
hands, and I am satisfied you are able and willing to cure him;
NERVOUS EXHAUSTION.
Rockhampton, November 25th, 1890.
Dear Doctor,—l feel it my duty to inform you of the great
benefit I have received. For nearly eight years I was suffering
from Nervous Exhaustion, and was so wretched at times that I
thought I should go out of my mind. I tried several medical
men, but none cured me. A friend of mine persuaded me to con-
sult you, which I did, and now I am quite a different person,
thanks to your skill. If you use this letter please do not put
my name in full.
VARICOCELE AND NERVOUS DEBILITY.
Wilcannia, N.S.W., Oct. 2nd, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I have now discontinued wearing your Varicocele
Quadrant for some time, as lam completely cured—never felt


better. I attribute my cure to the persevering use of your
medicine and appliance, and I cannot speak too highly of them.
It is impossible for me to express the deep thankfulness I feel
for my deliverance from what 1 once took to be hopeless suffer-
ing, but 1 must make some attempt to acknowledge the prompt
•care and attention you have bestowed on my case.
Yours gratefully,
SPERMATORRHOEA.
Launcestom, Tas.,|July 4th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —No one ever can know the mental anxiety I would
have saved myself could I have known you six years ago. I
had been treated by nine different doctors, each of whom
guaranteed to cure me, but they only made me worse. You
<mred me in seven weeks.
SEMINAL WEAKNESS.
Narrabri, August 21st, 1890.
Dr. Langston, Dear Sir, —I suffered long from Sperma-
torrhoea or Seminal Weakness, and used all forms of treatment
and Electric Belts to no purpose. I have now thought it due
you to state that your course of medicine has cured me com-
pletely, and I will gladly recommend your treatment to anyone
similarly affected.
You may furnish my 'address to any one who may apply
for it.
NIGHT LOSSES.
Hawthorn, September 2nd, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —I can recommend your treatment to all those
who are suffering from any evils of abuse. I suffered greatly


from eight losses, pains in my back, palpitation and noises in
the head, and your medicine effected a cure in five weeks. It
is eight months since you cured me, and I never was in better
health than I am at present.
Moonta, S A., July 16th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —Just a. line to let you know that I have taken the
case of medicine you sent me, and I am very glad to be able to
tell you that I am like a new man to what I was when I first
consulted you. Kindly send me another case with your usual
promptness. I may say here that it is very reassuring and en-
couraging, as it shows no loss of time on your part, to order
medicines one day and receive them by return post. Thank
you also for your attention to my letter.
Invercargill, N.Z., August 25th, 1890.
Dear Doctor, —Please excuse not writing to your before, but
I am pleased to inform you I am again in good health, thanks
to your kindness and good medicine. Your treatment ought to
be more known I am sure.
Wishing you every success, I am, yours truly,
Beechworth, November 9th, 1890.
Dear Sir, —I have taken the medicine as directed, and
followed your advice as well as possible, and I am very glad to
be able to tell you that I am very much pleased with the effect.
I feel very much better; the pain near my heart is gone. I
feel quite well as far as my general health is concerned.
The foregoing testimonials are, I may say, only a very few
of the many thousands that have accumulated day by day, and
week by week, and which would fill volumes. Patients may
see a profusion at any time and convince themselves, but in
every instance the name and address will be suppressed.


From the Globe, Sept. 19th, 18S8
A GOOD SAMARITAN.
THE WORK OF A LEADING SPECIALIST
DR. W. LANGSTON.
Saving the Imprudent Man from Himself.
Results of Interviews with Medical and other Gentlemen.
Important letter from Dr. Joyce, the renowned Irish pro-
fessor of materia medica and therapeutics.
W. Langston, M.R.C.S., Eng.
My dear Sir, —I am perfectly aware that any tribute I may
offer a gentleman like yourself, whose high professional standing
and literary attainments have stood the test of a scrutinising
public so many years, must he considered a trifle. Still, you
will allow me to add my mite to the many proofs you have
received from the profession and the public, bearing testimony
to their high appreciation of your distinguished services in this
country covering a period of about fifteen years, lecturing and
practising in all the large cities throughout the land, I have
come largely in contact with persons who had received your
professional services. This, perhaps, was for the reason that I
was educated in the University of Dublin, where diseases of the
nervous system and reproductive organs receive more en-
lightened attention than in this country, I cannot recall an
instance of aught but the most perfect satisfaction from among


-the legions who have been under your care. And this has made
the more lasting impression, as it is in such direct and positive
contrast with the dissatisfaction, positive injury and woe, pain-
fully manifested by invalids who had been under the treatment
of those unworthy persons, erroneously and falsely styling them-
selves physicians, who in their endeavours to deceive the public
by imitating your business methods, have done serious and in
some cases lasting injury to those whom they have thus
deceived. These charlatans are numerous, infesting all the
large cities, and flaunt the advertisements of bogus medical
institutes broadcast in everybody’s face. I shall carry back to
my native city grateful recollections of your friendship. Your
zeal and great success in your speciality will inspire me to
renewed and greater efforts in the new and exalted position that
lam to occupy. A.s you are aware, I have been honoured by
an election to the professorship of materia medica and thera-
peutics recently made vacant by the decease of my old dis-
tinguished friend. In occupying the chair made vacant by so
renowned and able a physician and instructor, I will be able to
instance cases of your triumphant skill, and hope in the future,
as in the past, to receive the benefits and aid of your counsel,
and it is not too much for me to expect that our correspondence
will be mutually beneficial, Believe me, my dear Sir, with the
most distinguished regard and respect, to be very sincerely, your
friend and co-labourer,
P. JOYCE, M.D.
The writer had taken up a work in , which on the
-cover bore the legend “ Mens Sana in Corpore Sano,” and out
of curiosity examined the title page. Supposing it to be one of
the ordinary catch-penny works which are to be met with now
and then, in out-of-the-way places principally, he turned over
its pages carelessly, when the name of Dr. Joyce attracted his
attention, and knowing that gentleman by reputation, he was
induced to read the letter above quoted with, it is needless to


say some surprise. The perusal of this letter interested him at
once in the work of Dr. Langston in which it occurred, and the
result was that he read the book from beginning to end with
increasing interest. He found it not only to be well and plainly
written, but abounding in valuable information upon subjects
of the most vital moment to the human family, and advice that
was at once warning and hopeful. Another feature of the book
also struck him, and that was that while it was scientific and
thoroughly practical in its treatment of the special subjects
discussed, it still so plainly presented its matters as to never
rise above the comprehension of the common mind. Its
language was pure, impressive, and on occasion even dramatic
in form as well as important. The work indicated the ex-
perience of long years of practice and research, and the writer
pictured to himself a venerable gentlemen, with spectacles on
nose and silvery locks crowning a benevolent face. He became
curious to see and talk with Dr. Langston and to this end called
upon him at his consultation rooms. When ushered into the
presence of the distinguished specialist he found him to be a
man of a good physicial appearance, with a fine face and head,
and the manner of a good sympathetic gentleman. The visitor
mentioned the cause of his intrusion, and said his visit was one
of simple curiosity, induced by reading the flattering testimonial
of Dr. Joyce. The doctor spoke warmly of the fine enthusiasm
for his profession and the great ability, of the eminent Irishman,
and predicted for him a most brilliant career. The conversation
turned to personal matters, when the doctor said, in reference
to himself, I was born in Hertfordshire and have practised
medicine and surgery 43 years. I was graduated from the
Royal College of Surgeons, London, after the usual curriculum
at St. George’s Hospital, more than 45 years ago. I served in
the Imperial forces during the Indian Mutiny as Surgeon ; after
its close I returned to England and engaged in the practice of
medicine and surgery with a strong desire to enter into special


practice, especially the treatment of nervous affections. After
five years of study and investigation to fit me for this line of
practice, I established an institute for the sole purpose of treat-
ing chronic and obstinate diseases which are but indifferently
understood by even the most distinguished general practitioners.
“Is your practice extensive ? ” “ Yes, for the afflictions which
I treat are very prevalent, and their victims, after seeking in
vain for relief elsewhere, hearing of my success, invariably come
to me at last. I should say during the last fifteen years 1 have
received consultation letters from every post office in Australia
and the islands; I have also been personally consulted by
invalids in every colony. Nor is my practice confined to this
continent alone ; I have patients in every country where the
English language is spoken, and also in France and Germany.
Last week I sent medicine to a patient in Calcutta. To-day I
have a letter of consultation from Bombay. I have patients
also in British and Dutch Guinea. “Do you see that large pile
of receipt books there P ” pointing to a case of shelves, “In
these you can find receipts for packages of medicine shipped to
all parts of the civilised world.”
“Your correspondence must be very extensive then Dr.
Langston.” “It is indeed. I have a medical assistant with
me, a stenographer, and an amanuensis to aid me in the work
of answering those letters, and filing and recording the orders
for medicine which they call for.”
Here the doctor requested his visitor to walk into another
department where the correspondence is filed. Pointing to a
pile of packages of letters which have occupied one side of a
large room and made a pile of several feet high, the doctor said
“ Here is an accumulation of more than 100,000 letters, all of
which have been read and carefully considered by me during
the last few years.”


“ These would seem to indicate that your practice is most
■extensive indeed, No doubt many of them bear testimony to
the efficacy of your treatment.”
“ You are right, and to verify that fact you are at liberty to
examine any letter or any number of letters if you will only
allow me to conceal from you the names of the writers, for I
guarantee inviolate secrecy here to all who consult me as to
their indentity. I may also add, that I guarantee certain relief
in every case that I undertake after a personal examination.”
By the way doctor do you treat such diseases as Bright’s,
-cancer, etc.”
“ I do not Sir, because the diseases you name, as well as
many others, belong to the class of incurables, and I have
neither the time nor the disposition to devote my energies to a
line of cases where I can accomplish no good, when I can be
■doing a. good work in the line I have chosen,”
“ I presume like all successful specialists you have more or
less opposition from the profession.”
“Yes, I have met with a mean kind of professional jealousy,
but less of late years than formerly, I may say that I have quite
ns many physicians under treatment as any other class, con-
sidering their proportion to the community.”
“ I have read your last book with great interest, and consider
it of vast interest and importance to humanity at large. May I
ask if it has a very large sale ? ”
“Yes. In the past the sales were very large, now they are
■even larger than they have ever been. You can form an idea of
the vast number of copies of that work which have been printed
and sold, when I tell you that we have worn out four sets of
electrotype plates in pi’oducing them.”
A call being made for the doctor by a new patient, he bade
the writer a courteous adieu, and hastened to his consulting
room, and the visitor departed.


Meeting Dr. Hayes at his office, enquiry was made of him in>
regard to Dr. Langston, his treatment of nervous affections, and
the results of such treatment. He replied that he had known
Dr. Langston for more than twenty years, and considered him
by far the best physician and surgeon in the city, in the broad
acceptation of that term, and, as a specialist in nervous diseases,,
he believed him to be without a peer anywhere. Dr. Hayes
said he was personally acquainted with Dr. Brownsequard of
Paris, and Dr. Winslow Forbes of London, and he believed that
Dr. Langston had cured more cases than both of these world-
renowned physicians. “ General Outram told me ” said Dr.
Hayes, “ Dr. Langston, when in the army, could keep more men
on their feet and able for military duty than any five surgeons
that he ever knew.” In summing up, Dr. Hayes said that from
his intimate knowledge of Dr. Langston’s practice, he knew him
to be a very skilful physician and an honest man, always worthy
of implicit confidence.
Conversations with the other gentlemen in regard to Dr.
Langston only confirmed the opinions above expressed, and the
whole matter is so remarkable that the writer has thought that
what is here given was at least worth recording.
Pater & Knapton, Printers, 290 a Little Collins Street, Melbourne.




/? iiUO
11 A
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




FILL this blank out with pen and ink.
Cross out whatever is not applicable to
your case, and underscore such symptoms as
you have, when room is not left to answer,
and return it to me with your order.
(Temperament means habit of body. The
Bilious is dark, not inclined to be fleshy, but
muscular, wiry. In the Nervous, or En-
cephalic, the nervous system predominates —
Mr.
Town „
BLANK CHART FOR CASE OF
F.O. Address.
is usually light-complexioned, muscles soft, but
not large ; large forehead, and apt to be active, Colony s- -
energetic, nervous, sensitive, and intellectual.
The Lympathic has a predominance of Lym- Age Waist Measurement Weight. __
pathic system : inclined to be fleshy ; usually
fair, plump, indolent and rather easy going. Occupation
The Sanguine has a predominance of blood ;
full blooded, warm natured ; passions easily .
excited; usually of sandy complexion, and of Married or Single..
active habits. The temperaments are often
mixed, or blended, as Nervo-Bilious, Sangui- Have you sent Urine
Lympathic, etc.)
QUESTIONS.
General Health. —Good, medium, impaired,
very poor. Usual condition ; strong, weak,
fleshy, thin, medium in flesh and strength F
Bowels : regular, irregular, costive F Troubled
with Piles : slightly, badly F Fistula Itching
of the Fundament F Appetite : good, medium,
poor F Digestion: good, medium, poor F
Pimples or Eruptions on the face and skin F
Subject to headache, nervousness, sleeplessness,
depression of spirits, fits of the blues F Ever
had any serious illness; if so, what F Fever
and Ague F Drink, or use Tobacco F • Been
under medical treatment F Whose F State
of pulse F
The Vital Organs. —Affected with Chronic
Nasal Catarrah F Discharge from nose ; drop-
ping in throat, sore throat, enlarged tonsils,
pain in front of head between the eyes, water-
ing of the eyes F Any tumor membrane
growing on the eyes F Lids red, granulated
or inflamed; tears overflow F Ears affected,
hardness of hearing, discharge noise in the
head F Any cough F Pain in lungs : which
side F Pain in chest, back, sides, between the
shoulders F Stomach feel tender; troubled
with wind or flatulence, sour eructations, a
goneness and faintness when stomach is
empty F Have you lost flesh ; chilly, at times
feverish ? Palpitation and flutterings of the
heart F Sleep well F Frightful dreams, sen-
sations of falling in sleep, nervousness, fear
of sudden death F Any relatives die of con-
sumption—father, mother, brother, sister F Any
hoarseness, wheezing, shortness of breath F
Any of your relatives been insane F What are
your worst symptoms F Are you troubled
with rush of blood to the head, dizziness,
ringing in the ears, dots and webs before the
eyes, and loss of memory F To what cause do
you attribute your disease F


Reproductive System. — If ever addicted to
evil habits or excesses ? If so, to what extent ?
If present habits are good ? If subject to in-
voluntary discharges, and how often ? Lose
semen in the urine ? If easily excited ? If
there is coldness, torpidity, or lethargy of the
organs P Loss of erectile power ? Premature
emission ? If you have gone to excesses and
over-taxed yonr generative powers in the past?
If the Yeins of the scrotum bag on either
side are varicose or enlarged, feeling like
earth-worms P If there is any shrivelling, or
wasting of the parts ; or any deformity or lack
of development ? If ever diseased, and if so,
in what manner, whether with sores or ulcers,
or a discharge ? Any swellings in the glands,
in the groin, or bubo ? How long since the
disease was contracted ? Any eruptions, cop-
per-coloured blotches, or sores on any part of
the body ; or falling out of hair, scabs on the
scalp, etc.? Any sores in the month or swel-
ling of the glands in the neck, armpit or
elbow ? Any pain, aching, nodes or enlarge-
ment of the bones of the legs or head ?
Describe any of these symptoms you may have
fully, or other evidence of the blood being out
of order. Have you used Mercury in any
form you know of ?
Urinary Organs. —What is the condition
of the urine : clear, cloudy, or high-coloured ?
Does it deposit a sediment after standing : if
so, of what colour ? Can you hold the water
well ? If the urine flows naturally and
freely; or is there any dribbling of the water
after urinating P Is there a constant gleety
discharge ? Any pain in passing water ? Do
you pass it oftener than natural, or in larger or
smaller quantities ? Any pain in the|back or
kidneys P If ever troubled with rheumatism p
Is the urine acid or alkaline ?
In confirmed kidney diseases, a quantitative
analysis is advisable, for which my charge is
10s. Take a block of pine wood inches
thick, 1| inches wide, and incher long;
bore a | inch hole through it lengthwise, fill a
small round vial with the morning urine, cork
it up tight, wrap a slip of paper (containing
your name and address), round the vial put it
in the block, wrap it up and seal it, and mail
it to me. The most important tests are for
Semen, Albumen, Sugar, Phosphatic and Uric
Acid deposits.
Special Diseases. —lf affected with any
Chronic Disease, Piles. Fistula, Varicocele,
Liver Complaint, Rheumatism, or any form of
Skin Disease, write as full a description of it
as you can. Of how long standing the disease
is, and to what extent if has affected your
general health whether physicians have been
consulted, and what they said of the disease.
Their treatment, and what benefit, if any, was
derived from it. If ruptured, how long, on
which side or both, and the measure around
hips. If trusses have been worn, and what
kind. This description of your case (omitting
of course, all that does not apply to it), will
enable me to form as correct a diagnosis as if
I had seen and examined you. The object is
to have you describe in what manner you are
affected as accurately as possible in your own
way.
Dear Sir,
THIS STATEMENT IS STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL.
SURGEON
LANGSTON,
121 Collins Street,
Melbourne, Victoria.
Enclosed please find ff ’ ■ :
for COURSE OF TREATMENT, which you will:
please send to my address at once. :


/ Hi
