

NEW SOUTH WALES
FEDERAL
ODE,
"BLENDED"
BY
HENRY L. TRAVELLER.
INTRO:
Australia lives—all hail her natal morn
A nation and a century, twins are born;
A world of nations know and own
That we from nothing have to greatness grown.
JANUARY 1ST, 190 0
[COPYRIGHT] PRICE, 1/-
Printed and published by H. J. Murray, Printer,
Burwood Road, Burwood,


“BLENDED.”
Something from nothing it is hard,express,
Yet the biithplace of Britons is after all, but a guess ;
Though small the beginning and rough was the way,
They fought and they conquered and came there to stay.
Of whom do we speak ? Why, of Britain’s brave sons
Who to England once came; we would fain be thought one
The more that they fought the larger th<=y grew—
Though now counted by myriads, they once were but few.
So great they became that the land would hold them,
So to make them more room, other islands jmfold them ;
These islands are many —Australia is one
Thus Australia was peopled by Britain’s brave sons,
For years they left parents and husbands and wives,
And a great many of them lost all but their lives
In trying to found from the land of the free
A solid foundation for the nation to be.


Yes, the Standard of England with its nine lions royal
Has waved ever since o’er Australia’s rich soil,
And, linked with the Unicorn and Ireland’s Harp sweet,
Helps to form such a banner that the world thinks
complete.
That same royal banner waves round the whole earth,
And the lands that are mourning it turns into mirth ;
Many centuries have passed, since told that should be,
And Britain’s children should own all the isles of the sea.
Many other things promised, but will not stop to name
them,
Let us be well contented, to do nothing to shame them ;
As children of honor let ns win—at least try—
A name like our Mother’s —let us do it or die ;
May England, and Ireland, and Scotland so great,
America and Canada with their great size and weight,
New Zealand and all other allies agree
That just like themselves, shall Australia be free.


As children at playtime, while we join hands and hearts,
Let us not be forgetting ingratitude smarts,
Let us hold out one tendril to clasp the old vine,
In one family’s love, may our whole hearts entwine
Our destiny one—now bound closer than ever,
May our love like our glory flow on as a river,
And now as we drink to all nations good health,
If the last, not the least, be ou- great Commonwealth.
A health to the sons of our great federation.
Ah ! sons of the greatest of great living nations,
Sons who have charged and plunged up to the hilt
Their swords and their bayonets, or have fell on the veldt.
To subdue the oppression so hated by Britain,
And pain that same freedom of which much is written ;
Those who have fought nobly to assist their brave mother,
Why should they not fight for and love one another.


Federated we be a family of six,
To our parent obedient for ever we’ll stick,
While great we’re becoming and mighty and strong,
May we, like that parent, always scorn to do wrong.
Midst festive rejoicings—our hundred years’ mirth—
Let’s remember the Patriots who assisted our birth—
Our Lang and our Wentworth and other bright sparks,
John Robertson, Jennings, our Dibbs and our Parkes.
And not only those who have laboured and died,
But those who still labour and stand side by side,
May their councils prove sweet as the voice of a Reid,
And continue to help all their brothers in need :
May one brotherly love all else far outshine,
Each wish be a word, that will end in a Lyne,
And while Australia drinks to the health of the State,
Let’s drink one more bumper to the States Federate.


Once more we lejoice as a Nation we stand,
A Nation who’ve cause to be proud of their land ;
Six Nations in one who will soon draw the sword
To break down oppression in deed or in word,
Yet will peacefully live and call all nations brother
And in unity dwell and assist one another;
Then roll on swift time, when the world shall be one,
When all nations are planets and Britain their pun.
Then hail, to the land of the Great Commonwealth,
God grant to its sons long life and good health,
And grant that its daughters may ever be free,
Its Queen and Her Rulers, good sound policy ;
Hail! to the land of the wild kangaroo,
The land of bright gems and the stately emu,
The land of the cocoanut, banana and apple,
The land that with poverty never need grapple.


The land that affords all the fruits of the world,
From such a bright spot may all sorrow be hurled ;
Yet again, then, we hail in song and in verse
The land that in commerce leads the whole universe,
The land that produces all kinds of seed
For drink or for bread or whatever we need ;
Again and again, o’er the sea, on the shore,
We sing to Australia—our home evermore.
•
Hail, Queensland, the favorite resort of the pine,
Victoria, so regal in name and in clime,
Adelaide and Sydney, so distinguished for beauty,
Tasmania and Perth, who have all done their duty.
Some lands produce one thing, and others another.
But we combine all of them mingled together;
Thus mingled by nature, and by God thus defended,
A Nation is formed that most truly is “ Blended.”
H.L.T.
( Copyright.)


