

NEW HEBRIDES
AND
TRADE IN THE PACIFIC.
EXTRACTS FROM REPORT
Proceedings of Intercolonial Conference
Australasian Chambers of Commerce,
HELD AT
SYDNEY, MAY, 1897,
Aqd from a Statement submitted to the Hon. G. H. REID,
Premier of New South Wales, February 17th, 1897.
Snbntu, :
John Andrew & Co., Printers, 13 Bridge Street,




NEW HEBRIDES
AND
TRADE IN THE PACIFIC.
EXTRACTS FROM REPORT
Proceedings of Intercolonial Conference
Australasian Chambers of Commerce,
HELD AT
SYDNEY, MAY, 1897,
And from a Statement submitted to the Hon. G. H. REID,
Premier of New South Wales, February 17th, 1897.
Snbiun It.S.i®. :
John Andrew & Co., Printers, 13 Bridge Street.


Memorandum of Chambers of Commerce, represented
at the Intercolonial Conference, held at Sydney, in May,
Melbourne
Sydney
Brisbane
Adelaide
Geelong
Maryborough
Rockhampton
Gympie
Charters Towers
Launceston
Hobart
Auckland
Napier
Canterbury
Dunedin
Wellington
Perth
Victoria
New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
Victoria
Queensland
Queensland
Queensland
Queensland
Tasmania
Tasmania
New Zealand
New Zealand
New Zealand
New Zealand
New Zealand
Western Australia
This Conference, held in the Exchange Buildings, Sydney,
was formally opened by His Excellency Viscount Hampden,
Governor of New South Wales, on Tuesday, 18th May, 1897,
and sat during a week.


From the Proceedings of the Intercolonial Conference of
Australasian Chambers of Commerce , held in
Sydney , in May , iSgy.
New Hebrides and Trade in the Pacific
M. I). M'EACHARN, Melbourne
In marvellous contrast to the somewhat arid and
uncertain climate of the Australian continent is that of the
many beautiful Island groups lying to the East and North
of Australia. The whole of the Pacific Islands are justly
celebrated for their wonderful beauty. Luxuriance of
lovely foliage usually fringes the bright sandy beaches, while
the clear water in the bays and inlets shows up the beautiful
submarine coral formation. There is little doubt but that
in the near future all these numerous Island groups will
become favourable and healthful resorts for the people of the
large cities now extending and increasing so rapidly in
Australia.
At present the great majority of the Islands are unsafe
for Europeans to live in, but, as in other lands, the Mission-
ary is pioneering the Island trader, and already small sailing
crafts are making way for steamers, so that in a very short
time the whole Pacific Ocean, four times as large as the
Atlantic, will become a busy scene of commercial life. A
very few years ago steam communication with the Islands


w ould have been thought unlikely and unprofitablenow
we have the steamers of the Union Co. of New Zealand
plying regularly to Fiji and the Friendly Islands, whilst
Messrs. Henderson and Macfarlane have a regular steam
line to the Gilberts, the Ellice, Admiralty and other Island
groups. The A.U.S.N. Co. trade regularly to New Cale-
donia and Fiji, and three or four French companies have
steamers trading between Noumea and Sydney.
Messrs. Burns, Philp and Company, Ltd., have estab-
lished regular communications with British and German
New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, and the Australasian
New Hebrides Co. run a steamer every three weeks between
the New Hebrides and Sydney as well as another steamer
between the ports in the New Hebrides Group itself. A
rapidly expanding trade is being done in coffee, sandalwood,
indiarubber, copra, tortoise-shell, pearl-shell, ivory nuts, and
other Island produce, whilst large quantities of bananas are
being received in Sydney from the New Hebrides.
Altogether some 15 steamers are already employed,
principally from Sydney, in this Island trade, and every year
the number of these vessels will increase, till in time the
Island trade will vie with the Coastal trade of Australasia
and prove a great source of wealth and power to Australia-
There is, however, a grave injustice being done in con-
nection with many of these fertile groups of Islands, and,
notwithstanding that representations have been made for
many years past to the different administrations in the
mother country, no steps have been taken to further British
trade.
The Federal Council of Australasia, on the 22nd
January, 1891, agreed to the following resolutions with
regard to the New Hebrides : —“That negotiations should
be renewed with the other Powers in order that there may


be applied universally to the subjects of all nationalities the
restrictions in the way of trading with the natives of this
group, which are at present laid exclusively on British
subjects.”
Early in this year an address was again adopted by the
Federal Council for presentation to Her Majesty, in which
the resolution of 1891 was embodied. It pointed out that
whilst Her Majesty had been pleased to command that the
subject to which such resolution related should receive due
attention, the Council had to regret that Her Majesty’s suc-
cessive Imperial Governments had been unable to arrive at a
satisfactory arrangement with reference to such matters; and
the address further states that Her Majesty’s subjects in the
New Hebrides and in Australasia had been seriously injured
in their business transactions and otherwise, as the conse-
quence of restrictions which had been imposed on them in
regard to their trading operations in the New Hebrides,
whilst no such restrictions have been imposed on other
persons —subjects of other nations. I think, therefore, that
this conference offers a fitting opportunity for urging the
Chambers of Commerce in the various colonies to take this
matter up with spirit and to urge the various Colonial
Governments to make such representations to the Imperial
Government as will induce it to remove these disabilities
under which Australians suffer.
Up to the present only resolutions have been passed
and representations made, but the matter has not been fol-
lowed up with that determination and spirit which is abso-
lutely necessary if we are to protect and foster British trade
in these Islands.
The Pacific is principally patrolled by British Men-of-
War, and, strange to say, these vessels, partly paid by
Australia itself, enforce stringent rules and regulations


against all British subjects, whilst they allow exemptions to
other nationalities, who consequently have fuller liberties,
which place them in a position of special vantage as com-
pared with our own countrymen. A French, German, or
American subject may start a coffee estate, bring his labour
from an adjoining island and thrive, while a British subject
cannot do so under very severe penalty.
It is a well-known fact that the Islanders never work on
their own Island, but have to be engaged and brought from
other Islands. British subjects are also debarred from
trading in or even introducing firearms, and a curious in-
stance of this is narrated in a small pamphlet recently
published.
A French trader at the New Hebrides called on a
British settler, and asked whether he wanted to buy a gun.
He said : “ No; he had one coming in the A.U.S.N. Co.’s
steamer ‘ Croydon,’ which he had ordered from Sydney.”
This Frenchman went to an English Man-of-War, and asked
the Captain whether he w r as aware of the British Imperial
law against the introduction of firearms, and informed him
that if he examined the “ Croydon’s ” manifest he would
find a gun consigned to an Australian settler. Upon
arrival of the steamer an officer of the Man-of-War boarded
her, examined the manifest, seized the case, fined the Cap-
tain and informed him the next case would result in
his deportation to Fiji. The Frenchman was then enabled
to sell his inferior firearms to the British settler.
Another case exemplifies the impunity with which
foreigners may commit crime and go unpunished. A few
years ago an American quarrelled with a native at Vila,
and chased him, rifle in hand; the native, expecting some
protection at the house of a well-known Australian resident
ran to it, but was shot dead in the entrance. The white


residents secured this murderer, and sent him to the High
Commissioner of the Western Pacific at Fiji; but upon
arrival there he was released at once, as the High Commis-
sioner said he had no jurisdiction over foreigners. British
subjects are supposed to go unarmed, and residence by
Australian settlers of respectability appears to be intention-
ally discouraged under the present joint protectorate. As a
consequence the natives themselves, whenever the British
Men-of-War leave the station, begin to kill and commit
crime with impunity, and woe betide a British subject if, in
self-defence, he injured any native. A Fiji planter was
killed by the natives, and upon his comrade applying to the
British authorities for redress, he Was told by high officials
that it served them right for going to the place.
The dual control of the New Hebrides is a huge farce;
different laws are made to apply to different nationalities.
The French Government pay an annual subsidy of some
16,000, from the vote for the encouragement of French
colonisation, and by this means they settle people on the
Islands, and run an inter-island and a direct steamer to
Australia. The Australian Co., so far, has carried on
nearly all the trade, but has to battle against many disabili-
ties. It receives no encouragement from the Colonial
Governments, and after eight or ten years loss and fighting,
must, if pitted against the French Imperial Treasury, and
discouraged by our own Imperial regulations, have little
chance of ultimate success.
Considering that the Presbyterian body have helped to
civilise these Islands at a cost of about that they
were originally discovered and named by the British, and
that the whole of the trade is done with Sydney, it seems
unique that a group of Islands close to our own doors should
be practically barred against Australians.


To a greater or lesser degree what applies to the New
Hebrides applies also to many of the Island groups
throughout the Pacific. Already we have French, German,
Dutch, Portuguese, and Spanish possessions, all of which
put disabilities upon Australian commerce, while at the
same time all these nationalities have the freest access to
British Islands and Australian ports.
With a fair field and no favour, the enterprise and in-
fluence of Australia must prevail, and the whole of the
Pacific Islands might fittingly be included in the Austral-
asian Federation in future years.
In New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands the French
Government place restrictions upon Australian traders that
they will not agree to their compatriots being subjected to
in the other Islands of the Pacific. The representatives of
French interests are ever active in blocking the extensions
of British trade, and in fostering their own holding over the
Islands, yet the Colonial Governments have only taken this
matter up in a half-hearted manner; and unless new life can
be infused into this serious and important subject, an incal-
culable injury may be done, not only to the Australasian
interests, but to the whole of the native races, and, indeed,
to the foreigners themselves who have settled in these lovely
Islands.


RESOLUTION.
NEW HEBRIDES.
“ That this Conference emphatically records its convic-
tion of the reasonableness and necessity of the demands
which have for several years been made by and on behalf of
British subjects who have trade dealings in the South
Pacific. That the restrictions in the way of trading with the
natives of the New Hebrides group, which are at present
laid exclusively on British subjects, should be applied, alike,
to all nationalities, and the Conference endorses, on behalf
of the mercantile communities of these colonies, the
petition on the subject in the address to Her Majesty the
Queen, adopted by the Federal Council at Hobart in Feb-
ruary last.”
Carried unanimously.
Chairman ; A. W, Meeks.


Statement in Reference to the New
Hebrides, being part Extract of that
submitted to the Hon. G. H, Reid,
Premier of N.S.W., Feb, 17, 1897.
The New Hebrides were discovered by the British ;
trade was first opened up by the British, and these Islands
and New Caledonia are said to have been included in the
commission of the first Governor of New Zealand.
The Presbyterian Churches of Great Britain and Aus
tralasia have spent over are now spending
per annum, and have given many lives in the civi-
lising of the Group and the instruction of its people.
The language of intercommunication in the Group,
even between the French and the natives, is English, and
the natives have desired British, and protested earnestly
against French, annexation.
On these and other grounds, and in the interests of
Australia, the attempted annexation by France was resisted
by Britain, and the dual control was instituted.
That control has been worked entirely in the interests
of the French. Under it British settlers are prevented by
their own Government from selling intoxicants, firearms, or
explosives to the natives, and are not allowed the privilege
exercised by Queenslanders of obtaining labour in the
Islands of the Group. The French settlers are not so re-
stricted by their Government, the result being that even
British traders and planters are tempted to become natural-
ised French subjects. Some of the restrictions named are
certainly most desirable as a proper protection to the
natives, but there can oe no such protection when French


subjects may and do supply what British subjects are pro-
hibited from supplying. The result is a great advantage to
the French trader, not so much in the trade done in objec-
tionable articles, but in the return trade which it commands.
But for this French trade would have disappeared.
While British traders are thus handicapped, British
planters are practically banished by being compelled to
refrain from using the only labour obtainable—that from an
adjoining Island (a New Hebridean will not work on his
own Island), though the same labour is passing their doors,
under the British Hag, to more distant Queensland. This more
than accounts for any excess of French over British planting.
The French Government have exhibited throughout a
restiveness under the dual control, and have shown a strong
desire to so establish French influence and trade that they
may at a suitable time demand possession on the ground of
an overwhelming interest. Such interest once obtained that
demand could not be long resisted by Britain.
The French seek possession in order that they may
enlarge their South Sea Colonies, and that they may obtain
fertile Islands suitable for extensive planting which will pro-
vide opportunity for the settlement of free colonists, and for
the wide employment of convicts. Every promise to cease
deportation of convicts to New Caledonia has been broken.
Only recently a vessel containing convicts arrived there, and
the New Hebrides are much better fitted to absorb that
element than New Caledonia. But, above all, the French
value the New Hebrides because the Group, with the fine
harbour (Port Sandwich) and other good harbours, would
form a powerful base to direct operations against Australia
in time of war.
Shortly after the establishment of the dual control it
was represented to residents of Sydney by missionaries and
others in the New Hebrides that the French were setting


themselves down to a policy of enlarging their influence and
trade in the Group; that a French New Hebrides Company,
containing some Island Englishmen, was operating; that i
was in receipt of subsidies up to ,£20,000 per annum from
the French Government; that the Government were aiding
French settlers by refusing to place on them the restrictions
the British Government placed on its subjects ; and that all
this was with a view to establishing eventually a good claim
for annexation. It was asked if Australia was going to
allow her trade and influence in the Group to be wrested
from her, and it was pointed out that if she wished to retain
these she would have to exert herself. In response a
number of Australians joined together, and established the
Australasian New Hebrides Company, and embarked on an
effort to maintain British prestige and Australian trade.
The result has been, in comparatively few years, the
securing to Australia the bulk of the New Hebridean
business, and the immense improvement of communication.
An Inter-Island steamer visiting each Island of the group
every three weeks, and an ocean steamer direct to Sydney
every three weeks, having replaced the few schooners
previously intermittently engaged.
This has not been done profitably, but at a loss to those
concerned, and it is felt that the inequality of the contest
with French interests must end in British interests going
under unless the latter get that fair play which they have a
right to demand from the British Government.
The “dual” control should impress its regulations on all
alike, and should not mean severe restriction on an English-
man and comparatively no restriction on a Frenchman.
Such unequal control provides practically no protection to
the natives, and compels English settlers either to become
French subjects or to give up the effort to establish them-
selves in the Group.




