

NEW ZEALAND.
A VINDICATION
OF
THE CHARACTER OF THE MISSIONARIES
AND
NATIVE CHRISTIANS.
LONDON;
CHURCH MISSIONARY HOUSE, SALISBURY SQUARE.
18GL


Lt^^Ca — *
tXo <
/#- * /.. ■' v fa* 2~*
**./*/ sr
£*/3-


CONTENTS.
Introduction ........I
The Services Rendered bt the Missionary Body . . . 2
(1.) At Earlier Periods . . . • . ib.
(2.) Since the Colonization of New Zealand . . . 6
The Native Character Marked by Good Faith and a Desire
eor Law 11
(1.) Immediately before the War . . . . 13
(2.) Since its Commencement . . • .17
(i.) Among the non-belligerent Natives . . ib.
(ii.) Among those actually Engaged in the War . 20
Tabular Statement or Civilization , . . . . 25
APPENDIX.
Letters oe Wiremu Kingi to Archdeacon Hadeield .• . 27
Extracts erom the Reports oe Mr. Fenton and the Waikato
Committee . ....... 30


NEW ZEALAND.
A VINDICATION
OF
THE CHARACTER
OF THE
MISSIONARIES AND NATIVE CHRISTIANS.
Few iu a position of any publicity pass through
lire without incurring some degree of obloquy,, and few
enterprises wliicli have for their object the amelioration of
neglected and degraded portions of the human race are
carried _ through without much, and often long sustained,
opposition to their progress, and undeserved aspersion upon
the character of their agents. Nor is the bitterness of mis-
representation or misunderstanding usually softened, lint
rather enhanced, when the object is of a direct and decisively
spiritual nature. The servant is not greater than his Lord.
If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you. If
they have kept My saying , they will keep yours also. (John
xv. 20.) v
It is, therefore, no matter of surprise that, under the
exciting circumstances of New Zealand at the present
moment, reflections should have been cast both upon the
Missionaries themselves, and upon the success of their work.
The former are alleged to have embarassed, or even to have
taken part against the Government. The natives whom
they have brought over to the profession of Christianity,
are, in substance, alleged to have exhibited a barbarity
which indicates how incompletely they have been reclaimed,
and how rapidly they are relapsing into the brutality
of a savage state.
It is necessary, therefore, to vindicate both the Mis


sionaries and their converts from the charges which have
been brought against them; and, so far as onr materials
enable us, to show that the aspersions cast upon both are either
wholly unfounded, or in* a very high degree exaggerated.
So far as tendencies of a discouraging character exist among
the Maories, the Missionaries have not disguised them; nor
do the Committee desire to withhold from the public facts
which may be considered unfavourable. They are anxious,
however, that these should be rightly understood, and espe-
cially that what have been the consequences of a state of
unusual excitement should not hastily be assumed to be its
causes.
The observations now offered will be classified under two
heads :
I. The Services Rendered by the Missionary Body.
11. The Native Character marked by Good Faith,
and a Desire eor Law and Order.
I. The Services Rendered by the Missionary Body.
(1.) Services in the earlier periods of European inter-
course with New Zealand, and at the time of its colonization.
New Zealand became known to Europe about the middle
of the seventeenth century; and the first representation
given to the world of its inhabitants was that they were “ a
bloodthirsty race who had commenced hostilities with their
western visitors without provocation/’’* Even Cook sus-
pected them of evil, and some untoward collisions took place
between the natives and the ships of his expedition, in spite
of his steady discipline and friendly policy, f A few years
later, the island had acquired a character which made them
the very bye-word of abhorrence in the civilized world.
“New Zealand was at this time proposed in the House of
Commons as an eligible field for convicts; but the cannibal
propensities of the aborigines overpowered every argument in
favour of the scheme.” % Indeed “it is difficult to convey an idea
of the terror in which the New Zealanders were held about this
* Thomson’s Story of New Zealand, yol i., p. 229.
flb.p. 231,232. fib. p, 241.


period. Sailors groaning under scurvy, and in sight of a country
covered with vegetables—the specific of the dire disease—pre-
ferred toothless gums to contact with cannibals. As the deer
™ tog 6l 80 all men dread the eaters of men. . . In
1791, Captain Vancouver anchored in Dusky Bay, in the Middle
Island, on his voyage round the world ; but no vessel entered any
ot the northern harbours during that year; and an idea of the
dread in which the natives were held even by educated tra-
vellers might be drawn from the following incident:— Admiral
d iimtrecasteaux, when searching for La Perouse, arrived off New
Zealand m 1793. His naturalist represented the importance of
obtaining several flax plants, but the Admiral refused, out of
terror, to approach too near to the coast, although the natives
weie friendly, and paddled in their canoes to the ship to barter
mats and weapons of war for iron and fish-hooks.” 116
The South Sea -whale fishery, the excellence of New
Zealand flax, and the establishment of penal and other
settlements in the neighbouring seas, gradually led to fur-
ther intercourse between our commercial navy and New
Zealand, New Zealand chiefs found their way, not only
on hoard our ships, but to Sydney and even to England
But this growing confidence was checked by lamentable
instances of disgraceful cruelty and breach of faith on
the part of our misguided navigators; till in 1809 the ill-
treatment of Tarra, the son of a Wangawa chief, issued
in the well-known massacre of the Boyd; the captain
crew, and passengers of which, were, with four' excep-
tions, treacherously murdered and eaten, and soon after as
remorselessly avenged. The natives were denominated “ the
enemies of mankind ;”f* and so great was the estrangepient
between the two races that u every vessel approaching the
coast had boarding nets, and during the three years ending
1817, one hundred New Zealanders were slain by Europeans
in the immediate vicinity of the Bay of Islands.” J-
At this crisis it was, that the Missionary stepped upon
the scene. Missionaries, indeed, had been ready to enter
upon the work in 1810; but the state of excitement on all
sides was such as to render a postponement of their enter-
ic1 ’ I ® 6 imperative, and it was not till the end of 1814
and while a bloody fend between two native tribes, arising
* lb. p. 241. f Ib. p. 252. t lb. p. 253.


out of the massacre of the Boyd, ran high, that the Bey.
Samuel Marsden, with his little hand of followers, landed in
the Bay of Islands. With noble intrepidity, Mr. Marsden
and Mr. Nicholas spent the night among the chieftains of
Wangaroa, the very perpetrators of the massacre y and by
this hold act healed at once the open sores which existed be-
tween the hostile tribes, and laid the foundation of that
better understanding which, with few, though sometimes
fearful interruptions, has reigned between the European and
the Maori to the present day; and which, there is good ground
to hope, will, under God, be yet perpetuated.
The influence gained by the Missionaries may be traced
in the records of the Missionary Societies which have la-
boured in the island, in Mr. Marsden's interesting memoirs,
and in Miss Tucker's beautifully delineated “ Southern
Cross."* It is sufficient here to adduce, in proof of it, the
thankful recognition of it by those who have since realized
the substantial benefits thus secured to them.
The Governor of New Zealand, on opening the second
session of the Legislative Council (Dec. 14, 1841) said:—
“ Whatever difference of opinion may be entertained as to the
value and extent of the labours of the Missionary body, there can
be no doubt that they have rendered important services to this
country, or that, but for them, a British colony would not at this
moment be established in New Zealand.”!
And these words have received the imprimatur of Mr.
Swainson, who was at that time and for many years after-
wards, Attorney-General of New Zealand:—
« Whatever difference of opinion may be entertained by the
settlers of the extent of Missionary influence among the natives,
all are now agreed that the Missionaries have rendered important
services to both races, and that but for their labour’s, a British
colony would not at this moment have been established in the
country.”!
New Zealand, which by various public acts had been ac-
* Life of Marsden, by the Rev. J. B. Marsden., The Southern Cross and
Southern Grown, by Miss Tucker.
f Lari. Papers, Aug., 1842, p, 199.
| Swainson’s New Zealand, p, 93.


knowledged independent,* became a part of the Queen’s
dominions by cession, under the treaty of Waitangi, in 1840.
It is well known that the Missionaries were ff promi-
nently forward }> in obtaining this treaty. Mr. Taylor,
in whose handwriting the treaty was drawn up, observes
that “this was mainly accomplished by the influence of the
Missionary body/' j- Captain Hobson bears the most de-
cisive testimony to the same effect. In a letter dated May
39, 1840, and addressed to Mr. Davis, he says :
u The period having arrived for proclaiming the sovereign
authority of Her Majesty over these islands, it accox’ds no less
with my public duty than it gratifies ray personal feelings, to
acknowledge in the most ample manner the efficient and valuable
support which I have received from the resident members of the
Church Missionary Society, in carrying into effect with the native
Chiefs the views and objects of Her Majesty’s Government,
“As the official organ of that body, I beg you will accept and
convey to every member of the Mission in .New Zealand my
cordial and hearty thanks for the very zealous and effective
assistance which they have x'endex-ed me ixi the execution of
this duty.
“ Ihe station which I have the honoui’ to fill may justify my
recording in this public manner, my thankful sense of the
personal attention which I have received from the gentlemen of
the Mission, &c.”:j:
_ Captain Hobson further manifested bis confidence in the
Missionaries and the high sense he entertained of their
qualifications for regulating the intercourse between tlie
natives and the colonists, by appointing Mr. George Clarke,
for sixteen years a catechist in the Mission, to the important
office of “Protector of the Aborigines/’J
The state of the Colony at the beginning of 1810
was critical, and it was of great consequence to secure the
cession of the sovereignty both cordially and without delay.
In the effort to secure this important object, the Mis-
sionaries rendered a service deeper and more opportune
than is conveyed in the mere assertion of their having
assisted in the negociation. But it is not so much to
this service, valuable as it was, that the Governor and Mr.
*Parl. Papers, Apr. 1840, p. 68. Thomson, vol. ii. p. 11.
f Taylor’s New Zealand, p. 210.
t Report of the Church Missionary Society for 1340-1, p. 95.


Swain son refer in the passages cited above, as to previous
exertions extending over a period of a quarter of a century,
by which the native race had been prepared to welcome
British settlers, and to allow “the shadow” of a British
Queen to rest upon their beautiful and productive islands.
(2.) Services since the colonization of New Zealand.
The beneficial effects of Missionary influence has never
ceased to be felt. The testimony of Governor Grey on this
point, and as to the devotion of the Missionaries to their
work, is full and explicit. It was given in person to the
Committee of the Church Missionary Society in May, 1854,
and afterwards embodied in a Minute, which was corrected
by himself.
“ Sir George Grey stated that lie had visited nearly every sta-
tion of the Society, and could speak with confidence of the great
and good work accomplished by it in New Zealand; that he be-
lieved that out of the native population, estimated by himself at
nearly 100,000,* there were not more than 1000 who did not make
a profession of Christianity; that though he had heard doubts ex-
pressed about the Christian character of individuals, yet no one
doubted the effect of Christianity upon the mass of the people,
which had been evidenced in their social improvement, their friendly
intercourse with Europeans, and their attendance upon divine
worship; . . . . that the great want in the native church at
present was a consolidation of the work, and its establishment upon
a basis of self-support; that it was impossible for a single bishop
to accomplish such a work, from the extent and geographical isola-
tion of the different parts of the diocese; that he understood it was
the opinion of the bishop that there should be four bishoprics in
the Northern Island, in which opinion he concurred; that the most
suitable persons to be appointed to the new sees were those he un-
derstood to have been recommended by the bishop, namely, three
of the elder Missionaries of the Society, who had commenced the
work, and brought it to its present state; that the appointment of
these gentlemen would, he believed, give satisfaction; that he be-
lieved nothing could induce the Missionaries to desert the natives ;
that they would rather give up their salaries and throw themselves
upon native resources ; that they possessed the full confidence of
the natives, and were thoroughly acquainted with their character ;
* The result of the census of 1858 gave a native population of only
56,049. But this was an estimate rather than a census ; and is generally
believed to be an under-statement. Other authorities give the numbers at
from 70,000 to 80,000. —See C. M. Intelligencer, Jan,, 1861, p, 19.


but that, if the Society were now wholly to withdraw from
Zealand, the work would, he believed, fall to pieces, and the Mission
do an injury to Christianity? whereas, if the work should be con-
solidated and perfected, as he hoped, the conversion of New Zea-
land would become one of the most encouraging facts in the
modern history of Christianity, and a pattern of the way in which
it might be established in all other heathen countries.”*
The Parliamentary Papers are prolific of and
reports furnished by the Missionaries of different Societies
who have been consulted by the various Governors, examined
by Commissioners on native affairs, and thanked for in-
formation furnished respecting movements in progress among
the people around them.
It is sufficient to mention, specifically, that several were
examined by a Board of Commissioners on Native Affairs in
1856 j and again by a Committee of the House of Representa-
tives appointed in November of last year; and that the present
Governor has invited their opinions on matters of native
policy, and availed himself of the information their position
enabled them to give, up to the date of the latest letters
which have been received from them.
In a Report on Native Affairs in the Waikato District,
by F. D. Fenton, Esq., Resident Magistrate, lately printed
by order of the House of Representatives, that gentleman
remarks:—
“ The Government owes a deep debt of gratitude to the
Missionaries. Most dilemmas have been solved, more or less, by
their interference. When Sutton was assaulted, the agent sent by
Governments obtain the surrender of the offenders was insulted and
defied. The chief, Te Katipa, who was present, declaimed his wish
that they should be given up, and pleaded his total want of power.
Ultimately they were surrendered through the influence of one of
Mr. Maunsell’s native teachers. The powder stolen by the Man aha
natives was, I believe, returned through the agency of the Mis-
sionary clergy.’G
Aud again:—
“ The time will come when these Missionaries, the only efficient
state police now existing in the country, will be taken by death, or
* Report of the Church Missionary Society for 1853-54, p. 153.
f Fenton’s Report, p. 9.


rendered unable by advanced years and much labour to render that
assistance to Government which has often and again been their only
reliance in the time of trouble; —and we quietly await that time
without an effort to supply the vacancy. When we see the great
things these men achieved and the influence they have gained,
without gifts of money to covetousness or offerings of power to
ambition, we must admit that some secret existed in their system
which would be a valuable knowledge for Government when they
are no more. The secret is simply this; they worked upon Maories
with Maories, choosing talent before birth, a new energy rather than
an ancient name.” *
This passage affords incidentally an important testimony
to the value and efficiency of native agency ; and to the ex-
istence of materials for its supply. Mr. Fenton, it need
hardly he remarked, is far from having brought out the
whole secret of the Missionaries" power, and does not touch
the deeply penetrating tap-root through which it draws its
true support. It is, however, an important testimony to
the reality, the extent, and the beneficial nature of that
influence.
The powder referred to by Mr. Fenton was stolen early
in the year 1856, and restored a few months after, through
the instrumentality of Mr. Lanfear of Haurald.
To the_ instances adduced by Mr. Fenton, we may
add an earlier but still more important one. In 1843, im-
mediately after the collision at the Wairoa, the thanks of the
Governor of the Colony were given to Archdeacon Hadfield,
for services thus described by Mr. Swainson:—
“ Now was the time to attack the white people before they were
prepared. Happily for the peace of the country, the people of the
district had for some time been living under the ministration of one
of the most devoted and influential Missionaries in New Zealand; and
it is hardly too much to affirm that Wellington owed its safety at
that moment to a single individual, the Rev. Octavius Hadfield.”f
The last mail has supplied a further example of the whole-
some interpositions of the Bishop, the Missionaries, and
other Clergy, in the case of a threatened attack upon Auck-
land. The details of this affair will be referred to hereafter
in illustration of another point. J In alluding to it here, there
* Penton’s .Report, p. 12. f Swaiason’s New Zealand, p. lIS. J See p. 18.


is no intention in the slightest degree to undervalue the ex-
ertions of the Government officers and of Mr. McLean,
especially, whose part in the transactions appears to have been
a leading one. There can be as little room to doubt the sub-
stantial aid the latter received from the active efforts of the
Clergy.
These instances are sufficient to vindicate the general
conduct of the Missionaries. It is quite true that, in common
with the Bishops and other Clergy of the Church of Eng-
land, they have, for the most part, if not uniformly, taken a
position adverse to the Government in respect to the justice
of the present war. This they have done, not hastily, or
out of preconceived hostility to the Government. On the
contrary, the earlier letters of those remote from the seat
of war, distinctly reserved the opinion of the writer till after
fuller investigation, and it is only as the result of deliberate
inquiry and well grounded conviction that they have at
length come to the conclusion now openly avowed by them.
This obviously was not only a question on which they had a
full right to form and express an opinion, but on which it
was their bounden duty to do so. The censure directed
against them falls with equal weight upon the many inde-
pendent members of the House of Representatives who have
taken a similar view, and as boldly proclaimed it. Neither
class of men can be justly charged with having “ aided the
rebels ” or taken part with the natives in the present war.
The Missionaries, indeed, deplore in the strongest terms
the infatuation of those among the natives who evince a
determination not to listen to reason. Thus Archdeacon
Kissling comments upon the demands which, in the first
instance, were made by the party who threatened Auckland—
demands from which happily they were induced to recede —
in these words (Nov. 1, 1860) :
“ It is clear that the attack upon Auckland is altogether different
from the Taranaki affair. If the murderer can be discovered, all
will be done by British law and justice to convict him, and make
him suffer for his guilt; but, even if he were found, to deliver
him up to the revenge of natives can never be done. They
have been warned by our Missionary Brethren on their course
down the Waikato river ; but they seem to be reckless of life.
They are now warned and admonished by the Bishop of New


Zealand, and no opportunity will be left unimproved to show
them their error both from the Scriptures and reason; if in the
face of these warnings they persist on adopting and carrying into
effect their self-made law, ‘ that if a native is killed by a white
man, the white man must be delivered up to the natives ; and if a
white man is killed by a native, the native will be delivered to
the white men,’ there is no other prospect than war between the
two races in this province.”
And Mr. Morgan speaks thus of the headstrong self-will
which hurried on the war parties with whom he was brought
in contact (Oct. 3, 1860): —
“At present things look very dark. Many of whom we had
hoped better things join the movement. I wish, poor creatures,
they could see their true interests, and that they would remain at
lt is useless to speak with them on this subject. They
leave in full confidence of victory. It is not a pleasant thing to
see the armed bands passing our home, and to fear that many
may never return. All we can do now is to pray that God may
open their eyes to see their danger.”
Against Archdeacon ITadfield, a charge less vague and
general, yet scarcely less unsubstantial has been advanced.
He is accused of having withheld important information and
even of having declined to forward to the Governor an offer
on. the part of Wiremu Kingi, to submit the question of his
rights in the Waitara Valley to arbitration. In vindication
of the Archdeacon it may be observed, that KingVs letters,
which will be found printed at length in the Appendix, con-
tained nothing which had not already been said by Kingi
himself to the Governor and his subordinates; that, so far
from expressing any willingness to submit the matter to
arbitration, they announced his determination to hold the
land to death “Man first, the land next ” that the
Archdeacon was actuated by an implicit confidence in the
moderation of the Governor, never anticipating that he would
push matters to the extremity of war; and that the Governor
was expected at Wellington in March, (the last letter being
dated in December) when he looked forward to an opportunity
of personal conference on the subject. The feelings which
influenced the Archdeacon were shared with him by the
Bishop of Wellington; who, in a letter to the Governor,


printed in the Southern Cross (Sep. 1, I 860), has openly
avowed the responsibility of having given advice in accord-
ance with the course actually pursued. The Bishop’s words
are: —
“ I think you have been misled in the matter of Archdeacon
Hadfield’s conduct about the Taranaki war. He told me, months
back, that he wished to write to you about the state of the natives
at Taranaki, as he had received a letter from William King; but
as I then expected you at the General Assembly in February or
March, I recommended his waiting till you came, and then to talk
the matter over. We had no idea of the sudden coup de main
your Excellency was planning, and the proclamation of martial
law in the province of Taranaki came upon us before we had any
opportunity of remonstrance. Both the Archdeacon and I were
out of the country and on the high seas when your Excellency
made the speech you allude to at Taranaki; I never saw it or
heard of it till last month. But at the same time I should say
that if I had seen it, I should never have understood from it that
you were going to introduce a new principle in the deciding of
native titles to land; and that you were going to ignore the tribal
right of ownership, and to accept the usufructuary possession as
being a title to the fee simple.”
The •unprejudiced reader will now he able to appreciate
the justness of the imputations against the Missionaries and
Clergy generally, as regards their conduct in the un-
happy state of affairs in New Zealand.
11. The Native Character Marked by Good Faith
and a Desire eor Law.
A disposition has lately been manifested on the part of
writers on New Zealand, to mete out a more even-handed
justice between the natives and their European visitors, even
'dining the period of the greatest animosity between the
races. Thus Dr. Thomson says :
“ Captain Cook on several occasions unjustly suspected them of
evil, while they almost invariably reposed confidence in him. With-
out measuring the past by the present standard, the savage New
Zealanders on several occasions acted like civilised men, and the
Christians like savages.”*
* Story of New Zealand, vol. i. p. 230.


Doubtless ignorance of their manners and customs, and
the extreme difficulty of communicating with them, led to
numberless misunderstandings ; and neither side sufficiently
appreciated the sacred value of life in respect to the other.
But it is foreign to our present purpose to go back to those
more distant eras.
The progress of the Maories since 1770 is well exemplified
by a tabular statement drawn up by Dr. Thomson, and
which will be found at the end of these remarks. Further
information elucidating the point will also be found in the
Church Missionary Intelligencer for January, 1861.*
The present race is described in general as “ intelligent,
high-spirited, and warlike, but good-humoured^—“impa-
tient of injustice, yet amenable to reason, and possessing
more common sense and judgment than the mass of a
European community. J '’*j-
Dr. Thomson represents them as
“ respecting their ancient laws and customs, but ready to
embrace new opinions given out by men in authority. . . . Chiefs’
words,” he says, “ were rarely broken, and they never, like
Highland chiefs, fulfilled promises to the ear, and broke them
to the sense. Revenge is their strongest passion, and this
feeling is kept alive for generations When mastered either
physically or mentally, they become as manageable as children,
but this power must be exerted in the right way, for like their own
supplejacks, they are more easily overcome by gentle and skilful
management than by ill-directed foi’ce.”t
These elements of character will account for many of the
features which have been exhibited during the present out-
break, and might have furnished a solid basis for other than
a forcible solution of the complications which have arisen.
It will be convenient for the purposes of the present
paper to examine into the phases of native character mani-
fested—
(l.) Immediately before the war.
(2.) Since its commencement .
■ (i.) Among the non-belligerents.
(ii.) Among those actually engaged in the war.
* See especially p. 23. f Strainson, pp. S, 9.
I Thomson’s Story of Km Zealand, vol. i., pp. 84, 86.


(1.) Immediately before the war. It has been alleged that,
as in the case of the Chinese lorcha in 1857, the disputed
land question was merely the spark which kindled the names
of a war long inevitable. This is grounded upon the
uneasiness exhibited hy the natives, more especially in what
is known as the Maori King movement. It is admitted on
the part of some of the Missionary body that “ before the
war commenced, there was an evident desire on both sides to
try their strengthyet the communication in which these
words occur, speaks of the present war as one which img’h
easily have been avoided.” It will be seen that the desn e
adverted to, so far from being general on the side of the
natives, must have been confined to a very limited section
of them —a section at the worst not larger than the war
party among the colonists.
For the Europeans have hitherto been greatly inferior in
number, the positions occupied by them have been scattered
and undefended, and their occupation has been that of peaceful
settlers seeking a livelihood from tillage or merchandize and
surrounded by their families. All this has put it in the power of
the natives —if only a general feeling had resulted iu a com-
bination of purpose, at least to have destroyed the colony lor
colonization purposes —if not literally to have “ driven the se
tiers into the sea,”* at anytime within the last twenty years.
They have on the contrary, as Governor Grey declares,!
manifested a most friendly feeling. At present
“the male Maori population on the North Island over .14
years of age are 27,700, against the European male population
over 12 years of age of 11,500. Every native above quoted is
capable of bearing arms, but not 1 in 20 of the European adults
ever saw a rifle or musket. The one is brought up to agucultuie,
the other to war from a child.”!
* " During a night debate, held in the large house erected lor the
purpose, when one of the Southern orators was advocating the total ex-
pulsion of the Europeans from the country, Tarahawada arose, and, passing
round the house, blew out, one after another, all the candles, and resumed
his seat without a remark. The orator, understanding the allusion, suit,
‘I think you had better light the candles again;’ to which iarahawaiki
replied, ‘lt was foolish to blow them out.' ” ( Fenton t Report , p. 2.) Mi.
Buddie adds, “The meeting at once apprehended the meanmg_ ot this
symbolical act, and the orator sat down amid roars of laughter enjoyed at
his expense.” (The King Movement, p. 8.) t p, 8.
+ Correspondence in the Times , Dec. 26, 1860.


They are, therefore, still superior in number to the set-
tlers. But their actual and relative strength has within the
last few years greatly decreased, and this circumstance
must act powerfully as a check upon any disposition to assume
the aggressive, supposing it to have existed.
In reference to the tribes within his personal observation,
Mr. Ashwell (Oct. 33, 1860) expresses his fear that cc a
retrograde movement has taken possession of the native
mind/-’ He thinks “ that feelings nearly akin to their native
customs are beginning to prevail and ascribes the increase
of this to “ what they consider an unjust and unholy war"
with Wiremu Kingi, with whom he says “ their sympathy
is very great." Yet he adds :
“ Their anxiety for peace at the commencement of the war
was proved, by meeting and proposing that thirteen Waikato
chiefs, four Missionaries, six native teachers and deacons, and
two English magistrates, to be chosen by the Government, should
be allowed by the Governor to proceed to Taranaki for that
purpose ; but it was too late. Whilst writing this proposition to
the Government, a canoe brought word that a battle had been
fought, and mediation was at an end. Nothing would have been
easier had such a plan been tried before the declaration of martial
law . Old Te Wherowhero * said to me, ‘lf I had been applied to I
could have settled this. But the first news that reached me was,
that the soldiers had left for Taranaki.’ The poor old chief was
deeply distressed.”
The head quarters of the Maori King movement will
be found among the Waikato tribe; and by far the most
turbulent and active of the natives now in arms are members
of the same warlike tribe. Yet it is among these very people
that we have the most distinctive evidence of a disposition
favourable to the formation of law and order.,
In the year 1857, Mr. Benton was appointed Resident
Magistrate among the Waikato, for the purpose of intro-
ducing or rather of encouraging the adoption of civil institu-
tions among the natives. A Committee of the House of
Representatives, which met in November, 1860, designates this
as “ a wise course/' as having been carried out in cc all
essential points" with judgment, and as having been
“ attended on the whole with decided success." t The Rev.
* Potatau, .the first King, since dead, f New Zealander, Nov. 3. 1860.


B. Ashwell, of Taupiri, speaks of it in these terms (Oct. 23,
1860) : —■
f£ If the plan so successfully commenced, had been persevered in,
I do not hesitate to say that the whole of Waikato, and, in all pro-
bability, other districts, would have now been covered with court-
houses and machinery for the gradual introduction of British law.
The experiment was successful beyond our most sanguine expecta-
tions. In less than twelve months, five court-houses had been
erected on the river, and a good staft of native assessor’s, to assist
the European magistrate, were organized. A Runanga, or Muni-
cipal Council, assisted in carrying out the decisions of the Court ;
i.e, their moral influence rendered physical force unnecessary in
no case has the decision of the magistrate been resisted. This
hopeful movement was suffered to die out, from a groundless fear
on the part of the Government that it would widen the breach
already existing between the Queen’s party and the native King
party. Even now, although more than two years have elapsed
since his removal, in some of the villages summonses are still issued
by the native assessors, and damages awarded. A case occurred a
few months ago, when a young man stole some salt from a store in
this neighbourhood - a summons issued ; the case was tried , and
the damages, five shillings, willingly paid.
<< j have only one or two remarks to make on this subject, to
prove how the leaven of this movement was increasing, and what
a powerful engine for good it was becoming.
“ The reports of the Waikato Courts had reached distant tribes.
In 1858 I received a letter from Bishop Williams, in which
he said that the Courts of Waikato had excited much interest
among the natives of Poverty Bay and the East Cape, and
that he should, perhaps, send some chiefs to Waikato, to see their
practical working. Secondly—the moral power of these courts
will be seen from the last case tried at Kahumatuku, a village _ two
miles from Taupiri Church Missionary station. A native from
Kanawhanawba River, a tributary of the Waipa quite the back-
woods of New Zealand—when in Auckland, stole clothes from the
fence of Archdeacon Kissling’s Institution. He managed to escape
to Kanawhanawba, to his home. Mr. Fenton heard of it, and
sent two native assessors to bring the offender to Kahumatuku.
He came, accompanied by his father and brothers, who offered to
pay eight times the value of the articles stolen, if they (the Couit)
would let off the prisoner from the sentence of the magistrates,
viz., three months’ imprisonment in the Auckland jail. The magis-
trate said, ‘No ; it cannot he. I wish to show the young men of
Waikato that they cannot commit theft in Auckland with impunity,


and think they can escape to the bush and be safe.’ He was ac-
cordingly imprisoned.
“ Only second to the success of the Gospel was the progress of
this movement.”
These extracts show how amenable the natives are to the
firm and judicious exercise of authority, grounded on prin-
ciples of equity and good conscience. But the Report of Mr.
Benton, and that of the Committee of the House of Repre-
sentatives, bring out another point involving considerations
scarcely if at all less weighty. It is now generally acknow-
ledged that the Maori King movement is to be regarded
chiefly as an attempt to set up a kind of concurrent authority
with that of the Colonial Executive, both being subordinate
to the British Crown. The Reports in question bring out
the fact that the movement is, virtually and in the strength
of it, neither more nor less than an effort on the part of the
natives to secure for themselves a code of civil and criminal
law, adapted to the peculiar circumstances of the race. Mr.
Fenton says:—
“ Believing that the cause of the regular success, and the origin
of the imposing position of the European body, exists in a perfect
concentration of action resulting from order and organization,
they have resolved to use their utmost efforts to introduce these
prime requisites amongst themselves.”
The Committee of the House of Representatives unani-
mously arrived at the following conclusion :
“ Such a movement need not have been the subject of alarm.
One of its principal aims undoubtedly was to assert the distinct
nationality of the Maori race, and another, to establish , by their
own efforts, some organization on which to base a system of law and
order. These objects are hot necessarily inconsistent with the
recognition of the Queen’s supreme authority, or antagonistic to
the European race, or the progress of colonization.”
Fuller extracts from these important Reports will be
found in the Appendix.
Abundant other evidence to the same effect might be
produced. What has been said is sufficient to show that,
in the opinion of those most interested and best qualified to
judge of it, this movement was, at least up to a recent period,
divested of a treasonable character; it indicated no general


wavering of allegiance, no warlike tendency ; and was capable,
if wisely dealt with, of being turned in a safe and wholesome
direction.
It has been shown elsewhere that the natives did not
take the initiative in the war;* and that it is an open ques-
tion whether justice is not on their side.f
We come next to examine,
(3.) The disposition of the natives since the commencement
of the war ,
(i.) Among the non-belligerent natives. The great hulk
of the people have, up to the date of the last despatches,
taken no part in the war.
The Rev. R. Burrows writes (Nov. 5) :
“ All the natives north of Auckland are quiet, but much excite-
ment exists among them, and they are anxiously asking when the
Governor means to stop the Taranaki war.”
“We are doing what we can, each one in his sphere, to allay
the present excited state of the natives generally. Pray for us,
that we may act with wisdom towards those that are without and
with faithfulness towards all.”
Archdeacon Hadfield (Nov.) says : —■'
“I am happy to say that it has been a great comfort to me and
others that the Home Government has not approved of Governor
Browne’s proceedings in reference to the Taranaki war. The
ablest men also in the House of Representatives have condemned
the Governor’s conduct in the matter. Nothing has produced such
a good impression on the natives as this last circumstance ; they see
there is a power now in the country to check injustice on the part
of the Governor.
“ The natives of my district are all quiet and peaceably dis-
posed ; but it is impossible to say how long this will last, if they see
the Government persecuting those whom they most highly respect.
We, however, look above for help and guidance.”
The Bishop of Waiapu writes that all are quiet down the
East Coast. “ Your Missionaries of Tauranga and Maketu
report the same of their districts. - ”
Similar assurances from the Missionaries might easily be
multiplied, as well as promises of security both of person
* See Memorandum on New Zealand Affairs , p, 20, Xb. pp. 2, seqq.


and property, not only to Missionaries but to settlers, Mr.
Morgan, who resides in the most unsettled part of the Waikato
district says :
“ The feeling amongst the natives towards the scattered Euro-
peans in Waikato is generally good. Personally they are as civil
to me as ever.”
Mr, Ashwell writes, (Oct. 30); —
“ The excitemeftt [about the murder at Patumahoe] is very
great; I much doubt, humanly speaking, if the chiefs can control
it. Many have been to assure us of our perfect safety in the
worst of times.”
And Mr, Armitage, a settler near Taupiri, writes to Mr.
Ashwell;—
“ The time has come when I am obliged to go with my wife and
children. The Ngau Ngau have advised me to go, and Paldwhau
himself has come up to my house to give me the same advice. . . .
I shall be obliged to leave my goods, but Pene assures me they will
be respected by the whole tribe.”
But a transaction near Auckland, to which allusion has
already been made, shows more speakingly than anything*
else can, that though the natives are perhaps sensitively
suspicious where ground exists for suspicion, they are open
to the influence of reason, and that, even when their passions
are deeply aroused, confidence may be restored by kind and
judicious management. For be it remembered, the party of
natives here referred to were not only under the influence of
the excitement common to the whole race, and the special
excitement of the death of Erietera; but were of the ISfgati-
haua luupu, the very branch of the Waikato tribe at that
moment engaged in hostilities at Taranaki. The narrative of
the whole affair will be best given in Archdeacon Kissling's
own words:—
“A most untoward event took place about the 12th or 13th
October, which has thrown both Europeans and natives into
very great excitement and consternation. A young man named
Erietera (Eliezer), closely related to an influential chief, was
found dead in the bush at Patumahoe, about twenty-eight miles
south of Auckland, a bullet having evidently entered the pit of
his stomach, and lodged itself in his thigh j the fingers of his hand


also were grazed. From this the natives at once concluded that
lie was murdered, and that the fatal ball passed through his hand
while he endeavoured to divert the weapon in his murderer's
hands ; the shoe-marks also not far from the body were con-
cluded to be those of a white man. Soon after the discovexy of
the body, the chief above mentioned wrote a letter to one of my
native deacons, expressing his opinion that this was the first
blow of war on the part of the white men, to whiclj, the natives
were obliged to respond. The native deacon immediately an-
swered the letter, under my direction, showing to the chief that
he had hastily assumed what was yet to be proved, that an
inquest was to be held on the body of his relative, that if any
person was suspected to have been the murderer, and if that
person was proved to be so, that person should bear the penalty
of the law, —but that the blame should not be laid either on the
Governor, nor on the innocent, whether white or black. Copies
of this letter, and that of the chief, were immediately forwarded
by me to the Governor, with the omission of the xxame of the
former. lam thankful to say that the chief has entirely changed
his mind with respect to the intentioxxs of the Government. We
had indeed hoped that the crisis was over as far as the province
of Auckland is concerned, when, on Monday night, the eldest
daughter of the Rev. B. Y. Ashwell came to our house with the
information, that a number of natives, including some of those
who were going to Tar an aid, had come down the Waikato river,
demanding the murderer of Erictera. They are now eixcamped at
Patumahoe, while the out-settlers ai’e taking x’efuge in Auckland.
The chief of the deceased, with many other Christian chiefs,
are urgent in their call upon their people to maintain peace
with the white men, and to Ixave the question fairly investigated,
hut the turbulent Maori youths, flushed with success in the Tara-
naki outbreak, will in all probability rush on, unless God’s Provi-
dence interpose and avert the fearful consequences. The Bishop
went early yesterday morning to their camp, twenty-eight miles
distant from Auckland They have been warned by our
Missionary brethren, &c.~{See p. 9,)
“ Nov. 3rd. lam most thankful to finish this gloomy letter with
the gratifying infoxunation, that it has pleased God thi’ough the in-
strumentality of Tiis servants, and the Christian chiefs above in-
ferred to, mercifully to avert the threatening evil. The armed
natives have returned to Waikato, stating that they have given up
hostile intentions upon Auckland. How well would it have been
throughout our dealings with this noble and excitable people, had
moral means and kindly explanations preceded the recourse to
bx’utal force of arms ! ”


It remains only to examine somewhat into the feelings
exhibited
(ii.) Among those actually engaged in the war.
It must not be forgotten that war universally and inevi-
tably stirs np all the worst passions of human nature, leading
to excesses which its historians rarely permit themselves to
detail. It is not to be expected that the peculiar usages
and feelings of a New Zealand warrior, engrained within him.
by the custom of centuries, can be altogether eradicated; or
that the international usages which prevail in Europe, of which
he has had no experience, can arise spontaneously within
his-bosom. Again, when we arraign the New Zealander for
the savageness of his nature, it is as painful as it is just to
set against these allegations, language such as that quoted
beneath from the correspondence columns of the leading
journal in this country, and inserted without one word of
protest on the side of moderation and common sense :
“It is now known for certain, that for many years past, two
dignitaries of the Church have been urging the natives not to sell
any land to the Government. Such being the case, it is to be
hoped the Government will not lose the opportunity of criminally
prosecuting them. It will be ultimately proved that the Clergy
have been the means of the sacrifice of property at Taranaki to the
amount of nearly a quarter of a million, and had we had a Napier in
New Zealand, he would ham hung them long ago”*
The death of Mr. Brown, soon after the commencement
of hostilities, and similar cases of individuals, who have been
shot down while approaching the native lines, cannot he
fairly ascribed to wanton cruelty. There was no firing upon
a flag of truce as at Hango; no treachery, as in the late
capture of Mr. Parkes and his companions in China; hut
men in hostile array on the field exposed themselves in a
way no soldier would venture or he allowed to expose him-
self in the face of an enemy in European warfare, and lost
their lives in consequence of their own incaution.t
The letters of the Missionaries enable ns to discriminate
between the tribes who have been guilty of acts of spoliation
and those who have abstained from it. It appears that
* Times, Dec, 25th, 1860.
f “Nearly all .the casualties our settlers haye sustained during the war
are to be attributed to imprudence Our people seem to court their
fate." —Nelson Examiner.


Wiremu Kingi and his immediate followers have taken very
little part in the war. The burden of it lias been sustained
by the Waikato. A party of Waikato took up the position
on the disputed ground which led to the first conflict in March.
The Waikato were engaged on the 27th June, and the
Waikato, again, were defeated Nov. 6. The operations south
of Taranaki have been directed against a different body of
natives, of whom it will be necessary to.speak presently.
Among the Waikato, the only parties ■who have made any
attempt to enrich themselves by plunder, belong to the
Ngatimaniapoto hapu. Mr. Morgan, in a letter already
cpioted, says:—
“ The statement that Kawhia natives had returned without any
plunder, but that Kahikihi natives returned laden, is false. The,
Patukoko of Kahikihi, and the Ngatuhikairos of Kawhia took
no part of the plunder. Ngatimaniapoto tribe alone brought
back plunder. They have upwards of 60 horses, &c. I think
when peace is made that the property would be returned.”
In a later letter (October 33rd) lie says :
" Only one tribe brought back plunder. They brought 61 horses,
6 oxen, 3 drays, and also 32 rifles taken from the troops, or rather
from the slain on the battle-field. They also brought much other
plunder, as tools, &c. A large quantity of stock plundered from the
Europeans was consumed, or is reserved for the Waikato now on
their way to Taranaki.”
But the heaviest charge, and that which is most ab-
horrent to our notions of war, —though unhappily not with-
out parallels in European warfare—is that brought against
the Ngatirnanui, south of Taranaki, who, on the outbreak of
the war, cruelly murdered the families of unprotected out-
lying settlers. Utterly abhorrent as these barbarous mur-
ders are to every principle of humanity, there is yet a lesson
in them, deserving our closest study. There is traceable the
band of God, permitting evil so to fall as to mark bis dis-
pleasure at national offences.
“This nation,” says Dr. Thomson, "has not yet forgotten
how their people were slaughtered by Commander Lambert in
H.M.S. ‘Alligator,’ in 1834, and keep as mementoes of their treat-
ment some of the shot thrown at them.”*
* Story of New Zealand, vol. i, p. 91.


The circumstances were these :
«In April, 1834, the bark Harriet, J. Guard, master, bound
for Cloudy Bay, was wrecked at Taranaki, near to the spot where
the English settlement now stands. _ For six days the ship-
wrecked mariners were treated as friends; but from some un-
explained cause a quarrel arose, in which twelve sailors and
twenty-five natives were slain, and Mrs. Guard, two children,
and ten seamen were made prisoners. Guard and several sailors
were allowed to depart, on promising to return with powder as a
ransom for the others.
uln consequence of GrU&rcl s personal representations} the (jrO"
vernment of New South Wales sent His Majesty’s ship ‘Alligator,’
Captain Lambert, to rescue the prisoners. On the arrival of the
force at Taranaki, the captured sailors were delivered up, and the
two interpreters who were sent on shore promised, that a payment
should he made when the women and children were released.
The soldiers were then landed, and as they formed in battle array
on the beach, two unarmed and unattended natives came down to
meet them. One introduced himself as the chief who had got the
women and children, rubbed noses with Guard in token of ancient
friendship, and told him that Mrs. Guard and the children were
Well and that they would he surrendered on the natives receiving
the promised payment. The officer in charge of the boat, attu-
ning evil motives to this man, seized him, dragged him into the
boat, and stabbed him with a bayonet.
£t A few days afterwards, Mrs. Guard and one child were
released, and the wounded chief was restored to his friends. The
other child was subsequently brought down to the strand on the
shoulder of the chief who had fed it, and he requested to he allowed
to take the child on hoard ship, in order to receive the promised
ransom. When told none would be given, he turned away; hut
before getting many yards he was shot, and the infant was taken
from the agonising clutch of the dying man, to whom it clung
as to a friend. The dead man’s head was then cut off, and kicked
about the sand; and Mrs. Guard afterwards identified it as the
head of their best friend. ,
«In consequence of a shot discharged, by whom and at whom
none knew, the ship’s guns and the soldiers commenced firing?
and after destroying two villages and several canoes, and killing
many natives, the troops re-embarked, and the expedition returned
Government of New South Wales then urged on His
Majesty’s Government the necessity of supporting the British
Resident with an armed force, as that officer was placed in a


position neither creditable to himself nor to the English whom he
represented.
“ It would have been well for the honour of the English name
had the Government of New South Wales been, like the Resident
in New Zealand, powerless ; for the Taranaki campaign resembled
the operations of insulted buccaneers more than an expedition of
His Majesty’s forces. A Committee of the British Parliament
expressed its disapprobation of this affair; pointed out that the
New Zealanders fulfilled, while the English broke, their original
compact ; and stated that this opinion was drawn even from the
one-sided evidence of the culpable parties, the chief witness being
Guard, an old convict, who said a musket ball for every New
Zealander was the best mode of civilizing the country,” *
In a maimer thus humbling to ourselves are the atrocities
of the NTgatiruanui accounted for. They have arisen out of
the unchristian conduct of professing Christians, and out of
provocations which might and ought to have heen avoided.
No one can do otherwise than deplore and condemn them.
Again, since the war begun , there have sprung up feelings
which did not exist before.
The late Chief Justice of New Zealand, Sir W. Martin,
says;—
“ The inevitable result of the course pursued in this matter
was, to weaken indefinitely every influence for good which was at
work amongst the natives, and to strengthen indefinitely every in-
fluence for evil. An immense impetus in the wrong direction
was given to the schemes of Maori agitators, an impetus which
they could not have acquired in any other way ..... There is
reason to believe that the King movement has gained more strength,
more adherents, since the beginning of this year, than in the
whole previous period.”
“ Of all the evil consequences of the doings at the Waitara, the
most formidable is this, the estrangement of the most thoughtful
of the native people, the destruction or grievous diminution of their
confidence in the Government.”-)-
Mr. Morgan says (Oct. 23) :
“ It is no longer a war on account of the piece of land purchased
from Te Teira, but a war to establish the mana or sovereignty of the
Maori King, and hold New Plymouth, by conquest.”
* Thomson's Story of New Zealand, vol. i. pp. 272, &c. See Pari.
Papers, June, 1837, pp. 18 —22.
f The I'amnaki Question , by Sir W. Martin, pp, 112, 114.


Mr. Asliwell says (Oct. 30) that “ a national spirit has
been evoked which it will he difficult to control/ - ’
Archdeacon hassling, referring to the anxious state of
affairs near Auckland, ascribes the whole to the Taranaki
war:—
“ Such is the lamentable effect of the unwise proceeding of the
Government at Taranaki—it has awakened the spirit of war in the
New Zealanders, who some years ago had literally exchanged their
weapons of warfare into plough-shares, pruning-hooks, sickles,
and spades, to carry on their peaceable occupations on their
farms, gardens, and pastures.”
The Pev. T. S. Grace writes (Oct. 23) :
“ As regards Taupo, I may say the position of the natives is
an armed neutrality. So far as the Gospel has held them hack,
they say they will not fight unless they see a just cause. Since
the commencement of the war the King Movement has gained ground
amongst them . They say they must do something to save their
island.”
The more earnest of the Christian natives at the Mission
stations are throwing in the powerful aid of Prayer in be-
half of their distracted country. Archdeacon Kissling says,
(Oct. 4) :
“At St. Stephen’s School we have a Prayer Meeting once a
week, at which Christians of both races attend and take part in the
prayers.”
Mr. Asliwell says (Oct. 23) ;
“ Our only hope is in the gracious influences of God the Holy
Spirit, who alone can rule the unruly and sinful affections of man.
We assemble every day at ten a.m„, to pray with my native teachers
for the blessing of peace and the gifts of the Holy Spirit.”
Mr. Grace says (Oct, 23); —
“We hold a "Weekly Prayer Meeting, to pray God to send a
spirit of peace amongst us.”
Fearful then as has been the catastrophe which has fallen
upon Taranaki and its settlers; terrible as has been the
shock under which the whole colony has quivered; and
demoralising as must be the effect of a state of mutual
suspicion and open warfare; there is traceable in the
events which had occurred up to the date of the latest


State of the New Zealanders in
vm.
1830.
1850.
1. Cannibals.
Cannibalism practised.
No instance of cannibal-
ism since IS t:5.
2. Wars frequent.
Wars frequent.
No general civil war for
eighteen years.
3. Knowledge of the art
Knowledge of the art of
Knowledge of the art of
of war without fire-
arms.
war with fire-arms.
war to resist Europeans.
4, Murders frequent
Murders less frequent
Murders less frequent
from superstition.
than in 1770.
than in 183(5,
5. Child-murder common
Child-murder loss fre-
quent than in 1770.
Child-murder less fre-
quent than in 183(5,
6. Strangers not tolera-
ted.
Strangers tolerated.
Anxiety to have English
settlements near vil-
lages.
7, One-tenth of the peo-
ple slaves.
One-tenth of the people
slaves.
Slavery extinct.
8. Population estimated
Population variously esti-
Population estimated at
at 100,000.
mated.
66,000.
0. Language unwritten.
Language written, por-
tions of Scriptures tran-
slated.
, All the Scriptures tran-
slated, several hooks
printed in Maori.
10. Not protected from
Not protected from small-
Two-thirds of the people
small pox.
pox.
vaccinated.
11. No potatoes, pigs, or
Potatoes and pigs abound,
Potatoes, pigs, and cattle
cattle.
few cattle.
numerous.
12. Plough unknown.
Plough unused.
Plough in frequent use.
13. Wheat unknown.
Wheat rarely cultivated.
Extensive wheat cultiva-
tions.
It. No commerce.
Trade limited to ships.
Extensive trade with
English settlements.
* Thomson’s Story of New Zealand, vol. ii., p. 294.
intelligence (December 12th), little to give an exag-
gerated feature to the sore judgment of war; nothing to
fasten upon a whole race the actions of a few; or to discour-
age the hope that harmony and good will may be restored,
and the blessings of an advancing Christianity and civiliza-
tion continue to be vouchsafed alike upon the European and
upon the native race throughout the islands. Events and the
preparations of the heart are of the Lord; may He yet
.suffer Himself to be entreated in behalf of His suffering
people; and speedily deliver them out of all their fears.
Church Missionary House,
February 1 lth } 1861.
CHRONOLOGICAL STATEMENT
SHOWING THE PROGRESSIVE CIVILIZATION NOW GOING ON
AMONG THE NEW ZEALANDERS,*


1770.
1886.
1839.
IS. Native laws in force.
Native laws in force.
Occasional reference to
English Courts, anxiety
for English laws.
16. Huts badly ventilated
Huts badly ventilated.
Huts badly ventilated, a
few wooden honses.
17. Native dress in use,
Blankets in occasional use
Blankets and imperfect
European dress common
18. Native food.
Native food, with pigs and
Native food, with pigs,
potatoes.
potatoes, and wheat.
19. Dead not interred.
Dead occasionally interred
Dead almost always in-
terred.
20. No half-castes.
21. No fire-arms.
A few half-castes.
Eiro-arms and ammuni-
Nearly 2000 half-castes.
Donble-barrclledguns and
tion abundant.
ammunition abundant.
22. Tea and sugar un-
Tea and sugar never used.
Tea and sugar in frequent
known.
use.
23. No European settlors.
About 1000 Europeans in
Nearly 60,000 Europeans
in the country.
. the country.
24 European ships plun-
Ships occasionally plun-
Ships never plundered.
dered.
dered.
25. Tobacco and spirits
Tobacco-smoking in use.
Tobacco-smoking univer-
unknown.
spirits rarely vised.
sal, spirits occasionally
drunk.
26. Iron, nails, and co-
Gunpowder, tobacco, and
Money alone an article of
loured clothes taken
blankets, taken in ex-
change for flax,pigs, and
exchange, no idea of
as payment for cu-
interest for money.
riosities.
potatoes.
27, ‘Women subjected to
Women lead lives of la-
Women do much labour.
much labour.
bour.
Pots, pans, and native
28. Native cookery in use.
Native cookery in use.
cookery in use.
29. Christianity unknown
1C00 Christians.
33,000 Christians.
80. Believed in a future
Believed in a future state.
Believed in a future state.
state.
Moveable property indi-
31. Property in common.
Property in common.
vidualized, laud occa-
sionally.
32. Wars, tapus, feasts.
Wars, fire-arms, selling
Trade, ships, land, flour,
subjects of conver-
land, Christianity, the
laws, ploughs, horses,
sation.
subjects of conversation.
wheat, &o., the subjects.
33. Tribes kept apart by
Tribes kept apart by an-
Union of some ancient
ancient feuds,
cient feuds.
foes, for mutual protec-
tion.
34. Stimulated to work by
Stimulated to work by
Stimulated to work by
hunger.
hunger and the wish for
hunger, and to obtain
fire-arms, Sc.
various articles of use
and luxury.
SB. The people distrusted
The people distrusted each
With few exceptions the
each other.
other.
people trust each other.
36. “ Como on shore, and
Several chiefs dying about
“ Wore wo to turn against
the settlors, wo should
we will kill and oat
this time exhorted their
you all,” were the
followers to protect the
bo shutting Up the road
defiant words ad-
Missionaries, even if
they waged war against
by which wo receive
dressed to some of
many advantages,” said
the early navigators.
the traders.
Moauui, in his letter to
the Hawke’a-Bay Jour-
nal, in 1857.


APPENDIX.
(A.)
THREE LETTERS FROM WIREMU KINGI TO ARCHDEACON
HADMELD.
(From the New Zealander, sept. 1860.)
Waitara , July 2, 1859.
Mr. Hadfield,—
Salutations to you, the face (friend) of my parents in death.
Great is xny love for you in the talk of the Pakehas, for the false
statements of the Pakeha are constantly reaching me. My loving
thought towards you has therefore arisen, that you may send a
word to the Governor and to Mr. McLean, about the proceedings
relative to Waitara here, for they persist in following the thoughts
of the man who is offering Waitara. Do you hearken. My
thought is not a new thought. You are aware that it is upon
Waitara. lam not willing to give up this ground. Think of (or
consider) Here's word which he spoke to you and to Wirenm when,
you two arrived at Waikanae* You know of that word relative
to Waitara. It will not be given up by me to the Governor and
Mr. McLean. However, you have heard my word to you when
you came to visit us. I said to you the wrong that will take place
after your departure will arise out of the land. You replied, Mr.
Parris has the management (or it lies with Mr. Parris). Now his
heel is lifted against me. This was his word to me, u lt was by
me you were saved.” At the present time he and Mr. Halse have
talked about taking (apprehending) me because of my holding the
land; for, holding the ground is a very bad thing in their estima-
tion. Hence has arisen the word of all the Pakehas that lam the
worst man, but I do not know wherein I am bad. If Pakeha
land had been taken by me my badness would be correct (it
would be just to call me bad). Another thing, if I had
struck the Pakeha my fault would be correct. But as it is,
*.it is they who bring wrong to me, I therefore remembered,
* “ The conversation to which he refers took place in the year 1839,
before this Island was a British Colony." Archdeacon Haclfield, Aug 4,


that with you would be the thought to the Governor, Mr. McLean,
and Mr. Parris, that you should send a word to that Pakeha, Mr.
Parris, for he strongly persuades Mr. McLean, and because I have
heard that the price for Waitara has been settled by him. Another
word of his was that they, the Pakehas, would not listen to my
words. At present they say that though but one man offers the
land the Pakehas will accept it. Hearken. This will be wrong
very wrong, very wrong. According to me, the boundary for the
Pakehas is settled, it is Waitara. Enough, let that remain there,
let your words be strong to the Governor and Mr. McLean to cease
their importunity regarding Waitara, so that we and the Pakehas
may sit quiet. You write to me that I may hear. Enough. Sa-
lutations to you,
From WIREMU KINGI WHITI.
Kaipahopaho, July 7, 1859.
Friend Mr. Hadfield, —
Salutations to you. Great is my love fox* you. Your letter
Ixas reached me, for this your love has come to me, the love of my
parents who are dead, you the one living, your clear words have
reached me, and I have seen them. Hearken. The Pakehas still
hold to their determination of taking (apprehending) me for my
hardness (firmness) in holding the ground. If indeed you had not
heard the word which you quote (in your letter) to me. Is it not
so, you and Te Wiremu (Williams) heard the word of Here (Here-
tawhangawhanga) relative to Waitara (saying) that it should he
held ; that was Here’s word and mine, that word was also from
you two. This is another word of mine, Do not you he dark.
Mr. Parris is the Pakeha who is pex’sisting ; great is the obsti-
nacy of that Pakeha. Mr- Parris has also talked of my being
shot with a gun, and simply bui’ying me outside, in our cultiva-
tions, (I am) not to he taken to the graveyard. It was his plan (or
idea) to fetch Te Wait ere, he died, and in like manner by Mr.
Parx'is also shall I die. That Pakeha, Mr. Pax'ris, is glad that I
should die, so that he may get the land. He rejoiced also at the
death of Te Waitere (Katatore) that the land might he clear. I
therefore considei’ed tlxat the tlxought is with you, the Governor,
and with Mr. McLean, as to that Pakeha, Mr. Parris, to do away
with the plaxi he persists in of getting Waitara, The system of
that Pakeha, Mr. Parris, is a had system, he leads by roads upon
which men go astray, for I have heard of a word of Mr. McLean’s m
saying that lamto he apprehended. It was said to Ihaia Kiriku-
mara. Enough of this. Do you hearken, peace has been made


by Matiu Te Waero with Ihaia Kirikumara, who has been here
at Waitara. Do you hearken, lam living outside, i shall not see
Ihaia. Do you hearken to my thoughts relative to the word you
wrote me on the subject of Christianity. My thoughts are upon
your word, that is, upon belief in our Lord Jesus Christ. Hearken.
I will hold to your word till I go and see you.
Waitara , December 5, 1859.
Friend Mr. Hadeieed, —-
Salutations to you. The countenance (friend) of my parents
and younger brothers who are dead. (We are) residing here in
the great grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Father, hearken, this
is to ask you to explain to me the new system of the Governor; I
heard of it from Mr. Parris when I went to town to close (stop
the payment of) the money of the Governor, the payment for
Waitara, one hundred pounds (100/.) I said to that Pakeha,
Friend—keep away your money. That Pakeha said, No, I said,
there is no land for your money to be placed (alight) upon. Mr.
Parris then said to me, It is wrong. If the Governor comes this
will be the real wrong, I said, It is well, you give (be the cause of)
the wrong, sufficient for me is the land. I also said to Mr. Parris,
Disputed land the Governor does not desire. That Pakeha replied,
That was some time ago, now this is a new system of the Gover-
nor’s. From what I know (in my opinion) the Governor is seek-
ing a quarrel for himself, for he has fully exhibited death. I
therefore ask you to explain it to me; perhaps you have heard of
the Governor’s new system of the present time, relative to cause-
less anger, insisting upon disputed land, and unwarrantably pay-
ing for disputed land which has not been surveyed, i)o you
hearken, I will not give the ground ; if the Governor strikes with-
out a cause, then death. Then he will have no line of action
(tikanga) for this is an old word, a Man first, the land next,” My
word was therefore spoken that you might distinctly hear what my
offence is, and also the error of all the Pa keh as, of Mr. Parris, Mr.
Whiteley, and the Governor. They say that to Te Teira only be-
longs his piece of land ; no, it belongs to us all; to the orphan and
to the widow belongs that piece of land. If the Governor goes
there (to where you are) you speak a word to him, and if he docs
not listen, it will be well, for I have constantly heard of the talk
relative to death. It was told me by Mr, Parris and Mr. Whiteley
—Enough,
From me,
From your loving friend,
From WIKEMU KINGI WHITI.


(B.)
Extracts FROM REPORT PROM MR. FENTON, R.M., AS TO
NATIVE AFFAIRS IN THE WAIKATO DISTRICT. (Dated
Whaingaroa, March, 1857.)
(Printed by Order of the House of Representatives .)
“1. The feelings and desires of the Maori population with
respect to their present social and political position may be suc-
cintly stated, as they are entertained almost with unanimity,
although the plans by which these desires are proposed to be
effectuated are various and conflicting. Recognising generally the
advantages derived from the European connection, they are still
conscious that they are gradually losing ground before the greater
individual energy, and more complete social organisation of the
whites ; and they are anxious to arrest their downward progress
before the disproportion of the races shall render the attempt hope-
less. They observe that the Government of the country is more
anxious to obtain possession of their lands for the augmentation of
the intruding body, than to elevate the present possessors, and
admit them amongst themselves as a component part of one people,
and they desire therefore to devise measures which shall tend to
advance them in civilisation, and entitle them, at some future
period, to demand the rights of citizenship on terms of equality.
They perceive that Government is unable or unwilling to elaborate
and prosecute any scheme by which law and order may be intro-
duced and enforced in their villages, and they now seek, by their
own intelligence and activity, to discover some means by which
these desirable objects may be attained. They observe that,
though they have followed the injunctions of their rulers, to live
peaceably and cultivate the habits of industry, yet they have made
little social progress, and their political status is daily becoming
of less consideration. They rejoice that the old Maori ‘ture,’
severe in its penalities and unjust in its application, has fallen into
disuse, but lament that the superior intelligence of their governors
has devised nothing to replace it. They remember the constant
interchange of politeness and diplomatic courtesy that has taken
place between the chiefs and each successive Governor, and they
recall these attentions with satisfaction, but they also ask what
mean these good offices from the representative of the Queen.
“ They know that when an assault is made, or a murder com-
mitted, a reprehensive article is written in the Maori Messenger ,


or a letter is despatched from the Native Department pointing out
the sin of what has been done, and urging the Maories not do so
again ; but they have failed to observe that punishment follows
guilt with more frequency than reward accompanies virtue. Finally,
believing that the cause of the regular success, and the origin of
the imposing position of the European body, exists in a perfect
concentration of action resulting from order and organization, they
have resolved to use their utmost efforts to introduce these prime
requisites amongst themselves.”
“ The following are the principal plans which are entertained
and advocated in the Waikato district; —
“ (1.) That an assemblage or parliament should be formed', to be
composed of men deputed from each tribe, and that Te Whero
Where shall be made King of New Zealand.
“ I have been present at several of their meetings, but have
never heard this plan advocated, though I have often heard it
condemned.”
“ (2.) There is a second class who suppose that the substitution
of the title ‘Governor* for that of King, would avoid most of
the objections connected with the former, and might possibly meet
with the approval and support of His Excellency. Their idea is,
that a Maori Chief should be named by them, and, having been
instituted into office by the European authorities, should be a sort
of second consul, specially charged with the supervision of the
Maori interests—that he and his secretaries should be supported
by the revenues of the country, alleging as a ground for this claim
to support, that the Maoris are large contributors thereto—that he
should have power to summon a ‘runanga’ resembling the General
Assembly which meets annually to adjust the European interests,
which ‘ runanga’ should, with his consent, make laws and appoint
officers—that he should be charged with the peace of the country,
and the execution of justice therein —and that when he died, of
became incapable to act, his successor should he appointed accord*
ing to their custom, by the voices of an assembly of_ themselves.
“ The number of Maori politicians attached to this creed is few,
and may be easily enlisted either amongst No. 1 or No. 3,
“ (3.) The third class appears to me to comprise the great hulk
of the community The active part of the agitation is
principally in the hands of the most intelligent of the middle-aged
men, though the old chiefs, without much actual interference, lend
their influence, and approve of the proceedings.


“ The plan is, to establish in each large village, by popular elec-
tion, a { runanga,’ or council, consisting of about 12 men, the duties
of which council shall be to make laws for the government of the
village. These laws will touch the Maori race only, and will deal
with such subjects as women, cattle, trespass, fencing, growth of
noxious weeds, adultery, theft, slander, pigs, canoes, taus, taurnau,
and spirituous liquors.”
Extract from Report op the Waikato Committee.,
“ appointed by the House of Representatives, to enquire as
to the circumstances wider which an attempt was made,
in the year 1857, to introduce institutions of Civil Go-
vernment amongst the Natives of the Waikato district,
the practical effects of the same, and the causes which led
to its discontinuanceN
44 They recognize as an undeniable fact, that of recent years, a
great movement (attributable to a variety of causes) has been going-
on amongst the native people, having for its main object the estab-
lishment of some settled authority amongst themselves. This move-
ment is not, in the opinion of your Committee, a mere transitory
agitation. It proceeds from sources deeply seated, and is likely to
be of a permanent and growing character. Upon the proper direc-
tion of this movement, the peace and progress of the Colony for
years to come will greatly depend. Though it does not appear to
be absolutely identical with what is termed the King movement,
it has become, and is now so closely connected with it, that the
two cannot be made the subject of separate political treatment.
The objects of a large section of the natives were distinctly ex-
pressed at the great meeting at Paetai on the 23x-d of April, 1857,
at which the Governor was present, and at which it was understood
by them that His Excellency promised to introduce amongst
them Institutioxis of law founded on the principle of self-govern-
ment, analogous to British Institutions, and presided over by the
British Government. 4 1 was present,’ says the Rev. Mr. Aah-
well, referring to that Meeting, ‘when Te Wharepu, Paehia, with
Potatau, asked the Governor for a Magistrate, Laws, and liunan-
gas, which be assented to ; and some of the xxatives took off their
liats, and cried 44 hurrah.” ’
“ Such a movement need not have been the subject of alarm.
One of its principal aims undoubtedly was to assert the distinct


nationality of the Maori race, and another to establish, by their
own efforts, some organization on which to base a system of law
and order. These objects are not necessarily inconsistent with
the recognition of the Queen’s supreme authority, or antagonistic
to the European race or the progress of colonization. Accidental
circumstances, it is true, might give, and probably have given, to
it a new and more dangerous character ; such, at present, appears
to be its tendency; but it would have been from the first, and still
would be unwise on that account to attempt to counteract it by
positive resistance, and unsafe to leave it, by neglect and in-
difference, to follow its own course without attempting to guide it.
“ For these reasons, your Committee beg to declare their
entire concurrence in the views expressed by the Governor in his
Despatch to the Duke of Newcastle of the 9th May, 1857, and in
the Memorandum accompanying the same.
“ In this Despatch, His Excellency writes thus with reference to
the King movement and its true character :— ‘ It was, however,
clear that they (the natives) did not understand the term ‘ King’ in
the sense in which we use it : but, although they certainly pro-
fessed loyalty to the Queen, attachment to myself, and a desire for
the amalgamation of the races, they did mean to maintain separate
nationality, and desired to have a Chief of their own election, who
should protect them from every possible encroachment on their
rights, and uphold such of their customs as they were disinclined
to relinquish. This was impressed upon me everywhere ; but
only on one occasion, atWaipa, did any presume to speak of their
intended King as a Sovereign having similar rank and power with
Her Majesty, and this speaker I cut short, leaving him in the midst
of his oration.’ In the Memorandum accompanying this Despatch
His Excellency writes thus :— ‘ The Governor approves the
appointment of Mr. Fenton, and desires to urge on his advisers
the importance of giving him instructions without delay. The
present moment is (as they observe) a critical one ; and if the
Government does not take the lead and direction of the native
movement into its own hands, the time will pass when it will not
be possible to do so. The subject in question is probably much
discussed at the meeting now going on at Kangiriri, and will be so
again at the more important one expected to take place at Mangere.
The influence of oratory, and perhaps evil counsel, aided by the
natural excitement of the natives, may induce them to frame laws
of their own at these meetings, and thus add to the present diffi-
culty ; but they will probably refrain from doing so if they see that
the Government is actually doing what they wish. Mr, Fenton’s
able Minute, which the Governor has perused with great satisfac-
tion, confirms these views and opinions, and enlarges on the danger


of delay. The thanks of the Government, expressed in strong
terms, should be conveyed to Mr. Fenton for his zeal and ability,
and the value of his information.’
“ For the same reasons your Committee must respectfully
state their inability to concur in the views expressed by the Go-
vernor in his Despatch to the Duke of Newcastle of the 9th of
August, 1858, in which he says :— C I have the honour to forward
for your Lordship’s information the latest accounts which have
reached me relative to the so-called kingdom established in certain
native districts, together with a report on the subject from the
Native Secretary. These accounts are far from satisfactory, but
I trust that time and absolute indifference and neglect on the part
of the Government, will teach the natives the folly of pro-
ceedings undertaken only at the promptings of vanity and insti-
gated by disappointed advisers.’
“On similar grounds your Committee must express their
absolute dissent from the Memorandum of the Native Secretary,
(Mr. McLean) accompanying the Governor’s Despatch on the
27th September, 1857, in which he says :— * The present movement
on the part of the Waikato tribes to elect a King of their own, is
not likely to be attended with any important or serious con-
sequences, if the Government abstain from interfering in the
matter. The course which I would recommend for the adoption
of the Government in reference to the King question, is decidedly
one of non-interference, unless the movement assume more of a
hostile character and tendency than it does at present,’
“ The whole tenour of this Memorandum appears to overlook
the importance of the King movement as an effort to obtain law and
order, and in so far to indicate an imperfect and unsound view of
the movement itself, and an erroneous conception of the proper policy
to be observed in reference to it. The view taken by Responsible
Ministers in reference to the policy thus indicated, as expressed in
their various Official Memorandum and Minutes, appears to your
Committee to have been the sound one.
“ The course taken by Flis Excellency in 1857, under the advice
of his Ministers, in introducing, or rather encouraging, the adop-
tion of civil institutions by the natives in the Waikato district,
was, they believe, a wise course. The selection of Mr. Fenton ns
a Resident Magistrate was in their opinion judicious. That gentle-
men appears to have been well qualified for the task, and to have
possessed in a singular degree, in addition to other qualifications
of a high order, the earnestness which is indispensable for such a
work. Subject to a remark which your Committee hereafter make
as regards the omission .on his first circuit to visit the Chief
Potatau, his task seems to have been in all essential points exe


cuted with judgment. It was also attended on the whole with
decided success. It no doubt contributed to stimulate the native
mind, and so to produce excitement, but not (so far as appears to
your Committee) of a dangerous or unhealthy character. No such
work was ever done without similar effects. It doubtless tended
also to produce a more distinct demarcation of parties. This would
necessarily be the case in any political counter-movement. But
no choice seems to have been open between suffering the whole
people to be absorbed into the King party, or attempting to gain
them over to allegiance to British authority j an attempt to which
some visible separation of parties was an inevitable incident. 1 our
Committee have failed to discover that this separation of parties
was attended with any actual or threatened disturbance of public
order.”
T.ONDON: T. C. JOHNS AND SON, ST. BRIDE’S, FERET STREET.


May be had on application at the Church Missionary House,
14, Salisbury Square:
A Vindication of the Character of the Missionaries and Native
Christians. Bvo.
Williams and Margate have published:
The War in New Zealand. By William Fox, Member of the
House of Representatives, Auckland, New Zealand. Bvo.
One of England’s Little Wars. A Letter to the Right Hon.
the Duke op Newcastle, Secretary of State for the
Colonies. By Octavius Hadpield, Archdeacon of Kapite,
New Zealand. Bvo. ...... Is.
