

NEW ZEALAND,
AS IT WAS AND AS IT IS.
BY
ROBERT BATEMAN PAUL, M.A.,
LATE ARCHDEACON OF NELSON.
“Welcome, my friends, to a home, that is better perchance than the old one.”
LONGFELLOW'S EVANGELINE.
WITH MAP.




NEW ZEALAND,
AS IT WAS AND AS IT IS.
BY
ROBERT BATEMAN PAUL, M.A.,
LATE ARCHDEACON OF NELSON.
“ Welcome, my friends, to a home, that Is better perchance than the old one.”
Longfellow’s Evangeline.
LONDON;
EDWAED STANEOED, 6, CIIAEING CEOSS.
1861.


“To BE A SUCCESSFUL COLONIST, A PERSON MUST
EITHER POSSESS CONSIDERABLE CAPITAL, BE SHREWD,
STEADY, AND NOT FASTIDIOUS IN HIS HABITS; OK HE
MUST BE POSSESSED OF STRONG ARMS AND A STOUT
HEART, ABLE AND WILLING TO WORK, SOBER AND HOPE-
FUL ; SUCH MEN I HAVE NOT KNOWN TO FAIL.”
Correspondent of the “ New Zealander.”
The profits (if any) of this edition will be given to the
fund for the relief of the Taranaki sufferers,


PREFACE.
My object in writing the following pages was to
give intending settlers, especially those of the work-
ing-class, such information about New Zealand as
might perhaps be of service to them in settling their
plans for the future. This, as far as the matter is
concerned, has repeatedly been done, and well done,
by former writers; but I cannot call to mind any
who have condescended to do what I now attempt —
I mean, to tell a homely tale about New Zealand
in homely words, for the use of unlettered men. This
is the only excuse I can think of for having added
one more to the multitude of works on New Zealand.
The substance of what I now publish was delivered
in the form of a lecture at Stamford in Lincolnshire;
and was listened to with attention, and, I would fain
hope, not altogether without benefit, by more than
seven hundred persons, most of whom were either
mechanics or agricultural labourers. The details of
the native war have been obtained from papers pub-
lished by authority of the Colonial Government, and
from private information which I am sure is trust-
worthy.
27, Bury Street, St. James's, April, 1861.


NEW ZEALAND,
&c. &c.
The Colony, which I am about to describe, is the most
distant possession of the British Crown, being exactly
opposite to that part of the globe which we ourselves
inhabit. Hence the term‘“ Antipodes,” which means,
in English, “ feet against feetthat is to say, if a hole
could be bored right through the earth, and one of
us were dragged through it feet foremost, and if a
New Zealander started from his country at the same
time, and travelled also feet foremost in the same
direction, the two would meet “feet against feet”
somewhere about the centre.* From this it follows,
that an Englishman, in order to reach New Zealand,
must sail half round the globe, a distance of some
thirteen thousand miles.
The islands were discovered and named by the
Dutch navigator, Tasman, more than two hundred
years ago ; but were little thought of in Europe until
1769, when Captain Cook took possession of them in
the name of the King of England. As early as the
year 1793 the coasts seem to have been visited by
whalers, whose reckless cruelties provoked the natives
* This is not strictly correct; the real “Antipodes” being- a
little island about 700 miles to the south-eastward of New Zealand.
B


to frequent and Woody revenge; but no European
resided on either of the islands until 1814, when the
Rev. Samuel Marsden established a mission in the
Bay of Islands. Since that time, Church of England,
Wesleyan, and Roman Catholic missionaries have been
actively at work in the Northern Island, where 54,000
out of the 56,000 natives reside. New Zealand
became a possession of the British crown in 1840,
when a declaration of allegiance, called the treaty
of Waitangi,* was signed by all the principal chiefs,
who thereby became as much subjects of Queen
Victoria as we ourselves are. Erom time to time
there have been attempts on the part of the natives
to violate this treaty; but all had been tolerably quiet
for some years, natives and Europeans living peaceably
together under the protection of the British govern-
ment, when Wiremu Kingi began his treasonable
proceedings at Taranaki. Of this rising and its con-
sequences, I shall speak more particularly when I
describe that province.
On the 29th May, 1842, Dr. George Augustus
Selwyn, who had been consecrated Bishop of New
Zealand in the preceding year, arrived at Auckland,
and proceeded to organize a more extensive missionary
system, in conjunction with the Church Missionary
Society, whose clergy had been labouring zealously
and successfully in the North Island since 1822. The
diocese has since been subdivided, four new Bishops
• So called from the name of a river in the Bay of Islands, at
the mouth of which the conference took place. The name was
held by some to be ill-omened, the word Wai-tangi signifying,
“ river of weeping or lamentation.”


having been appointed, viz., Waiapu (a native diocese*),
Wellington, Nelson, and Christchurch. By this ar-
rangement Bishop Selwyn has been enabled to devote
a large portion of his time to purely missionary labours,
for which he is well qualified by his singleness of pur-
pose, unshaken courage, fervent piety, and utter dis-
regard of the comforts of civilization, whenever the
enjoyment of them seems a hindrance to the great
work to which he has consecrated the beat years of
his life. Since the establishment of British sovereignty
in the islands, New Zealand has had four Governors:
Captain Hobson, E.N., who died at Auckland in
1842, Captain Fitzroy, E.N., who was recalled in
1845, leaving his government in a state of deplorable
confusion and insolvency, Captain Sir George Grey,
now Governor of the Cape of Good Hope, and the
present Governor, Colonel Gore Browne, C.B.
Having told you where New Zealand is, and given
you a rough outline of its history, I will now introduce
you to the country itself.
The islands known by the name of New Zealand
(so called by Tasman from the island of Zealand in
Holland) are three in number, extending from about
35° to 47° south latitude, and bearing the names of
the Northern, Middle, and Stewart’s Islands. The
length of the whole country is about nine hundred,
• The Bishop of Waiapu is the Right Eev. William Williams,
D.C.L., who came out to New Zealand as a missionary in 1825.
Bishop Williams was conseprated at Wellington in 1859, by the
Bishops of New Zealand, Christchurch, Nelson, and Wellington.
Two native students (one of whom was present at the consecration)
have been ordained deacons by the Bishop of New Zealand.


■and its breadth about two hundred miles. The three
islands together are supposed to contain an area of
about seventy millions of acres, of which two-thirds
perhaps are more or less available for agricultural
purposes. Calculating roughly, as we needs must,
where so large a portion of the country is still un-
explored, we may say that New Zealand is somewhat
-more extensive than the British isles. Most of you
know that the globe, as it appears on a map, is divided
into two equal parts by an imaginary line called the
Equator. Under this line is the hottest part of the
earth, and whether you travel north or south it comes
to the same thing —the farther you go from it, the
colder the climate becomes. This causes a little puzzle
at first to a man who goes out from this side (Eng-
land, France, or wherever his native country may be).
He will probably meet with fellow-passengers who
have already been in Australia and New Zealand, and
he will stare when he hears them talk of a garden
facing the warm north, or a sitting-room which is cool
and pleasant in summer because it has a southern
aspect. Such, however, is really the case. In our
hemisphere {i.e. our half of the globe) the sun travels,
as you know, from the east by the south to his resting-
place in the west. In the southern hemisphere {i.e.
between the equator and the south pole) he travels as
with us from east to west, but makes the north instead
of the south his half-way house. I need hardly tell
you that the poles are surrounded by eternal ice; but
perhaps you are not aware that in this respect the
south pole is the worse of the two. There is also a
much greater extent of sea in the southern hemisphere


than the northern. The effect of these two causes
together is, that a place in New Zealand will (generally
speaking) be a few degrees colder, but will have at
the same time a more equal temperature than the
place in Europe to which it corresponds.* A good
deal will, of course, depend on locality. Thus Nelson,
which is sheltered from every cold wind, will enjoy as
genial a climate as Oporto (to which it is nearly oppo-
site), whilst Christchurch, being unsheltered, will be,
many degrees colder than its opposite, Montpellier.
But it is in the extreme south that the difference is
most perceptible. The southern extremity of Stewart’s
Island, for example, is three degrees or more nearer
the equator than Torquay in Devonshire ; but I think,
if I were a medical man, I should hardly be inclined
to recommend a winter’s sojourn in Stewart’s Island
to a consumptive patient.
Bearing in mind what I have told you about south-
ern latitude, you may, without much incorrectness,
call Otago the Scotland, and Auckland the Hamp,
shire or Devonshire of New Zealand. There will con-
sequently be as much difference between the climates
of the North Cape and Stewart’s Island, as between
those of the Isle of Wight and John o’Groat’s House.
• Latitude of places in New Zealand, with corresponding latitude
Of places in Europe:—
New Zealand Europe
Auckland . 36° 50' Gibraltar . 36° 6'
New Plymouth 39° 8' Lisbon . 38° 42'
Wellington . 41° 6' >
Nelson . 41° 15' i ■ • • • oP°r‘° 0 P° r ‘° • « # 10',
Christchurch 43° 35' Montpellier 43° 36'
Dunedin . 45° 46' .... . Lyons . 45° 50'


In the early days of New Zealand colonization, a great
deal of nonsense was talked about its climate. People
were told that the climate of Italy was nothing in
comparison of it: that the balminess of the air, the
bright blue of the skies, the perpetual greenness of
the country, rendered it such a land as none of us had
hitherto met with except in a fairy tale. In the words
of a man, who wrote home to his friends after spending
one of the best months of the year in the pleasantest
part of New Zealand—“ The climate of this country
(John o’Groat's House and all!) is that of Paradise.”
Now what was the effect of all this extravagant praise ?
A man goes out as a settler to one of the New Zealand
provinces.—We will suppose that he sails from Eng-
land in April, and lands in July, which answers to
our January, all the seasons being exactly the reverse
of those in Europe. Perhaps his destination is
Auckland.
I have seen it rain at Auckland for nine weeks in
winter with scarcely any variety, except in the change
from muggy drizzle to blustering storm. Or to take
a more southern settlement. He lands, we will say,
at Lyttelton, the principal sea-port of Canterbury.
Hardly has he had time to turn round, when up comes
the terrible south-wester, with the discharge of such a
battery of rain and sleet, as he has only read of in
books of travels. His umbrella, if he carries one, is
taken aback by the first squall, so that he is glad to let
go his hold of it to escape being blown over a precipice
or into the sea. He is quartered at first in the emigration
barracks; but this is only a temporary arrangement.
In a few days he gets a room in some cottage, or


hires a little dwelling, or perhaps sets up a tent, or
what is termed a Y hut, from being in the form of a
V turned upside down. lam afraid the chances are
against his being very comfortable in any of these
habitations. Somehow the wind will find its way
through the chinks of weatherboard walls; and the
rain through the warped shingles of the roof.* I have
slept (in a very tolerable cottage too, as cottages were
in those days) with seven plates on my bed, to catch
the rain that dripped from seven distinct leakages in
the roof.
These storms last from twelve hours to three days.
They are of course more frequent and last longest in
winter, but even the summer is not altogether free
from them. This is one side of the picture.—Now
what of the other ? You have in New Zealand every
where, except perhaps in the extreme south, a climate
where the sun shines brightly during three-fourths of
the year, sending a man forth to his daily labour with
a heart full of buoyant cheerfulness.
The winter, properly so called, does not last more
than three months in any of the settlements, and snow
in the country north of Timaru is seldom seen, except
on the distant mountains. Ido not remember that I
ever saw snow on the low grounds during my nine years’
residence in Canterbury, Wellington, and Nelson.
Night frosts are always followed by bright sun-shiny
• Shingles are thin plates of split wood, (totara is the best)
measuring about 8 in. by 4. They are apt to warp in a hot sun,
and let in the rain, until they are again rendered weather tight
by a continuance of wet. After a few weeks exposure to the
weather they can hardly be distinguished from grey tiles.


days without wind. The most broken season, generally
speaking, is the spring ; the warmest and at the same
time the most windy, the summer; the pleasantest,
the autumn, being free for the most part from rain
and strong winds. The hottest and driest month is
generally February, (answering to our August), the
coldest and wettest, July. I don’t think it blows
harder there than it does in England, but it blows
Lard oftener, and there are gales of wind at seasons
of the year when we generally look for calms or
moderate breezes. But what of that ? A man does
not run much risk of being blown off his legs, unless
he is very lightly ballasted indeed, or persists in
carrying an umbrella.
And here it may be w r ell to mention two great
advantages which New Zealand possesses : —There are
seldom, if ever, any dangerous thunder-storms ; and
the country is entirely free from beasts of prey and
venomous reptiles. Gro where you will, —and sleep
wherever you can find shelter, —you have nothing to
apprehend more serious than the bite of a sandfly or
a mosquito. Is the climate healthy, and suited to an
English constitution ? I think you would say so, if
you could see, as I have seen, the rosy children of
the southern settlers : and even in the North, the
colonist is, as far as I know, as healthy and as strong
to labour, as the inhabitant of any part of England;
though more wiry perhaps and not quite so full
blown as some of our Lincolnshire yeomen. Allowing
that he has more hardships at first than he would
have at home, he is supported by the hope, (in which
a steady settler is hardly ever disappointed,) that in


ft very few years he will be an independent man. And
certainly I should say that he has more heart to
struggle against difficulties than he would have in this
country : for he is full fed, getting, if he likes it, meat,
wheaten bread, tea and sugar, three times a day ; and
whatever labour he undertakes, it interests him, for it
is either some work on his own little homestead,
worst every day’s toil brings him nearer to that object
of his wishes.
“ Each morning' sees some task begun.
Each evening sees its close ;
Something attempted, something done,
Has earn’d a night’s repose.”
And then the capabilities of the soil and climate are
such as you will hardly find in any other country in the
world, except perhaps in its neighbour, Tasmania. “ The
climate of New Zealand,” says Mr. Pox, who resided
nine years in that country, and has recently returned
to it, “is, for the purposes of production, probably
the finest in the world. Whatever will grow in
England will grow there. Many things flourish for
which England is too cold, and the south of Europe
too hot. Thus the grape ripens to perfection in the
open air, which it will not do in England, and so does
the gooseberry, which it will not in Spain.” * In the
North maize is cultivated by the natives, and also a
Sweet sort of potatoe, called leumera, very agreeable to
the taste. I have seen a few oranges and lemons in
gardens at Auckland; but they require, I suppose, in
any part of New Zealand, more attention than they
• Fox’s Six Colonies of New Zealand.


are worth. There are vineyards at Nelson and
Akaroa, and in the former of these places the stan-
dard peach tree is so productive, that I have seen
bushels of the fruit lying on the ground in almost
every garden. Apples, pears, plums, cherries, goose-
berries, currants, and strawberries are cultivated with
complete success. I had a pomegranate in my garden
at Nelson; but the fruit, though eatable, was never
thoroughly ripe. Wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, car-
rots, turnips, lettuces, cabbages, peas, Trench beans,
all thrive admirably well, and so do the geranium,
fuchsia, rose, arum, and a variety of flowering shrubs
from England and the Cape of Good Hope. Eich,
however, as New Zealand now is, in fruits and grain
of almost every description, it produces naturally
hardly any roots or berries fit for the food of man;
nor are there any quadrupeds belonging to the island,
unless you call a lizard a quadruped j nor any great
Choice of fish (I mean as regards variety of sorts, for
there are plenty of fish on the coast, such as they are).
Of birds there are the weka, or wood-hen (a little
curious fellow, that peers about your camp), several
varieties of the goose and duck tribes, the kiwi (a bird
without tail or wings), the large and small hawk, the
quail, the white crane, one of the most beautiful birds
in the world, the ka-ka, or New Zealand parrot (a
homely, brown bird), the delicate little green paroquet,
and the tui, or parson-bird, so called from two white
feathers under the throat, like a clergyman’s bands,
the rest of the plumage being jet black. In former
days there existed in New Zealand a gigantic bird,
called by the natives Moa. From bones which have


been discovered embedded in sea-sands, swamps, and
river-beds, it bas been conjectured that the bird,
which was of the ostrich tribe, stood from thirteen
to fifteen feet high, with strong legs, large powerful
feet, and wings too small for flight. The most perfect
specimen that I have seen was taken out of a lime-
stone cave near Collingwood, into which it had appa-
rently crept to escape pursuit, for the hole into
which it had squeezed itself was hardly two feet high.
In this trap, being unable to back out, it was pro-
bably starved to death. The race has long since been
extinct, the birds having been slaughtered by the
natives for the sake of their flesh and feathers. Ac-
cording to their traditions it resembled in appearance
a large Cochin China fowl.—Almost all of the New
Zealand trees are evergreens ; so that there is little
variety in the appearance of the forest at • different
seasons of the year, except that in winter the green
is somewhat less lively. The most useful tree of the
pine tribe is the kauri, which furnishes vessels with
the straightest, tallest, and strongest spars in the
world. Large quantities of the gum extracted from
this pine are exported to Europe for the use of varnish
manufacturers, calico glazers, and others. It grows
only in the northern part of the Northern Island.
The totara is also a pine, which supplies very durable
timber for building purposes. The trunks both of
the kauri and totara are of immense size, being not
unfrequently from thirty to forty feet in circum-
ference. The Eimu, Manuka, and several other
trees are used by cabinet-makers. The Puriri is a
sort of teak, the wood of which is exceedingly hard


and durable. There is a parasite called Rata, which
twines round the trunks of other trees, gradually-
destroying them as it increases in size, until the trunk
resembles the twisted columns of the “ beautiful gat©
of the temple ”in Raphael's cartoon. Towards the
end of November or beginning of December this tree
is covered with a profusion of the most brilliant scarlet
flowers. The varieties of fern are very numerous.
The most beautiful is the tree-fern, a tall and very
graceful shrub, with drooping leaves like a palm. It
flourishes best in the heart of the forest, from which
the sun’s rays are shut out by the thick foliage of the
surrounding .trees. Attempts have been made to cul-
tivate this beautiful tree in gardens, but hitherto,
believe, unsuccessfully. The ti-palm, or cabbage-tree,
is a sort of vulgar tree-fern, not unlike its elegant
sister when seen from a distance, but much coarser,
with leaves something like those of the flax plant.
The tutu (pronounced toot) is a low shrub, the
berries of which are often fatal to newly-landed or
half-starved cattle and sheep. The Fhormium tenax ,
called by the colonists flax, though it possesses no
quality of that plant except its strength and tough-
ness of fibre, is not unlike a huge iris or flag, growing
to a height sometimes of six feet or more. The leaves
are tough, and shiny like the laurel. It sends up a
long stalk, with clusters of reddish flowers, each of
which contains a drop of delicious honey. The stalk,
when dry, is often used by the colonists as a walking
staff. Many attempts have been made to prepare the
leaves for the market, but without much success
hitherto, from the difficulty, it would seem, of getting


rid of the bark, which, after a time, rots and destroys
the rope.* The natives used to separate the bark
from the silk-like fibre by means of a sharp-edged
shell; but this tedious work has long since been
abandoned for more profitable employment. The leaf,
when split into ribbons, is used by the colonists in
the place of rope, and the gum as a substitute for
glue.
Haring told you where New Zealand is, and what
are its climate and natural productions, my nest step
will be to give you some account of its native popu-
lation, the Maoris. f From what country they origi-
nally came, can only be matter of conjecture ; but as far
as we can collect from their own imperfect traditions,
the probability seems to be that Sumatra, the cradle
of the Malay race, was their mother-country; and
that thence they went on from one island to, another,
until a portion of them at last settled in New Zealand.
There are about 54,000 of them in the North Island,
of whom four-fifths reside, in the province of Auck-
land. ~ln the Middle Island the number does not
much exceed two thousand. Thanks to the inde-
fatigable labours of the missionaries, by far the greater
number of these are at least professors of our holy
religion, and many, we trust, are sincere and con-
sistent followers of our Blessed Saviour. But a good
* A patent for preparing the flax, by means of improved
machinery, has been recently taken out by Messrs. Purchas and
Ninnis.
t Pronounced Mow-ries (the first syllable as we pronounce the
word “ now ”), This is the name given to themselves by the
natives. The Europeans they call “ Pakehas,” or strangers.


deal of the old ferocity still remains, displaying itself
from time to time in acts of brutal violence. The late
Governor, Sir George Grey, seems to have well under-
stood the character of this high-spirited and intelli-
gent, but imperfectly civilized race. By his advice,
large sums were voted for the establishment of schools
open to natives and Europeans, the only conditions
insisted on being that the children should receive in-
dustrial training, religious instruction and instruction
in the English language.* Hospitals were established
and medical attendance provided for the natives at
their own homes. Considerable sums were also ex-
pended in the establishment of model farms, and the
• The colonial legislature have voted £7OOO per annum for
native education, the grant to continue for seven years. The same
amount has also been voted for miscellaneous purposes. The
objects to which it is proposed to devote this latter sum are as
follows:
Medical treatment of natives in hospitals, and as out-
patients £2,000
Magistrates 1,200
Assessors 1,000
Court houses 200
Travelling expenses 300
Contingencies of Courts ..... 200
Maori newspaper and other publications •. . 400
Pensions to natives 200
Gratuities to chiefs ...... 200
Presents and entertainment of natives . , . 500
For native purposes in southern islands . . . 500
For services not specified ..... 300
£7,000
From papers relative to native affairs presented to both Houses
of the General Assembly in 1858.


•npport of resident magistrates, and native assessors,
in various native districts. The chiefs, who had
always been faithful to the British Crown, were re-
warded with pensions; Walker Nene receiving £IOO
a-year, and Te Whero Whero, (afterwards King
Potatau), and Te Puni £SO each. The last named
was also presented with a cup by the Wellington
settlers. He is still alive, and with his long white
beard, and dignified manners, is a good specimen of
the “ fine old Maori gentleman.”
But while he thus endeavoured to promote civiliza-
tion by acts of judicious encouragement to the well-
disposed, the Governor took care to teach the natives
that British law could not be violated with impunity.
In addition to the troops already in the Northern
Island, five hundred pensioners were sent out from
England, and stationed in four settlements within
a few miles of Auckland. Each of these men had a
cottage and one acre of land, and the right of acquir-
ing five acres more after a certain time, on condition
of being ready for seven years to serve whenever called
out. Eauparaha, a powerful chief, whose fidelity
was more than doubtful, was seized at his residence,
and detained in custody on board H. M. ship Calliope.
Several natives convicted of murder were publicly
executed. On one occasion, three hundred armed
Maories landed at Auckland, and demanded that
a native policeman, who had insulted their chief by
arresting him, should be given up to them. The reply
to this demand, was a peremptory order to quit the
town witnin two hours, and as the order was likely to
be enforced by a broadside from the guns of a man of
13
AS IT WAS AND AS IT IS.


war, which had been brought to bear on them, no
course was left for the insurgents, but to drag their
canoes * over the mud, (the tide having by this time
fallen,) and paddle away in very unwarlike fashion.
The native men are fine muscular fellows, averaging
about 5 ft. 6 in. in height. In complexion not much
darker than gypsies ; picturesque when dressed in the
war-mat (a sort of mantle of dog-skin with the hair
on, or of platted flax,) but snobbish, so to speak, when
clad in European costume; an effect produced pro-
bably by their bodies being longer, and their legs
shorter than those of Europeans. Their faces are
broad, with coarse mouths ; the expression of the face
sleepy and rather sullen. Tattooing has gone very
much out of fashion since the introduction of Chris-
tianity. The mode in which the operation used
to be performed was this:—The figure was first traced
out in paint on the face, and then a sharp instrument
dipped in charcoal was driven into the skin by blows
of a small stick. The operation was a very tedious
* “ War canoes for sea navigation are eighty feet long, four feet
broad, and four feet deep. Fifty paddlers sit on each side, and
three fuglemen stand in the centre of the canoe, exciting the
paddlers to exertion by their songs and actions. They have
elegantly carved stern-posts, fifteen feet high, ornamented with
feathers and dyed flax, and shorter posts at their stems similarly
adorned. In the south part of the island they are made of totara
■wood, and in the north of kauri. Both are painted red. The
crew kneel two and two along the bottom, sit on their heels, and
wield paddles from four to five feet long. The steersman, sitting
in the stern, has a paddle nine feet long. Over tempestuous seas
war canoes ride like sea-fowl. Even when a canoe is upset, the
crew can bale her out, and put her right in the water.”— Dr,
Thomson's Story oj Xerv Zealand ,


one, and when completed, gave the man’s face the
appearance of a piece of inlaid cabinet-work. Both
sexes bore their ears, and ornament them with
pieces of green-stone, shark’s teeth, &c. I have also
seen little green-stone figures hanging round the
necks of some of the chiefs. Consumption, low fever,
and bowel complaints, are the diseases most common
among them. Neither cholera nor small-pox has yet
appeared in New Zealand; but measles have swept
away thousands of the natives. Some of their chiefs
are noble looking warriors, well set up, with an inde-
pendent and dignified carriage. Their ensign of com-
mand is a sort of club made of green-stone. With
this weapon, which is not unlike a soda - water
bottle in form, and about double the size, they
used to brain their enemy, having first grasped
him firmly by the hair of his head. Of the per-
sonal appearance of the women, I cannot speak very
highly. Their usual dress is not favourable to the de-
velopment of beauty ; being simply a shapeless sack
of printed calico, called a “ roundabout,” tied round
the neck, but loose at the waist. I suppose it is the
most ungraceful costume that ever was invented. A
bright blue under lip, and a pipe in the mouth, com-
plete the full dress of a Maori lady. Their gait is
rendered awkward by the habit which many of them
have of carrying little pigs in their arms, and sacks of
potatoes on their shoulders. I must, however, do the
Maories the justice to say, that here and there we meet
with instances of almost European civilization. No-
thing, for instance, can be neater than the pretty cot-
tage of Thomson (old Eauparaha’s son) at Otaki, with
c


its tidy chairs and tables, its snowy linen, its “ var-
nished clock that tick’d behind the door,” and its
“ pictures framed for ornament and use,” among which
not the least conspicuous was a portrait of old Te
Eauparaha, “ the old gentleman,” as Mrs. Thomson
proudly called him. Generally speaking, however, I
cannot say much in praise either of their domestic
architecture or their household arrangements. Most
of their habitations that I have seen were little better
probably than the huts occupied by their ancestors in
Captain Cook’s time, warmed by a stifling fire on the
floor, around which they either crouch or sprawl,
wrapped in blankets ; for their European clothes are
only for out of door wear. As church architects they
have been more successful. The large building which
they have constructed at Otaki would not disgrace an
English parish, with its huge pillars each of a single
tree, supporting the roof-tree, and its walls elaborately
ornamented with alternate pannelling of lattice work
and native painting. It is almost worth a voyage to
New Zealand to see a native congregation in this
church ; so picturesque are their costumes, and so
edifying their attention to the service. It was pleas-
ing too to see old grey-headed chiefs standing in class
with all the docility of little children, to listen to the
instruction of the Sunday-school teacher. the
arrival of the missionaries their toilet does not seem
to have been very costly. I have been told that in
the early days of his ministration one of these mis-
sionaries ventured to hint to a chief of some import-
ance that it was desirable he should appear on Sundays
in some article of dress more substantial than the light


drapery Usually worn in those primitive times. The
chief good-humouredly promised compliance, and on the
following Sunday came to church in a pair of boots.
Both men and women are great smokers, but until
very recently they have been remarkably temperate;
and even now I should say that drunkenness was much
leas common among them than among ourselves.*
Their manners are rather pleasing than otherwise, and
they are by no means wanting in good-nature, so far
aa is consistent with as shrewd an eye to the main-
ohftnoe, as any people,, I should suppose, on the face of
(he earth. They are very curious, asking all- sorts of
“Where do you come from P” “ Where are
you g™'"g P” “ How old are you f” “ How old is your
wife?” “Have you any children at home?” “How
many?" “How old is each of them ?” “ Where did
you get your horse ?” “ Will you sell him ?” “ How
much P ,r “ Have you any women horses (mares) at
home ?” and so on.
They will go on maundering,f when they can find a
♦ “The Maories generally, I believe, are anxious to arrest the
vice of drunkenness; and, if empowered, they can and will do so.’’
Report from Mr. Fenton, Resident Magistrate, as to native atfairs
in the Waikato district,
f Most of their modern speeches are mere statements of facts,
and orations are distinguished by the various ways one idea can be
turned. Thus:—
“ I am going to Auckland to-morrow;
The abode of the Pakehas;
The place where tobacco and blankets are sold;
Where the Governor and soldiers live;
Where the prison stands ;
Where the large ships lie ;
c 2


listener; are utterly regardless of the value of time ;
by no means fond of continuous labour ; are shrewd
reasoners; fond of imitating Europeans; not over
warm friends, but tolerably “ good haters.”
The head is held sacred among them. Through
ignorance of this superstition, one of the early mis-
sionaries exposed himself, it is said, to very rough
treatment. A chief was observed to be inattentive to
the good man’s exhortation. Thinking he had caught
the exact Maori style of figurative language, the mis-
sionary called out to the offender, “ I suppose, if I
plugged your ears with tobacco, you would hear me
well enough ?” To his utter astonishment the chief,
instead of being edified, rushed fiercely on the mis-
sionary and knocked his hat over his eyes. He had
unwittingly violated a native superstition, which for-
bids the associating the human head, or any part of it,
with articles of food. Both missionaries and natives
are now better acquainted with each other’s ways, and
misunderstandings hardly ever occur between them.
The practice of cannibalism is entirely extinct, though
many men are still alive who have tasted human flesh
in their youth. It has been often remarked that the
most civilized and prosperous among the natives are
those who have purchased little freeholds from the
Crown, instead of living in the old scrambling Scythian
fashion, cultivating patches of land, the property of the
whole tribe, and migrating to other places, as often as
The fire-boats are seen ;
Where men are hung;
To-morrow I shall go to Auckland.’’
Dr. Thomson's Story of New Zealand


the soil was exhausted, or the chiefs grew tired of
their residence. The sale of waste lands, of which
they could never have cultivated the hundredth part,
has already brought them in thousands of bright
sovereigns, which they have not always wasted, but
have laid them out in the purchase of agricultural im-
plements, horses, small coasting craft, and so forth.
To shew you that they have made some progress in
agriculture, I may mention that a great portion of the
wheat and potatoes consumed at Auckland is grown
bynative farmers, and brought to the town sometimes
in the old fashioned canoe, but more frequently in
tight little schooners and cutters, owned and generally
sailed and manned by natives. Many of them have
accounts at the Auckland and Wellington banks.
They are very fond of horses, and often get up races
among themselves in imitation of the settlers. But
with all this progress there are now and then instances
of simplicity that make one smile. It is not many
years ago since I saw a Maori, very well dressed, in
blue surtout, Wellington boots, and gold-laced cap,
mounted on a good-looking horse ; but not in the way
in which people generally ride in this country—not
he. He was seated astride on the horse’s neck, and
the good-natured creature, though wondering, like
John Gilpin’s steed, “what thing upon him he had
got,” carried him very quietly up and down the beach
at Wellington. The explanation of this queer scene
was, that our friend had bought only a share of the
horse, and as that share happened to be the shoulder,
neck, and head, he would have been trespassing on
another man’s property if he had ventured to seat
himself on the back. Their language is easily pro


nounced, and by no means inharmonious, but some of
our sounds are a sad puzzle to Maori tongues. Half
our letters are wanting in their alphabet; * and the
consequence is, that they are apt to present English
words in such a quaint disguise, that the original
owners find it bard to recognize them. Thus a book
becomes in their mouths puka, puka. Governor
Browne is Kawma Paraone; a minister, Minita;
Captain Langley, Kapene Rang ere; and the two
rival Taranaki chiefs, Taylor and King, Te Teira
and Wiremu Kingi. A recent number of the “ Maori
Messenger” ( Te Karere Maori), published by the
Kew Zealand Government, in the Maori and English
languages, contains an address presented by the Can-
terbury natives to the resident magistrate, Mr. Hall
{Te Iloro), on the eve of bis departure for England.
The concluding sentence of this address will give you
a specimen of their language : “ Haere e Te Horo,
a ma te Atua o Aperahama, o Ihaka, o Hakopa, Te
Atua o te Pakeha o te Maori, koe e atawhai i ou
haerenga katoa. Haere ra, haere ra.” Earewell, Mr.
Hall, farewell! May the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
and of Jacob, the God of the Maori as well as the
Pakeha, protect you in all your journeyings. Eare-
well ! farewell! The Book of Common Prayer, and
the greater part of the Bible, have been translated
into their language, and are in general use. Their
attendance on the ordinances of religion is very regular
and decorous.
* Their letters are A, E, H, I, K, M, N, 0, P, R, T, TJ, W, %.
The last of these is the only difficult sound in their language. The-
vowels are pronounced as they are in Italian. The first Maori:
Grammar was compiled by Professor Lee, of Cambridge, in 1820.


When friends or near relations meet after long
absence they rub noses for half-an-hour or more,
accompanying the action with a dismal noise like the
whine of an imprisoned dog. This quaint ceremony is
called Tongi. In saluting a stranger, or signifying
assent, they jerk the chin upwards, instead of nodding
the head. The word of salutation is “ Tenacqua,”
which every well-disposed European returns, though
it may be the only Maori word in his vocabulary.
Like all imperfectly civilized nations, they are sur-
prised at nothing. Nor is this apathy altogether con-
fined to the Maories, for I remember hearing from
the Bishop of New Zealand a remarkable instance of
the coolness displayed by a young lady, the daughter
of a missionary, who had been brought up among
them. During the disastrous struggle between Hone
Heke and the Government in 1845, the women and
children had been removed to a ship lying oif the
shore. They had hardly got safely on board, when
the powder magazine on shore, near which they had
been standing a few minutes before, blew up with a
tremendous explosion. Whilst all stood gazing in
solemn awe on this fearful spectacle, the young lady,
whom I have mentioned, came on deck and made the
following announcement: “ Mamma bids me tell you
that the dinner is waiting, and that it will be cold if
you do not come below at once.” “ Erom that hour,”
said the Bishop, “ I gave up all hope of anything ever
making an impression on her.” It is so long ago
since I heard this story, that I may not have stated
all the circumstances correctly, but the main fact was
as I have described it.


I Lave purposely refrained from puzzling you
with accounts of the various native disturbances
which took place during the five years which suc-
ceeded the treaty of Waitangi. Prom the com-
mencement of Gfovernor Grey's administration, to
the year 1856, all had been comparatively tranquil,
when men’s minds were again agitated by an extras
ordinary movement on the part of the Maories. At
a great meeting in the Taupo district it was proposed,
in their figurative language, to “ drive the settlers into
the sea.” During a night debate, held in the large
house erected for the purpose, this proposition was
advocated by one of the southern orators with great
vehemence of language and gesture. No sooner had
he sat down, than an old northern chief rose, and,
passing round the house, blew out all the candles one
after another, and then resumed his seat without
speaking a word. The orator, understanding the
allusion, said, “I think you had better light the
candles again;” to which the old chief replied, “It
was foolish to blow them out.” * The result of this
and similar proceedings was, that at a monster meet-
ing, held in May, 1857, on the banks of the Waikato
river, the crown of New Zealand was offered to old
Te Whero Where, who was proclaimed king in spite
of his refusal to accept the dignity. The deputation,
after delivering their message, backed, it is said, out
of the royal presence, whilst a guard of honour pre-
sented arms f to the poor old man, who sat shivering
• Mr. Fenton’s report.
f As neither of these is a Maori ceremonial, they must have
been taught them, it would seem, by some scampish European.


and blinking in front of his bouse. A very few weeks
after his elevation to the throne, Te Whero Whero (or
King Potatau, as his subjects called him) died, and
his son was soon afterwards elected to fill the vacant
throne. So the matter remains at present; hut it is
satisfactory to know that the King movement is by no
means universal among the natives, and that the
Governor has told them plainly that they will not he
permitted to withdraw their allegiance from Queen
Victoria, or to divide it between Her Majesty and
King Potatau 11. It is also gratifying to learn that
the treasonable proceedings of William King at Ta-
ranaki have been condemned by the Maori General
Assembly, a meeting held annually in imitation of the
colonial parliament.
Before taking leave of the Maories I may mention
that their numbers decrease every year :* from what
* The population, European and native, of the several provinces
(according to an estimate based on the census of December, 1838,
with due allowance for excess of births and immigration over
deaths and emigration) was as follows on the 80th June, I860:
European Native
Auckland 23,159 . . . 38,269
Taranaki 2,313 . . . 3,015 f Northern
Hawk’s Bay .... 2,307 . . . 3,673 Island.
Wellington .... 13,470 . . . 8,099 7
Nelson and Marlborough 10,941 . . . 1,120 J
Canterbury .... 14,017 .. . 480 > *! , 6
Otago 10,456 ... 525 $ lBlani
Stewart’s Island ... 52 . . . 200
Total . . 76,714 55,381
Add population of Chatham Islands—
Europeans, 85. Natives, 500.


cause it is not so easy to determine; certainly not
from any ill-treatment or injustice on the part of the
colonists.
I have told you that the soil of New Zealand
produces very little without cultivation, and from
what you have heard of the Maories you will have
understood that they were not the men to bring its
hidden capabilities to light, until they had received
instruction from their European neighbours. I will
now try to give you some idea of what has been effected
by European skill and perseverance, and what measure
of success may reasonably be expected by future
settlers. The best way of doing this, I think, will be
to take each province separately. The two to which
I shall especially direct your attention, are Auckland
and Canterbury; not because I consider them pre-
ferable to the others; but simply because they are
the only provinces, as far as I know, which now offer
any help to the poorer class of emigrants, either in
the form of assisted passages,* or free grants of land.
It would be a waste of time to speak at any length to
the poor man, of settlements which he is never likely
to see; and as far as the capitalist is concerned, he
will learn more by visiting the different provinces in
person, than I could pretend to teach him in a
lecture. The best advice that I could give to such an
one, would be, not to choose hastily, but to visit all or
most of the settlements, seeing with his own eyes, and
• By “ assisted passages,” I do not mean those which are granted
on credit, but granted at a lower rate of payment than the ordi-
nary scale, in consideration of the benefit which the settlement
expects to derive from the emigrant’s labour.


hearing with his own ears. A few months or even
weeks, spent in such an investigation, would aiford
him the best chance of escaping the disappointments
which are generally the result of a hasty choice, or of
lending an ear too readily to the representations of
interested advisers. And here it will not be amiss to
offer one word of advice to intending settlers of all
classes.—-Have nothing to say to the miserable rabble,
who are fond of boarding newly arrived ships, with no
ostensible business, but that of paying their respects
to the passengers. Eor reasons of their own, their
accounts of the settlements are generally discouraging,
but in any case they are untrustworthy. The last
thing a respectable settler would think of doing,
would be to waste his valuable time in paying visits to
people who do not require either his company or his
advice. Many a hopeful spirit has been saddened for
a time by the misrepresentations of these fellows.
“ I pray you, avoid them.”
The provinces, into which New Zealand was divided,
immediately after the passing of the Constitution Act,
in 1853, were six in number, viz.—Auckland, Taranaki
and Wellington in the Northern, and Nelson, Canter-
bury and Otago, in the Middle Island. Two small
provinces have since been added, viz.—Hawk’s Bay,
(taken out of Wellington,) and Marlborough, (out of
Nelson). Each of these provinces has a legislature of
its own, presided over by a Superintendent, elected like
the members of the legislature, by almost universal
suffrage.* Their revenues, arising from land sales,
♦ Except in the two new provinces, where the Superintendent is
elected by the Provincial Council.


customs, pasturage licences, &c., are divided, in un-
equal proportions, between the Provincial and General
Governments. All questions relating to the customs,
lighthouses, subdivision of provinces, and many other
matters, are settled by the General Government,
consisting of an Upper House, the members of which
are nominated for life by the Governor, and a Lower,
composed of members elected by the provinces, in pro-
portion to their population. No act of either the
general or provincial legislature is valid, until it is
allowed by the Governor, who has a discretionary
choice either of assenting at once to the Act, or
negativing it, or reserving it for the consideration of
the Home Government. In all native matters, the
Governor is entirely independent of the colonial legis-
lature. No private individual is allowed to purchase
land from the natives: but tracts of country are
bought by the Crown, as occasion offers, and re-sold
to settlers, at prices fixed by the respective provincial
legislatures. The title-deeds to lands so purchased
from the Government, are called “ Crown Grants,”
w'hich may be re-sold or mortgaged by the purchaser,
whenever he thinks fit. In every case, the native
possessor is as free to sell or to retain his freehold as
any landed proprietor in England. If he chooses to
sell, the*Crown is ready to purchase; if he prefers
beeping it in his own possession, nobody thinks of
interfering with him.
, I will now proceed to give you a short account of
each province, beginning with the northernmost,
Auckland. The city of that name, which is the capital,
not only of its own province, but of the whole of


New Zealand, was founded by Captain Hobson, tbe
first Q-overnor, in 1840. Tbe length of the province
is about 400 miles, and its greatest breadth 200.
The amount of its European population is 23,000;
native 38,000, occupying for the most part the three
southern districts, which| constitute two-thirds of the
province. On the eastern coast, a little to the south-
ward of the North Cape you have Monganui, a fine
harbour, with a small European population. Then
comes the picturesque Bay of Islands, where there is a
Church of England mission, and a considerable body
of settlers. Crossing the island to the western coast,
you come to Hokianga and Kaipara, the chief places of
shipment for the Kauri pine and gum. A consider-
able area on the western side of the island is covered
with forests of this pine. The rest of the province
(except the rugged district of Coromandel, where
some gold has been found) is broken up by hills of
moderate height, interspersed with valleys abundantly
watered, and well adapted for agricultural purposes.
This province possesses extraordinary facilities for
water carriage, the various estuaries and rivers being
navigable through nearly 1000 miles of country.
There are thirty harbours on the coast, of which
four are deep enough to admit ships of the largest
class. Immediately round Auckland the country,
though naturally dreary, being little more than a
group of extinct volcanoes without trees, has been
made, more than any other part of New Zealand,
except Canterbury, to put on the appearance of an
English country neighbourhood. The fern, which in
the uncultivated state of the volcanic soil, was almost


its only produce, has been forced to give place to
artificial grasses ; and every -where you see large
paddocks, (one was shewn to me of 300 acres), en-
closed by substantial scoria fences, and well stocked
with sheep and cattle. The manner of laying down
these paddocks is very inartificial. The fern is burnt
off, and clover seed sown in its place; and as soon as
the young sprouts of fern shew themselves, they are
eaten down by sheep; a process which eventually
destroys the fern, leaving only the clover. A better
system is, however, gradually gaining ground in this
province. Ido not know what number of sheep the
paddocks of which I have been speaking carry to the
acre : but there is little doubt that land carefully
prepared, and sown with seeds judiciously selected,
will carry from five to six all the year round. There
are abundance of farm-houses built also of scoria, of
which every extinct volcano furnishes a quarry, and sur-
rounded with very convenient yards and farm buildings.
The city of Auckland is no mean specimen of a
colonial town. Like Tolkstone in Kent, it is built
up and down the sides of hills, with wide handsome
streets and convenient wharves. The barracks, and
many warehouses and private residences, are con-
structed of scoria, with a solidity justified by the
exemption from earthquakes which this province
enjoys. Government House is a wooden building of
imposing dimensions, but no great architectural merit.
The little valleys between the hills are generally
occupied by villas, with their neat gardens, and
pleasant sea-view. To obtain the best view of the
town, you should hire a boat and row out a little way


from shore, when the whole panorama of houses,
gardens, public offices, churches and chapels will be
spread out before you like a picture on a wall. In
winter this picture seems to be framed in gold, from
the great quantity of bright yellow blossoms on the
mimosas. The town, which is about the size of
Stamford, stands on the eastern side of a narrow
isthmus, about four miles across as the crow flies, or
six by the highway. The whole length of the road
across this isthmus, resembles the approach to a good
second-rate English town. Pretty country seats for
the first mile or two ; then neat homesteads, and every
now and then a little village, with its modest wooden
church.
After a pleasant ride or walk of six miles, you
reach Onehunga on the shores of the Manakau, a
tolerable harbour, but somewhat difficult of access on
account of the bar at its entrance. Although in’ every
respect inferior to the Waitemate, (on which Auck-
land is situated,) it is useful, as forming a convenient
station for steamers, which ply between Auckland
and the settlements of the south, (Taranaki, Nelson,
&c. &c.) the doubling of the North Cape being
thereby avoided. Onehunga is one of the four pensioner
settlements. "Within an easy walk of Auckland is
St. John’s College, now used, I believe, as a training
college for young men brought by the Bishop of
New Zealand from the islands of the North ‘Pacific.
The climate being too severe in winter for natives of
a tropical country, the Bishop conveys them back-
wards and forwards in the mission schooner; either
himself accompanying them, or entrusting the care


of them to his chaplain, the Eev. J. C. Pattcaon.*
The most southerly settlement is Drury, where coal of
a good quality has been discovered. Near the southern
boundary of the province is the large and beautiful
lake called Taupo, and a little to the south-east, the
hot springs, near the lake of Eoto-rua. In these
springs the natives cook their victuals, and spend
hours every day in the hot baths. In every village
of any importance there is a neat church, and wherever
the natives congregate there are Church of England,
Wesleyan, or Roman Catholic missionaries, and large
native schools, supported by Government. There are,
as far as I know, no grassy plains in the province; the
unreclaimed country being every where covered with
fern, flax, the ti-palm and coarse natural grasses of
little value. Consequently there are no sheep runs,
as there are in the southern part of this, and in the
whole of the Middle Island.
This then is the province of Auckland, to which the
attention of intending emigrants has been particularly
directed of late by the tempting ofier of forty acres of
land to every adult, who shall emigrate at his own cost
from the United Kingdom. I think it by no means
improbable that such an arrangement may turn out
highly advantageous to small capitalists ; but it is
hard to see how it would benefit the poor man, who
would be met at the outset by the awkward question,
• By the latest accounts we learn, that this gentleman, whose
extraordinary facility in acquiring languages qualifies him well
for the duties which he has undertaken, is shortly to be consecrated
Missionary Bishop of the islands, which have been for some years
the scene of his labours.


“How will you be able to pay your passage out?”
Almost all the land in the possession of Government
lies to the north of Auckland; none nearer than thirty
miles, and the best land at a much greater distance.
But this is of little consequence, provided there is
water communication between the farm and the town.
Agricultural labourers, carpenters, brickmakers, and
bricklayers are invited to emigrate.*
Crossing the south-western boundary line of the
province, we enter Taranaki, to which recent unhappy
occurrences have given a painful notoriety. This pro-
vince is about 80 miles in length, and 70 in breadth.
Of the three million acres which it contains, one-third
consists of forest, and the remainder along the coast of
* The Auckland land regulations, as far as rural lands are con-
cerned, are as follows—
1. Price to purchasers, 10s. per acre,
2. Free grants to persons paying their passage out, on the pro-
duction of a land order, signed by an Auckland emigrant agent in
this country. Such order to be presented within twelve months :
40 acres to be granted for each adult, and 20 acres for each lad
from sto 18 years of age. After five years the holder to be en-
titled to a crown grant, if he has not been absent twelve months
during that time. Grants on behalf of children and servants,
brought out at the master’s expense, to be made to such master,
and not to such children, or servants.
3. School teachers fulfilling certain conditions, who have been
five years in connexion with the Auckland Board of Education, to
receive 80 acres.
4. Naval and military settlers to receive as follows, Commis-
sioned officers 400 acres; non-commissioned and warrant officers
80 acres; private soldiers, sailors, or marines, 60 acres.
Information respecting the Province of Auckland, may be ob-
tained from Messrs. Ridgway, General Agents to the Provincial
Government of Auckland, 40, Leicester Square.
1)


the richest agricultural and pastoral land, watered
several rivers. Taranaki used to be called by its in,
habitants, not without reason, “ the Garden of New
Zealand.” The great deficiency is the want of a
harbour, the shipping place of the town being only an
open roadstead. But this inconvenience is not per-
haps so great as at first sight it would appear to be;
for communication with the shipping is kept up in
ordinary weather by large boats, manned by as good
boatmen as any in the world. This establishment,
which is exceedingly effective, is maintained at the
expense of the provincial government. It is a vessel’s
own fault too, if she gets wrecked; for the north-
westerly gales never come on without notice; and
before they become violent, she can always get under
w r ay and find shelter in one of the ports in the north-
west of the Middle Island. The capital,. New Ply-
mouth, a pretty village-like town, with a very neat stone
church, was founded in 1841, by an Association of
Devonshire and Cornish gentlemen. The neighbour-
hood of the town used to be famous for its beautiful
country residences and neat farms; but war, I fear,
has turned this garden of Eden into a wilderness.
The climate of Taranaki is exceedingly pleasant;
cooler than Auckland, but moister and perhaps more
variable than Nelson. Within a few T miles of the
town, Mount Egmont, an extinct volcano, between
’BOOO and 9000 feet high, rises abruptly from the
woody and comparatively flat country at its base. I
saw T it-once on a cloudless winter’s day, when the con-
trast between the snow-clad mountain glittering in the
sunshine, and the dark sea of waving vegetation at its


feet, reminded me of an iceberg I had once seen rising
out of the blue waters of the South Pacific. The at-
tention of commercial men has recently been directed
to the metallic sand collected at the foot of this
mountain, from which it appears to have been origi-
nally thrown out. A portion of this sand, brought to
England by Captain Morshead has been analyzed and
pronounced to contain the purest ore at present known.
Taking the sand as it lies along the beach for miles,
the produce, after melting, is 61 per cent, of iron of
the best quality. I am indebted for much valuable
information on this subject, as well as for a specimen
of the sand, to Messrs. Moseley, of New Street, Covent
Garden, who have formed the steel into razors, pen-
knives, surgical instruments, saws, &e., and pronounce
it to be by far the best article they have ever used.
I now approach a question on which it may perhaps
be my misfortune to differ from some, for whose
opinions on most subjects I entertain a sincere respect.
A feeling has for some years been gaining ground
among the Maories, that the native race were dying
out before the stranger. I have already told you that
one of the measures adopted for arresting this ruin,
was the election of a Maori king; another was the
formation of a league to prevent the sale of any more
land. This league was in principle not unlike the
trades-unions, with which we are all familiar. In
defiance, it would seem, of this league, one Teira or
Taylor, had agreed to sell a block of land to the Gover-
nor. After the usual investigation of title, surveyors
were sent to mark out the land. These were met by
70 or 80 of the followers of a chief named Wiremu


Kingi (William King) who seized the survey instru-
ments. A detachment of troops was immediately sent to
protect the officers of government; but no actual force
was used, until a fighting party of King’s people had
erected a pa, or native fortification, danced their war-
dance upon the disputed ground, and contemptuously
rejected the summons of the officer in command to
evacuate the pa.* It does not appear that King ever
put forward any claim of a nature to be recognized by
the Government. On his return from Waikanaet to
Taranaki in 1848, he had been forbidden by Sir George
Grey to settle on the south bank of the Waitara;
but having obtained the permission of Teira’s father
to build a pa on bis property, he had set up a
sort of claim as conqueror of the land, on which
he had settled, in defiance of the Governor’s prohibi-
tion. The case was that of a man, who had been
admitted on sufferance into his neighbour’s house, and
had then forbidden the owner to dispose of it. The
surveyors were not sent until the land-commissioners
had reported, after an investigation which lasted more
than eight months, that Teira’s title to the land was
unexceptionable.J After some skirmishes, and the
storming of a pa, in which the volunteers were nobly
supported by Captain Cracroft, of H. M. 8. 8. Niger,
and a party of blue jackets, an action was fought with
* Memorandum of Mr. Richmond, Secretary for native affairs,
25th May, 1860.
t King’s section of the Ngnatrwa had migrated to Cook’s Strait
20 years before these events.
X With reference to the enquiry, “Had "William King any right
to interfere to prevent the sale of the block ofland at Waitara, to


a large body of Waikatos (who were on their way to
join the rebels), and the enemy defeated with the loss
of three chiefs, and a sixth of their number (400),
killed and wounded. In this engagement, the volun-
teer rifles bore a conspicuous part, and well sustained
the reputation which they had acquired in a former
struggle. It would be painful as well as wearisome
to particularize the events of this petty but most
unhappy war. The native insurgents, few in number,
but confident in the security afforded by the almost
impenetrable bush, in which a soldier, to use their
own phrase, is “ All same as target,” have hitherto
resisted the troops sent against them. They are
armed, for the most part, with double-barrelled fowl-
ing pieces. The difficulty of taking an accurate aim
with such weapons is of little consequence : for their
mode of warfare is to lurk in the fern until thO soldier
comes within easy distance, and then discharge both
barrels in his face, resting the stock of the piece on
the ground, instead of carrying it to the shoulder.
Meanwhile the town has been fortified, and most of the
women and children shipped off to Nelson. Several
settlers in the outlying districts have been murdered
by the natives. A poor widow writes thus to her
aged father in England:—“ My husband had been
the Queen —the question of title has been carefully investigated.
All the evidence that has come before me, including W. King’s
own testimony, goes to prove that he had no right to interfere;
the interference assumed by him has been obviously based on
opposition to land sales in the Taranaki province generally, as a
prominent member of an anti-land-selling league.” —Report of
Mr. McLean , Chief Land Purchase Commissioner ,


ordered to guard the wreck (of a brig) in the evening*
On his return he was cruelly shot, and afterwards
stripped and plundered by the savages. The body
was found the next morning by his old servant; we
can never forget that fearful morning, when we laid
him on his bed, murdered by savages. I cannot write
more. My baby is crying—l pray God help us ! ”
The following picture is, I have every reason to
believe, not too highly coloured. “In his intercourse
with the natives, the colonist is exposed to daily pro-
vocations. His cattle, for example, stray from his
paddock; he follows them to a neighbouring pa, and
is compelled to redeem them by an exorbitant pay-
ment. In the course of the dispute a musket is,
levelled at him, or a tomahawk flourished over his
head. On the other hand, should he try the experi-
ment of driving native cattle to the public pound, for
trespass on his cultivated land, a strong party of
Maories, with loaded muskets, break down the fence
and rescue them. He has to maintain party fences,
without contributions from his Maori neighbours.
Herds of native pigs break through to his crops. The
dogs of the pa worry his sheep. Eedress in the
courts of law is not to be obtained, because it would
be dangerous to the peace of the country to enforce
the judgment. And yet, under accumulated provo-
cations ; the contemptuous defiance of Her Majesty’s
authority; the ruin of one British settlement; the
most serious injury to several others ; the interruption
of the advancing prosperity of all; under the natural
indignation caused by cold-blooded murders, per-
petrated upon unarmed men and young boys—the


settlers of New Zealand still restrain their passions,
and in their addresses to the Governor confine them-
selves to the prayer, that the majesty of the law may
be vindicated and the authority of the Queen upheld.”*
Such is the condition of this beautiful but most
unfortunate province. That the right must eventually
prevail, we cannot for a moment doubt; but mean-
while it is fearful to contemplate the amount of
suffering which has fallen on the inoffensive settlers.
God grant that the signal chastisement which will
sooner or later be inflicted on the stirrers up of this
unrighteous war, may have the effect of placing the
European population of Taranaki on a more secure
footing than they have ever yet occupied.f
Proceeding eastward we reach the newly formed
province of Hawk’s Bay, of which I know very little,
never having visited it. It is reported to contain a
considerable breadth both of arable and pasture land.
The climate is, I believe, very windy,' but bright,
cheerful and remarkably healthy. The number of
European settlers is rather more than 2000 —natives
between 3 and 4000. Napier is the capital. J
Wellington, the southernmost province of the
Northern Island, lies somewhat in the form of a
wedge, between Taranaki and Hawk’s Bay, widening
• Memorandum of Mr. Richmond,
f The Taranaki land regulations are
1. Rural land to be sold by auction—upset price, 10s. per
acre.
2. Town land to be sold by auction —upset price to be fixed
by Superintendent.
3. Military and naval settlers as in Auckland.
i The Hawk’s Bay laud regulations are at present the same as
those of Wellington.


out after passing the southern portion of the latter
province. The length of this province from north to
south is 200 miles, its extreme breadth from east to
west about 80. The European population is about
13,000 —native 8000. The city of Wellington stretches
for a considerable distance in almost a straight line
along the shore of its beautiful harbour (one of the
finest in the world, I suppose), each of its extremities
spreading out into a knot of streets: so as to give it
the appearance of a double-headed shot slightly bent
in the middle. It contains several handsome wooden
buildings, which look well when viewed from the sea.
The most conspicuous of these are the Barracks,
Public Offices and Council Chamber, two English
Churches, Homan Catholic Cathedral, Scotch Church,
"Wesleyan Chapel, Government House, &c. On the
hilly terrace at the back of the town, as well as
on Thorndon and Te Aro flats (the two extremities)
are some very good private residences. The walks
through the forest at the back of the town are exceed-
ingly picturesque and beautiful. The isthmus on
which the town stands is probably the most windy
locality in the whole of New Zealand ; the entire
force of the winds which draw up and down Cook’s
Strait, as through a tunnel, being concentrated at this
spot. Hence the saying in the other settlements, that
a Wellington man may always be known by his habit
of holding his hat on his head. Wellington is the
centre of those volcanic shocks, which from time to
time agitate the shores of Cook’s Strait. The area of
their action is bounded by Wakari or White Island,*
Wakari or White Island in the Bay of Plenty is three miles in


in the north, and the Kaikora peninsula in the south.
Beyond these limits the shocks are felt, but very
slightly. The earthquake which shook Wellington so
severely on the 23rd January, 1855, was not felt at
the Bay of Islands—at Auckland it was felt by some
persons and not by others—at Canterbury it was de-
scribed as a “slight tremor”—at Otago it was felt by
some and not by others. The volcano of Tongariro, in
the north of the province, is reported to send out little or
no smoke for some time previously to an earthquake of
any violence. The commerce of Wellington is more ex-
tensive than that of any other province, except Auck-
land. It was founded by the New Zealand Company
in 1840. Along the N.W. shore of Cook’s Strait, this
province possesses a considerable extent of good arable
and pasture land, and three or four thriving settle-
ments. The most northerly of these, Wanganui, on
the river of that name, bids fair to be a town of some
importance. There are also tracts of very rich land in
the valley of the Hutt (a river which empties itself
into Wellington harbour, nine miles from the town),
and extensive runs on the Wairarapa plains, j -
circumference, and its highest point is 860 feet. Near the centre
there is a boiling spring 100 yards in circumference, throwing off
volumes of steam, which rise like a white cloud, and give the
island its name. Half-a-mile from White Island the sea is 2000
fathoms deep. —Captain Drury , R , N.
f The Wellington land regulations are—
1. Rural lands, available for agriculture at a fixed price of 10$.
per acre.
2. Do, unavailable for agricultural purposes to be put up to
auction at 55. per acre.
3. Naval and military settlers the same as at Auckland.


We will now take our passage in one of the inter-
colonial steamers, and make the best of our way
through Cook’s Strait, either running merrily before a
south-easterly breeze, or plodding our weary way in
the teeth of a Nor’-wester; for the wind in the Strait
always blows from one or other of these points, and
almost always blows stiffly. The Strait varies in
breadth, from 16 to 60 miles, its narrowest part being
a few miles to the westward of Wellington. On the
left hand are Cloudy Bay, Queen Charlotte’s Sound
(where Capt. Cook wintered) and the Pelorus—all
well provided with fine land-locked harbours, but pos-
sessing very little land available for settlements.
There used to be a little steamer, which plied now
and then between Wellington and Nelson, taking
Queen Charlotte’s Sound on the way. It might be
worth while, supposing this arrangement to be still in
existence, to run across from Wellington to Picton,
the sea-port and capital of the province of Marl-
borough ; from which a ride of about twelve miles will
bring you into the Wairau plain, the great pastoral
district of Nelson before the separation of the pro-
vinces. The river Wairau, which runs through this
plain, empties itself into the sea in Cloudy Bay. There
is a little town in the neighbourhood named Beaver,
which communicates with the sea by means of river
navigation.
The plain is about sixty miles in length. It was the
scene of the massacre of twenty-two Nelson settlers
(including Capt. Wakefield, the New Zealand Com-
pany’s agent), by Eauperaha and Eaugihaeta in 1843.*
• The Marlborough land regulations are the same as the Nelson
regulations in 1856, differing slightly from those in present operation.


If you continue your voyage in the little steamer, you
will probably enter Blind Bay by the French Pass,
a narrow strait between d’Urville’s Island and the
main, through which the tide runs like a mill stream,
affording more than enough of opportunity for the
exercise of courage, local knowledge and skill on the
part of your skipper. I will suppose, however, that
you have gone direct from Wellington to Nelson, and
have endured the usual amount of rolling and stagger-
ing in the race off Cape Stevens, a promontory which
terminates the eastern shore of Blind Bay. A few
miles steaming will exhibit a contrast as great as if we
had run from a Channel gale into the most sheltered
harbour on the English coast. I have rounded Cape
Stevens in a sailing vessel with double-reefed topsails
and been becalmed very soon after entering the
sunny waters of Blind Bay, or Tasman’s Gulf, as it
is sometimes called. “ Let no man,” says Bishop
Selwyn, in one of his journals, “ give an opinion about
the climate of New Zealand, until he has basked in the
almost perpetual sunshine of Tasman’s Gulf.” If there
be any thing that can fairly be brought into compari-
son with the genial climate of those lovely shores, it
is the warm-hearted kindness of their inhabitants. It
was like them to open their doors, as they have done,
to the poor exiles of Taranaki, who have been crowded
into the houses of all classes alike, at no small cost of
personal inconvenience, and, in some instances, of real
danger to their hosts.* The city of Nelson is about a
mile and half from the port ; an extensive dock, pro-
tected from the violence of the sea by a natural break-
♦ Since writing the above I have learnt that the Government
have provided comfortable barracks for the refugees.


water of boulders or huge pebbles.* The opening
of this harbour is narrow, with a large rock al-
most in the middle of it, on which the ebb tide sets
with great violence ; but thanks to skilful pilotage large
vessels have entered and quitted the harbour for many
years without a single accident. The shallow water
close to the boulder bank inside the harbour affords
great facilities for examining and repairing ships’ bot-
toms. The town itself, which was founded by the New
Zealand Company in 1840, is perhaps the least English'
in appearance of any in New Zealand. The principal
street, which is very wide, is made up almost entirely
of hotels and stores, most of them built of wood, and
exhibiting a very picturesque variety of architecture.
At the upper or southern end of the street, on a green
hillock, which has recently been laid out in walks with
great taste, stands the English church, a commodious
and rather handsome wooden building, in the form of
a cross, with a spire. There are also places of worship
for Scotch Presbyterians, Eoman Catholics, Baptists,
and Wesleyans. The last mentioned have recently
erected a large and by no means inelegant chapel.
The College, or as we should call it, the High School,
is well endowed, and is at present under the superin-
tendence of an able Principal. There are also Grovem-
ment schools for boys and girls, supported by a rate
of 361 for each house, and ss. for each child be-
tween the ages, I think, of 5 and 14. A settler
can thus obtain a fair commercial education for
four children at the cost of £2 per annum. These
schools are established in all the settled districts.
* An iron light-house, to be placed on the boulder bank, has
just been sent out.


Large collegiate and Government buildings were in
course of erection when I left Nelson at the close of
1859, and promised to be very ornamental to the town.
In the immediate neighbourhood are some pretty villa
residences, and even in the town itself many of the
houses have village-like gardens, and some of them
vineyards and hop grounds. A belt of hills shelters
the town from the cold winds. Nelson is famous for
its ale, the best, it is said, in New Zealand. Wine
has also been made, but not recently. It was in this
neighbourhood that I met with the heroine of Wake-
field’s Book (the Art of Colonization). She had been
a servant in England, and having married a fellow-ser-
vant, had gone out as a settler to New Zealand.
Two or three years after her arrival she writes to
a friend in England: “ The greatest cuss in this
country is the exorbant wages.” She and her hus-
band now occupy a large farm, with a handsome house
on it, and are I believe as prosperous as they deserve
to be. The wages are still “ exorbant,” but the good
woman can now afford to grumble and pay them.
About nine miles from Nelson there is a mine,
called the Dun Mountain Mine, which produces a large
supply of chrome, a substance used by manufacturers
of paint. The mine is worked by a London Company.
According to the last report of their mining engineer
2500 tons of this article were prepared for transit, and
only awaited the construction of a tramway to carry it
down to the port. The work, it is said, has been com-
menced, and will be sufficiently advanced to convey ore
in about six months. A small steamer plies almost
daily between the town and Motueka, a pretty rural


district on the other side of the Bay. There is also
steam communication with Coliingwood, in Massacre
(or as it is now called “ G-olden”) Bay, the metropolis
of the gold-digging district; a mere village at present,
but likely to rise into importance with the prosperity
of the diggings, of which there seems to be no doubt.
Two or three companies are now at work and realizing
large profits. Coal of tolerable quality is also found
in this neighbourhood. The climate of this district is
as bad as that of Nelson is delightful; its woody
mountains catching the clouds as they rise from the
western ocean, and its gulleys serving as blow-pipej
for the conveyance of the north-westerly storm into
the very heart of the town. It may, however, be
fairly questioned, whether the wet and cold of this
boisterous region inflicts half as much suffering on the
Anglo-Saxon gold-digger, as the heat and drought of
the Australian diggings. If he has little comfort, he
will have still less fever and dysentery. The popula-
tion of Nelson and Marlborough is about 11,000
Europeans, and 1100 natives.* Returning to Nel-
son, we will mount our horses (having provided, if
possible, a pack-horse to carry our blankets, provisions
and so forth, not forgetting a quart pot for boiling,
and a pannikin for drinking our tea, and a tomahawk
for cutting firewood) and start on the overland journey
to Christchurch. The first day’s ride will take u 4
* The Nelson land regulations are :
1, Pasture lands ( i. e. lands unsuited for tillage) upset price from
5.v. to 1 Os. per acre.
2. Rural lands ( i. e. lands capable of cultivation) upset price
-from IQs. to 20s. per acre.


through the "Wairnea, a well-watered and well-culti-
vated valley, thickly strewn with villages and farms.
Thence, on the following day, partly through open
country, and partly through a dreary forest called the
“ Big Bush,” to the “ Top House,” a hostelry chiefly
celebrated in my day for the demolition of saddle bags
and their contents by pigs, and its faithful resemblance
to an Irish cabin of the most forlorn description.* The
third day’s journey takes us through the gorge of the
river Wairau. I know few scenes equal in grandeur
to this. The noble river, walled in on each side by
precipitous cliffs, probably a thousand feet high, leaves
only room for a bridle path cut out of the mountain
side, sometimes at a height of 500 feet above the
river, or trodden along the narrow strip of shore left
sometimes on one bank and sometimes on the other, as
the river’s course inclines towards the rocky barrier on
the right hand or the left. Here and there large bodies
of water rush down the face of the mountain, flashing
like silver through the thicket. In one place, the
river is flanked on each side by a huge rocky pillar,
forming a sort of gateway, through which the waters
rush, roaring and hissing like an avalanche. The
close of day brings us to a desolate valley, or rather
table-land, to which the name of Tarndale was given
by its discoverer, Mr. "Weld, on account of the number
of little lakes, or “ tarns.” The whole of this district
is impracticable in winter, or nearly so, on account of
the deep snow. It is not much more than two years
* The roads divide just below the Top House, that on the left
leading to the Wairau plain, or province of Marlborough, that on
the right to Christchurch.


ago that a party, I think of four, who had impru-
dently attempted a journey from the Leslie Hills,
arrived at Nelson —two of them with loss of fingers
and toes ; and the others, like Hannibal’s soldiers in
the Alps, looking more like ghosts or photographs
than living men. In this dismal region, to which we
had gradually been ascending since the morning, our
bridles and tether-ropes, when I made the journey,
were frozen stiff, although the day (early in March)
had been one of almost African heat in the gorge.
The traveller will find shelter, and perhaps fire-wood
here; but nothing else, unless the owners of the run
happen to be residing in their hut. If he is wise, he
will not waste any time in preparing breakfast the
next morning, but pack his horses before sunrise, and
hasten to turn his back on this howling wilderness.
The sunshine of the valley into which he is rapidly
descending will soon thaw his stiffened limbs, and a
pleasant ride will bring him to a spot, where he can
eat his morsel in comfort, and his horses enjoy them-
selves in a luxuriant meadow. The fourth day brings
us, by the junction of the rivers Acheron and Clarence,
to the foot of Jollie’s Pass. The fifth, through that
and another pass in the Leslie Hills, and across a
river* and plain to the river Hurunui, which divides
the provinces of Nelson and Canterbury. Having
forded the Hurunui, we find ourselves on a vast plain,
or rather a succession of plains, divided from each
other by low spurs, and bounded on the west by a
high mountain range, which here recedes to a distance
* The Wai-au-ua.


varying from ten to twenty miles from the coast; and
on the east by a chain of limestone hills, which line
the coast as far as Double Corner. From Double
Corner southwards you have a dead level, broken
by insignificant hills along a portion of the coast,
a distance of about 130 miles in a straight line.
Throughout the whole of this province, except a very
few miles, there is a belt of good agricultural land along
the sea-board, extending inland from two to eight
miles on an average. The plain between Double Cor-
ner and Timaru is supposed to contain about three
millions and a quarter of acres, watered by several
large rivers. The only fault of these plains is the
scarcity of wood, an inconvenience only inferior to the
still more vexatious one of a thickly-wooded country,
which must be cleared by the axe. After floods,
which happen frequently, especially in spring, all the
large rivers are unfordable. The two best rules for
ensuring the traveller’s safety are —1. Never to travel
alone, if he can help it ; 2. Never to think of fording
a river, of which the water is discoloured, unless he
is thoroughly familiar with the locality, or has some
“ old hand” for a guide. The neglect of these pre-
cautions has cost the colony many valuable lives.
The first town that we reach after quitting Nelson
is Kaiapoi, on the banks of the river Courtenay
or Waimakeriri, which is navigable up to the town
for vessels drawing about six feet of water. A good
deal of wool is shipped at this port, to be put on
board English vessels at Lyttelton. After crossing
the Waimakeriri by two ferries, a pleasant ride
of ten miles, through a well cultivated country,
£


brings us to the town of Christchurch, 200 miles
from Nelson. If all has gone well, the journey-
will have occupied six days. The province of Can-
terbury, of which Christchurch is the capital, is
about a third of the size of England and Wales, and
contains a population of about 14,000 Europeans
and 500 natives. The settlement was founded in
1850, by an Association of zealous members of the
Church of England, whose first wish was to provide
such an endowment as would place the Church of the
new settlement in an independent position. This
was effected to some extent, by setting apart a third
of all their land sales for ecclesiastical and educa-
tional purposes ; but the plan, like most similar ones,
has been only partially successful. Much, however,
has been gained by the formation of a settlement, in
which a very large majority of the original .colonists
belonged to the same communion: for the founders
were able at once to organize a church and school
system, which would have grown up very slowly,
if it had depended on purely voluntary efforts. But
while these measures were taken for giving the Church
of England a fair start in the colony, no wish was
ever expressed, as far as I know, to exclude the
members of other denominations, even if such exclusion
had been possible. A pleasing proof of the harmony
subsisting among the different religious bodies in this
settlement was given the other day, when the Scotch
Presbyterians came forward in considerable numbers,
as subscribers towards the completion of the church
at Lyttelton. The provincial legislature have also
shewn their liberality by granting £IO, OOO for the .


erection of places of worship, to be divided in fair
proportions between the Church of England, the
Eree Church of Scotland and the Wesleyan Metho-
dists, the only religious bodies who have as yet settled
in this province in any considerable numbers.* The
College, according to a report written last May, con-
tained 66 pupils, including three students in the
upper department. Two or three of the students have
already been ordained by the Bishop of Christchurch.
The cityf of Christchurch stands on flat ground on
both banks of the river Avon, which is crossed by
several bridges. It is said to contain 1600 souls, but,
like Nelson, it occupies an area sufficient for thirty
times the number of its present population. There is
one long, wide and nearly finished street, several other
streets and squares more or less complete, and a large
number of detached houses standing in the midst of
gardens and paddocks. The town contains a large
• The proportions of the different denominations are, or were
very recently, as follows:
Church of England 10,500 Bishop, Archdeacon, and H clergy.
Church of Scotland 1,500 1 Minister.
Wesleyans 1,240 2 Ministers,
Church of Rome 360
Various denominations 400
14,000
This calculation is based on the supposition of the number of
inhabitants being 14,000, and the proportions remaining as they
were at the last census.
tl call these little provincial capitals “cities,” because they
are so designated in the Royal letters patent, by which the different
Bishoprics were constituted.


iron foundry, three breweries, a wind-mill and two,
water-mills, and the usual proportion of stores and
hotels. The Government Offices, Bishop’s house and
College are very handsome buildings. There are two
English churches, neither of them very sightly, a small
but very neat Wesleyan chapel and a Scotch church.
A good road leads us across the Heathcote Ferry to
the foot of the Lyttelton Hills, through a highly cul-
tivated country. At present the bridle path over these
hills is practicable only for horses and foot passengers:
but it is in contemplation to drive a tunnel through the
hill and construct a railway, which will bring produce
from Christchurch to the end of the jetty at Lyttel-
ton, a distance of about seven miles. This plan, I
hear, was submitted to the late Mr. Stephenson, and
approved by him.
The trade between Lyttelton and the inland country
is chiefly carried on by steamers or small coasting
craft, which ascend the river Heathcote to within two
miles of Christchurch. There is also a very circuitous
route by way of Sumner, a small hamlet on the estuary
of the Avon and Heathcote. From the highest point
of the bridle path we see almost beneath our feet the
town of Lyttelton, with its lake-like harbour, which is
so easy of access as to be entered by a perfect stranger
with any wind. There is good holding ground in five
fathoms water, about five miles from the heads, and
a mile from the town. Vessels of 200 tons come
alongside the jetty. The town contains about 1800
inhabitants, who are chiefly engaged in supplying
the shipping and in an export trade, which already .
amounts to a£150,000 annually, and is rapidly in


creasing. There is a very neat church, built of red
sand-stone, with a belfry. Here, as at Auckland,
there seems to be no imprudence in erecting stone
buildings, the shocks of earthquake being so feeble.
Banks’s Peninsula, on the northern side of which the
town is situated, is a rough, thickly-wooded district,
full of harbours, like the N. W. shore of Cook’s Strait.
At its southern extremity is the town and harbour of
Akaroa, originally settled by a French company in
1840. The vine is cultivated with great success in
this locality, which is warm and sheltered. The har-
bour is a place of call for French, and now and then
for English and American whalers. Near the southern
extremity of the province is the little town of Timaru,
the shipping port for wool grown in that neighbour-
hood. There is no harbour, but heavy moorings have
been laid down in the roadstead. The provinces of
Canterbury and Otago are pre-eminently the pastoral
districts of New Zealand.* In Canterbury, as in all
* “It appears to me (hat a capital of £2500 to £3OOO is
required to make a good beginning in sheep-farming. About
£2OOO is the minimum, with which a man, in the majority of
cases, may without rashness count upon establishing a sheep
station on a secure or self-supporting footing As a
general rule, I should advise persons whose capital will not allow
them to obtain a run of about 1000 ewes, and at the same time
reserve something in hand against contingencies, rather to place
the sheep with some respectable sheep-owner, paying part of the
produce for their keep and care, than to run the risk of setting up
a station on his own account with insufficient capital. At the
same time be may be living inexpensively at a sheep-station, and
acquiring experience.” —Hints to intending Sheep-J'armers , by F.
A. Weld, By far the most trustworthy of all the New Zealand
manuals.


the pastoral districts, the business of sheep-farming
is carried on for the most part by squatters, that is,
tenants under the Crown, whose tenancy expires
when the lands are wanted for sale. This is of com-
paratively little consequence when the price fixed by
the provincial government is high; but in provinces
where waste lands are sold at a low rate, the squatter
occupies but an insecure position, unless he purchases
a few thousand acres of his run. It would probably
answer well to lay down a portion of this freehold in
artificial grasses, where the sheep-farmer has plenty of
open country to fall back upon in case of drought:
otherwise the experiment would, I should think, be
too hazardous. In Canterbury, “ The land already
occupied for pastoral purposes may be considered
capable of carrying, even in its unimproved state, at
least two million head of sheep. But it is believed
the land improves by being depastured, and fresh
country is, besides, being constantly discovered and
occupied. The sheep-runs average from 10,000 to
30,000 acres. The goodwill of a sheep-run stocked,
would probably cost at the rate of forty shillings for
every head of sheep. There are about 20,000 head of
cattle fed for the most part upon the rich pastures in
the neighbourhood of the swamps that lie along the
coast.”* Mr. Weld says truly that there is decidedly
less risk in cattle than in sheep-breeding, but the
profits are more uncertain. Horses thrive well on a
sheep-station. At present the supply of horses does
not equal the demand, and many are still imported
* Canterbury Papers, published by authority of the Provincial
Government.


from Australia. “ A considerable amount of butter
and cheese is made for the New Zealand and Aus-
tralian markets. Oxen fetch from .£lO to £l2 per
head unbroken, and from £3O to £35 a-pair well
broken in. Heifers from £4 to £6. Good milch-
cows still fetch high prices. Horses are very dear :
a good riding-horse costs from £6O to £BO, and a
first-rate draught-mare £IOO or more. The farms
vary in size from 20 to 500 acres. It is said that
there are more small freeholders in Canterbury than
in any other province. The price of farm produce is
very fluctuating, depending mainly on the state of the
Australian markets. Wheat has varied from 4s to 12s
a bushel; potatoes from 30s to £lB a ton. Since the
third year after its formation Canterbury has been
exporting wheat, oats, and potatoes to the neigh-
bouring provinces. Great attention is now paid to
the rearing of trees, especially English forest trees.
By the latest accounts we find that all who had
arrived in the Colony had found employment soon
after landing, and that a ship every month would not
prove too much for a long time to come. The rate of
wages (which, however, is constantly varying) was at
that date nearly as follows :
Ordinary labourers, hired by the
day of 8 hours, without board
or lodging, per day . . 4s to 6s
Mechanics, ditto, ditto , . 10s
Farm labourers, by the year, with
board and lodging, a man and
wife .... £SO to £6O


Single men . . . £4O to £ SO
Lads from 10 to 17 . . ,£ls to £25
Female servants . . . £2O to £3O
The price of provisions was—
Flour, per 100 lbs. (not 112 lbs.,
as in Europe) . . . 18s to 25s
Bread, per 4 lb. loaf , . Is
Meat, per lb. . . 4 d to 6 d
Butter, per lb. . . Is Qd
Groceries rather dearer than in England. Eent
high ; but every working-man should get a piece of
land and build a bouse for himself, as soon as pos-
sible.” *
The price of waste lands is high—£2 an acre:
considerably more than in any other province. This
regulation is said to be popular both among the
squatters and the working-men; the former consider-
ing it a guarantee that their runs will not be bought
over their heads, the price being too high to tempt
speculators, and the latter knowing by experience
that very little land ever falls to their share in pro-
vinces where the lowness of the price makes the
purchase of large tracts of country a profitable in-
vestment for the capitalist, who can afford to wait for
the return of his money. There is no reason why a
steady working-man should not be able to purchase a
twenty acre farm (£4O), and stock it, within three or
four years. I have known many a man who has done
* Canterbury Papers, published by authority of the Provincial
Government,


so, and is now a thriving farmer. Ido not remember
any instance of a man remaining unemployed more
than a week after landing. About three years ago a
meeting was called by some immigrants who had just
arrived in the settlement, for the purpose of stating
their own complaints, and hearing those of their late
fellow-passengers. The Superintendent of the Pro-
vince and some of the leading settlers attended the
meeting, which was densely crowded. The newly-
arrived men were desired and encouraged to state
their grievances without fear or favour. After a
pause, one man rose and complained of being obliged
to work “up to the knees in water to which it was
replied, that most of the settlers present had at one
time or other been glad to get work, even though the
water reached far above the knee. Another then rose,
and, in a dismal voice, told the meeting that he could
get nothing but salt-butter to eat with his bread.
This was too much for the gravity of the meeting.
As soon as the storm of laughter, raised by the state-
ment of this wiseacre’s grievance, lulled a little, a
resolution was put and carried that a committee, con-
sisting half of working-men and half of gentlemen,
should be appointed to hear complaints. The next
day five complainants attended, of whom three were
already in work, and the remaining two had work
promised to them.
Assisted passages are granted by the Provincial
G-overnment of Canterbury to eligible persons, pre-
ference being given to agricultural labourers, carpen-
ters, blacksmiths, wheelwrights, sawyers, gardeners,
and domestic servants. The passage-money for an


adult is £l7, of which the Government pays half*
and the party emigrating as much as he can, in ready
cash, of the other half. Any deficiency is made up bv
an advance from the Government on the emigrant’s
promissory note, payable at sight, with an under-
standing that payment will not be required for six
months, unless the borrower disputes the debt or
attempts to leave the province. At the end of six
months he is expected to repay the debt by quarterly
instalments. I may add, that the payment of these
instalments is rendered perfectly easy by the high
rate of wages which he is sure to receive. Those who
can. pay the most in ready cash will be most likely to
obtain an early passage, j -
The southernmost of the New Zealand provinces
is Otago, which may be easily visited from Canterbury
either on horseback or by steamer. This fine province
is about the same size as Scotland, containing about
17 millions of acres, of which 10 millions probably are
available for agricultural and pastoral purposes. Be-
tween the great western range and the east coast there
is every variety of land, plains, valleys and mountains ;
affording abundance of food for stock both in winter
and summer. The climate, though of course colder, is
* This £B. 10* is, of course, a free gift, subject to no conditions
whatever, after the emigrant has fairly embarked for the Colony,
All that the settler has to trouble himself about is the other
£B. 10*, to be paid by himself or borrowed from the Provincial
Government.
j* All particulars may be obtained on application, either per-
sonally or by letter, to the “ Emigration Agent for the Province
of Canterbury, New Zealand, 32, Charing Cross, London, S.W.” .


drier than that of the Northern Island, and by no
means unpleasant even in winter. The mean tempe-
rature is said to be that of London. The gardens
produce abundance of strawberries, raspberries, goose-
berries, red, white and black currants. Cherries,
plums, pears and apples do well: but peaches and
nectarines require a wall. The soil is well adapted for
the cultivation of barley, wheat and oats. As a graz-
ing country, Otago is at least equal to any other pro-
vince in New Zealand, owing to the numerous streams
of fine mountain water, which everywhere intersect
the country. It has great advantages for dairy farming.
As a horse-breeding country it is second to none. In
some districts the common increase from sheep is 90
per cent.* Here, as in Canterbury, all the sheep runs
are probably taken up, but a good-will may from time
to time be purchased at a cost probably of from 30s to
35s per head for the sheep on the run. The price
however must be constantly varying according to cir-
cumstances. Otago was founded by the New Zealand
Company, in connexion with an Association of lay
members of the Free Church of Scotland in 1847.
The settlement was planted by the late Captain Car-
gill and a body of Scotch settlers in 1848. Dunedin,
the capital, stands at the head of Otago harbour. The
branch on which the town stands is accessible only
for small craft, but the deep harbour at Port Chal-
mers admits ships of heavy burden. Invercargill is
situated at the head of the estuary of the New Eiver,
and there are also villages on the banks of Jacob’s
• Otago, New Zealand, by John Cargill, Esq. J.P,


River, and on the shores of the fine harbour called the
Bluff. Stewart’s Island on the other side of Fo-
veaux’s Strait is well wooded, and possesses excellent
harbours. Its European population, consisting prin-
cipally of old whalers, is 52—natives 200. The popu-
lation of Otago (I mean the province on the mainland)
amounts to about 10,000 Europeans and 500 natives.
The whole of the land, in this as in all the provinces
of the Middle Island, has long since been purchased
from the Maoris, with the exception of a few native
reserves here and there. The rate of wages in 1859
was as follows:
Shepherds per annum with double
rations . . . .£SO to £6O
Agricultural labourers, do. do. . £SO to £6O
Ordinary labourers . . £4O to £SO
Female domestic servants . £2O to £3O
Trades, without rations, per day of
8 hours . . . 9s to 10s
Labourers, do. do. . 6s to 7s
Since that time the rate has probably fallen a little.
The price of provisions on February 25, 1860, was
about the same as at Canterbury.*
The Presbyterians are of course the most numerous
religious community in Otago, but members of other
denominations are daily settling in the province. There
are now two or three clergymen of the Church of
* All particulars relating to the land regulations of this pro-
vince, and the facilities afforded for emigration by the Provincial 1
Government, may be obtained from the u Otago Emigration Office,
20, St. Andrew’s Square, Edinburgh.”


England. The provision for education is on a very-
extensive scale.
Such then is New Zealand,* and such as I have en-
deavoured to describe them are the inducements held
out by at least two of the provinces to the labouring
man who contemplates emigration. Other colonies
may, for anything I know to the contrary, offer equal
advantages, hut it would he hard I think to find one
superior to New Zealand; whether we look to its tem-
perate climate, or the opportunities which it affords
to the steady settler of securing a competence after a
very few years of toil.
The only objection that can be urged against emi-
grating to this country is the length of the voyage :
but if it is the longest, it is also by far the safest that
you can undertake.! I will not go so far as to say,
that the three months or more of imprisonment on
board ship will be a time of very intense enjoyment;
but I think, if I had the choice, I should prefer it to
the rigours of a Canadian winter, or the broiling heat
* The Chatham Islands, four in number, are two days’ sail from
New Zealand. The largest of them is 36 miles in length. The
original inhabitants were enslaved by a body of Maories, who had
fled thither from Rauperaha in 1838. 'I he coast is very dangerous.
Potatoes are the chief produce. European inhabitants 85—native
510.
f “ If we look at the “ Government Emigration Report” we shall
find, that out of nearly 700 emigrant vessels despatched by Govern-
ment to these colonies (Australia and New Zealand) in the last
fourteen years, only two or three have been lost.”—Hursthouse’s
New Zealand,


of an Australian or African summer. Once over, it
is over for ever; whereas the excessive winter’s cold
and summer’s heat, may revisit you fifty times be-
fore the end of your earthly pilgrimage. I am far,
however, from urging a man who is really doing well
in this country, to subject himself to the weariness of
a long sea-voyage, to be followed by years of toil and
anxiety in a strange land. It is a homely but very wise
proverb, which bids us “let well alone.” If you are
earning competent wages, if you are tolerably certain
of finding steady employment for your children as they
grow up, and have a reasonable hope that when the
infirmities of old age at length overtake you, you
will not be left altogether destitute ; consider well be-
fore you decide on breaking up your happy English
home.
And again, if you are conscious that you have
always been among the hindmost in the race, through
idleness, or still worse through confirmed habits of in-
temperance, remember, I pray you, that an idle colo-
nist or a drunken colonist is more miserable and more
contemptible than a sluggard or a drunkard at home
—more miserable, because his conscience tells him
that his poverty is entirely his own fault —more con-
temptible, for in a colony all will despise the man, who
might have been independent, but who, through his
own misconduct, is a beggar—perhaps the parent of
beggars.
But if you belong to neither of these classes; i£
with all your care and industry and steadiness, you
find it hard to keep the wolf from the door—then


by all means emigrate. It is not for me to foretell
what your future fortune will be in that distant land.
“ Man proposes, but God disposes but your case
will indeed be an exceptional one, if at the end of a
few years you do not find that you have exchanged
the hard and anxious life of an English labourer or
mechanic, for one of comfort and independence.*
* The New Zealand Government Agency Office is at 3, Adelaide
Place, King William Street, where valuable information may al-
ways be obtained.


APPENDIX.
Imposts and Expoets of New Zealand.
1853. 1859.
Imports . £598,000 . . . £1,141,000
Exports . 303,000 . . . 541,000
Eetenxte of the Colony.
1853. 1859.
£149,000 . . . 36460,000
Land and Stock.
1853 1859.
Land under crop . 29,000 acres . . 140,000 acres.
Live stock 1,932,000 head.


BOOKS AND MAPS RELATING TO NEW P'S ALAN'S,
NEW PEA LAND, THE “ BE]TAIN or the SOITIi."
j’Jy Ciiaulhs ili;ns‘nioi;sE. With an Ajwaßhx on ibu Riiivc Vmiv
ip Jn o w Zealand aud our nituve Native Policy. A New aad cheaper
Edition, thoroughly rev Led, and corrcclod to the present time. 1 vol.
post Svo. with Maps. Price 15*.
PICTORIAL ILLUSTRATIONS or NEW ZEALAND,
64 Views, cnyraved on steel, from Drawings made by S. C.
late Principal Engineer and Surveyor to the New Zealand Company.
Handsomely bound in cloth, price 2P. (originally published at £B. 35.)
NEW ZEALAND, its present Condition, Prospects, and
Resources. By Edwahd Bhown Fitton, a Land-owner and late
Resident in that Colony. Price, with Map, 46'.
TRADITIONS AND SUPERSTITIONS of the NEW
ZEALANDERS, with Illustrations of their Manners and Customs, by
Edwap.d Shotitlaxi), M.A. Foolscap Svo. Price 3s. Qd.
CANTEEBUEY PAPEES, New Series. Information
concerning the Province of Canterbury, Nos. 1 and 2, price la. each,
(to be continued occasionally).
THE NEW ZEALAND EMIG-EANT’S HAND-BOOK,
containing a new and accurately coloured Map, and giving a full
description of the Frounces of Auckland, New Plymouth, Nelson,
Wellington, Canterbury, Otago, and of every Settlement and Agricul-
tural and Pastoral District in both Islands. Price Gd.
LOED LYTTELTON’S LECTEEE ON NEW ZEA-
LAND AND THE CANTERBURY COLONY. Pried 6 d.
HINTS TO INTENDING- SHEEP EAEMEES IN
NEW ZEALAND. By Fuederick A. Weed, New Zealand, Mem-
ber of the House of Representatives, &c. With an Appendix on the
Land Regulations. Price B d.
NEW ZEALAND.—Stanford’s Map of New Zealand,
compiled from the most recent Documents. Size 17 inches by 19.
Full coloured, in sheet, 2&. ; case, 3s. Gd.
CANTEEBUEY. —A Map of the Province of Canterbury,
New Zealand, showing the Freehold Sections and Pasturage Runs.
The Map is based upon the Admiralty Surveys, the Trigonometrical
Survey made by order of the Provincial Government, and the commu-
nications of Colonists. Scale 5 miles to the inch, with an enlargement
of Christchurch and its neighbourhood, on a scale of half an inch to a
mile. Price in sheet, 7s. 6</; case, 10s.; roller, varnished, 15s.
A L T CKLAND. —A New Map of the Province of Auckland,
New Zealand. Compiled by A. Willis, Gann, and Co, from the
latest Official Documents, showing the Lands already sold, the Lands
open for selection by Free Grant, and Crown lands not yet surveyed;
with Handbook. Price in sheet, 7s. 6 d\ case, 10s.
For other Publications on the Colonies, see Stanford’s Emigration
Catalogue, which can be had on application.
LONDON : EDWARD STANFORD, 6, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
