





SEW SOUTH WALES
PUBLIC SCHOOL LEAGUE,
FOR MAKING
PRIMARY EDUCATION
NATIONAL,
SECULAR, COMPULSORY AND FREE.
SUMMAEY
FACTS AND PRINCIPLES,
Ret. JAMES GREENWOOD, M.A.
Sydney:
Printed for the League by F. Cunninghame & Co.,
1 86 PITT street.
Urn]


SYNOPSIS.
NATIONAL. —All children of a given age to be either receiving
or in possession of a given minimum standard of
literary knowledge—the age and standard to be fixed
by Parliament.
SECULAR.—This standard"to include the course of instruction
now in common use in Public Schools ;—Denomina-
tional Schools to cease to be certified or supported by
the State.
COMPULSORY. —Parents and guardians neglecting to educate
their children to be compelled to send them to Public
Schools, if sufficiently available, to receive the minimum
of instruction provided by the State.
FREE.-—No fees to be charged for this minimum, and all
subjects beyond that to be left for the decision of
Parliament.
The great aim of the League is to have every
Adult inhabitant of New South Wales able to read
and write.


r&S'SSj f / 0073
DU-7-J
TO THE PEOPLE OF HEW SOUTH WALES.
It is now very generally admitted among all civilized nations
that ignorance is one of the most mostly things that can ever be
suffered to exist in a community of rational creatures. It renders
labour less efficient, it bars the way of. industrial progress, it
obstructs the path of national advancement, it lowers the type of
national character, and it is one of the most fruitful sources of
vice and crime. Under a despotic Government, ignorance is sure
to bear all these bitter fruits ; but in a free State, where the
sovereignty of the people is an accomplished fact, universal
education is an absolutely essential safeguard against the abuse
of universal liberty. Every child, not bodily or mentally dis-
qualified, ought to be so far instructed as to be able to perform
intelligently, when he comes of age, all the duties of citizenship.
It is undeniable that the foremost nations in the world are the
best educated; and the converse of this is true, that other things
being equal, the best educated are sure to become the foremost,
while those which are steeped in ignorance and left to slumber
in mental stagnation, whatever natural advantages they may
have, must dwindle down to the insignificance for which they
fit themselves.
One hundred years ago the Australian continent was regarded
by Europeans as a barren region, unworthy of colonization. Now
it is occupied by an English speaking population of nearly two
millions, governed by their own laws, and possessing four times
as much wealth per head as the inhabitants of Great Britain.
Of this continent, New South Wales comprises a magnificent


territory of 323,000 square miles—nearly three times as large as
the United Kingdom—with a population of 570,000, equal to
one-fiftieth of that of the mother country. This territory
includes some of the richest natural pastures, the greatest variety
of soil, the most extensive mineral treasures, the finest climate,
and some of the most gorgeous natural scenery to he met with in
the world. In this age of universal intelligence and rapid inter-
communication population is sure to gravitate to the country
which can offer the. best facilities for settlement, and the greatest
share of social happiness and the comforts of life. It is the
character of the people, and not the mere possession of material
wealth, that constitutes the greatness of a nation ; and if we are
to be worthy of that high destiny for which Providence has given
us every natural facility, we must be able to fuse the varied
elements from all parts of the world, which are sure to constitute
a young community, and build them up into a great, strong,
intelligent, and virtuous people. All distinctions of nationality
and creed must disappear in the common national character; and
the bond of a common patriotism must bind us together in a
sacred and indissoluble union. To accomplish this, the mightiest
of all forces is a uniform and efficient system of national educa-
tion. Let our children gx H ow up side by side in the same schools,
learning the same lessons, joining in the same sports, mingling
freely with each other in the healthy and bracing emulation of
school-boy life, with no national or sectarian distinctions; and to
whatever people or creed their parents may belong, and whatever
prejudices and jealousies they may inherit—a single generation
will subordinate these diversities in one common national
character. In the words of Fichte, “ the discipline of he child
s the discipline of the manand children who 1 earn their duties
side by side in the common schools of their country, are most
likely to discharge patriotically their duties as fellow citizens of
the same State. Impressed with these great truths, the Public
School League of New South Wales begs to submit the following
summary of facts to the earnest attention of every inhabitant oi
the colony.
1. From the last Census of New South Wales it has been
shown that of all the inhabitants over the age of ten years we


had then over 79,000, or nearly one in four unable to read and
write. In Victoria the proportion was only one in seven ; in the
Northern United States only one in thirteen; and in some of the
best educated nations on the continent of Europe illiteracy
scarcely exists. Irt Spain, Italy, Austria, Russia and all countries
that are in the back-ground in national and industrial progress,
ignorance is the rule and education the exception. Is New
South Wales to sink down into the condition of a semi-barbarous
people, or to advance to the front rank of the enlightenment
and progress of the age ?
2. According to the Census and Statistical Register for 1861
we had during that year twice as many prisoners from the illiterate
as from the educated part of the population ; in 1871 the pro-
portion was three times as many from the illiterate as from the
educated; in 1872 the proportion was four times as many , and in
five times as many , being in that year one prisoner for every
thirteen people over ten years unable to read and write, and only
one in seventy-one of those who could do both. The difference
in the several years is supposed to be largely due to the increas-
ing accuracy of our returns, and to the fact that here as every-
where else the diffusion of knowledge is making itself increas-
ingly felt in the reduction of crime. In all other countries where
reliable criminal returns are made, similar and even worse
results of ignorance are invariably shown. Every prisoner costs
us about £3O per year in police, gaols, and administration of
justice, and that is enough to educate a child during the whole
eight years which may be. taken as the average school term.
We are paying now a criminal tax of 10s. per head for every
man, woman, and child in the colony, and an education tax of
only 4s. 3d. per head. Which ought we to prefer, a heavy
criminal tax to degrade the country and impede its progress for
all time, or a liberal educational grant to put the key of
knowledge into the hands of every child in the land, and make
New South Wales one of the most enlightened, as she is one of
the richest, countries in the World ?
3. A complete system of national education includes primary,
.secondary, and advanced instruction. In this colony we have no


Southern „ , N
99 • •
over 1 „
8
over 1 ,,
12
Victoria
» » ••
>» 1 j)
4
nearly 1 „
11
New South Wales
99 >5 •*
>> 1 »>
6
„ 1 »
12
Queensland
in 1873, had. ,
1
6
over 1 „
12
Yictoria
a •
» 1 >>
4
nearly 1 „
8
New South Wales
99 99 • •
nearly 1 „
6
» 1
12
provision for advanced instruction, except the Sydney University,
which does not yet number one hundred graduates, and we have
scarcely any provision for secondary instruction between the
University and the Primary School. Ir> this respect there is
scarcely a nation on the European continent that is not far in
advance of us, and England, Germany, and America, present a
complete contrast. Leaving out, however, all reference to the
two higher branches, and without taking account of private
schools in any of the cases used for comparison, the following
table, based on the official reports of the Governments whose
elementary schools are compared, will give an exact idea of our
comparative educational condition.
Out of the whole population in the following countries :
Enrolled. Average Attendance.
Great Britain - - - in 1871, had.. over lin 12 over lin 16
Ireland „ „.. nearly 1 „ 5 nearly 1„ 15
Ontario and Quebec „ „ .. „ 1 „ 4 over 1 „ 9
Northern United States „ „.. „ 1 „ 4 nearly 1 „ 7
In none of these countries has the standard of either enrolment
or average attendance been reached—which the educational
authorities propose. We may, therefore, take as our standard
one in four of the population to be enrolled, and not less than one
in seven in average attendance. The Northern United States
have nearly attained this standard, even in the Western districts
where population is as scattered as in this colony, and Yictoria,
under her new Education Act, is rapidly approaching it. Our
Public School .Regulations give the school age at from four to
fourteen years, and, according to the Census of 1871, our present
population between these ages is 148,000. Out of this number,
the Council of Education report 92,000 as enrolled—some of them
two or three times over—and others below and beyond the limits of
the school age—reducing the proper enrolment of distinct children


to about 80,000. Giving due credit for all private and home educa-
tion —whatever these may be worth —and remembering the great
discrepancy between enrolment and average attendance, we can-
not have less than 40,000 children of school age in the colony
growing up in almost total ignorance. Are we to leave these
children to be the victims of their parents’ vices and misfortunes,
and to become a life-long burden to the State, or are we to stretch
forth the generous hand of State education to save them from
evils over 'Which they had no control, and train them to become
intelligent and virtuous citizens ?
4. During the last four years we appear to have made no
progress whatever in overtaking „the educational needs of the
colony. We had over one in six of the population enrolled in
1869, and we have a little below that proportion enrolled now;
therefore, we have barely kept pace with the increasing popu-
lation, without advancing one step towards reducing the proportion
of nearly one ignorant person in every four which prevailed at
the time of the Census of 1871. Is it the wish of the people in
this colony who have never grudged a Parliamentary Educational
Grant, that this period of stagnation shall continue, or do they
desire that a strenuous and sustained effort shall be made to
sweep away the costly burden of ignorance, the results of which
they will have to bear for a whole generation ?
5. Our present system of education throws two-thirds of its
entire cost upon the general taxation of the country. The parents
of our 40,000 neglected children pay their share of this taxation,
and as many of them have contracted vicious habits, the incidence
of taxation falls more heavily on them than upon the sober and
industrious who send their children to school. Under such cir-
cumstances, to waste one penny of public money, while so many
receive no benefit from an expenditure which falls on them so
heavily—is absolutely sinful, and a grievous wrong to those
families whose children have to pay the penalty of the parents’
fault. Judged by such a test, what shall be said of our present
divided system, which permits competing schools to waste the
public money in mere sectarian rivalry, to the injury of public
instruction ?


6. In the capital of the colony there are nine Public Schools,
with an average attendance of 418 children at each school, at a
cost in salaries of £l 2s. Bd. per child for the best education to
be had under our present system. Close beside these Public
Schools we have twenty-four Denominational Schools, with only
an average of 212 children in attendance at each school, at a cost
in salaries of £1 7s. 4d. for each child. Why should all the tax
payers of New South Wales be compelled to pay extra salaries to
have 5,000 of our city children educated in Denominational
Schools, when they can all receive a better education in Public
Schools, at a saving of 4s. Bd. per annum for each child in
average attendance ?
7. There are seventy-seven places out of Sydney where 189
schools are supported by Government, with an average attendance
at each school of only 86, and a cost in salaries of £1 11s. 9d.
per child. If we had only one school in each place, the attendance
would average 213 at each school, the teachers would be better
paid, the children would be better classified, and a far better
education given at a less cost to the country. Why should we
pay 9s. Id. per child more in salaries for the 16,000 children
attending these competing schools, than we are paying for the
best schools in the colony, merely to enable rival churches to
append their own special dogmas to the ordinary course of secular
instruction, which is all that the State wishes to give ?
8. There are 387 places in the colony where only one school
exists at present, with an average attendance of only 40 children
for each place, at a cost in salaries of £2 4s. 3d. per child. As
population increases in these places, the cost per child would be
reduced if all the children continued to attend one common
school. But our Public Schools Act permits any denomination
to open a rival school, and obtain a certificate and a salary from
Government for a teacher of their own nomination, provided they
can get an average attendance of 30 children. Under this pro-
vision several new Denominational Schools have been recently
opened, close beside Public Schools ; and if the Act is tohontinue
in force in its present form, this wasteful and irritating com-
petition will be eventually extended throughout the whole colony.


Why should the whole people, who cheerfully bear the burden of
education even in these thinly peopled districts when it is heaviest,
be deprived of the opportunity of lessening that burden afforded
by the increase of population, and have it made heavier still by
the rivalry of the denominations in the common schools of the
country to the serious injury of education itself?
9. The sections of the Public Schools Act, and the regulations
which make thirty the minimum number in regular attendance
for continuing a certificate to a Denominational School, are
practically a dead letter. There are several schools which have
been reported by the Inspectors as below the minimum for years,
whose certificates have been continued by the Council of Educa-
tion ; and on the 9th March, 1874, the Council actually agreed to
keep on the certificate of the Cabramatta Church of England
school at a lower salary for the teacher, in spite of the acknow-
ledged inability to keep up the minimum attendance. It has
been publicly and officially declared that the clause in the regu-
lations which says that “ certificates will be withdrawn, should
the required number of pupils not be maintained” is understood
to mean “ certificates may be withdrawn.” Backed by such an
official vindication of a breach of the law, what can be expected
of the Denominations, but that they will use the power thus
allowed by its administrators ? Is it fair to the electors of New
South Wales, after having fixed a limit to the burden which
sectarian jealousy can throw upon them, thus arbitrarily to
abolish this limit by a mere whim of administration, and compel
them to pay salaries, year after year, to separate Denominational
schoolmasters, whose few pupils could be educated in adjacent
Public Schools, without costing the people, in several cases, a
single penny more than they are paying to the teachers of the
common school ?
10. To maintain this rivalry between the competing schools,
the Denominations admit a larger number of free pupils, and
charge lower fees than the Public Schools—not at their own cost,
but at the expense of the schoolmaster, and to the consequent
detriment of public education. In 1872, no less than 39 per cent,
of all the Roman Catholic Schools, and 29 per cent, of all the


Church of England Schools in the colony, would have fallen
below the number of thirty, required by the Act, but for the free
pupils in attendance. During the last seven years, the Denomi-
national School teachers have lost —as compared with the Public
School teachers—in lower fees and no fees, the sum of £IB,OOO,
which the several churches have not in any way compensated.
Why should the schoolmaster be compelled to do work without
pay, merely to enable rival churches to keep their schools open
at the expense of the State ?
11. The Council’s report for the last year shows the annual
average attendance to be 23,748 at 400 Public Schools, at a cost
in salaries of £44,830, and 15,596 at 209 Denominational Schools,
at a cost in salaries of £26,158. This gives an average of pupils
per school, of 58 for the Public, and of 74 for the Denominational
Schools; thus showing that the Denominations come into the
field as rivals, chiefly where population is large enough to sustain
a good school economically, if there were but one. The cost per
child in salaries for the year was £1 17s. 9d. at the Public, and
£l 13s. 6d. at the Denominational Schools; thus proving, even
by their rivalry, that large schools are more economical than
small ones. But for the larger salary, we had 55’3 per cent, of
all our Public Schools, which satisfied and surpassed the Council’s
standard, and only 36-3 per cent, of the Denominational Schools
reaching and surpassing the standard. Out of these proportions
18 - 4 per cent, of the Public Schools were above the standard,
and only 7‘2 per cent, of the Denominational Schools. Leaving
out, however, the last fact, and taking ten as a basis of com-
parison, we have 400 Public Schools reaching a standard of 5-5,
and costing per child in salaries for each unit attained by the
schools, 6s. and we have 209 Denominational Schools
reaching a standard of only 3’6, and costing in salaries per child
for each unit of the standard, 9s. 3Jd. In other words, at the
same cost per unit as that of the Denominational Schools, the
Public School standard attained would have cost in salaries for
the year, £2 11s. per child in average attendance, instead of
£1 17s. 9d.; being for the whole number of pupils, £15,752
more than was paid. Or, to put it in another form, the same
educational results which cost, £26,158 for salaries in Denomi-


national Schools last year, would have cost at Public Schools,
with the same scale of salaries, £6,923 less than was actually
paid; a sum large enough, certainly, to pay a liberal interest on
all the Public School property. It is bad enough, under any
circumstances, to maintain these schools at the expense of the
country, which exist as separate schools for no other reason than
to give an opportunity for sectarian teaching; but is it not a
double wrong to whe whole community, to maintain them in spite
of their proved inefficiency ?
12. In accordance with the provisions of the Public School
Act, no money ought to be spent by the Council on Denomi-
national School buildings, repairs and furniture. But one-half
of the Council’s income from Church and School Lands is so
spent, although the proportion for Denominational Schools
should be only one-third of that income. The report for 1871
also says, “That claims from the late Board of Education,
amounting to £17,000, were made on the Council on account of
buildings, repairs, and furniture,” and these claims have been
paid since 1867. As all the National Schools became Public
Schools upon the passing of the Act, and, consequently, could be
legally supported out of the Council’s ordinary income, it is
believed that the bulk, if not all, of this sum has been spent on
Denominational School buildings, repairs, and furniture.
Several sums have been acknowledged to have been so spent,
and, therefore, the fact that there has been a violation of the law
cannot be disputed. Must not such evasions of law be demora-
lizing in their effect upon the people, and all the more so because
they claim the sanction of morality and religion ?
-13. It has been said in defence of Denominational Education
that as the school buildings ought to be supplied free of charge,
it must necessarily be cheaper than Public School Education, for
which buildings are provided partly at the cost of the State*
Passing by the fact that the unnecesary multiplication of schools
under a divided system is costing us annually, in extra charges
for salaries alone, a sum which is ample enough to pay interest
on the Public School property, and refund the purchase-money
by the time the schools are worn out; it can also be shown that


there is a balance against Denominationalism as tested by educa-
tional results. The total average attendance at all Denomina-
tional Schools for the last seven years gives an average per
annum of 16,698 pupils. The proportion of these schools which
satisfied the standard of the Co'ancil—taking ten as the highest
number attainable—is 3 - 7. For this result, they received
during the seven years £258,845 from public funds ; being at the
rate of £2 4s. 3d. per annum for each child, <fr 11s. 11-|d. for each
unit of the standard attained. The total average attendance at
all the Public, Provisional and Half-Time Schools for the same
period gives an average of 22,928 pupils per annum. The
Provisional and Half-Time Schools ought to be considered apart,
because they are at best doubtful ground between the two
systems, and they bring the proportion of Public Schools satisfy-
ing the standard down from 5'6 to 4'6, But as we cannot
ascertain their share of expenses separately, we include them
with the Public Schools for the purposes of this comparison.
From the whole amount received from public funds by the
Council during its whole existence, deduct the sum which has been
published as received by the Denomiational Schools, and we
have a balance left for the Public Schools of £483,468 ; being at
the rate of £3 Os. 3d. per child per annum, or 13s. Id. for each
unit"of the standard attained. This includes the whole cost for
buildings, rents, repairs, and furniture ; and it is believed, also,
a share of the expense that belongs to Denominational Schools,
the amount of which can only be ascertained by Parlimentary
investigation. But including this for the present, it appears
from the above facts that the whole Public School property has
cost the country during the last seven years—as compared with
the cost and efficiency of Denominational education—only
£32,248, for which outlay the people at large retain the whole
Public School property, estimated to be worth over £200,000.
Thus, without including a single disputed point, it is evident
that Denominational education has been wasteful of the public
money ; and this waste is the more greivous because it has been
largely in the form of a worthless or unsatisfactory education.
The Council’s standard for the schools includes their general
condition and efficiency, as well as the proficiency of the pupils.
Taking the latter only, it has been shown that in 1873 the pro-


ficieney of pupils at all the Public Schools of the colony was
equal to an average of 6 - 4, and at all the Denominational Schools
only 5-4 —a difference of one-fifth in favour of the efficiency of
Public Schools. Applying this fact to the salaries and average
attendance, it has also been shown that for every unit of pro-
ficiency we pay in salaries 6s. 2d.0 per child per annum at Denom-
inational Schools and only 5s lOd. at Public Schools, a difference
in itself large enough to pay interest on the cost of Public School
buildings. How much longer are we to tolerate a system which
is as inefficient in its results as it is wasteful of the money of the
people ?
14. It has been maintained that the and religious
instruction imparted in Denominational Schools more than com-
pensates for their extra cost. To this it would be enough to
reply that whatever may be the value of such instruction, since
1862 it ought not to be given in this colony at the expense of the
State. But waiving this reply, it has never been shown that the
moral and religious instruction in Denominational Schools, as
compared with what is to be obtained from the common reading
books in Public Schools, has any superior value whatever. The
Inspectors never test it by examination ; we have no means of
knowing how far the teachers are competent to give it, and
there is not the smallest proof that Denominational School
children are either more moral, or religious, or in any way
better behaved than Public School children. Why then should
separate schools be maintained out of the general taxation of the
colony, not only in violation of our common religious equality,
but in the absence of proof that they succeed in imparting that
religious instruction which they claim to be a compensation for
the expense of their separate existence ?
15. It has been proved in Parliament that in" some of ‘bur
Provisional and Half-Time Schools sectarian influences have
succeeded in teaching the children certain religious dogmas
which one section of the people may hold as conscientious con-
victions, but which another section as conscientiously oppose.
It is acknowledged that in these schools such dogmas ought not
to be taught; but is it not just as inconsistent with religious


equality to have them taugkt in the Denominational Schools,
which exist as separate schools for no other reason than to give
an opportunity for teaching them ? No class of the people can
have a just claim to the expenditure of public funds on either
Denominational or any other sectional ground. The incidence
of taxation is not regulated by Denominational distinctions ; we
all pay taxes simply as citizens ; and as citizens only, have we
any right to require the expenditure of these taxes; and an
expenditure which must be for the general and equal benefit of
all the people.
16. National education means that the State shall bring the
means of instruction within reach of all its people, on the most
economical and equitable terms, without distinction of class or
creed; and ensure that all children not mentally or physically
disqualified shall at least be educated up to a given standard.
Secular education means that this standard of common school in-
struction shall not in any way be associated with the beliefs and
opinions of any religious sects—not that these beliefs may not be
of inestimable value, but because, in accordance with the law of
this land, they ought not to be taught at the public expense;
and because true religion can be taught only by those who are
truly religious, and that is a qualification of which the State can
have no tests. Compulsory education means that it shall be
lawful to compel attendance at the State School, when one
exists sufficiently convenient, wherever children are growing up
in ignorance, through the neglect, avarice, or vice of their
parents or guardians. Free education means that the standard
which the State requires all children to acquire shall be free of
fees for rich and poor alike ; the whole cost of such instruction
to be borne—as two-thirds of it is now —by the general taxation
of the country.
Let the electors of New South Wales determine that not
another year shall be wasted before entering on this benefioient
work of diffusing the light of knowledge throughout the whole
of the land, and the words of Fichte will be fulfilled in our case,
as in the case of all peoples that have been timely wise
“ Compulsory education will not extend beyond the present


generation, for it is sure to become voluntary in the next. Its
influence will be felt for good in every way; by national educa-
tion the expenses of the State will be diminished, and the cost of
maintaining standing armies will be done away with, because
education will produce a nation of patriots and an army of
intelligent men, better fitted to defend the country than the
ignorant boors who are drawn into a conscription. The prin-
ciples of political economy will come to be understood by the
working population, and industry will flourish and wealth
increase. The discipline of the child is the discipline of the
man, and in a well educated state abject poverty will bo a thing
unknown.”
Sydney, October 9th, 1874.
If. Ctinain.gb.ams & Co., Steam Machine Printers, 186 Pitt-street, Sydney.


