

flfiZVO
Chsv
n%-o\




Jluatyalasian InM Jiteam Saturation
sompnjr, limited.
NEW HEBRIDES
SCHEDULE,
SYDNEY.
Printed by John Sands, 374 George Street.
1889.
t c farv




memorandum of entered
into at Sydney, in the colony of New South Wales, this twenty-
fourth day of October, in the year of Our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-nine, between the AUSTRALASIAN
UNITED STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY, LIMITED, of
the one part, through their agents, Messieurs BURNS, PHILP
& COMPANY, LIMITED, and the Reverend JAMES
COSH, M.A., acting for and on behalf of the New Hebrides
Mission of the other part.
WHEREAS the Australasian United Steam Navigation
Company, Limited, at present run a fortnightly service from
Sydney to Fiji, via New Caledonia, AND whereas every
alternate steamer thus sailing calls at one of the southernmost
parts of the New Hebrides Group of Islands, AND whereas
the New Hebrides Mission are desirous that an inter-island
steam service should also be established, connecting with the
said Sydney and Fiji Line of Steamers, monthly, i.e. every
fourth calender week.
THE Australasian United Steam Navigation Company,
Limited, do hereby agree to provide the steamer, “ Truganini,”
or another steamer suitable for this inter-island service, to
connect monthly with the larger steamers of the Fiji Line, for
a period of twelve months, commencing about the end of
December or beginning of January next at their option, but the
contract herein entered into to be as from the first of January,
one thousand eight hundred and ninety, one month’s notice of
the exact date of the initiation of such service to be given in
writing to the Reverend James Cosh, M.A., as representing
the New Hebrides Mission, by the Australasian United Steam
Navigation Company, Limited, AND it is agreed that the service
will be conducted monthly as nearly as possible to a time
table which shall be fixed upon and agreed to by the Reverend


James Cosh, M.A., of the New Hebrides Mission, the Govern-
ment of the Colony of New South Wales, and the Australasian
United Steam Navigation Company, Limited, it being always
understood that the service, though guaranteed as hereinafter
specified by the Reverend James Cosh, M.A., of the New
Hebrides Mission, is also subsidized as a mail service of the
Government of the Colony of New South Wales.
THE inter-island steamer may connect with the Ocean
Service at Aneityum or Havannah Harbour, and immediately
embark passengers, cargo and mails for the New Hebrides
Croup of Islands calling at the various Mission Stations
throughout the Group. It is understood that at present there
are eighteen stations throughout the islands, and that others
may be opened during the currency of this service, AND the
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company, Limited,
agree that the steamer shall call monthly at each station.
SHOULD, however, the weather cause any anxiety to
the captain of the steamer, he may pass any station or stations
carrying on passengers or cargo or mails to the next or nearest
station which may afford better anchorage or shelter, AND the
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company, Limited,
will not be under any obligation to return to any station they
may have passed, but will when and where practicable meet
the wishes of the members of the mission stationed on the
islands, but in such a case any passengers will have the option
of remaining on board the steamer or staying on shore till the
return of the steamer, and then re-embarking for their desti-
nation.
THE steamer will anchor as near as safety will permit
to the various stations called at, and the Australasian United
Steam Navigation Company, Limited, will land cargo,
passengers and mails with the steamer’s boats, and with the
steamer’s crew, but in all cases the missionaries will assist
when possible, with native labor in giving the steamer every
despatch, and free from any charge whatever, and may also
assist with boats where available. AND as the New Hebrides
Mission are desirous that no work should be done in port on
Sundays the Australasian United Steam Navigation Company,
Limited, agree that no cargo will be received or discharged on
that day, excepting in cases where delay would endanger the
safety of the ship.


THE rates of freight and passage will be charged as
per annexed schedule, and the Captain of the steamer will send
monthly returns to Sydney, shewing all passengers and cargo
carried on behalf of the New Hebrides Mission, together with
vouchers and such sums, shall be debited to the New Hebrides
Mission under this agreement.
AND for the due and faithful performance of this
contract the New Hebrides Mission agree to guarantee a
minimum amount of fifteen hundred pounds per annum,
which they agree to pay quarterly on the thirty-first day of
March, the thirtieth day of June, the thirtieth day of Sep-
tember, and the thirty-first day of December, at Sydney, AND
at the expiry of the said contract should it be found that the
freight and passage money to and from Melbourne and
Sydney, and the New Hebrides, and among the islands, has
under schedule rates amounted to more than the said sum of
fifteen hundred pounds sterling, then the New Hebrides
Mission agree to pay any further balance which may be due
by them.
THE steamer will be at liberty to call at any island or
place among the Islands altogether apart from the Mission
Stations, and in the event of accident to, or loss of the vessel,
the Australasian United Steam Navigation Company, Limited,
agree to place another vessel on the service, making allowance
at the rate of one hundred and twenty-five pounds sterling
per month for the time the service has been suspended owing
to such accident or loss.
AND the Australasian United Steam Navigation Com-
pany, Limited, bind themselves not to sell or supply to any
natives whatever any spirituous liquors or intoxicating drinks,
and to place every restriction possible against any member of
the crew of their vessels infringing this rule.
IN WITNESS whereof the said Australasian United
Steam Navigation Company, Limited, through their Agents,
Messieurs Burns, Philp and Company, Limited, and the said
Reverend James Cosh, M.A., acting for and on behalf of the
New Hebrides Mission, have hereunto affixed their signatures
at Sydney, in the Colony of New South Wales, this "twenty-
fourth day of October, in the year of OUR LORD one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-nine.


WITNESS to the\
Signature of the Austra-
lasian United Steam Navi- „ XTT ,.. T „ , mTT _ .
gation Company, Limited, I BURNS, PHILP & COMPANY,
through their Agents, Mes- J Limited,
sieurs Burns, Philp & Com- Per A. FORSYTH,
pany, Limited.
George Duncan.'
WITNESS tothe SigA
nature of James Cosh, M.A.,
acting for and on behalf of V
the New Hebrides Mission. I
George Dungan J
JAMES COSH,
For the New Hebrides Mission.


SCHEDULE (referred to in this Memorandum of
Agreement) of Freights and Passages from Sydney and Mel-
bourne to and from the New Hebrides.
FREIGHT (Dead Weight and Measurement).
From Sydney, From Melbourne.
Aneityum 275. 6d. Ton. 355. Od. Ton.
Tanna ... 275. 6d. ~ 355. Od.
Eromanga and all)
Islands south of > 275. 6d. ~ 355. Od. „
Havannah Harbor. 3
Havannah Harbor and) OA AJ
all Islands north f 30s. Od. „ 375. 6d. „
Boats from Sydney to any Island ... ... 10s. per foot
Cattle from Sydney to any Island £5 each
rparcel } *M. eaoh - Od. each.
FREIGHT (Dead Weight and Measurement),
To Sydney. To Melbourne.
Havannah Harbor and
Islands north of Havan- > 30s. Od, Ton. 375. 6d. Ton.
nah Harbor S
Tanna, Eromanga and An-)
eityum, and Islands south V 255. Od. „ 325. 6d. „
of Havannah Harbor )
Parcel Minimum 4s. Od, each. 6s. Od. each.
PASSAGE MONEY (from Sydney and Melbourne).
Saloon. Return. Steerage.
Aneityum, Tanna and) ,
Eromanga | £l ° 10s - 0d - £2l 0s - od - £6 0s - od
Havannah Harbor and) .
Islands north ( £l2 0s - 0d - £U 0s - 0d - £7 0s - 0d
Children.
Under five years of age, free ; from five to twelve, at half
adult rates.


Native Deck Passengers.
Sydney—to and from Southern Islands ... £4 Os. Od.
„ „ Northern Islands, including)
Sandwich ) Os. Od.
INTERINSULAR FREIGHTS AND PASSAGE RATES,
Rate of Freight between
any Two Islands south of
Sandwich Island.
Rate of Freight between
any Two Islands north of
Sandwich Island.
Rate of Freight between
any Two Islands North to
South or South to North of
Sandwich Island.
Pigs 3s, each
Goats ... ... 3s. each
Cattle £1 10s. each
Boats ... ... 2s. Foot
Luggage 10s, Ton
Copra 15s. Ton
Other Cargo, D.W. 10s. Ton
„ „ Meas. 10s. Ton
Pigs ss. each
Goats ... ... ss, each
Cattle ... ... £2 each
Boats ... ... 3s. Foot
Luggage 15s. Ton
Other Cargo, D.W. 15s. Ton
~ „ Meas. 15s. Ton
Copra ... ... 15s. Ton


Maximum Rate between Stations on the same Island, 30s. Minimum
Rate
between
Stations on the same Island, SOs. Children under S years, Free; over §, under 12, Half Fare.
£1 per day; Natives, 10s. per day.


