

938
[?]
New guinea and the unappropriated islands of the pacific 1883-4


1883-4.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
lEegislatifae Council.
NEW GUINEA AND THE UNAPPROPRIATED ISLANDS
OF THE PACIFIC.
(FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE RESPECTING PROPOSED ANNEXATION OF.)
Ordered hy the Council to he printed, 29 October , 1884.
No. 1.
Telegram from Acting Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 20 October,
Abstain from joining in any protest as to Imperial diplomatic action concerning islands Western Pacific.
Imperial Government not to be embarrassed. Probably its action in accordance with our views at
Convention.
No. 2.
Telegram from Agent-General to Acting Colonial Secretaiy.
London, 21 October, 1884.
A Gents-General no intention of protesting in any way. Object, in seeking interview with Lord Derby,
to ascertain intentions Imperial Government respecting Protectorate. Be assured will do nothing t
cause embarrassment. Have acted strictly in accordance with your wishes. Request for interview was
before notice of Protectorate. Lord Derby still willing interview. Agents met, and agreed to ask for
instructions.
No. 3.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Premier of New South WViles.
Melbourne, 21 October, 1884.
I have much pleasure in communicating to you the following telegram received from the Colonial
Secretary, Western Australia, viz.: “His Excellency the Governor wishes me to convey to you, and through
vou to the other members of the Committee appointed at the recent intercolonial Convention to watch
over Australian interests, his congratulations on the establishment of a British Colony in JN ew Guinea; a
sten which may be regarded as the first really substantial result of the unremitting zeal and energy with
which you and your colleagues have for many months been advocating measures for securing the integn y
of Australia.”
No. 4.
Tele°ram from Premier of Victoria to Premier of !New South V ndcs.
Melbourne, 22 October, 1884.
Circular.— Have received the following telegram through our Agent-General, apparently acting for
Agents-General in conference. I shall be glad to be the medium of conveying any reply you may wish
to make. Telegram as follows: — , , . . , , ~ j..ei • ±
“ Agents all met yesterday. Have reason believe decision Imperial Government final against
extend’”" TW~** o ~ite Word so-tU P o ast Npw CVnea, as proclaimed Please ascertain, as
from other Governments,' whether this decision accepted; also, whether Governments desire Argents
make further representations respecting convicts and mixed tribunal for jurisdiction outside Protectorate
li.nite.-E, Mbebat Smith.” jAMEg gEImCE)
Chairman of Convention Committee.
1178—
No. 5.
* c 229-


No. 5.
Telegram from Acting Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Victoria.
This Government considers it undesirable for Agents-General to make ™y“nrthOT°renreMntotfoas
lith^tC 0 ” 1611 *' USt aWait cO - urse l Tents ! and can ” ot therefore instruct our
Agent-General to act with others on questions concerning which we are imperfectly informed.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4.
[3*]


1883-4.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ILegtglattfje (Council.
NEW GUINEA AND NEW HEBRIDES.
(CORRESPONDENCE RESPECTING PROPOSED ANNEXATION OF.)
Ordered hy the Council to he printed , 22 October , 1884.
SCHEDULE.
NO * PAGE.
1. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of Queensland to Colonial Secretary of New South W ales. IS April, 1883 ... -
2. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South \Y ales. 18 April, 1883........... ...........
3. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to Colonial Secretary of Queensland. 19 April, 1883 ... -
4. Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General. 19 April, 1883 " 0
5. Telegram from Chief Secretary of South Australia to Colonial Secretary of New South W ales. 19 April, 18»3...
6. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Whales to Chief Secretary of South Australia. 19 April, 1883...
7. Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary. 20 April, 1883
8. Telegram from Chief Secretary of South Australia to Colonial Secretary of New South W ales. -1 April, 1883... -
9. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South W T ales. 8 June, 1883 3
10. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to Premier of Victoria. 8 June, 1883 ”
11. Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General. 8 June, 1883 •••••• •••••• *•••••
12. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South W ales. 13 June, 1883
13. The Agent-General to the Colonial Secretary. 15 June 1883 j*
14. Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary. 23 June, 1883 6
15. The Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 23 June, 1883 ’
16. Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary. 28 June, 1883
17. The Agent-General to the Colonial Secretary. 29 June, 1883 • • Vi ' Voqq a
18. Telegram from Colonial Secretary, Queensland, to Colonial Secretary, New South W ales. J uly, 1883 *
19. Colonial Secretary of Queensland to the Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 1/ July, 1883
20. The Agent-General to the Colonial Secretary. 27 July, 1883
21. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland. 31 July, 1883 o
22. The Colonial Secretary to His Excellency the Governor. 1 August, 1883 " °
23. The Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 3 August, 1883 .....■• «
24. The Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Chief Secretary of Tasmania. 23 August, 1883
25. The Premier of Victoria to the Colonial Secretary of New South Whales. 25 August, 1883 o
26. The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to the Premier of Victoria. 27 August, 1883 o
27. The Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Whales. 29 August, 1883
28. The Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 29 August, 1883 ••••••••••• i
29. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 31 August, 1883 i
30. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Victoria. 31 August, 1883 i
31. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South W 7 ales. 31 August, 1883 I
32. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to Premier of Victoria. 31 August, 1883 ‘
33. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Victoria. 1 September, 1883
34. The Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 4 September, 1883 ®
35. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to Premier of Victoria. 8 September, 1883 o
36. The Colonial Secretary to the Agent-General. 8 September, 1883 '
37. The Colonial Secretary to the Agent-General. 11 September, 1883 ;••••• ! n
38. The Premier of Victoria to the Colonial Secretary, New South Wales. 11 September, 1883 au
39. Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary. 13 September, 1883
40. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales. 14 September, 1883 Ay
41. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to the Premier of Victoria. 18 September, 1883 •■••••••• r,
42. Telegram from Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 19 September, 1883..... A A
43. Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Tasmania. 19 September, 1883
44. The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to the Premier of Tasmania. 20 September, 1883 fl
45. The Agent-General to the Colonial Secretary. 21 September, 1883 ••••■• *
46. Telegram from Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 2 October, 1883
47. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 6 October, 1883 A
48. The Premier of Victoria to the Colonial Secretary of New South Wales. 9 October, 1883 A
49. Mr. R. Beckwith Leefe to the Colonial Secretary of New South W T ales. 9 October, 1883
50. The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to the Colonial Secretary of New Zealand. 24 October, 1883
51. The Colonial Secretary of New South Whiles to the Premier of Victoria. 17 October, 1883 A
52. The Premier of Victoria to the Colonial Secretary of New South W T ales. 24 October, 1883
63. The Reverend James Cosh to the Colonial Secretary. 31 October, 1883 ••••••
54. Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South ’Wales. 5 November, 1883
*c 224—A 88-


NEW GUINEA AND NEW HEBRIDES.
No. 1.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of Queensland to Colonial Secretary of New
South Wales.
t? r ui T — io "
should have been highly blameworthy. 1 calamity, for nhich we, by shirking responsibility,
No. 2.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
tZeT *— th ° -*» - q— 1 1 l!^Z B l w
No. 3.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Colonial Secretary of
Queensland.
““eraf. ™ WS al “> n ° f <**>« *> British
[Similar Telegram on same date to Premier of Victoria.]
No. 4.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
This Government views favourably annexation of New Guinea to British Cto^™ 7 ’ 19 Apnl, 1883 ’
No. 5.
Telegiam from Chief Secretary of South Australia to Colonial Secretary of
New South Wales.
Hate your Government been requested by the Queensland and iohf in
i^f ru S ing Agent-General to represent to Lord Derby that the Australian Colonies support and approve
the action of the Queensland Government in annexing part of New Guinea to that Colony P Please
reply, giving your decision if so asked. . incase
No. 6.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Chief Secretary of
South Australia.
Briti^Cr t own graphed Agent ' Q ' eneral that we view favourably the annexation*o?New Gmnea to^he
No. 7.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
New Guinea delivered your message to Secretary State. Press view annexationfavourfbly 1883 ‘
No. 8.
Telegram from Chief Secretary of South Australia to Colonial Secretary of
New South Wales.
Absence from Adelaide prevented earlier reply to your telegram re New Guinea. His Excellencvthe
Governor, by advice of Ministers here, has telegraphed Secretary of State as follows“ My Ministers
Sh ° Uld be '" ritish action Queensland
No. 9.


No. 9.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Melbourne, 8 June, 1883.
Have been urged by weighty deputation invite Australasian co-operation to induce Imperial Government
ammx island^lrom New Hebrides to New Britain and New Ireland. Credibly
that French annexation is imminent , and will be accomplished unless prompt action be taken. Suggest
each Colony telegraph urgently through Governors to Colonial Office representing immense importar c
Australasia that these islands should not fall into hands of any foreign Power.
His Excellency.—A.S., 8/6/83.
No. 10.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
M dear Sir Sydney, 8 June, 1883.
I received your telegram. I have not heard any rumour of Erance taking hold of the islands
of late years. It has always been supposed she would form New Caledonia as a centre gradually about
the New Hebrides. Surprised she has not long ago. „ ,
A further extension of foreign power in these seas is to be deprecated, and therefore I have sen
our Agent-General a telegram as on other side, although I see no immediate prospect either of the French
or of our own Imperial authorities moving in it. . ~ , . ;i1
I have also submitted your telegram to Lord Augustus Loftus, with the suggestion that he will be
good enough to convey similar views to the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
jl nave, ouc.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 11.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 8 June, 1883.
Observing suggestion that England assume islands New Hebrides to Guinea, urge Imperial Government s
occupation as infinitely preferable to risk of foreign; but we have no knowledge here of any foreign
movement being imminent.
No. 12.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Melbourne, 13 June, 1883.
Propose sending telegram to our Agent-General as follows. If you concur, please communicate similarly
with yours. Copy Pacific Islands annexation or protectorate necessary for Australian future.
Colonies willing to contribute expense. In interests of Natives British philanthropists should support;
England should do for Australia what Australia cannot do for self. Great dissatisfaction if England
fails to secure our future.
Please repeat to Albury to Mr. Stuart, and return to me.—C.W., 14/6/83. Eepeated copy to
Wagga, at 1015 a.m. — C. Aspinall. Seen, and formed the subject of personal conversation with
Mr. Service.—A.S., 21/6/83.
No. 13.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
gtr ? 5, Westminster Chambers, Victoria-street, S.W., 15 June, 1883.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of the Bth instant, having
reference to the annexation of the New Hebrides and New Guinea. _
I have handed a copy of your message to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and it is proposed
by the Agents-General to ask Lord Derby to receive them at an early date ; but before doing so we are
anxious to receive replies to the messages sent to our respective Governments to ascertain if they are
prepared to bear any portion of the cost of occupation, should the Imperial Government determine upon
annexation.
I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
No. 14.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 23 June, 1883.
Pacific Islands, Lord Derby shortly to receive Agents-General. Question will arise in addition to expense
whether Colonies will make joint and not separate engagements with Imperial Government; desirable
should know if this practicable.
No. 15.


No. 15.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 23 June, 1883.
„ With reference to the recent telegrams Avhich have passed between this Government and
that ot New South Wales, on the subject of the desired annexation of the New Hebrides, and the islands
irom thence to New Guinea, I now have the honor to inform you that, on the 18th instant, I addressed a
despatch to His Excellency the Marquis of Normanby, submitting copies of documents bearing on the
subject, and setting out the salient points in the claim which Australia makes for Imperial action in this
a. matter.
I have much pleasure in submitting herewith, for your information, a copy of the despatch in
question, and of its enclosures. " 1 have, &c., 1
JAMES SERVICE
Premier.
No. 16.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 28 June, 1883.
Pacific Islands. Had long interview with Lord Derby; Ashley present. All our arguments fully stated.
Lord Derby appeared impressed gravity of question. Eequested views might be embodied in joint paper
when he would submit to Cabinet. 1 1
No. 17.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
Sir > 5, Westminster Chambers, Victoria-street, S.W., 29 June, 1883.
. continuation of my letter of the 15th instant, and my telegram of the 21st idem, I have the
honor to inform you that the Agents-General for South Australia, New Zealand, Queensland, and
Victoria, in company with myself, waited upon Lord Derby yesterday afternoon, at the Colonial Office,
on the subject of the proposed annexation of the New Hebrides and other Islands in the Pacific.
Lord Derby expressed himself impressed with the gravity of the question, and discussed the subject
at some length with the Agents-General; and requested them to embody their views in a joint statement,
which he undertook to place before the Cabinet.
Mr. Evelyn Astley, M.P., one of the Under-Secretaries of State, was present during our interview.
I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
No. 18.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary, Queensland, to Colonial Secretary, New South
Wales.
Brisbane, July, 1883.
The cablegram announcing the intention of the British Government to repudiate the action of Queens-
land in annexing New Guinea has caused great dissatisfaction here, and this Government consider that
prompt and united action on the part of the Colonies is necessary. I propose advising you at length by
letter.
N
No. 19.
The Colonial Secretary of Queensland to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane, 17 July, 1883.
, . 1 h ave tlie honor to forward you the enclosed copy of an extract from the Minutes of the
Proceedings of the Executive Council of this Colony, of this date, embodying a memorandum by myself
on the refusal of the Imperial Government to confirm the recent annexation of the Island of New Guinea,
and to request that you will be good enough to favour me with the views of your Government thereupon,
and to take such steps as you may consider necessary to move the Imperial Government to an early
reconsideration of their decision against the annexation of this valuable territory,
I have, &c.,
THOMAS M'ILWRAITH.
No. 20.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
Sir, 5, Westminster Chambers, Victoria-street, S.W., 27 July, 1883.
Eeferring to my letter of the 29th ultimo, in which I informed you that Lord Derby had
requested the Agents-General to submit their views respecting the annexation of New Guinea and the
New Hebrides, in a joint letter to him, in order that he might lay the same before the Cabinet, I have
the honor to inform you that we have complied with His Lordship’s request, and have placed our views
before him, in a communication, dated the 21st instant, of which I have now the honor to enclose twelve
copies for your information.
You


You will notice that the letter is not signed by Sir Arthur Blyth the Agent-General for South
Australia, his GoA r ernment having instructed him that they did not concur in the A'iews of the other
Colonies Avith regard to annexation or the establishment of a protectorate over the NeAA r Hebrides and the
other Islands in the Pacific, Avhilst they AA r ere favourable to the annexation of New Guinea.
I ha\’e, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
No. 21.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Colonial Secretary of
Queensland.
Sir, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 31 July, 1883.
I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 17th instant, communicating to me
the views of your Government, as expressed in a minute of your Executive Council, upon the refusal of
the Imperial Government to confirm the annexation of New Guinea.
In reply, I desire at the outset to assure you that I deprecate as much as any one that New
Guinea should ever betaken possession of by any Foreign Power, as it not only would tend to cripple the
trade in Torres Straits, which has proved a beneficial enterprise both to your Colony and to ours, but
would at all times, and especially in any European conflict, be highly inconvenient and menacing to the
whole Australian Group.
Holding this view, I had no hesitation in sending, in April last, instructions to our Agent-General
to state to Lord Derby that this Colony viewed Avith the utmost favour the annexation of New Guinea
by the British Crown, in place of permitting any Foreign PoAver to take possession of it or obtain further
footing therein.
While strongly holding these views, I am not altogether surprised at the attitude taken by Lord
Derby, because it seems to me that, while deeply impressed yourself Avith the danger to be apprehended
of immediate foreign aggressive movement upon the island, you have not very definitely shown to Lord
Derby the grounds for your fears, but have urged him to accept your strong feelings as evidencing the
fact rather than submitted definite proofs of the facts themselves, or pointed out sufficient overt acts of
any Foreign Power upon which he could come to the same conviction as yourself.
I take a somewhat different vieAv from you with regard to the expense of annexation. It is
contrary to the English genius of colonisation to be content with exhibiting the mere nominal symbol of
her flag. When England annexes she must govern —she must rule. She cannot be content with the
“laisser faire" system which you point out as having been followed by the Dutch, —not interfering with the
aborigines, but Avaiting and simply holding the country as against any other Power. It seems to me,
therefore, to be unwise to brush aside the matter of expense as a mere fancy; it should, on the contrary,
be fairly looked at, and a division suggested as to the proportions to be borne by the countries interested.
The Imperial interests are probably as great as the Australian, and the colonies would doubtless respond
to any liberal basis for its apportionment.
I have always looked upon the question of Federation as one which would not probably assume a
definite shape until the outward pressure of some common danger compelled the various Colonies to sink
many minor differences and jealousies in the necessity for combined action for common safety. Whether
such danger exists in the present refusal by the Imperial Government to recognise the action you have
taken with regard to Ncav Guinea, I feel hardly called upon at present to decide ; but I gladly accede to
your suggestion that the question of Federation should be discussed by the Colonies, and if it be
considered that the present is a fitting time, then that such discussion should take the form of putting
forAvard the basis on which a Federal Government could be constituted.
This Government is also prepared to accede to your request to urge upon the Imperial GoA r ernment
that it is desirable that the question of annexation be reconsidered ; and with that vieAv I have addressed
a letter, inviting His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus to lay our views before the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, and of such letter I beg to hand you a copy.
I have, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 22.
The Colonial Secretary to His Excellency the Governor.
My Lord, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 1 August, 1883.
I have the honor to address you on the subject of New Guinea annexation; with the view of
inviting your Excellency to convey to the Secretary of State for the Colonies the views of this Government,
I beg to enclose a copy of a communication received from Sir T. MTlwraith, with a minute of the Sl
Executive Council of Queensland, and of my reply thereto.
I would respectfully urge a reconsideration of the question by the Imperial Government, because
that although I am not prepared to say that there was an imminent prospect of New Guinea being taken
possession of by any Foreign Power, yet I do fear now that the prominence which has been given to the
subject will of itself cause some nation to take it up as a strong strategic point in the future domination
in these seas.
From its close proximity to the northern part of Queensland, and from the control over that
important highway of commerce —Torres Straits, —which would be given to any possessor of the southern
shores of New Guinea, its occupation by a foreign nation might be, in the event of European war, most
disastrous to Australia, and therefore to British interests.
I was at one time inclined to think that a protectorate of the Southern Coast would have been
sufficient, and even yet it may be so if its effect would be to keep any other nation from obtaining a
footing ; but if a protectorate be inefficient for that purpose it would be better to accept the annexation,
so that there might be no ground for the future disquiet arising from foreign settlements so close upon
our shores. I have, &c.,
ALEX. STUAET.
~ No. 23.


No. 23.
k.
The Premier of Tasmania to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Premier’s Office, Hobart, 3 August, 1883,
I have the honor to forward for your information a copy of the reply addressed by me, on
behalf of the Government of Tasmania, to the Premier of Queensland, in answer to his memorandum on
the question of the annexation of New Guinea and the assembly of a Federal Council or Convention to
consider that and other questions.
I should feel obliged by receiving from you a copy of the answer sent by your Government to Sir
T. MTlwraith’s suggestions. ' I have, &c.,
W. R. GIBLIN.
No. 24.
The Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to The Chief Secretary of Tasmania.
Sir, New South Wales, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 23 August, 1883.
In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the 3rd instant, I have the honor to express my
thanks for the copy therein enclosed of the reply addressed by you to the Premier of Queensland, in
answer to his memorandum on the question of the annexation of New Guinea, and to transmit herewith
for your information a copy of my communication to Sir Thomas MTlwraith on the same subject.
I have, &e.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 25.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Sl r > _ Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 25 August, 1883.
With reference to Sir Thomas MTlwraith’s circular letter, enclosing a minute of the Executive
Council of Queensland, in which it is proposed that some concerted action should be taken, consequent
on the refusal of the Imperial Government to annex New Guinea, and that a Convention of Delegates
from the Colonies should be held “to discuss the basis on which a Federal Government could be consti-
tuted,” I have the honor to inform you that, at the special request of Sir Thomas MTlwraith, Premier of
Queensland, I have consented to act in the capacity of Convener of the proposed assembly of delegates.
Having learned that all the Colonies have replied to Sir Thomas MTlwraith’s circular, I now write
with a view to ascertain what date would best suit the convenience of the various Colonies; and as a
means of eliciting this, I beg to communicate my own suggestion, that the Convention should meet in
Melbourne at a period in the ensuing month, say on the 25th proximo.
According to the information before me as to the sittings of the Parliaments in the different
Colonies, this period would, for the convenience of the majority, be the most suitable, at least of any
period within a reasonable time.
I beg also to suggest the desirability of giving this Convention a higher status than that of the
Intercolonial Conferences hitherto held to discuss comparatively subordinate topics; and with this view
I propose that the number of delegates should be four from each Colony, and that these delegates should
be of as generally representative a character as possible ; of course any one Colony having the option of
sending a less number, if that should be more convenient,
I propose sending a telegram to anticipate the arrival of this letter, in order to facilitate the
despatch of an early reply.
I shall be obliged if you will similarily communicate by telegraph your answer.
I have, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE
Premier.
No. 26.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Mr. Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 27 August, 1883.
I received on Saturday your telegram asking me if 25th September would suit me to meet in
Melbourne representatives from the other Colonies. I replied that it would not, but that I would write
you to-day.
On Saturday night I received your second telegram, suggesting that to suit South Australia or
Tasmania it should be end of October or beginning of November.
I regret to say that none of these times will suit us. Our Parliament meets early in October, and
as our Land Bill is the first measure that will occupy our attention, and it is of overwhelming interest to
this Colony, it will be quite impossible that any Minister can be absent at the time indicated by you.
Nor am I able at present to name a time, as our movements or arrangements must be guided by
the mode in which our measure is received by Parliament.
Ecgretting that I am not able to give you more satisfactory reply, —
I remain, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 27.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
My dear Mr. Stuart, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 29 August, 1883.
I am in receipt of yours of 27th, and regret exceedingly to find that you cannot make it
convenient to name any time for the meeting of the Convention that would suit you.
This


This would seem to indicate an indefinite postponement of the meeting, which, under all the
circumstances, is to be deeply regretted. The fact that you, like all the other Colonies, had accepted Sir
T. Mcllwraith’s suggestion for a Convention was taken by me, and no doubt by him, as an indication
that you meant to attend at some convenient time ; and in sending a circular telegram to the other Colonies
I was influenced by a desire to consult as far as possible the convenience of all.
But now, when you put it that you cannot name a time, or any time, it seems to render the Con-
vention at present impossible. This I think is to be greatly deplored ;it will cast a damper over the
movement throughout the whole of the Colonies, and will be regarded in England as an evidence that we
are not all truly in earnest. My own feeling is that the occasion is one which would have justified the
adjournment of the Parliament of any Colony for a fortnight.
I wish you would think over the matter again, and devise some means to go on. New South
Wales is too important a factor in the Conference to be done without, but I think the other Colonies
will scarcely be able to help feeling that, after being led up to the very of fixing a date for the
Convention, the whole thing is knocked on the head by New South AY ales backing out of the agreement.
I hope that you will see it in this light, and enable me by a quick wire on receipt yet to fix a suitable
time. Yours trul Y
TAMVC! QVDVTrrp
JAMES SERVICE.
No. 28.
The Premier of Tasmania to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
g- r Premier’s Office, Hobart, 29 August, 1883.
I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 23rd instant, in reply to mine
of the 3rd *********
I desire to thank you for the copies of your exceedingly interesting and valuable letter to Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith, and also for the copy of your despatch to Lord Loftus, on the .subject of the
annexation of New Guinea. . , ~ .
I may mention that I have informed Mr. Service that, if the proposed Conference is held in
September it is not likely that this Government can be represented; but that if the Conference is held
in October’ or later, we should wish to take part. The Premier of New Zealand has intimated, in reply
to a message from me, that his Government proposes to send two delegates, and has wired Mr, Service
that October will suit his Government. Should the Conference be fixed for the later date suggested,
this Government would propose to send two delegates (as New Zealand intends to send only two), and
not four as suggested by Mr. Service. 1 ’-J^^ibllN
W. E. GIBLIN.
No. 29.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of ±sew Sontli
Melbourne, 31 August, 1883.
Would holding Convention in Sydney help out of present difficulty? lam prepared to ask our
Parliament to adjourn for a fortnight, if necessary, end of September or beginning October.
No. 30.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New Sontli Wales to Premier of Victoria.
Sydney, 31 August, 1883.
Be assured we have no desire to put a damper on views or wishes of the other Colonies. Your telegram
to-day removes our difficulty of interfering with meeting of our Parliament, but apparently November
suits South Australia and Tasmania better ; moreover, grave constitutional difficulty appears to us to
exist regarding Queensland meeting at present time, as her Government is under appeal to country.
She was first to move in this matter, and her interests are, perhaps, more involved in New Guinea
annexation question than those of any other Colony.
No. 31.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Melbourne, 31 August, 1883.
I think Queensland can probably surmount difficulty you mention. Am -wiring there now and will
advise you reply. I must of course communicate again with South Australia and lasmama, but before
doing so let me know the limits of your convenience. Can I fix any time now that will suit others, or
must we meet before your Parliament opens, and if so when will that be F
No. 32.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Mr. Service, , Sydney, 31 August, 1883.
I have to-day replied by telegram to your letter of 29th, received this morning, and to your
iny colleagues have not held such strong views as you and Mr. Mcllwraith upon the necessity
of immediate federative action in formulating a system of Federal Government, merely because the
Imperial Government has not seen its way to fall in at once with the action of Queensland in regard to
annexation; but we have no wish to prevent in any way the fullest discussion of the whole question, when
such is the evident wish of so many of our neighbours. 1


I have however pointed out what appears to me to be an important constitutional difficulty as
regards the Colony most deeply interested, viz., Queensland. Ido not see how she can constitutionally
take part in so important a Conference, which I observe you elevate into the dignity of a Convention, until
her recent or present appeal to the country has received a decisive stamp one way or the other’ from
Parliament. J
. 1 lam in saying that it is in accordance with constitutional practice, that when a
Ministry has made such an appeal, it only carries on necessary work pending the result; and that a
measure fraught with such important results as are contemplated by some of you as possible from this
Convention ought to remain until the appeal is finally settled.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith may be able to sustain his position with increased strength ; and in that
case the Convention would have the great benefit to be derived from his views on the question in which he
has taken so deep an interest; but on the other hand, it is by no means impossible that he may have to
give place to others in the guidance of the affairs of that Colony, and it would only be right and proper
that such persons should have the opportunity of joining in so important an affair.
About November, I presume, that question will be decided; and as both South Australia and
lasmania wish it to be in that month, I think that the views of all will be best met by your coming here at
that rime. I remain, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 33.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Victoria.
to- j.- £ nrj. i „ . Sydney, 1 September, 1883.
With exception of fifteenth to twenty-fifth of this month, we are quite prepared to meet in Sydney at any
time between this and February that may suit general convenience of other Colonies.
No. 34.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
My dear Mr. Stuart, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 4 September, 1883.
. 1 ain favoured with yours of 31st August. It has been quite evident to me that New South
Wales did not feel so strongly on the federation and annexation question as we in Victoria do ; and I must
say that such should be the case surprises me a good deal. I could understand it so long as we were not
threatened with annexation by France of some of the most important of the islands, and with the avowed
intention of making them the receptacle for the moral filth of that country ; but that any Australian can
coolly contemplate an irruption of people into these parts, in comparison with whom the Goths and Vandals
were civilized races, is to me quite incomprehensible.
• ? u f f ° r tllGSe two dangers, which the recent action of the French Assembly has made imminent
we might have contented ourselves with nudging the old folks at home, at least for a time, although I do
not believe in unnecessary and unmeaning delays in doing what is inevitable, and is better done soon than
late.
The constitutional question re Queensland is one that concerns that Colony alone I think. Should
Sir T. Mcllwraith not retain his position, the likelihood is that his successor would adopt his policy re
annexation, as I think the Queenslanders are warmer on the subject than your people arc ; but if it were
otherwise, what harm could ensue?—Queensland cannot be committed seriously without the consent of her
Parliament.
I confess I will be sorry if we cannot arrange the Convention so as to have Sir Thomas present • it
would matter less if I could imbue you with his ardour.
By the by, you credit me with elevating the proposed Conference into the dignity of a Convention •
1 cannot accept the honor. The word Convention was that used in the Minute of the Executive Council of
Queensland, which was circulated to all the Colonies, and it was accepted by all of us I suppose. I have
used it therefore as a matter of course.
I have wired to South Australia, informing Mr. Bray that I purpose asking our Parliament to
adjourn in beginning of October, if he will do the same, so that the Convention can meet then. If he does
not agree I confess I cannot see how it can meet for a good while to come. Queensland Parliament meets
middle of November, and when could that Colony make it convenient to attend?
The people of England are at our back. If we are prompt and resolute, the battle is as good as
won ; it we are cool, or hesitating, or indifferent, I believe the New Hebrides, and probably some of the
other gioups, will be lost to us. Yours very truly
JAMES SERVICE.
No. 35.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Mr. Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 8 September, 1883.
Looking at the enthusiasm with which you have taken up the whole matter of annexation, I
am not surprised that you should regard us as cold and impassive. It is not, however, that we are indif-
ferent to the mode in which France may pour the refuse of her criminal classes into the islands to the
eastward of us, hut rather that we differ from you as to the best mode of meeting that threatened evil.
.. When you spoke to me in Melbourne upon the subject of New Hebrides, I mentioned to you that
it it turned out, as I believed it would, that there was some sort of agreement or understanding between
France and England that neither should take possession of the group, our action in urging annexation
was m direct violation of such agreement, and might actually defeat the object we had at heart, by causing
the French to use it as a justification for carrying out the annexation themselves.
Having


Having carefully watched the various phases of the movement, I am more convinced of the sound-
ness of this view, and therefore it is that I am unable to join heartily with you, although I do not set up
my own view as sufficient to warrant me in declining to hold conference with you and the other Colonies,
as to the best course to be pursued in a more united manner by the whole group of Australasian Colonies!
I think you are taking a sanguine view when you say “ the people of England are at our back.”
My own belief is that the people of England are comparatively indifferent whether the islands are annexed
or not by England. To a certain portion of the community, any accession of territory by England is a
subject of triumphant cry ; such persons, however, often overlook the responsibility which such acquisition
of territory brings with it,- a responsibility for the right administration of the islands themselves, and a
responsibility to those other European nations who will not stand, idly by, when we have laid violent hands
upon the islands with which they have also been cultivating mercantile or trading relations.
It is because I see, or believe I see, some of these difficulties and responsibilities, that I do not
enter upon the matter with the same impulsive spirit which you have brought to bear upon it, and thus it
is that I seem to you to be “cool, hesitating, or indifferent.”
I am strongly impressed with the idea that a protectorate by England over New Guinea, or at all
events over its southern coast, and a joint protectorate by England and France over the New Hebrides
and other groups of islands, would be the best and most practicable solution of the question. I believe
that it would be more advantageous for us —I mean for the whole of the Australian Colonies—if the
assurance were clear that no other nation would annex the islands, than that we should be saddled with
the responsibility and expense of annexation ; and moreover, I feel perfectly sure that whatever may be
the feeling of France with regard to New Guinea (probably she would not care much about it), she would
not allow us to annex the New Hebrides without a strong protest and struggle.
I do not undervalue the trade with those islands—personally I have been as much concerned in it
as any man in the Colonies—but in the event of war they would be rather sources of weakness than of
strength, having such a number of places to protect and defend ; nor do I see where the annexation is to
end ; if the New Hebrides, then how about the Solomon Group, the Santa Cruz, New Ireland, New Britain,
and scores of others? Are we to annex them all, or are we to be content with the New Hebrides and
New Guinea, and see France take up these intermediate groups as the outlets for her criminal classes?
I regret extremely to see the question complicated by injudicious letters of colonists in London,
who speak of non-annexation by England involving alienation of the Colonies from the Mother Country.
I hold, in contradistinction to such sentiments, that the Colonies are thoroughly loyal in their attachment
to the old country, and would best show their loyalty to her and to their own interests, if they were to
content themselves at present with urging upon her the desirableness and necessity of coming to some
arrangement with other maritime nations of Europe, that no one should take any overt steps towards
annexation, but that free trade should be permitted to all, and that there should be combined action for
the protection of that trade so far as it is legitimate, the suppression of what may be deemed illegi-
timate, and the regulation of what is commonly known as the labour trade upon principles of humanity
and morality. J
I have thought it right that before we meet, you should know my views, which are shared by my
colleagues, and to a great extent, I believe, commend themselves to a majority of the people in New
bouth Wales. I remain, &c.,
ALEX STUART.
No. 36.
The Colonial Secretary to The A gent-General.
My clear Samuel, Sydney, 8 September, 1883.
I received duly your letter o£ 27th July, with copies of the joint letter of the Agents-General
to Lord Derby, on the question of annexation.
I must compliment you all upon the able manner in which the historical statement of the matter
is drawn lip. I consider it a valuable addition to the literature of the subject, tracing, as it does, the chief
points of interest in connection with that which has now culminated in a desire for annexation.
lor my own part, I have not felt any strong desire to see the annexation policy carried out. I
believe it would be far preferable if some arrangement could be come to whereby none of the maritime
Powers should annex any of the islands ; but so detrimental to Colonial interests would be their occupation
by Foreign Powers, that, rather than leave such a contingency open, I would urge as strongly as any one
that the Imperial Government should annex them; and thus it is that I telegraphed to you to join with the
other Agents-General in urging the Imperial Government to take some action in the matter.
In order that you may clearly understand my views, I enclose copy of correspondence I have had
here with Sir Thomas Mcllwraith on the one hand and Mr. Service on the other.
We are to have a Conference here about the latter part of November, when the matter will be
discussed in all its bearings, I have no doubt.
In New South Wales there is marked contrast between the feeling of the masses of the people and
that which obtains in Victoria or in Queensland. I don’t know whether we are more phlegmatic in our
temperament than they are, but assuredly it would be a hard task to get up upon this subject the enthusiasm
which is displayed by our neighbours on either side of us.
Believe me yours very truly,
ALEX. STUART.
[j Enclosures.']
No. I—Colonial Secretary, Queensland, to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales. 17 July, 1883.
„ 2.—Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Colonial Secretary, Queensland. 31 July, 1883.
„ 3.—Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier, Victoria. 27 August, 1883.
» 4-—Premier, Victoria, to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales. 29 August, 1883.
„ 5 —Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier, Victoria. 31 August, 1883.
„ 6.—Premier, Victoria, to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales. 4 September, 1883.
„ 7.—Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier, Victoria. 8 September, 1883.
*c 224 —B
No. 37.


No. 37.
The Colonial Secretary to The Agent-General.
Sir, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 11 September, 1883.
In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the 27th July last, enclosing copies of the
communication laid before Lord Derby by the Agents-General, containing their views respecting the
annexation of New Guinea and the New Hebrides, I have the honor to inform you that I recognize the
value of the communication as an historical resume of the subject.
2. The Government is more favourable to a protectorate than to annexation, the chief objects to be
desired being—
-Ist. The prevention of any Foreign Government taking possession of New Guinea.
2nd. The prevention of France or other nation annexing the New Hebrides, or sending the
off scouring of its criminal classes to that or other island groups of the Western Pacific, —
a process which would be hastened probably by our annexation.
I have, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 38.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary, New South Wales.
Sir> Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 11 September, 1883.
My circular letter of the 25th August was written with a view to ascertain what date would
best suit the various Australasian Colonies for the meeting of the Convention which Sir Thomas MTI wraith,
the Premier of Queensland, proposed should be held to discuss the two questions of the annexation of
adjacent islands and the federation of the Australasian Colonies.
I have been since that date in constant telegraphic correspondence on this subject with the different
Australasian Governments ; and the result is, as already announced to you by my telegram of the 7th instant,
that on collating the advices from the different Colonies, I am enabled to name the last week in November
as the time most convenient for the meeting of the proposed Convention.
My telegram of the 7th instant will also have informed you that, to meet the convenience of the
Sydney Government, who could not name any day on which it would be convenient for them to send
delegates to Melbourne, I had suggested that Sydney should be the meeting-place. This has accordingly
been arranged.
The precise date for the meeting of the Convention will be announced later on.
I beg now formally to invite your Government to appoint delegates to represent your Colony.
I find a slight difference of opinion amongst the Colonial Governments as to the number of delegates
which should be appointed, some proposing four, some two. In my letter of the 25th A ugust I suggested
that each Colony should send four delegates. My reason for this was that on so important an occasion it
seemed desirable that the delegation from each Colony should be thoroughly and fairly representative, not
only of that party which may be at present in power but of all parties.
A precedent for this is found in the history of the formation of the Dominion of Canada, on which
occasion parties and party leaders Avho had been long opposed coalesced for the purpose of forming that
Federal Government which has so much enhanced the prosperity and importance of the Colonies united
under it.
In view of the attention which this movement has received from the Imperial Government, as well
as from the English Press and people, it seems to me especially desirable that the importance of the present
occasion should not be under-estimated, and I feel that it would add greatly to the weight of the Conven-
tion’s determination if it were made a thoroughly representative body.
It is of course a question for each Colony to decide how many delegates it will send.
I have, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE
Premier.
No. 39.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 13 September, 1883.
Lord Derby answer our joint letter of twenty-one July re Guinea telegraphed to Government
Victoria, with request to inform you thereof immediately.
No. 40.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales.
Melbourne, 14 September, 1883.
Received following telegram from Agent-General. Colonial Office replied. Joint letter very unsatis-
factory. Admitting care and ability historical statement. Says referred Gordon and Admiralty for
consideration. Doubts whether so much ignorance in Australia regarding claims Foreign Powers as we
apprehend. Samoa independent kingdom, recognized European diplomacy. Tonga ditto. England and
France have since ’7B respected independence Hebrides position. These groups relation to Foreign Powers
cannot be summarily ignored. Referring other groups, Solomon Islands, &c., Colonial Governments
hardly considered responsibilities involved assumption of which Imperial Government not satisfied
necessary or justifiable. Guinea nothing to add former despatch. Derby concludes Governments desiring
bear cost of measures indicated, has final paragraph, will confer, make proposals, and furnish effective
guarantee for expense; also make similar definite proposals concerning other islands not already con-
nected, treaty or otherwise, with Foreign Powers. Read with attention observation regarding French
penal settlements communicating with Foreign Office. Inform other Governments prompt. Other
Agents absent; am arranging meeting early date.
No. 41.


No. 41.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
Be annexation of adjacent Islands and Federation of Australian Colonies.
Office of Colonial Secretary, Sydney, 18 September, 1883..
’ The time which you have ascertained by telegraphic communication with the other Colonies
to he the most suitable one for the assembling of the proposed Convention will meet the ca™ience of
this Government; and I await the announcement of the precise date, which you will doubtless make as
early as to the appointment of delegates, and the .suggestion
contained in your letter of the 25tb August, that each Colony should send four delegates, I desire io make
a few observations, which I am the more anxious to make without delay, m order that you may clearly
understand in what light I regard the proposition. „ , ~ ,-i
3 You explain your reason for'suggesting so unusually large a number of representatives, on the
ground of the importance of the occasion, and the desirableness of securing the thoroughly repieseiitMive
character of the Convention, not only of the party which may he at present in power hut of all parties.
4. While reciprocating your desire that the importance of the present occasion should not he
under-estimated I am unable, on purely constitutional grounds, to give my immediate assent to a proposa
which have supposed to'have been unprecedentedl had ! not been informed you that it had
been sanctioned in the preliminary steps taken for the establishment of the Dominion of Canada.
5. It appears to me that a Minister would hardly be justified m exposing himself ernment'
tion to the of being outvoted by the representatives of a party directly opposed to the Government,
and yet that might be the situation in which he would find himself it he nominated as representatives those
who differed with him on leading questions of public policy. And moreover, in the unjertai y of pollt cal
affairs it might very easily happen that, in nominating men who, in his judgment, at the present time
o" representative he might fail to select those who in the order of^
his successors in the Government; and, as I presume, this is one of the mam reasons!by-
exceptional could alone be justified. If there is any doubt about tbe object being attained, the thing
itself could not on any constitutional ground he defended. £
6. I feel sure that I should experience great difficulty in vindicating the adoption of a course of
procedure which is certainly at variance with the principle of Ministerial responsibility; and lam
quite satisfied that, were I convinced of the expediency of adopting it, I could make the necessary noun -
tions, because of the great unwillingness of public men in this country to depart from well understood
gWd be sayed £rom embarrassment in your very difficuh negotiations
that I deem it right to place you in possession of my views upon a proposal which is certainly novel,
without danger, and as I think, somewhat impracticable. I have, «c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 42.
Tele°ram from Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New Sontli V ales.
Hobart, 19 September, 1883. _
Will you inform me, confidentially or otherwise, as to your proposed action re Conference, to.be
Sydney end of November, as to number of delegates, whether from both sides of the House, and if no
nations will be submitted to your Parliament. Information desired to ensure uniform action. Please reply.,
No. 43.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to Premier of Tasmania.
Sydney, 19 September, 1883.
Will send you copy my reply to Service, giving reasons against his proposal.
No. 44.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Tasmania.
TV! . jyj- r Qihiin 20 September, 1883.
I 6T replied at once to your telegram, and now send you copy of my reply to Mr. Service’s'
circular which pretty well explains my views. I have not yet had time to look up the particulars of the
Canadian case alluded to ; but it does seem to me to be against all constitutional practice that Ministers
and their Opposition should be together on such a Conference. If a question were earned in which a
Minister’s view was defeated chiefly by the adverse view of a member of his only Colony s Opposition,
how can he ask his own Colony’s Parliament to affirm it ? . , ,
The suggestion seems to me to be impracticable, and could only be otherwise were the rather
visionary position to occur of an entire unanimity upon all questions brought before the Conference.
It is hardly to he expected that the leader of the Opposition would consent to place himself in the
position, which would really be destructive of that wholesome criticism which is one of the good effects
of our Co own v - ew ? s t^at twQ wou iq be quite sufficient for each Colony to appoint, and these two
should be members of the Government. Of course voting must be by Colonies, and not by individuals.
ii6li6T6 me, <bc.j
ALEX. STUART.
No. 45


No. 45.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
r » T 5, Westminster Chambers, Yictoria-street, S.W., 21 September, 1883.
E " . continuation of my letter of the 27th July last, on the subject of the annexation of New
Guinea, I have now the honor to forward for your information a print of the reply of the Earl of Derby
to the joint letter addressed to His Lordship by the Agents-General on the 21st July last.
I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
, No. 46.
Telegram from Premier of Tasmania to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Hobart, 2 October, 1883.
Many thanks for your letter and enclosure. My reply, fully concurring in your views, missed mail
yesterday, and will not reach you for a week. I find end of November awkward to leave here, and should
much prefer middle of November or early in January. Perhaps changes in Brisbane and Adelaide may
alter date of meeting. J
No. 47.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Sydney, 6 October, 1883.
Referring to my letter of 11th September, I now have the honor to announce Wednesday, the 28th
November, as the day for the meeting at Sydney of the Convention respecting Annexation and Federation.
No. 48.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
S ir , Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 9 October, 1883.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 18th ultimo, in which you
assent to the time named by me for the proposed Australasian Convention, and in which you deal with
the proposal made in my letter of the 25th xAugust, and further urged, in my letter of the 11th September,
that the number of Delegates from each Colony should be at least four—with a view to giving a fair
representation of the whole Colony—not merely of the dominant political party.
2. I am glad to notice that, while stating your objections to this course, you only expressed your
inability to give “ immediate assent” thereto; from which I with pleasure infer that you are still open
to approve of it if, after a due consideration of the objections you urge, sufficient reasons can be shown in
favour of my proposal. I therefore proceed to a consideration of the points of objection submitted by you.
3. You state that a Minister would hardly be justified in exposing himself to the peril of beino-
outvoted in the Convention, by the representatives of a party directly opposed to his Government. Now
Ido not see how this could possibly happen. In appointing Representatives to the Convention, the
Government of each Colony, representing as it necessarily does the majority in Parliament, would be
justified if it thought proper, in nominating a majority of Representatives from its own party, —or, in
selecting from the Opposition gentlemen whose views of the subject matters of the Convention were
known to accord with those of the Government. That being so, the vote of such Colony in the Convention
(for I presume voting must be by Colonies and not by individuals) would be determined according to the
mind of the Government. This objection therefore disappears.
4. With regard to the course proposed by me being at variance with the principle of Ministerial
responsibility and well _ understood constitutional principles, it is requisite to bear in mind that the
occasion is one not within the lines of ordinary constitutional procedure but is outside the sphere of
domestic politics altogether. The Convention finds no place in our Parliamentary system, and so far from
being part of our Constitution, its very object is to lay the basis of another Constitution—a Federal one.
The occasion being thus exceptional, I think we must be prepared to admit modes of action which may
indeed appear novel, but which may really be the best adapted to accomplish the object in view.
5. That the foregoing is the view which was taken by all the leading men hi the British North
American provinces, without a single exception, is evidenced by the fact that each of the separate Colonies
sent to the Convention at Charlottetown, about an equal number of Representatives from the Govern-
ment and the Opposition. The Honorable Dr. Gray, in his History of the Confederation, says,
vol. 1, page 29 : #
“ In order that the question of their union might as much as possible be removed beyond the pale of party conflict, the
Delegates to attend the Convention at Charlottetown were selected from the Liberal and Conservative ranks alike. Dr. Tupper,
the leader of the Government of Nova Scotia, with his own colleague, Attorney-General Henry, and Mr. Dickey, a Con-
servative supporter, had included the Hons. Adams G. Archibald and Jonathan M'Cully, long and well-known leaders of the
Liberal party. Mr. Tilley, the leader of the Government in New Brunswick, with his own colleagues, Messrs. Johnston and
Steves, had included the Hons. Edward Barron Chandler and John Hamilton Gray, prominent and well-known leaders of the
Conservative party there ; whilst in Prince Edward Island, the Premier had with equal consideration selected the Island
delegates from both sides of the House. The recommendations of the respective Governments were approved by the Lieu-
tenant-Governors, and the Convention was opened in due form at Charlottetown, September Bth, in the Chamber of the House
of Assembly.”
In the case of the Canadian Provinces it was at first proposed that a Royal Commission should be
formed to consist of an equal number of Members of the Government and of the Opposition, and this
was only set aside because the Opposition and the Government coalesced for the purpose of confederation.
6. The case of the Canadian Dominion therefore furnishes a powerful precedent.
There can be no doubt that the spectacle of a Convention representing the leading parties in each
of the Colonies would have a much more imposing effect —because possessing a greater significance—
than one based on party lines.
7.


7. To regard a matter of this sort as in any sense a party one deprives it of all its special value.
The fact of doing so would imply that there is a party in the Colony which is opposed to the objects of the
Convention. If such exist it may of course one day possess the ascendancy, and therefore the voice of a
Convention based on party lines would, instead of being a national one, be merely the ephemeral
utterance of the dominant party, and could not make the commanding claim to the attention of the
Mother-country which a really National Council could assert. Here in Victoria our Parliament is
unanimous—without a single dissentient. In New Zealand the case seems very much the same. In
Queensland I have reason to believe and I most assuredly hope that the Colony will be represented by
the leaders of both parties, and I hope that New South Wales and the other Colonies may see their way
to follow suit, I have, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE
Premier.
No. 49.
Mr. R. B. Leefe to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Sir, Sydney, 9 October, 1883.
I have the honor herewith to enclose the original and several copies of a memorial from the
European inhabitants of Fiji, to the President and Members of the Colonial Conference about to be held
next month, praying for a consideration of their claim to be allowed to participate in whatever arrange-
ments may be determined upon at such Conference, in view of a United Australasian Confederation.
I have to request you will do me the favour of forwarding a copy of the memorial to each of the
Premiers of Victoria, and Queensland, and New Zealand.
For your perusal and information I also enclose a copy of a Petition to Her Majesty the Queen,
praying generally for an amelioration of their political disabilities in the direction of federation or
annexation to one or other of the Australasian Colonies.
I have, &c.,
E. BECKWITH LEEFE.
Appointed by the signatories of Petition and Memorial to present the aforementioned document.
Submitted, 10/10/83. Forward to the Premiers of Victoria, Queensland, and New Zealand
copies of Petitions, and forward to His Excellency for perusal.—A.S., 11/10/83. His Excellency.—A.S.
Seen.—A.L., 13/10/83.
No. 50.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Colonial Secretary of
New Zealand.
Sir, Sydney, 24 October, 1883.
I have the honor to transmit to you herewith a copy of a memorial that has been received from
the European inhabitants of Fiji, addressed to the President and members of the Intercolonial Conference
to be held in Sydney during next month, praying for a consideration of their claim to be allowed to
participate in whatever arrangements may be determined upon at such Conference, in view r of a United
Australasian Confederation, together with a copy of a petition from the British subjects resident in Fiji,
addressed to Her Majesty the Queen, praying generally for an amelioration of their political disabilities in
the direction of federation or annexation to one or other of the Australasian Colonies.
I have, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
[Similar addressed to Premier of Victoria and Colonial Secretary of Queensland.]
No. 51.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Mr. Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 17 October, 1883.
I have attentively considered all the arguments put forward in yours of 9th instant.
It seems to me that you practically give up the position, when you say that the Government might
select from the Opposition gentlemen whose views were known to accord on this matter with those of the
Government. This seems to me to be somewhat at variance with the view r s propounded in your letter of
11th ultimo, in which you considered that all parties in each Legislature should be represented.
If the Members of the Opposition are merely to be echoes of the Ministerial Members (while those
holding other view r s arc left out), then I think my argument in favour of only Ministerial Members is
greatly strengthened. I would test it thus: If the Convention were to arrive at the conclusion that
federation is desirable and ought to be carried out, it can go no further but has finished its work, and the
Representatives of each Colony must then return to their respective Legislatures for acquiescence in the
resolutions, and be then armed with powers to carry the same into effect. If the view r s of the Opposition
accord wdth those of the Government, the acquiescence will be given as readily as if they had been
present at the Convention; but if the views be adverse, it is surely better that the difference
be fought out on the constitutional arena rather than in the Conference.
I could agree better with your fourth paragraph, with one alteration, and that is, if it be decided
that a Federal Constitution is to be prepared, then I can quite understand that it w r ould be desirable to
have men of both sides engaged in raising a common platform on which w r e could all stand ; and this, I
think, is the true application of the Canadian precedent. Practically all the Colonies now united in the
Dominion had expressed the opinion that the time had arrived for federation, and they w r ere appointed to
give effect to that opinion. The


The Australasian case differs in the important point that the Colonies here have not unanimously
expressed an opinion that the time has arrived. We have all more or less expressed our opinion that the
time will come ; but there has been, so far as I can judge, no general consensus of opinion that the time
has arrived.
I think that some misapprehension has arisen from the use of the word “ Convention” instead of the
more usual word “ Conference” ; i.e., we meet for the purpose of exchanging our views and endeavouring
to put forward a scheme which we can submit to our respective Legislatures ; and if they agree thereto,
and appoint delegates to carry the views into effect, the meeting of that legislatively-created body would
be better entitled to the name of Convention , which is, in diplomatic usage, as I believe, more usually
applied to a body summoned to carry out in a binding manner something which has arisen out of a
Conference, or out of negotiations. I remain, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 52.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
Mj dear Mr. Stuart, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 24 October, 1883.
Yours of the 17th to hand. I hardly know what position it is that you say I “ practically
give up” in suggesting that the Government might select from the Opposition gentlemen whose views
were known to accord on this matter with those of the Grovernment. This suggestion was made to meet
a difficulty started by you that, if you selected members outside of the Grovernment, you might be
exposed to the peril of being outvoted in the Convention. The difficulty itself seemed and still seems
to me an unreal one ; but if it be real then it would be easily got over by the course I suggested. But
if you mean that by such a suggestion I “ give up” the position that it is desirable for the opposing
parties in the various Colonies to be represented on the Convention, then I do not agree with you.
I think you and I are looking at this matter from different points of view. You assume that the
question comes within the range of party politics, and so must be treated in a Constitutional, to wit, a
Parliamentary, manner. I assume that there is a substantial unanimity in your Parliament, as in ours, as
to the desirability of federation ; and the suggestion that the delegates should be chosen from both sides
of the House is to give the outward and visible sign of that unanimity, as well as to secure the hearty
co-operation of the leading statesmen, on whatever side of domestic politics they may range themselves.
The notable examples of the British North American Provinces show that my suggestion has a
solid significance. In each and every case the delegates were selected in equal numbers from the
Government and the Opposition. The question of being outvoted seems never to have occurred to the
minds of the Governments of those Colonies; and they appear to have fully apprehended the moral
effect of selecting delegates from both sides of the House.
Just imagine the difference in effect on the Home Government and the people of England which
would be produced by the one and the other of the two following telegrams from Sydney: —
I. —“ Mr. Stuart has carried his federation proposals by a considerable majority.”
IT.—“ The New South Wales Parliament has unanimously agreed on the federation proposals
submitted by the Government. Delegates will be chosen from both sides of the House.”
The one represents a united and unanimous people ; the other, a section dominant for the moment.
Unless there is a consensus of opinion * * * * * in favour of federation, then
assuredly the time has not come for even a Convention ; but the universal acquiescence in and acceptance
of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s proposal for a Convention surely indicated a conviction on the part of the
various Governments that such a consensus did exist, and that all the Colonies were agreed as to the
desirability of some sort of federal union, if existing conditions will permit it to be carried out.
I also differ from you somewhat as to the functions, and especially as to the limit of the functions
of the coming Convention. You say, “If the Convention were to arrive at the conclusion that federation
is desirable and ought to be carried out, it can go no further, but has finished its work,” et cetera. My
view is that the Colonies have already approved of the principle of federation, and that the business of
the Convention will be to discover how far and on what points federal action can be carried out at
present.
Your view of the Canadian, or rather the Charlotte Town, Convention, is not, I think, borne out
by its history. Probably at that time some of the North American Provinces were further advanced in the
direction of a federal union than the Australian Colonies now are ; but when the Maritime Provinces
decided to hold a Convention, in 1864, all reasonable hopes of effecting any arrangement with the Canadian
Provinces had been abandoned; and yet that Convention, to which, in the first instance, the Canadian
Provinces were admitted on mere sufferance, resulted in the establishment of the Dominion.
You take exception to the use of the word “ Convention,” instead of the usual word “ Conference.”
The word “ Convention” was used in Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s original memorandum, and, as it seemed to
have been accepted by all the Colonies in their replies, I have continued to use it.
The definition of the Charlotte Town Convention is thus given by the Hon. J. H. Gray, in his
history, page 30: —
“ It is to be borne in mind that this Convention was not a public representative body, having
power to legislate, determine, or finally affect the public interests, but rather a Committee
of public men deputed by their several Governments to inquire and report upon a proposi-
tion which might or might not ultimately be adopted, but which, before either its adoption
or rejection, would be subject to a searching and exhaustive public discussion in the several
Legislatures of the Provinces.”
Now, I think this fairly describes the object of our meeting in Sydney next month, and the term
“ Convention” may as fairly be applied to it as the meeting at Charlotte Town.
You


You say, “the Australasian case differs in the important point that the Colonies here have not
unanimously expressed an opinion that the time has arrived. We have all more or less expressed our
opinion that the time will come, but there has been, so far as I can judge, no general consensus ot opinion
that the time has arrived.” Neither had tbe North American Provinces when their Convention met. As
a matter of fact, New Brunswick drew back, and did not enter the Dominion for years after it was con-
stituted How can the Colonies express an opinion that the time has arrived, until they meet and discuss
the matter? That the thing is desirable, if it can be done, must be assumed to be the feeling of all the
Colonies otherwise the sending of delegates is a delusion and the Convention a sham.
That confederation can now be effected in all its fulness I do not hope, but that some basis can be
agreed on for a federal union of both a legislative and executive character, capable of dealing with
those important questions which are immediately pressing, and which will gradually develop into a com-
plete Australian Dominion, I have the greatest hopes; indeed I see no difficulty m the way if the various
Colonies desire that it should be so. . . _ ,
Conferences hitherto have produced the minimum of results. Resolutions have been passed ove
and over again, but as there existed no common legislative body to give them force, the greater part ot
them remain a dead letter. „ , ~ 1 ,
A limited federation now would give practical effect to the wishes of the Colonies on those points
on which they are agreed, and the basis would widen and grow as the advantages became manifest. A
common danger (the outpouring of the moral filth of Europe into these seas) and a common desire (to save
the islands of Australasia from the grasp of strangers) render federal action a necessity, and federal action
is only possible by means of federal union of some sort. . . .
J I hope to have your hearty co-operation at the Convention in considering how this is best to be
brought about, and the question as to how New South Wales should be represented I may now fairly
leave to your own judgment. SERVICE.
JAMES SERVICE.
No. 53.
The Rev. J. Cosh to The Colonial Secretary.
Balmain, 31 October, 1883.
I have the honor to send you herewith a copy of resolutions passed at a public meeting held in
St Stephen’s Church, Phillip-street, Sydney, on the 12th instant, under the auspices of the Missions
Committee of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, and to request that you will kindly take an
opportunity of presenting them to your Government, and also to the Intercolonial Conference to be held
in Sydney nest month. * COSH,
Convener of Committee on Missions and Chairman of Public Meeting.
[Enclosure to No. 53.]
Annexation of New Guinea, &c.
Resolutions adopted at apublic meeting held in St. Stephen’s Church, Phillip-st., Sydney, on Friday, October 12th, 1883.
“Ist. That this meeting strongly urges the annexation of the Islands of New Guinea and the New Hebrides, and
the intervening islands, by the British Crown. „ . ~, . ~ • „
“2nd That in view of the Convention to be held in Sydney in November next, a copy of the foregoing resolution
be forwarded to the Hon. the Colonial Secretary of New South Wales, m order to its being laid before the
Government of New South Wales and also before the Intercolonial Convention. JAMES COSH
Chairman.
No. 54.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary of New Soutli Whales.
Melbourne, 5 November, 1883.
Oue Agent-General telegraphs that Lord Derby has consented to representation of Fiji at Convention,
and that he has telegraphed instructions accordingly. This is important, as it gives Imperial recognition
to the Convention.
APPENDIX A.


APPENDIX A.
[Enclosure to No. 15.]
The Premier of Victoria to His Excellency the Most Noble the Marquis of Normanby, G-.C.M.Gr., &c.
(No. 67.) Proposed annexation of New Hebrides and adjacent islands.
My Lord, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 18 June, 1883.
With reference to the interview which I had with your Excellency on the 9th instant, respecting the desired
annexation or protectorate of the New Hebrides and neighbouring islands, I now have the honor to transmit herewith to
your Excellency, for the information of the Bight Honorable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, certain documents
bearing upon the subject in question.
The first is a letter from the Rev. D. Macdonald, a new Hebridean missionary, at present on a visit to this Colony,
and (besides being interesting in itself) sets forth what, I submit, are cogent reasons why the British Empire should take
possession of the islands in question.
I received the deputation proposed by Mr. Macdonald, and returned a reply, in substance the same as that contained
in a newspaper report which forms my second enclosure.
Enclosure No. 3 gives a list, asked for by me when receiving the deputation, of the various petitions which have at
different times been directly or indirectly addressed to the Imperial Government (some from the natives themselves),
praying for the annexation or a protectorate of the islands; and No. 4 is a letter from the Rev. J. G. Baton, setting out the
reasons for the desired course.
To the reasons contained in these documents I trust Lord Derby will give the gravest consideration.
I will now add, that the action of this Colony has been somewhat precipitated by the circumstance that it was
reported in Melbourne, a few days after my interview with the deputation, that the French Consul here had telegraphed
to his Government an account of the matter, with a view to prevent British possession of the islands.
It was at once felt by Ministers that it might prove a fault, to be ever deplored but never to be remedied, if
Australia, through supineness, were to allow these islands in the important strategic position which they occupy towards
her, to fall without an effort into the hands of a Foreign Power.
I therefore at once communicated with the other Colonies, and they joined unanimously in this view.
I would ask your Excellency to be so good as to call special attention to the fact that the desired annexation of these
islands stands altogether apart from any question as to a general annexation policy on the part of the Empire. It is of the
first importance, in order to apprehend the true bearings of the question, that it should be seen that this annexation has no
connection with any such general policy; that, in fact, the unwisdom of such a policy may be freely granted, so far as it is
concerned, and the proposition still remains true that it is an urgent necessity of Australia that the possibility of these island-
territories becoming the post for foreign guns and foreign ships should, without delay, be placed beyond question and
beyond fear. It undoubtedly prejudices the case that it comes to be considered at a time when any such general
policy is before the public mind, but I trust it may not be confused with it by the experienced statesmen who will have to
deal with it.
As to the question of expense, I would point out that the course we advocate may yet prove to be the truest
economy. To take and hold possession would be at present a very small expense, but what would be the expense if in time
of war these islands should become points from which foreign vessels could issue to attack Australian ports and harass
British commerce? And it must be recollected that the great majority of the ships that trade to Australia are British
registered and of British owners.
But, independently of this consideration, I feel sure that Australia would not wish the mother country to be at the
whole expense of the projected measure. I have communicated with the other Colonies, asking their concurrence in this,
and there has not yet been time to receive their replies; but I ■would ask your Excellency to be good enough to convey to
Lord Derby my opinion that expense should not, and so far as an Australian subsidy is concerned, would not, be allowed
to stand in the way.
It will probably be deemed equitable that, if Australia shares the expense, she should be consulted as to the mode of
governing; but this is a matter of detail which should not be allowed to hinder proceedings.
There is one other consideration of great importance, and that is, that Australia is, in this respect, fettered in her
action by her forming part of the British Empire. She cannot take the course which her truest interest dictates without
the authority of the Crown; she is therefore entitled to make request of the Imperial authority to do that for her which
her connection with the Empire prevents her from doing for herself.
I have confined myself in this letter to the political aspect of the question, but, as well pointed out by the mission-
aries, there are questions of humanity and civilization which seem to add a clenching force to every other consideration.
In conclusion, I would ask your Excellency to be so good as to represent that there is no doubt that a strong feeling
of dissatisfaction will spread throughout these Colonies, if England, while holding Australia back from acting in her own
interests, at the same time neglects to take a step which Australia deems essential to her future security and welfare.
I have, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE
Premier.
[Sub-enclosure No. I.]
The Honorable James Service, M.L.A., Premier of the Colony of Victoria, —
Sir, 4, Eamont-terrace, Grey-street, East Melbourne, 31 May, 1883.
I have the honor to lay before you, as briefly as possible, the following statement: —
From a recent telegram we learn that the British Government, partly owing to the action of Queensland, supported
as it ha.s been by the other Australian Colonies, has annexed the southern part of New Guinea to the Empire, and resolved
to administer it as a Crown Colony, This is a result heartily to be rejoiced in.
But to annex merely the south-eastern part of New Guinea is not, considered from any standpoint, sufficient, whether
in the way of protecting the Australasian Colonies from the danger that would arise from the establishment of an alien
power in the neighbouring islands, or in the way of protecting the natives of these islands from the atrocities of the labour
traffic, and so of conserving the honor of the Empire, while promoting the interests of its commerce and civilization, A
glance at the map will show that the chain of islands, inhabited by the same race, extending from New Guinea to the New
Hebrides, or rather to the Fijis, including New Britain, New Ireland, and the Solomons, forms a natural group, should be
annexed together, and together put under the same administration.
As to the danger that might arise from the proximity of a great naval power in any part of this region of Western or
Papuan Polynesia, the New Hebrides is exactly the same distance from Brisbane as New Guinea; Melbourne is somewhat,
and New Zealand immensely, nearer to the New Hebrides than to New Guinea. To the swift war-vessels of the present day,
a few hundred miles is a very small matter. The climate of the New Hebrides is healthier than that of New Guinea, or any
other part of the region abovenamed, except Fiji, and it has by far the best harbours; the island of Efate or Sandwich has two
of the best harbours in the world, well supplied with fresh water. Finally, the natives of the New Hebrides group are more
prepared for the reception of civilization than those of any other islands in the Papuan Archipelago, with the exception
of Fiji, and it would be easier to establish a civilized Government among them; if not so advanced as the Fijians when Fiji


wafe annexed, they are more advanced than the islanders of the Solomons, New Britain, and New Guinea. Speaking of Fiji
reminds us that it may be regarded as the outlying extremity of the chain of islands abovenamed, being only 400 miles from
the New Hebrides, which again are only 1,000 miles from New Guinea. It is most undesirable that a Foreign Power should
possess the New Hebrides and Solomons lying between Fiji and New Guinea, and forming the very heart of our nascent
South Sea Empire, for it would be a standing menace to it as well as to the Australasian Colonies.
As to the protection of the natives from labour traffic atrocities, and conserving the honor of the British name, the
necessity of doing which we have abundantly recognized by Acts of the Imperial Parliament and otherwise, it is in the New
Hebrides and Solomons that that protection is most needed ; there the flag of England has been most foully stained, and
there has been done to the helpless people most grievous wrong, for which we are nationally responsible; we owe therefore to
them a national debt of reparation, which we do not owe to the people of New Guinea. And the perpetration of that wrong
is going on every day in these islands, whereas it is only begun in New Guinea. There is no other way worth trying of
putting an end to these outrages and massacres that we are constantly hearing of, and many which we never hear of, but by
annexing the islands, and thereby making the islanders British subjects. Lord Derby and the Home authorities recognize the
need of new efforts to put a stop to them, or better regulate the labour traffic.—[See his reply to a deputation in February
last.] Nothing short of annexation and putting the Papuan islander, as a labourer, on a footing analogous to that of the
Hindu coolie, will avail. This, in fact, is a strong argument for annexation. The expenses now incurred—and they are
considerable—for inefficient regulations would be applied efficiently under the new system ; the honor, the interests, and the
safety of the Empire would be promoted, the natives protected, and commerce and civilization permanently rooted and
grounded in one of the fairest and most fertile portions of the globe.
There are four Missionary Societies at work in Papuan Polynesia, and only four, and the whole four are British ; the
Presbyterian in the New Hebrides, Church of England in the Solomons, Wesleyan in New Britain, and London Missionary
Society in New Guinea. Of these missions the Presbyterian in the New Hebrides is the oldest and largest; it has now four-
teen European missionaries, together with about 150 native Christian teachers and evangelists, who may be regarded as the
hope of their race, both as to Christianity and civilization, and it is carried on at an annual expense of about £6,000 of
British, Home and Colonial, money. Similar things might be said of the other missions. Already a considerable number of
traders and planters have settled in the New Hebrides, and most or nearly all of these are British subjects. All would hail
annexation as a boon. The natives to a man are as much in favour of British as they are opposed to French annexation.
There is not commercially a richer or more fertile or desirable group than the New Hebrides throughout the vast extent of
the Pacific.
The Imperial Government can have no objection, on principle, to annexing these islands, since they have annexed New
Guinea and Fiji ; and there can be no reasonable objection on the score of expense, as the same machinery that is necessary for
New Guinea and Fiji can be extended over the intervening islands, and the present expense of the abortive regulation of the
so-called “labour traffic” will be available, and probably sufficient to cover any slight additional expense. And as soon as
civilized Government is extended over these islands in connection with either of the established Governments of Fiji or New
Guinea, as may be most convenient, the rapid commercial development and progress certain to take place in them will
speedily secure more than th§ defrayment of their proportion of the expense of government; for these islands will become
the Australasian Indies, and will yield cotton, coffee, and cocoa-nut oil, sugar, and spices, and all other tropical products in
large quantities.
Thus, generally speaking, it is exceedingly desirable to annex these islands along with New Guinea and Fiji. Hitherto
the British Government have not seen their way to annex the New Hebrides, though frequently petitioned to do so ;
but now that Fiji at the one extremity, and New Guinea at the other, have been annexed, it is reasonable to expect that they
would see it to be their wisdom to annex the intervening islands also, attaching them to either of the existing Colonies of
Fiji or New Guinea, according to their proximity ; and these islands not only lie between the two extremities of our South
Sea Empire, but also form a chain that runs parallel to the Australian coast.
I therefore respectfully and earnestly suggest to you, as Premier of the Colony of Victoria, that, if you agree with these
views, you take such steps as your long political experience may dictate to you to secure the co-operation of the other Austra-
lian Governments, in order to the annexation to the British Empire of the New Hebrides, Solomons, and New Britain, along
with New Guinea and the Fijis; and have much satisfaction in feeling that to none could so important a business be more
appropriately committed.
May I request that you will be good enough to appoint a time to receive myself and a number of gentlemen who are
deeply interested in this matter, at your earliest convenience, to more fully explain their views on the subject.
I have, &c.,
D. MACDONALD
Missionary, New Hebrides,
\_Sub-enclosure No. 2.]
Extract from the Argus Newspaper of 7th June, 1883.
The South Sea Islands.
A large deputation, including a number of clergymen, waited on the Premier yesterday to urge him to do everything in
his power to induce the Imperial Government to annex or accord its protection to the islands in the South Seas that are not at
present under the dominion of any other power. Mr. Balfour, M.L.C., introduced the deputation, whch was also accompanied
by Messrs. Anderson, Mirams, Gibb, and M. H. Davies, M.L.A.’s. The Minister of Justice was present with the Premier.
Mr. Balfour said that for many years those connected with the missions in the New Hebrides Islands had seen the
necessity for the annexation of those islands, or else for their being brought under the protection of the Empire. The iniquitous
labour traffic was really not under control, and it had had the effect of almost bringing Christianity and civilization to a stand-
still. Movements in favour of annexation or protection had been repeated, but unsuccessful. He assumed that Great Britain
would either annex New Guinea or allow the Colonies to do so ; and the present seemeda good opportunity to urge the annex-
ation of the other islands, which could be advocated not only from a missionary’s but from a stateman’s point of view, for on
these islands valuable products could be grown. Common humanity demanded the suppression of the labour traffic, about
which there were numerous official reports, and which had lately been commented upon by Mr. Morrison, an independent
witness. The Wesleyan mission at New Britain was represented in the deputation. The missionaries there did not want
annexation until the natives had been consulted ; but the New Hebrides missionaries could speak confidently, as to the desire
for annexation of the natives there. Throughout these islands there was a great deal of other powers, but a great desire to
be annexed to the British Empire.
The Eev. D. Macdonald, Presbyterian missionary of the New Hebrides, said that the British had the most right to annex
the islands, because they had spent more money there than any other nation. Moreover, precious British blood had been
spilled there, and the British were more numerously represented than any other foreign nation. The annexation of the islands
would be a reparation for the wrong done to them by the labour traffic by persons of British nationality more than any other.
There was no other means than annexation of stopping the constantly occurring massacres. The New Hebrides were centrally
situated, and were near to the Australian Colonies, and contained splendid harbours, the best of which was in the central
island, called Sandwich Island.
The Rev. J. King, of theYictorian Auxiliary to the London Missionary Society, said that he had spent ten years on
the Navigators’ Islands. The missionaries did not advocate annexation, because they desired governmental patronage and
help. They did not want British gun-boats to assist them in evangelizing the people. Thegreatest achievements of Christianity
had been accomplished in the islands without such aid. He advocated annexation purely on humanitarian grounds. The
British Government was the natural protector of these races. The long connection of British people with the islanders in
missionary work and commercial enterprise had led the islanders to look up to the British as their natural protectors. Samoa,
over and over again, asked the British Government for a protectorate, but such requests had been declined, and now Germany
and America had obtained very strong footing there. Unless the British Government soon stepped in the New Hebrides
also would soon arrive at a stage at which British annexation would be impossible. The French had a considerable interest in
the Loyalty group beyond New Caledonia. In the past the English Government had signally failed in conserving native races,
because it had not yet adopted the right policy. The
* c 224—C


The Rev. E. I. V atkin, President of the Wesleyan Conference, said lie was not authorized to speak on behalf of the
W esleyan Church, but so far as he knew the opinions of her missionaries it was that the case of the New Hebrides was not
parallel with that of the Solomon Islands and New Britain. There had been a Presbyterian Mission in the New Hebrides
tor many years, and annexation was desired there. He was inclined to favour the establishment of a protectorate over the
Solomon Islands and New Britain, with a view to annexation, should the natives desire it. There was already, it should
be lemembered, self-government in some of the islands. The natives had rights that should not be interfered with, except
i? 1
the New Hebrides, Solomon Islands, and New Britain might perhaps be justified.
. . . The R ev - T. Nekon, the New Hebrides Mission, said that the French strongly desired to take possession of those
islands, the natives of which, however, strongly wished for annexation to Great Britain.
The Rev. J. G. Patou, missionary of the Free Church of Scotland, said that twenty years ago the Tanna chiefs
petitioned for British annexation, and such request had been since renewed. As to the expenditure that annexation of the
islands would entail, it had been magnified, because some of the islands could be governed from Fiji, and the others from
New Guinea w hen that was annexed. The natives hated and feared the French, but they loved the name of Queen Victoria.
If the French annexed the islands, the Protestant missions would be suppressed. All the islanders longed for British pro-
tection. It would be a pity if, after the expenditure of so much British money there, some other nation were to step in and
reap the harvest. He concluded by relating instances of atrocities perpetrated by the labour vessels.
Mr. Sendee said that he would like to be furnished with a short r6sum6 of all the appeals that had been made for the
annexation of the islands and of other facts bearing on the subject. Every consideration pointed to the desirableness of the
course so strongly recommended by the deputation. Unfortunately, humanitarian, civilizing, and Christianizing movements
were often, if not antagonistic to political considerations, at all events not on the same line with them ; but here every con-
sideration pointed in the same direction. Politics, religion, commerce, civilization, humanity, all pointed to the absolute
desirability of getting hold of these islands. As to New Guinea, he not only put himself in communication with the Agent-
General, but requested the other Colonies to support the action of the Queensland Government, But in the steps he took
on that subject lie had not the slightest desire to encourage that labour trade which the deputation had referred to in terms
that were not half strong enough. The mission of England all along had been to elevate, Christianize, and civilize the dark
nations of the earth. Of late years she seemed to have felt that she was getting too many dependencies, but he believed that
that was a mistaken notion altogether. England was an immense moral power among the nations ; she owed her position to
her grand moral status, and it was a position that her military power would never give her. He would immediately bring
the matter under the notice of his colleagues, and would allow no delay to elapse in his efforts to bring about the desired
result. If the Australian Legislatures could be induced to pass resolutions in favour of annexation, that would tell very
fa\ouralily with the Government and Parliament of England, who would regard such opinions as of more importance than
mere governmental action. He believed the Victorian Government would be unanimously in favour of prompt action.
The deputation withdrew, gratified with the statement of the Premier,
[Sub-enclosure No. 3.]
The Honorable‘James Service, Premier, —
Dear Sir, Cotham-road, Kew, Friday, June Bth, 1883.
I am sorry I could not sooner send you the required dates of memorials and petitions to the Queen for a pro-
tectorate, and for annexation of the New Hebrides Islands. I feel also sorry the following are so imperfect, as all such
records are kept by Dr. Steel, the agent of our mission in Sydney, and now he is in Melbourne attending a conference, but
they can be got from him on his return ; but at present I forward all I have been able to get from blue books, though very
imperfect, as a number are not noted in books now within my reach.
In A. D. 1862 the chiefs of Tanna sent a petition through me to Sir John Young, Governor of New South Wales, for a
protectorate. He did not forward it.
In a.d. 1868 a petition was presented to the Earl of Belmore, by the New Hebrides Mission, for Her Majesty the Queen.
liia.d. 1868 a petition was presented to Lord Stanley, by the Reform Presbyterian Church of Scotland, for Her
Majesty the Queen.
In a.d. 1872 a petition was presented to Earl Kimberley, Secretary of State for the Colonies, by the Reformed
Presbyterian Church of Scotland, for the Queen.
In a.d. 1874 a petition was sent to the Queen regarding the labour traffic and implying a British protectorate, like all
the above noted.
In November, 1874,another petition was sent from Victoria regarding the “slave or labour traffic” and a protectorate.
In a.d. 1874 or 1875 a petition was sent by the natives of Efate, per Lieutenant Carey, of H.M. gun-boat “Conflict,”
which was presented, for annexation like Fiji, as they expressed it, through Mr. Macdonald.
In a.d. 1877 the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, and the Free Church
of Scotland, and the Mission, all sent petitions to the Queen for annexation of the New Hebrides to Great Britain.
In a.d. 1882 a petition was sent from a Conference which met in Sydney, representing all the Presbyterians of
Australasia, and others followed from Victoria, and South Australia, and Tasmania, and the New Hebrides Mission, and
the natives, and the Free Church of Scotland, to the Queen, entreating the annexation of the group to Great Britain.
The above will show you that the subject has been long before the minds of the natives, the missionaries and
Europeans on the islands, and all the Churches at home and in our Australasian Colonies which have been engaged in the
work of civilizing and Christianizing the New Hebrides Islands.
In the Conference of the Australasian Presbyterian Churches, which met in Sydney in April of last year, I pleaded for
British annexation of the New Hebrides Islands, on account of eight reasons which I have written out to you and enclose,
and which led to the six petitions being sent to the Queen, as above referred to, for annexation to Great Britain.
Thanking you heartily for the cordial reception of our deputation, and wishing you every blessing in Christ Jesus, —
I remain, &c.,
JOHN G. PATON.
[Enclosure to foregoing.']
[I enclose this from Dr. Steel, Sydney. —John G. Paton.]
Some ten years ago, when an abortive effort was made by a number of private individuals to form a settlement in New
Guinea, representations were made to some of the Colonial Governments on the importance of the annexation of New
Guinea by the British Government. At the same period simultaneous efforts were made by Presbyterian Churches to the
Governments of Australasian Colonies respecting the annexation of the New Hebrides. The labour traffic at that time
excited great interest on account of its many inhumanities.
The Government of New South Wales, at the period referred to, formally agreed to recommend the annexation of New
Guinea, the Duke of York Islands, New Britain, New Ireland, and the New Hebrides. Sir John Robertson, then Colonial
Secretary of New South Wales, addressed a communication to the Earl of Kimberley, the British Minister for the Colonies,
urging the importance of annexation. The answer of the Earl of Kimberley was unfavourable ; but the correspondence,
which was published by the Government of New South Wales, shows that this proposal is not now urged for the first time.
The population of natives in the New Hebrides is rapidly declining, and these islands will certainly be annexed by
some power, as they are well fitted to grow all kinds of tropical spices and other fruits. They were discovered for the most
part by British navigators, traded with by British vessels, regularly visited by Her Majesty’s ships of war, and justice
frequently administered by Her Majesty’s naval officers, and finally evangelized by the labours and munificence of British
subjects.
[Sub-enclosure


[Sul-enclosure No. 4.]
To the Honorable James Service, Premier,—
Sir ’ For the following reasons we think the British Government ought now to take possession of the gew Hebrides
group of the South Sea Islands, of the Solomon group it will soL be known iuthoritatively that
Ist. Because she hmlready possessions, and the islands between com-
!he r way to New Guinea, would almost be sufficient lor all her requirements
rarfe
***£ British subjects, wholong
Melbourne topical products, so that if a possession of Great
msssmmm
m other lauds and others that might be given, we sincerely hope ml pray'tot you wffil d°^gOMibleto
surelyit is most desirable that they should at once be British possessions ; hence we plead for your judicious and able help.
, J . Your humble servant,
and remain,— G. PATON.
JOHN G. PATON
Senior Missionary, New Hebrides Mission.
APPENDIX B.
[Enclosure to No. 19.]
New Guinea.
Extract from the Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Council of Queensland, at Government House, Brisbane, 17th
July 1883. Present—His Excellency the Administrator of the Government m Council.
His Excellency the Administrator of the Government, at the instance of the Honorable the Colonial Secretary, lays before
the Council the following Memorandum by the Premier on the refusal of the Imperial Government to confirm the
annexation of New Guinea, and recommends that the same be approved :
Memorandum by the Premier of Queensland on the refusal of the Imperial Government to confirm the annexation of New Guinea.
The decision arrived at by Her Majesty’s Government in reference to the annexation of New Guinea seems to me to
justify some decided and concerted action on the part of the Australian Colonies It is scarcely necessary to refer at any
length to the previous correspondence on this subject or to the repeated representations in connection with it which have
been reference should be made to the various reasons assigned for this refusal. In 1875 Lord
Carnarvon, while not discouraging the idea of extensive annexation, assigned as one reason why he could, not act on the
representations of the Australian Colonies, that the British tax-payer could not and would not bear the expenditure. Lord
Derby advances the same reason now. He adds to this other reasons—the enormous extent of the territory, the unknown
character of the interior, and the hostility of the natives. These objections may be easily combated The expense need not be
great and we now know that the Australian Colonies will undertake this expense, or share it with Her Majesty s Government
ff reouired to do so. As for the natives, the Dutch have not interfered with the aborigines in that part of New Guinea
claimed by them, and their claim costs them nothing. They wait, and simply hold the country as against any other Power.
There would be no difficulty in our doing single-handed, in that part of New Guinea contiguous to our shores, a peat deal
more than the Dutch have done during the last fifty years in the north-western portion of the island. Queensland has simply
been desirous that New Guinea should not fall into the hands of a foreign Power, and that the requisite authority should be
exercised over those adventurers who frequent the shores of that island. Experience in Torres Straits has already proved
valuable in this respect. The “ beachcombers” who frequented the islands of Murray and Darnley have taken themselves
off since the annexation of these islands to Queensland territory. What was effected in Torres Straits could have been
carried out with perfect ease on the main land of New Guinea. All that was required was the acceptance of the proclama-
tion. I still think that it ought to have been accepted, and I hope that the Australian Colonies will, by their several and
united representations, urge upon Her Majesty’s Government a reconsideration of their decision.
But there can be no doubt that the refusal to annex New Guinea, together with the possible acquisition by foreign
Powers of some of the Pacific Islands contiguous to Australia, does raise very serious questions intimately connected with the
future interests of the Australasian Colonies. If Her Majesty’s Government does not feel that the annexation of Aew Gninea,
or of the islands adjacent to Australia, is of so much importance to the Empire at large as it is to the Australian Colonies,
let some means be devised by which those islands may be held and governed for the benefit of the Australian people. Ihe
step


the ? ue ? n u sland { G ° v^ n,n A ent . in causing a formal claim to be made over New Guinea, was done in the interests
not only of Queensland but of all the Australian Colonies, and in the interests of the natives of New Guinea, who ought to
be protected by some lawful authority from contact with the lawless adventurers who are too oftenalaw to themselves. That
also which is for the advantage of this country is surely for the advantage of Great Britain. The middle island of New
Zealand was won for Great Britain by a timely act of annexation. In the last century similar timely acts of annexation
r t lC f ng o ' SaXOn rac , e - Why* , then ’ sll0ul(l not Queensland be permitted, with the sanction
vfwn G, i ty £ eniment to assist in carrying out this national and beneficial policy ? If then, the real reason for the
nati™ rices “iSnSl th + e , expen ! c ’ but * he difficulty of providing for the Government and protection of the
Jfj “l ght n ?* thl , s be n .\ et hy the sanction and authority of the united Colonies ? Some justification, it has been
often said, is required for federation—may it not be found in this exigency ?
• I submit that a case has arisen which maybe made use of to call into existence the higher forms of government
and devotfofto tlm British F P ° hCy +/ am ! exatlon - The Australian Colonies are now united by sentiments of filial regard
and demotion to the British Empire though they are not represented in the British Legislature. The Imperial Parliament
I 0 T lO C Lm Pu-e, a nd the Colonies are not represented in that Parliament, though their interests may be vitally
Wmfl +i y - ltS (leC1 i lonS ', • n ot possible to give authoritative effect to the wishes of the people of Australia in anything
beyond their own domestic interests, except through the intervention of Her Majesty’s Government. °
combination I forWhTt® w* he pr *f ent ca f. e seem to P oil A to a necessity for combination among the Australian Colonies—a
for both legislative and executive purposes. Australian interests are involved in securing the peaceful and pro-
fnt s , u P remac y °f Australian influences in the adjoining seas. In order to effect this it is necessary that there should
not only be sentiments held in common, but that a form of Government should be provided capable of giving expression to
these sentiments. The federation of the Australian Colonies may thus be forwarded. Here is work for the united Colonies
to do if they can be got to unite. I suggest that a convention of delegates should be held to discuss the basis upon which
a r ederal Government could be constituted. 1
This I believe, was tiie form adopted in Canada previous to the constitution of the Dominion Parliament. May not
e ? am Pjf be foll ° wed here? The Dominion Government has added largely to the influence and the national integrity of
Canada. It seems probable that a similar form of Government adapted to the special requirements of Australia would give
life to national aspirations here without repressing the autonomous Governments of the respective Colonies. To it would
properly belong the discussion of such measures as are necessary for the consolidation and security of Australian interests
as well as for the government of these outlying islands in the Pacific, which at present are not claimed by any civilized power.
. th v r • t : ie , re^? re ’ that tbere oll gbt, in the first place, to be representations from all the Australian Colonies, urging
r I j y S G , ov . ern f out a reconsideration of their decision as regards New Guinea ; and, in the next place, Her
thc J e rXn nt « Sh0 T dbC m 7w^ m ° Ve 111 th | dire ? tlo !\° 1 f Providing for a form of Federal Government suitable for
In TTp t V°J? nieS - 1 Propose that this memorandum should be embodied in an Executive minute and forwarded both
to Hex Majesty s Government and to the Governments of the respective Australian Colonies, for their consideration, and for
such action as they may deem expedient.
10th July, 1883.
T. M‘ILWRAITH.
C °UnCII dellberate and advice, as recommended, immediate action.—A. V. Deuev, Clerk of the Executive
APPENDIX C.
[Enclosure to No. 20.]
The A gents-General to Lord Derby.
My Lord, London, 21 July, 1883.
In accoi dance with the desire expressed by your Lordship on the occasion of our recent interview with you we
purpose now to place before your Lordship in writing the representations which we then submitted to you on the annexation
or protectorate of the Western Pacific Islands and the eastern portion of New Guinea.
a 4. 18 n ° ( \ ouht well known to your Lordship that during a period now extending over more than thirty years, the
Australasian Colonies have one after another pressed upon Her Majesty’s Government the expediency of bringing the islands
of the Western Pacific within the dominion or the protection of England ; and we feel assured that the whole question will
appear to your Lordship invested with a graver aspect, when for the first time the Governments of nearly all the Dependen-
cies of England in Australasia come before Her Majesty’s Government to make a united remonstrance against the present
state of affaus m the Western Pacific, and to ask from the Imperial authority the adoption of such a definite policy and
purpose as they believe is essential to their future well-being. 1 y
It is true that fear of foreign intervention has been the immediate cause of this concerted action on the part of the
Australasian Governments ; and this, we understood, seemed to your Lordship hardly adequate to justify a strong sense of
present danger VV e can assure you that our Governments would receive with a sense of great relief your Lordshin’s
assurance that there is no foundation for our fears. But it is not only the apprehension of immediate foreign intervention
that has influenced our Governments nor would its removal change their opinion as to the necessity for making it
impossible in the future. Other powerful reasons bring them together to urge upon the Imperial Government the necessity
of a policy different from the one that has been pursued in the past, the conviction, indeed, that the state of things in the
V\ estern 1 acific has at last become intolerable. W e feel that we ought not to say this, without an attempt to trace the
eourse of events that have led to so grave a declaration. 1
r , wasin 1848 that Sir George Grey, then Governor of New Zealand, first called the attention of the Imperial
Government to a species of trade m the native inhabitants which had commenced in the Pacific,” and to the danger of
foreign annexation, pointing out the necessity of providing against these in time. For many years successive appeals of the
same kind, and from one Colony after another, were made to Her Majesty’s Government to interfere. In the meanwhile
the constant repetition of outrages m the Pacific had become such a scandal to civilization that the Imperial Government
resolved to make a vigorous attempt to repress them. The Foreign Jurisdiction Acts, which had been in existence in
182 Vi e Pactfc Islanders Protection Act of 1872, had proved insufficient to meet the increasing
difficulties of the case. At last, in 1870, two Acts of Parliament were passed, amending the former law, defining more clearly
the powers and jurisdiction of Her Majesty in the Pacific Ocean, and creating the office of High Commissioner for the’Westerii
1 acme. These were followed, two years after, by the promulgation of the “Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877,”
which established the High Commissioner s Court, with elaborate provision for the government of the Western Pacific, and
the new Colony of Fiji, whichhad meanwhile been created in 1876, became the centre of the High Commissioner’s operations.
humane intentions of the Imperial Government in these measures have always commanded the respect and sym-
pathy of the Australasian Colonies, and if it had ever been possible to give them real effect, we should not be addressing your
Lordship to-day ; but there was an inherent difficulty, the results of which could hardly have been foreseen at the time
but which was certain to paralyze every endeavour to confer the benefits of law and order on the vast region, stretching
from Mw Guinea across the Pacific Ocean, which those measures embraced. The Act of 1875, which created the office of
High Commissioner, only empowered Her Majesty to “exercise power and jurisdiction over her subjects” within the islands,
and expressly declared that nothing in the Act or in any Order in Council under it should “ extend, or be construed to
extend, to invest Her Majesty with any claim or title whatsoever to dominion or sovereignty” over the islands or to
derogate from the rights of the tribes or people inhabiting them, or of their chiefs or rulers, to such sovereignty or
dominion. And although the powers of the Order in Council were apparently extended so as to include foreigners in a few
specified cases they were practically restricted to British subjects only, for no foreigner could be brought under the Hffih
Commissioner s jurisdiction unless he could produce “ the consent in writing of the competent authority on behalf of his
own nation, a condition which, from the nature of things, could seldom, if ever be fulfilled.
Nor


Nor did the Order in Council fully carry out the idea with which it had been originally devised. Though the
Act was passed in 1875, it was not till 1877 that the order in Council under it was issued ; and it was not till 1878
that it could be brought into operation in the Pacific. Meanwhile the intentions of Her Majesty’s Government had undergone
some change. Differences arose between the naval authorities and the Acting high Commissioner as to their respective powers.
The work to be clone was daily becoming more and more difficult, and the nature of the difficulty was becoming better know n
to Her Majesty’s Government. Hardly was the Order in Council brought into operation, when it was found to be too intricate
and complicated an instrument, bristling as it did with technicalities and minute provisions in precise legal language,, to be
really workable. The High Commissioner described the position in which he was placed in the clearest terms. His jurisdiction
being one extending over British subjects exclusively, he had no authority whatever to deal, whether judicially or in his
executive capacity, with offences by natives of islands not under the dominion of the Crown. He more than once represented
to the Imperial Government, that unless such a jurisdiction were created as would be competent to take cognizance also of
offences committed against British subjects, the infliction of punishment on these for outrages against natives in the same
regions was certain to excite on their part a natural irritation, and a sense of being treated with injustice. But the reply to
his representations invariably was, that “in the opinion of the Law Officers of the Crown, insuperable obstacles existed o
any assumption of jurisdiction by Her Majesty over other than British subjects, beyond the limits of Her dominions.
. The High Commissioner could not with fairness be reproached for not having exercised a jurisdiction which he had
been strictly forbidden to assume. Early in 1881 he reminded Lord Kimberley how often the attention of Her Majesty s
Government had been painfully called to the greatly increased frequency of the murder of Europeans by natives m the islands
of the Western Pacific ; this he attributed (among other causes) to the “far greater intercourse between whites and
and to the possession of firearms by the latter, “which had given them a confidence and boldness they did not before possess.
Later on he recommended that power should be granted for the trial of natives for offences against British subjects, where
such a power might be conceded by the native chiefs themselves ; but it would have been no easier to get the assent ot the
natives than that of foreigners. The High Commissioner regretted that so elaborate an instrument as the Order in Council
had been in the first instance prepared ; and he represented that of its 321 articles by far the greater part were never called
into use, that it was constantly found, in the remoter regions of the Pacific, impossible to comply with its directions, andthat
the powers intended to be conferred by it were therefore ineffectual. So things went on from 1877 to 1881. _
Another year elapsed, and the evils only got worse. In the hope of lessening them, the High Commissioner appointed
two officers, Captain Dale, R.N., and Captain Cyprian Bridge, R.N., commanding H.M.S. “Diamond,” and Espiegle, to be
Deputy Commissioners. But the old difficulty reasserted itself at once, that there was no jurisdiction over foreigners : the
evil-doers of any nation had only to represent themselves as belonging to some other nationality, in omer to escape control.
In his instructions to the Deputy-Commissioners, Sir A. Gordon warned them that they would have difficulty in ascertaining
who were British subjects and who were not, because many would seek to plead some other nationality; and that they would
find caution to be essentially requisite, as they had no jurisdiction whatever over any foreigner unless he submitted to it
voluntarily. There was never any doubt that this device of assuming other nationalities would be resorted to by cnmina s ,
but it was hardly necessary to resort to it, for outrages in which foreigners were openly concerned took place. A boat from a
vessel named the “Aurora,” flying the French flag, had a collision with the natives of an island called Apim the JNew Debut es
group, in which the chief of a small village was shot. The natives thereupon resolved to murder the first white man they
could in revenge. An English labor vessel, the “Dauntless,” went to the island shortly afterwards to recruit labourers : her
boat was decoyed to the beach, when the natives opened fire with rifles, killing the second mate and wounding the Government
Agent. Complaints were often made of there being cases of kidnapping by French vessels at one island or another, and
consequent threats of the natives that they would kill the first white man who went there. An inquiry was held at Noumea
respecting the French vessel “Aurora.” In her case it was clearly shown that the crew had put in practice the worst form o
kidnapping, such as staving in or running down canoes, capturing the natives, and shooting those who attempted to escape.
Labourers were being apparently recruited by the crews of vessels nearly all of which flew foreign flags. The planters of all
nationalities were greatly exasperated by the conduct of masters of labour vessels, both French and English, in enticing away
their servants. Where the foreigner committed an outrage he was not amenable to punishment; where he suffered injury
he could get no redress in the High Commissioner’s Court. . ~ , ~
But if there was serious trouble by reason of there being no jurisdiction over foreigners, another trouble was growing
un even more serious because there was none over natives. So far from outrages diminishing after the Order in Council was
promulgated, they increased. In November, 1880, Commander Bower, R.N., of H.M.S “Sandfly,” with a boat s crew, was
put to death on a small island of the Solomon group under circumstances of much barbarity. The Governor of New South
Wales reported to the Colonial Office that “the atrocious murders lately committed by the South Sea Islanders had caused
and were causing a very deep feeling of pain and indignation.” The newspapers teemed with accounts of these outrages ; it
was said that “no week passed without the announcement of another massacre in the Islands.” The exasperation predicted
by Sir Arthur Gordon as certain to occur, was becoming greater every day. Early in 1881 Lord Kimberley, in a despatch
to the High Commissioner, deplored the “unusual number of outrages by natives upon white men which had recently been
reported to the Colonial Office.” In the meanwhile stern reprisals had been resorted to. When the outrage took place at
the island of Api in revenge for what had been done by the crew of a French vessel, the Commodore had gone down in
H.M.S. “Wolverene” and landed a party of 100 seamen and marines, who destroyed four of the villages implicated, and cut
down the fruit plantations in their vicinity. And now, after the “Sandfly” outrage, the Commodore felt it his duty to take
even severer measures. In December, 1880, he sent down Captain Maxwell, R.N., in H.M.S. Emerald, to inflict numsh-
ment not only for the “Sandfly” murders, but for others that had been committed on crews of the vessels Ripple,
“Esperanza,” “Borealis,” and “Anne Brooks.” The punishment was very severe. From bay to bay, from island to island,
the villages were set in flames, the cocoa-nut and other fruit trees cut down, and the canoes destroyed. “There was no more
to be done,” said Captain Maxwell, “in the way of hunting these wretched people. . . ._ They have been hunted and
worried till it will be long before they settle again. ... I regret that my whole voyage m these islands has been one o
apparently ruthless destruction, but no other course has been possible.” Nor was this enough. A few months afterwards a
still stronger step was taken. Commander Bruce, of H.M.S. “Cormorant,” was sent to the I londa Isles by the Commot ore
to bring the perpetrators of the “ Sandfly” murders to justice. There he issued a declaration that “In consequence of an
English officer and boat’s crew being murdered by Florida men, the Queen of England declares war witn the whole tribes ot
Floridas, unless the actual murderers are given up in fourteen days” ; adding that “in case of any other white man being
killed in the Florida Isles, the whole of the chiefs would be held responsible, and the Florida Islands be considered to beat
war with the Queen of England.” Bishop Selwyn, being then on the spot, humanely did all he could to save We. Writing
to Commodore Bruce, he says “I have acted as I have done, because you, sir, as the representative of Her Majesty, nave
declared war against all the people of these islands unless the murderers are given up. It appears to me to be my duty to
save the people from such a calamity, by using what influence I possess to induce them to comply with Her Majesty
demands.” The Commodore “fully approved of the ‘Cormorant’s’ action at the Flondas. Thus it seemed that a naval
officer, in reprisals for an outrage, might issue a “declaration of war” against entire tribes in the V\ estern Pacific, and that
what he required must be considered as being “Her Majesty’s demands.” Surely it was not this which could ever have
been looked for as the outcome of the scheme of 1875 for the government of the Western Pacific.
Remedies which were suggested.
It is no wonder that such a state of things should have caused serious anxiety to Her Majesty’s Government, or that
the Secretary of State should have desired the High Commissioner to advise what was now to be done. That the Order in
Council had failed was evident; “an acknowledgment,” says Sir Arthur Gordon, “that the present system is a failure, and
the consequent repeal of the Order in Council would have the merit of simplicity.” But the question was what should be
put in its place. When the news came home of the events we have just described, Lord Kimberley sent a despatch to the
Governor of Queensland, saying that it was contemplated to invite the Naval Powers to agree to the appointment of a Joint
Commission for considering the measures which should be taken for the regulation of the labour traffic, the trade in fareaims,
and the prevention and punishment of outrages of all kinds, under the sanction of a Convention between Her Majesty s
Government and the other Powers. The Queensland Government immediately expressed their willingness to co-operate with
the Imperial authorities for such a plan. The High Commissioner expressed his own concurrence. ‘ Some sort of intei -
national agreement,” he said, “seems to me to form on essential part of any satisfactory arrangement.” He then went on to
make


Colony.
Vessels.
Tonnage;
Value.
Imports.
Exports;
Total.
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
New Zealand
1,305
187
320
908
395,391
67,725
47,390
349,681
£
2,147,858
162,095
2,899
705,223
£
2,726,227
110,647
83,800
548,187
£
4,874,085
272,742
86,699
1,253,410
2,720
860,187
3,018,075
3,468,861
6,486,936
mak e several recommendations for improving the existing system, one of which was that the judicial powers conferred by the
ers in Council should be so extended by Act of Pailiament as to render offences committed by natives against British
subjects equally cognizable with those committed by British subjects against natives. But it would evidently have been
assume jurisdiction over the native people and continue to except foreigners. Nor did the High Commissioner
tTV^n admittmg f hlS ’ • i- 10 ob * ai “’ lie said > “ the power of dealing satisfactorily with the misdeeds of other whites
Frnnno Q O L°/v attacka U P°“ them, an international agreement, having the sanction of a treaty, with
for a - *? 10 Uaitecl States, would be necessary. Such an arrangement would probably involve the substitution
Avfi rTT C « mmissl °n of a mixed Commission similar to the old mixed Coimnission Slave Trade Courts.” And Sir
» i G n or - o i n ° n ’ - W T? th P erf r ect truth » t 0 toucb the real kernel of the whole matter. “It should be borne in
that , Ul . e Punishment of outrages, though at present forced into prominence, is not the only nor the most
y hlch to be dealt with in these seas” ; and he reminded the Secretary of State that the jurisdiction of
■ Gommissioner and his Court was one “ primarily created to bring law, both civil and criminal, within the reach of
dPvllnnmpni e 3 S^ fa -+- f^ 0m +n U 0t \ er • leg u l bunals ’ to check a SS ressive lawlessness, and to regulate the growth and
Br irm h S u + ements ?“ tie yy esteru Pacific.” This was wise language. But when such recommendations
were made, it was difficult to escape the logical conclusion from them. Once let it be admitted that the Imperial Government
and suc f h as >vas advised by the High Commissioner, and is there anything but the thinnest veil left between that
and the assertion of the very right of sovereignty or dominion ” which it was the purpose of the Act of 1875 to forbid ?
in 1 SSi nfTl b l fair lf We r dld , no . t refer t( ? r other remedies which were suggested by the High Commissioner. Early
Ariw’r f reciting the causes for the increased frequency of murder of Europeans by natives in the Western Pacific, Sir
Gordon referred to two ways by which they could be prevented in future. “ One is,” he said, “ that which I know
fliartorori Pn° n 7 was seri ° us ty contemplated by Her Majesty’s Government some years ago, —the establishment of a strong
mpany possessing an exclusive right to trade. Another course would be to limit the protection given for trading
’° f 10S ? ca f ne( J o* l certain specified localities.” But Sir Arthur Gordon even then allowed that the time for
y. • a c artered Company had passed ; and last year he proposed another plan to improve the working of the
Commission the leading features of which, in addition to extending his jurisdiction by a new Act of Parliament,
. - w n ivr ien tbree Deputy-Commissioners, the conferring of Deputy-Commissioners’ powers on naval officers in
T V . . ‘ ’ p lu^ s cis, and the permanent employment of a vessel, not a man-of-war, in the service of the Commission,
in flip wATST* + ave been the recommendations some years ago, in favour of granting an exclusive right of trading
f® „ l ! 1C a cha f tei ’ ed Company, we entirely agree with Sir Arthur Gordon that the time for any such scheme
pSmSSSf ?w y r i An e \ a T bor w?P. la , n Wa f de , vised “ 1876 b y Sir Julius Vogel, then Premier of New Zealand, and the present
fpP th t ( j olony ’ Mr hltake , r > *°. r tbe establishment of a great trading Company for the Western Pacific ; but it
fp gf ound ’ as an y scheme of the kind now proposed must inevitably do. There are no circumstances in the Pacific
. p W } UCh W^ re held t 0 Justlf y the gating of a Royal Charter, in November, 1881, to the North Borneo Com-
PfJ 1 / > on the contrary, there are circumstances essentially adverse to any plan of the kind. But even if there were not, we
K t . wo * hin f® hlch alon ® ought now to dismiss it from consideration. In the first place, it would always have
S™ \° that any grant of exclusive rights of trade to a Company would be effectual even in the case of British
L not on fy would they have traded in spite of it, but at no time after the promulgation of the Order in Council could
w 1 e ff Clu fT e i rai i, t ha l e b< r en lnade without grave injustice to them; while as regards foreigners, such a right would
the Fr | nch ’ German, and American traders; and if it was not to be respected by everybody, it must
shere5 here alread y Drench Companies established in New Caledonia, whose operations extend
the islands, and there will certainly be several others. By what process could these Companies be prevente d
.‘ i , sll gh te st attempt to do would show how the question ever comes back to the same point; to the
exercise, namely, of rights of sovereignty and dominion.” But in the second place we feel sure your Lordship will allow
; ba K “ x n 7 o S i° glVm § a cbarter ® d Company exclusive rights of trade, the interests and the wishes of Australasia
!!i d r ;if n 6 ° Ut ° f co -: ideratlon - Now > tbe exclusi Y e ri g ht t 0 trade could not exist for a moment in the islands without
i • f go r/ n ’ a^ d the Governments of Australasia could not be expected to acquiesce in any right of government
being transferred from the Imperial authority to any other authority than their own. S
i O T-p eOVe % ® V i 6a could be said for the palliatives which have been suggested as being applicable to the
W P •' Of islands, it is certain that they would be utterly useless in the case of New Guinea. Sir Arthur Gordon
inKWn °, ut tbe old y mea ? s b y which the question of New Guinea can ever be settled. His opinion on this
+ lon f b ! en faraibar to your Lordship, but it is only now that it has become known. “I am irresistibly compelled,”
to a conclusion, which I should have wished to avoid, and which I was at first inclined to think might be
fjpv£hip namely ’-f t ! Int 1 n t the an ? exatlon b y Gr eat Britain of at least certain portions of New Guinea will speedily become
Wih wlfi. ! u 'l*? 6 “ lty f T or su ? k a ste P has not alf eady arisen * * Could I see any other way of dealing satisfac-
i State °{ hl ? gs ’ I would recommend a resort to it; but I must with regret admit that after the most careful
„„ i. I *, . amnoaWe topercei ve anymode of meeting these difficulties except by annexation; for it appears to me
te^ ori ?l Jurisdiction should be assumed by Great Britain, to enable us to deal with offences committed by
r Br , l ? ;isl l 1 sptGers, or with those committed by natives, and unless such jurisdiction over them be
j T ’ . d f 1011 , ie practicability of exercising it with the smallest degree of efficiency over British subjects themselves ;
ifTf i U e I S; therefore, that I see no middle-course between annexation and the abandonment of all control over the
vSwfST n* 8 “ N 7 u Gumea ’ involving a practical acquiescence in the establishment there of a reign of lawless
take if wp clip,,/? w tatter is a course which we cannot creditably adopt, and which, indeed, were we disposed to
inevitable n i ? ff 1 a v!™ 6 be ced to abandon. A greater or less degree of annexation, consequently, appears to be
cases conki f d r there i b<3 °^ he , r m . e t b o d . unknown to me but known to Her Majesty’s Government, by which such
cases could be met, I need not say I should prefer its adoption.”
rennrfpfl r °P^fi°i 1 as X? n b^,* be Digh Commissioner at a time when there was much excitement over the
nkce there wHpb £, a hg ° f d iS and when an expectation existed of a great influx of miners taking
p eV6r • Ulfilled - I* 1 thoUgl Sold-mining on a large scale has not yet come to aggravate the evil!
solutioii than Co ™ miss + l o ner ’ otb er events have happened whose impelling force has not been less towards the same
solution than would have been the presence of a large body of miners. To these we shall refer later on.
Trade.
for a new e noiw e nn d +hl°w ed t t 0 t^ ace . fl the eve “ ts wh^ b have gradually but surely been pressing with ever increasing force
stantly 6 Hade In^aR 8 tffiit Region.^ UeS^10n " n ° W fr ° m t 0 & matter USt aS P reSS “ g ’ Uamely ’ the
Pf) mmplp Wwpf Gommodore Wilson collected from the various Customs officers some valuable returns of the
pvidprfpp nfwi of fi, th + e Australasian Colonies and the Western Pacific Islands ; from these we have taken out the following
evidence of what the trade amounted to in the ten years from 1871 to 1880 • 6
The


The Commodore did not merely point out how large was, even at that time, the value of this trade; he said significantly that
‘ ‘as vTthe sources of trade may be said to be in their infancy. ” He might have added that these Customs returns only
included of course, the British trade, and took no account of foreign traders ; if the French, German, and American trade
could have been added, the total would have amounted to a much larger sum than 6k millions. It is needless for US L 0 P
out that the greater part of the produce of the Western Pacific only passes through Australia, and really comes to England.
That this produce will greatly increase is beyond doubt. The whole trade, indeed, of the Pacific is destined to unc ci go a giea
change whenever the Panama Canal is made. It is then that will be seen the foresight of France in establishing he e
Tahiti and the Marquesas : and the Navigators, with the splendid harbour on Tutuila Island, will come into a new nnpo ,
while the Fiii group will become the nearest colony of England in the Pacific. , ,
The pearl-shell and bdche de mer fisheries alone amount to nearly a million sterling annually. Tic grow i o sug i
plantations is equally remarkable. Probably £1,000,000 have been spent in Queensland alone in wh “!
only a few years ago there was nothing but the wilderness ; the actual produce of these estates is ah ea y , ,
in three yeJrs will probably be 50,000 tons. The great importance of this to Australasia will at once be seenfrom thie fact
that in the single year 1881 sugar to the value of close on £2,700,000 was imported into Australia and New Zealand of v Inch
. the import from Mauritius exceeded £1,500,000. It is quite certain there will be a great extension of the growth of sugar in
Queensland and Fiji, and in it a constantly larger amount of Polynesian labour is sure to be employed Now the> necessity of
further regulations for the labour trade and traffic in firearms, by foreigners as well as our own people is one> ft he things
that have been most strongly pressed upon Her Majesty’s Government by the highest Imperial officers, a y J y
of importance in the Colonies concerned.
Foreign intervention.
The chief difficulty we have in referring to this is that no one in Australasia really knows how far the ground is clear
of foreign claims, or to what engagements Her Majesty’s Government is now committed It is of the first importance to
define with accuracy the political relation in which each group of islands stands to-day, whether to the Imperial Government
or to any foreign Powers. We therefore trust that we may ask your Lordship to enable us to place before our Governments
a full statement of what claims have yet been made by foreign Powers, and of the extent to which such claims have been
recognized f n c er tlintyand insecurity which prevails in Australasia on this subjectmay perhaps be best illustrated by
what has happened in the case of the New Hebrides. That group was originally part of the Colony of New Zealand undei
the Charter of 1840. At some time, of which we are not aware, a rather vague understanding appears to have been come to
with the Government of France that the New Hebrides should be relinquished as a possession of.the* Crown and their
independence recognized. In 1878, upon reports coming to Europe of a French project to annex the group, the French
Ambassador declared that his Government had no intention to interfere with the independence of the isWs, and asked o
an assurance that Her Majesty’s Government would also respect it. lour Lores ip, emg tint Her Maiestv’s
Foreign Affairs, informed the French Ambassador, with the concurrence of the Colonial O:ffice that Her, Majesty s
Government had no intention of “ changing the condition of independence which the New Hebrides now enjoyed. Upon a
remonstrance being made by Sir George Grey, then Premier of New Zealand, the Secretary of State replied that the
New Hebrides were no longer within the limits of New Zealand, and that the Imperial Government had no intention o
proceeding in the a Political Protectorate. In the Order in Council of 1877. the New Hebrides had (evidently
by design) been omitted from the islands specified by name; nevertheless, the High Commissioner understood that his
authority extended over them, for he appointed Captain Cyprian Bridge, R.N., to be a D ®P thltlfter
in that character that Captain Bridge went down to the islands Now we venture to ask whether it is quite certain that after
Her Majesty had once been graciously pleased to include the New Hebrides in the boundaries of New Zealand, the mer
of new boundaries being afterwards fixed for that Colony was sufficient to make the New Hebrides cease to be a possession of
the Crown ? At any rate, if they have ceased to be so, and there is an understanding between the Governments of Englam
and France to respect the independence of the group, the least that can be asked is that English and F rench subjects shall be
on the same footiiig there. But it transpired, in a debate in the Chamber of Deputies, on the Bth May, that a Company had
been formed at New Caledonia, by a planter who had acquired “des terrains importmts at Sandwich Island : and the I emps,
only a few days ago, announced that a Company, composed ofcolonists from New Caledonia, had succeeded in „c very
important interests in the islands, had bought several of them, and had obtained large concessions in others whereupon
that journal suggested that the “ best method of procedure would be to grant to the Company rights similar to those recent y
accorded by Government to the North Borneo Company.” We venture to ask whether the agreement, whate e
it is which exists between the two Governments, would allow of any grant of that kind being made by Fra ice.
it is, ™ c e an the colonists fe ei secure against some sudden act on the part of France in annexing other islands whose
independence may stand on, at any rate, no worse a footing than that of the New Hebrides. It is only a few years since
Commodore Hoskins reported to the Admiralty that a French ship of war had been sent to the Chesterfield and Bampton
Reefs by the Governor of New Caledonia, to proclaim those islands to be French territory, which was done with the usual
formalities.” But the Governor of New South Wales has already granted a lease of the islets for working guano deposits
and it had to be arranged that the deposits should be worked jointly by French and English Companies until the question of
title was decided as to which Sir Hercules Robinson hadsent a telegram to the Colonial Office immediately on receiving notice
of the annexation from the Governor of New Caledonia. Still less can the colonists feel any security against other acts of
which they have already complained. Early in 1880 a schooner arrived at Auckland from New
French authorities, bringing eleven political offenders, and nine convicts for criminal offences. Sir John Hall, then i remier
of New Zealand, immediately telegraphed to all the Governments of Australia, asking them to
Government to remonstrate with the Government of the French Republic agomst a, repetition of that act. 1 lie Gov ernment
of New South Wales stated that « batches of pardoned convicts from New Caledonia had on
The Avent-General brought the case before the Colonial Office, and Lord Kimberley requested the Foreign Office to mov e the
French Government to discontinue any shipments of convicts from New Caledonia to New Zealand. But; wnvicts hav> e o
escaped from New Caledonia in open boats, and landed on the Queensland coast; more than fifty who came to Queensland
were afterwards extradited, besides many others known to be French convicts from Noumea , R - +
Again, by a “Reciprocal Engagement” entered into between England and France in ! 847. respecting the ICaiateagroup
of islets (to the leeward of Tahiti), both nations bound themselves “ never to take possession of the islands, either absolutely
or under the title of a protectorate, or in any other form whatever. ” But the French flag has been hoisted for three years oi
those islands without, so far as we know, any consent or recognition having been ever given by Her Majesty s Government,
those islands without, so , f Jt ig ied ito effect, will be more disastrous for the
Pacific than anything that has happened since the creation of the penal settlement at New Caledonia, for it is nothin
than a well-matured design for transporting for life [transportation « vie) to Nevv Caledonia, the Loj alty Isles, and the
Marquesas Islands, great numbers of French habitual criminals (rdcidivistes et malfaiteurs d habitude). I our proposals to
thL effect were before the French Legislature, one of them a bill brought in by the Government. They were all referred
together to a Committee, which reported that the Minister of the Interior had accepted certain modiiic
was no further difficulty. In the debates in the Chamber of Deputies, the reporter of the projet de lot (M.Gerv ille-Rcache)
stated that at least 60,000 could be sent to New Caledonia, and 23,000 to the Loyalty Isles. It was calculated that m t
first year after the law came into force 5,000 convicts would be transported for life under it, and an official estimate was
presented of the probable cost of sending these 5,000 to the Loyalty Islands and the Marquesas. It was said by the opponents
of the measure that the number of convicts transported would be 100,000 ; this was denied ; whereupon it was asked whether
since in the very first year 5,000 were to be sent, it could be expected that the number would not increase every yeai after.
The class to be sent was officially described by M. Gerville-R6ache as dangerous, steeped in vice, debauchery, and crime
(hommes dangereux, perdus de vices, usds par la ddbauche, souilUs de tousles crimes). These criminals were to be transported
for life (la rogation consistera dans Vinternement perpetud des condamnds); but were not to serve any term of P |
and were to be free on arrival [en rdsumd, le transportd a son arnvde dans la colonic scra hbre) The object was
to rid France of them (en ddbarrasser la patrie). The Government was to support them at first,.till they could
cret work; if they would not work, they must live how they could (ils vivront comme ils pourront). The pi qjet de tot
appointed New CMedonia and its dependencies, and the Marquesas group, as “ colonies to which the rdc idm to be
sent; but it was openly proposed in the debate to include the New Hebrides, the Loyalty Islands, and the Isle of Pines.


i Comte dc Lanjuinais said it had been talked of to send the convicts to the New Hebrides [on avail parl6 d'envoyger Ics
transports aux Nouvelles Hebrides). Mr. Richard Waddington, speaking officially as a member of the Committee, said that
the title to the New Hebrides was not settled (il s’agit d'une question de. propriety non encore determine?), but that he thought
the French title was good, and that the French flag might very soon be hoisted on the islands (je crois que notre titre de
possession est serleux, et que dans un avenir tres rapproche le pavilion de la France pourra y flatter); adding, however, that
in saying so he was speaking for himself and not for the Government [en engageant ma responsabilitd seulc et non celle die
f gouvernement). Another speaker went further, and said that, in response to the supposed action of England in New Guinea,
the New Hebrides would be seized by France ( pour repondre d V Angleterre, qui si audacieusement vient de meitre la main stir
la Nouvelle-Guinde, nous saurons d notre tour nous emparer des Nouvelles Hebrides). The Chamber of Deputies, after
adopting most of the Government Bill, sent it back for revision to the Committee, who returned it with very little alteration.
They estimated that in the first four years the number of convicts to be sent would be 20,000. The colonies to which the
convicts might be sent remained the same, namely, New Caledonia and its dependencies, the Marquesas, an island called
Fhu-Quoc, and Guiana. The Bill has passed the Chamber, but is not yet before the Senate.
Your Lordship will not be surprised at our Governments urging that this scheme for making the Pacific Islands the
receptacle for the dangerous classes of France, is one deserving the serious consideration of Her Majesty’s Government. It is
impossible for Australasia to look without the gravest apprehension at the prospect of any proposal of the kind receiving the
tacit acquiescence of England. What hope is there for the Pacific Islands, if a great nation like France pours into them vast
numbers of her dangerous classes, not as convicts under penal servitude, but free the moment they land, so long as they do not
return to France ? or how can Australia and New Zealand be expected to hear with patience of such a law being passed ?
There have been rumours of some proposal by which the penal establishment at New Caledonia should be altogether given
up by France, and the convicts transferred to the New Hebrides ; the inducement being that New Caledonia would then be
opened up to settlement by free colonists. We do not deny that there would be an advantage in freeing New Caledonia from
the curse of transportation; but the Bill before the French Chambers expressly retains New Caledonia as one of the places to
which the ricidivistes are to be sent; therefore as to the New Hebrides, all the Colonies trust that full effect will be given to-
Lord Granville’s assurance iu the House of Lords a few days ago, that “both Her Majesty’s Government and the French
Government acknowledge in full the obligation which the understanding about the New Hebrides imposes upon both,” and
that the group shall not be allowed to pass in any way under the dominion of France.
Nor is it only with regard to French policy that there is, in the opinion of the colonists, cause for some apprehension.
It is often said that Prince Bismarck has no desire to extend the influence of Germany to the Pacific ; but what happened in
the case of the Isavigators’ Group shows that idea to be a mistaken one. In the early part of 1880 a scheme was proposed in
Germany for a great trading Company to take over the property of Messrs. Godeffroy. In a communication to the Imperial
Under Secretary of State, Prince Bismarck laid down the conditions on which the Company was to receive a guarantee from
the State of an interest of 4.j per cent, on its capital, not to exceed 300,000 marks a year, and to be for twenty years. The
Chancellor referred to “the interest which the State takes in the prosperity of German enterprise in the South Seas,” and
the financial assistance he proposed giving to the new Company, by reason of the Godeffroy firm having “ got into
difficulties which threatened the German South Sea trade with the loss of their factories and plantations on the Samoa Islands.”
A Bill to give effect to the Chancellor’s proposal was introduced accordingly, but rejected by the German Parliament in April,
1880. Again, as recently as December last, the Royal Colonial Institute called the attention of the Colonial Office to an
article in the AllgemeineZeitung, strongly advocating the annexation by Germany of Eastern New Guinea. The answer was
that neither Lord Granville nor your Lordship saw any reason for supposing that the German Government contemplated any
scheme of the kind; but we venture to ask that a more definite assurance should be obtained from that Government, which
can hardly refuse to recognize the vital character of the matter to every Colony in Australia.
Before leaving the subject of foreign intervention we submit that it would be expedient to settle more clearly the
extent to which the independence of the chiefs in the various islands is recognized, and their right to make treaties admitted.
Where the treaty-right exists is it quite certain that the Western Pacific Order in Council is in operation ? For instance, the
Navigators’ and the Friendly Islands are among those specified by name in the order in Council; but we understand there is
an English treaty with the ‘ ■ king” of Tonga ; and in the case of the Navigators’ there is a treaty with Germany, which Prince
Bismarck communicated to the Reichstag in 1879. And we believe a treaty of some kind was made between Samoa and the
United States, giving to the States the exclusive right of using the fine harbour at Tutuila as a coaling and naval station, the
U.S. frigate “ Narragansett” thereupon saluting the chief’s flag with fifteen guns ; indeed, this treaty was afterwards the
subject of a representation by Sir Edward Thornton to the Government of Washington. Again, several of the Powers have
appointed Consuls to the Islands : Her Majesty has a Consul at Rarotonga, a Consul at Samoa, and a Vice-consul at Tonga,
while Sir Arthur Gordon, the High Commissioner, is Consul-General for the Pacific Islands, the conduct of relations with
native States and tribes being confided to him in that capacity, under the control of the Foreign Office. As there is nothing
that can be called law administered by the native States and tribes, it is difficult to see how one day the same evils will not
arise from conflicting consular jurisdictions as have been so powerfully described by Lord Dufferin in the case of Egypt.
The new policy proposed.
The two things we set ourselves to show were, first, that the Western Pacific Order in Council could never be made
adequate to do what is wanted, without assuming a jurisdiction hitherto forbidden by Act of Parliament; and secondly,
that the fear of foreign intervention which has existed in Australia was not without warrant. For this purpose we have
relied not on assertions of our own but on official records, and with.hardly an exception have only spoken of events that
have happened in the last three years.
If we have established these two points, then the Imperial Government can hardly reject the consequence, that the
time has come when complete jurisdiction ought to be assumed by England over the Western Pacific, as the only means of
meeting the difficulties which beset alike the Imperial and the Colonial Governments, and of averting evils which threaten
Her Majesty’s loyal subjects in all that region.
We have rejoiced to see that such a policy has already received the almost unanimous support of the English Press.
Some opposition to it is perhaps only natural. We are sensible of the repugnance that exists to the idea of adding to the
already vast responsibilities of England a new and admittedly immense charge like that of the Western Pacific°lslands.
Yet it is difficult for any one to avoid the conclusion that these islands, unless they are meanwhile lost by foreign annexation,
will inevitably belong to England in the end. The same impelling power, not of mere desires but of events, which induced
the Imperial Government to do at last in Fiji what they had so often refused, is constantly at work, and incessantly being
renewed and strengthened with regard to the Western Pacific. But it was not till Fiji had become the opprobrium of the
Southern seas that Her Majesty’s Government would interfere. Surely they will not now inflict upon Australasia the hard
necessity of waiting till New Guinea also, and perhaps other islands, become Alsatias as dangerous as Fiji once was, scourges
to the peaceable subjects of Her Majesty, and a disgrace to civilization. For it is vain to think that the trade and inter-
course between Australia and New Zealand and these islands can be suppressed. Settlement both English and foreign is
spreading in every direction, yet of safety for life and property there is none. The High Commissioner himself has shown
that it is quite impossible to do what is wanted by any Order in Council capable of being issued under the Act of 1875 ; in
other words, impossible to do it without assuming the very jurisdiction which it was the purpose of that Act to forbid. Nor
would an International Convention do it, for a convention could only extend to the nationalities concerned, and could not
embrace the natives. England could not claim, in a convention with Foreign Powers, any jurisdiction over the native tribes,
without herself asserting over them the same right of dominion as would be asserted by the policy the Colonies are urging
upon your Lordship : nor could any convention be made at all, without first acknowledging that Foreign Powers possessed
an equal right with England to exercise a right of dominion over natives, an acknowledgment against which every subject
of Her Majesty in Australia and New Zealand would unite in making the strongest remonstrance.
The case of New Guinea is very pressing, because whatever powers are given to the High Commissioner, they can, in
the nature of things, be even less exercised there than in any of the other islands. New Guinea is in such close proximity to
Queensland, that whatever is done there must affect Queensland more than anything that is done in the other islands could
affect the rest of Australia or New Zealand. All the trade of Queensland with England and India by steam passes through
Torres Straits ; regular steam communication is now established there ; it is really indispensable not only that the Straits
should be free to navigation, but that there should be no risk of a foreign Power establishing a naval station there.
Adventurous men are occupying portions of New Guinea coast-line, and irregular settlement is sure to take place more
and


and more. What has so often happened ■R ill happen again. Failing the colonization of the great island under proper
authority, adventurers will flock there who will neither show regard for the native inhabitants, nor be under any restraint
among themselves ; the evils and dangers which existed in Fiji will repeat themselves, only on a larger scale, and Queensland,
of all the Australias, will suffer from them the most. This has been stated over and over again, in speeches in both Houses
of the Imperial Parliament, by the Governments and Legislatures of Australasia, by the Royal Colonial Institute, and by private
persons of high rank and experience in affairs, till we are almost ashamed to repeat it ourselves ; yet it must be repeated for
the danger is not far off and a pretence, but imminent and a reality. Surely the Imperial Government cannot continue to
refuse so reiterated an appeal. But if, fearing the responsibility of assuming authority over a vast and inaccessible region
of mountains and forests peopled by several millions of savages, the Imperial Government finally determine not to take full
jurisdiction over all New Guinea east of 143°, we trust that the same objection will not apply against establishing law and
order along the coast where settlement is now extending. Let it at least exist over the fringe of the southern coast-line for
the present, as was done the other day on the west coast of Afr ica. No Act of the Imperial Parliament is necessary for this
purpose, because Her Majesty has the same right now to assume jurisdiction over the southern coast-line of the island as
she had to assume it when the islands in Torres Straits were annexed ; and if it were deemed more convenient, the same
process as was adopted then might be adopted now, of giving power by Letters Patent to the Governor of Queensland to
declare by proclamation that certain portions of the coast-line of New Guinea should be annexed, under such conditions as
it might; be thought fit to prescribe.
We have referred to the irregular settlement that is even now taking place. We must with all respect remonstrate
against the doctrine laid down by the High Commissioner on the New Guinea question in 1878, when he “formally and
emphatically declared that the Imperial Government disclaimed all obligation to protect or interfere on behalf of persons
voluntarily placing themselves in positions of danger in a savage country, and that those who entered on such enterprises
must do so at their own risk and peril.” It is certainly not by colonists, who have founded communities on the other side of
the world, whose trade already exceeds in volume the whole foreign trade of England at the accession of Queen Victoria, that
this doctrine will ever be acquiesced in. It was by “ voluntarily placing themselves in danger” that English adventurers
built up our Indian and Colonial Empire, and created a commerce which now is numbered by hundreds of millions every
year; nor is the colonizing spirit which has done that work capable of being extinguished by the knowledge that the enter-
prise of founding new settlements involves risk and peril. But at least it may be said that if the Imperial Government was not
to interfere on behalf of English settlers it should not interfere against them. It surely can never be contended that an
elaborate scheme of .government was to be invented whose sole object should be to punish a subject of the Queen for any
wrong he might commit, while it denied him redress for any wrong that he might suffer.
Imperial interests also concerned.
So far we may perhaps be said to have urged only points that specially affect Colonial interests, or at any rate do not
closely touch Imperial ones. This may be true so long as Europe is at peace ; but the Imperial interest would spring up the
moment any war broke out which involved England in hostilities with a European power. The Imperial Government have
called upon the Colonies to do their part in the defence of their own harbours, and our Governments have not only
acknowledged they had a duty in that respect, but are doing their best to fulfil it. They feel that they have a right to ask
in return that the task shall not be more difficult for them than the Imperial Government can help, and that they shall not
be exposed to the creation of fortified naval stations and places d'armes in the Pacific, which should shelter an enemy’s fleet
and threaten their commerce, their coal measures, and even their safety. The nation will never permit that her naval
supremacy in the Pacific shall be endangered ; and it can hardly be contested that if France and other European powders
created new naval stations in the islands, the existing conditions in all that ocean would be changed, and everything relating
to Her Majesty’s Australian squadron assume a new aspect and a new importance.
Concert between the Impe. i d and Colonial Governments.
But while we have thus represented what the Australian Colonies believe ought to be done by the Imperial Govern-
ment, they are also ready to acknowledge what they ought to do themselves. Your Lordship stated in the House of Lords, that
if anything was to be done, it must be done either by the Imperial Government itself or by the Australian Colonies acting
together in concert, or by the Imperial and Colonial Governments combined ; and we assure your Lordship that our Govern-
ments will hail with the greatest satisfaction such an invitation to them to co-operate with the Imperial authority. There are
two immediate ways in which the Colonies can give their co-operation : by contributing to the cost of the policy they are
asking your Lordship to pursue, and by placing themselves in a position to act in union with each other and in concert with you.
As regards the first, whatever differences there were when Lord Carnarvon made his proposal of 1876, there are none
now. The Victorian Parliament has already passed an address, assuring Her Majesty that Victoria will share in the cost of
the policy which is being urged upon your Lordship ; the Queensland Government has assured your Lordship of its readiness
to do the same ; and the other Colonies will also do their part. But it does not need for us to remind your Lordship that no
Ministries can engage for the payment of indefinite sums, and that the assent of our Legislatures to grants of money must be
expressed in the usual way. Permanent appropriation will certainly be necessary; and for this not only time is required, but
consultation among the Governments, arrangement of the respective contributions of the Colonies, and the passing of the
requisite votes; in the meanwhile the first point for us to know is the amount which the Imperial Government would require
to be provided for whatever action is contemplated by your Lordship.
As regards the other question of concerted action between the Imperial and Colonial Governments, your Lordship
expressed your opinion to us at our interview with you in the clearest terms, and repeated it in the House of Lords. “ If,”
you said, “ the Australian people desire an extension beyond their present limits, the most practical step that they could
take, the one that would most facilitate any operation of the kind, and diminish in the greatest degree the responsibility of
the mother country, would be the confederation of the Colonies into one united whole, which would be powerful enough to
undertake and carry through tasks for which no one Colony is at present sufficient.” The large question of Federation w hich
your Lordship has here raised is one on which the Colonies have not made up their minds, and is one of too grave moment to
be decided even under the sway of the strong feelings which now exist among them respecting the policy that ought to be
pursued in the Western Pacific. But there is nothing to prevent concerted action at once with the Imperial Government
for that particular policy ; and we acknowledge that your Lordship may justly require not only such concerted action, but
joint engagements on the part of the Colonial Governments for the permanence and stability of the policy itself. This too
requires time, consultation among our Governments, and probably legislation also—at any rate concurrent resolutions in the
respective Colonial Assemblies. On the other hand, the Colonies will not imagine that your Lordship has invited them to a
co-operation which is to be barren of results : and our Governments will feel assured that if they on their part pass the
requisite appropriations, and combine for that concert with the Imperial Government which is necessary for any policy to
succeed, they may rely upon the policy itself being adopted, and effect being given at last to the wishes which they have
cherished for more than thirty years. In once more urging these wishes on Her Majesty’s Government, they have not come
as suppliants for some light favour, but as Englishmen to whom their country has given a great destiny which must be kept
from harm ; desiring no new territories for themselves, but asking that the Queen’s subjects may enjoy the blessings of peace
and order where now the law has no terrors for the evil-doer ; not seeking by a clearer policy to set new burdens on the
English tax-payer, but willing themselves to bear its cost; and welcoming with gladness an invitation to be associated with
the Imperial Government in a work which must assuredly be done one day, and can as certainly be best done now.
We have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
F. D. BELL.
THOMAS ARCHER.
R. MURRAY-SMITH.
* c 224—D
APPENDIX D.


APPENDIX D.
[Enclosure to No. 23.]
The Premier of Tasmania to The Premier of Queensland.
g- r Premier’s Office, Hobart, 30 July, 1883.
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th instant, addressed to the Colonial
Secretary, with reference to the proposed annexation of New Guinea, and enclosing a copy of a memorandum by you on
the subject, dated the 10th July, approved by the Administrator in Council on the 17th July. v - . •
I have perused with much interest your memorandum, which deals with a subject which the Premiei ot \ ictor a
has repeatedly brought under my notice during the past two months—although Mr. Service’s action appears to nave; been
directed with a view to secure the annexation, not of New Guinea only, but of the New Hebrides and other islands in
This Government is prepared to act in cordial unison with the other Australasian Colonies in making all urgent repre-
sentations to Great Britain to induce the Imperial authorities to prevent the occupation of either South-western New
Guinea or any of the at present unannexed Pacific Islands by any foreign Power. The occupation of any of these places by
a foreign Government as a penal settlement would be in the highest degree objectionable ; and their occupation, even for
peaceful colonisation, by any Continental Power, would in all probability cause trouble to Queensland and New South
Wales in the future. Now, the interests of the Australasian Colonies are so far linked together that even a probability of
future trouble or danger to one Colony is a sufficient reason for united action on the part of all. But the real difficulty of
the case, to my mind, lies in this—that the question of what measures are expedient, or eveni possible to be'taken, is one
the determination of which must be left to Her Majesty’s Ministers in England, and in coming to their decision they must
necessarily be affected by larger considerations than those which present themselves to our minds, and their action maybe
limited by obligations of the nature of which we are uninformed, and of the extent of which we are ignorant. The question,
therefore, 7 whether the end we seek—viz., the prevention of annexation by any other Power—is only to be attained by an
act of annexation on the part of England, or whether it may not be attained by diplomatic representations, is one that only
English Ministers can settle, and it should be left in their hands. It is perfectly obvious that the Australasian Colonies,
standing alone, are in no position to enter upon a policy of aggression, and that, apart from their position as a portion of the
great English Empire, they could offer no effectual resistance to the occupation by France, Germany, or America, of any one
of the numerous islands which dot the Pacific, although the occupation of such island by a foreign Government mightjustly
be deemed fraught with menace to the future peacefulness of these southern seas. But if we are dependant upon England
for any effective check to what we regard as foreign encroachment, is it wise, or even becoming, to assume a semi-hostile
position to the Imperial authorities because, on our first approach to the Queen s Advisers, we do not at once get all wc ask .
I cannot but believe, in view of the strong language that has been used as to this question of annexation, and of the n pa
tience of control which the proposed action indicates, that the assembly of a Federal Council or Convention at * h^P[
time, for the purpose of expressing more forcibly and more collectively our dissatisfaction with the decision of Her Majesty s
Ministers, and our opinion of the unwisdom of their action, would be the beginning of difficulties the end of which Ido o
gtioQ Qf the expense 0 f governing any new dependency is, I venture to think, of secondary consideration.
Shared among.the Colonies it would not be burdensome, and probably Tasmania s share would , be tnAmfr
My objection to the course suggested is rather that it appears to me that we are going too fast and too far that we are
subordinating Imperial to Colonial interests, and assuming an incapacity or an unwillingness on the part of Great Britain
to defend us from the evils which we dread, for which there does not seem to be any sufficient warrant.
For these reasons this Government is not prepared to do more than to join in urging Her Majest;y to ta!ke s
effectual steps as the wisdom of Her Advisers may suggest to prevent the occupation of New Guinea or the Pacific Islands
by any foreign Power. £ GIBLI -tf.
W. R. GIBLIN.
APPENDIX E.
[Enclosure to No. 45.]
Colonial Office to The Agents-General for New South Wales, New Zealand, Queensland, and Victoria.
Downing-street, 31 August, 1883.
mised during your recent Lord Uer y g ® Lordship does not perceive that this department need take
ssss s o/ s
to Sir Arthur Gordon “ d t 0 the Lords c » mmis “ of the
Admiralty, for their consideration. , , . e i a ; ms 0 f Foreign Powers in the Western Pacific have been
the., j really eo much uncertainty or
absence of information on am Kt “Int from Australia, the Navi-
gafo.A»S^^
fSxercked influence over public and affairs at
arise wVther its annexation by any Power
the whioh> with th neighbouring Island of Eotumah kW fe we-«£«-»£
Hebrides: and your letter shows that you are aware.of the SLda has bSn up to the present
The Loyalty Islands, being close to New Caledonia, are to be looked
tute a very serious impediment to that complete ju f r o miP nf P ,i , mn ™ of islands have already such relations with
over the Western Pacific, and that the best known anc 1 g V, -i u0 + specifically refer to the important
Foreign Powers, in common with England, as cannot be iou ? s X. Cruz islands 1 They
islands or group of islands known as New Britain, New
si*
that that he
h.at’mS^^
Her Majesty’s Government .nay be preparcdfo


Fake will confer together and make those united recommendations which have been invited, furnishing also an effective
Foreign Powers.Q Lord Derby has read with attention your representations as to.the
JOHN BRAMSTON.
APPENDIX F.
[Enclosures to JVbs. 49 and 50.]
Memorial to theHonorab.e the
The Memorial of the inhabitants of the Colony of Fiji,—
Respectfully SnowETH^ regidents of the Crown Colony of Fiji, and regard the question of the ultimate
rlstrcl 6^^^
some influence on every branch of industry that it has revenue now amounts to £98,000 sterling, and
That the Colony is self-supporting is evidenced by the fact that notwithstanding that
the expenditure to £87,000 sterling ; yet in its,a ? pro P mfcoui the> peopk yet-such is the
the Legislative Council contains certain non-official membe , , Ton noil they are powerless for good, and can neither
dominating influence of the executive aril offlce g within the Colony,
control the expenditure m any way nor ar y I . all d increasing business connections with New South stales,
The geographical position of this Colony, its la 0 s ,i ,xi m av be allowed to place before
Victoria, and New Zealand, has induced the inhabitants o come ov. benefits w hi c h would accrue to the Colony and its
the Conference, now shortly to sit, its political position al y advantages which the Australasian Colonies
Ltdffir^
OT the
Dated in Levuka, Fiji, this 19th September, 1883.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, &c.,&c., &c.
This the humble Petition of the undersigned your Majesty’s British subjects, resident in le o ony j ,
respectfully titioners are colonists of Fiji) and are largely interested, commercially and otherwise, in the
present and future prosperity of the Colony, _ 1 .,, , , n _, , , „
P 2. That Fiji has been a British Colony since the 10th day of October, 18 /4. .. , Fijians and of 2,500
Council. That the Executiye Council> as ordinarily constituted consists of the Governor, the Colonial Secretary, the
wh° are nominees p!Msed for the Government of the Colony arc enacted bythe Governor with the advice
of the Ugislative CouncilL rf the Council are recorded at His Excellency may direct, not-
***?&££•» “p“ diture o£ mOMy ’“
164,108 Kt F That as now existing, no single ordinance has been passed when intro-
duced by any non-official member. , , f , l t £o o 000 per annum : that the European inhabi-
tants such exceeds the present expenditure of
th ° appointments to offices and positions
that in the great majority of instances preference has been given to
cadets aradeniel local p^^J^u^of’nminbi^rfmiS^be^elect^i
made for the appointment of a Town Board m Leva a, so That this system worked successfully when tried in
Kk“SC °of Suva an officer of the Government alone manages the municipal busi-
ness of the town and imposes and experidspirates. ther sources of information will show that the European
colonists are
heard
Sr^rthfmeffium' mess! or in otL ways timmgi the is no reason why
theriiL^^^
denied to your Majesty’s subjects in this Colony.


18. That, as there will shortly be assembled at Sydney, in the Colony of New South Wales, a Convention of Represen-
tatives of the Australasian Colonies to consider the question of a General Federation of the Colonies, and the annexation of
parts of New Guinea and also certain other islands or groups of islands in the Western Pacific, the time has therefore seemed
to your Majesty’s Petitioners opportune for praying from your Majesty’s Government consideration of their present political
position. In furtherance of which object your Petitioners have memorialized the said Convention now about to meet, and
have requested them to assist your Petitioners in obtaining the objects herein set forth.
Your Petitioners therefore now most humbly pray :
1. That your Majesty will see fit, in the event of the Australasian Colonies becoming federated, to constitute the
Colony of Fiji an integral portion of Federated Australasia.
2. That in the event of such Federation not being now immediately accomplished, your Majesty will see fit to allow
the Colony of Fiji to become incorporated with one of the Australasian Colonies as now existing, with the
consent of such Colony.
3. Or, that your Majesty will see fit to grant to the British-born subjects resident within this Colony complete
relief from the humiliating condition in which they are at present politically placed.
4. That such relief be granted with due regard to the preservation of all existing rights and privileges of the native
races inhabiting this Colony.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.
Dated at Levuka, Fiji, this 19th September, 1883.
Sydney : Thomas Richards Government Printer.—lBB4.
[ls. 3d.]


ISB3-L
NEW SOUTH WALES.
JLfjjislattbe Council,
NEW GUINEA AND NEW HEBRIDES.
(FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE RESPECTING PROPOSED ANNEXATION OF.)
Ordered hy the Council to he printed, 22 October , 1884.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 12 November, 1883.
New Guinea.. —Nothing reliable since Lord Derby’s reply of 22nd October ; substance telegraphed to
Victoria, for information of Colonial Governments ; other rumours unreliable ; appreciate your views,
which I communicated to Colonial Office.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
Sir, 5, Westminster Chambers, Victoria-street, S.W., 16 November, 1883.
Referring to my telegram of the 12th instant, on the subject of New Guinea, in which I
informed you that since the issue of Lord Derby’s letter on the 22nd October, addressed to the Agent-
General of Victoria, nothing reliable had transpired in connection with this question, I have the honor to
state that vague rumours as to the action intended to be taken by the Imperial Government in regard to
New Guinea being in circulation at the time, I thought it wise to telegraph to you, lest some of the
groundless opinions entertained here might reach you. You may rest assured that I will not fail to keep
you promptly and fully informed of such matters as it is desirable you should know in relation to this
important subject.
Since I last wrote to you I have been favoured by Mr. Murray Smith, the Agent-General for
V ictoria, with a copy of Lord Derby’s reply of the 22nd October last to a communication addressed to
him by Mr. Murray Smith, at the request of the Victorian Government. I now forward a copy of this
letter for your information, the purport of which was telegraphed to the Government of Victoria, and has
already, I have no doubt, been conveyed to you. I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
[Enclosure. ]
J. Bramston, Esq., to The Agent-General for Victoria.
Sir, t Downing-street, 22 October, TBB3.
I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the sth instant,
in which, at the request of the Government of Victoria, His Lordship is invited to state more fully the
views of Her Majesty’s Government on certain questions connected with the subject of the proposed
annexation of various islands in the Western Pacific Ocean.
You ask (1) on what general conditions Her Majesty’s Government w r ould be prepared to assent
to the annexation of the islands in question ? (2.) If the Australian Colonies were to become federated
would the annexation of the islands be allowed, or would it be allowed on the simple agreement of the
Colonies concerned to provide for the expense of the proceedings? (3.) Can an estimate be given of the
cost of the measures indicated at the conclusion of Lord Derby’s depatcsh to the Officer Administering
the Government of Queensland, of the 11th July last ?
In reply to the first of these questions, I am to observe that it was explained, in the letter addressed
on the 31st of August last to you and other Agents-General, that there are obstacles in the annexation by
Great Britain of some of the Western Pacific Islands, and that with regard toothers Her Majesty’s
Government are not of opinion that their annexation, with all its attendant expenses and responsibilities,
is necessary at the time. Her Majesty’s Government will, of course, be prepared to give their
best consideration to the views of the Australian Governments, after those Governments have more fully
considered the whole subject at the approaching Conference; but it is obvious that Her Majesty’s
Government are not now in a position to define any conditions on which they will be prepared to assent
to anne :ation.
* c 225*“ 425 —
(2.)


(2.) If the Colonies should decide either upon confederation, or upon united action, in regard to
this particular question, there would undoubtedly he much less difficulty than at present in arranging for
the transfer to them of the obligations of this country in respect of neighbouring native communities; but
it is not possible to say, without full consideration of the manner in which the confederated Colonies would
propose to discharge their obligations, -whether annexation could be agreed to.
If the Colonies at the approaching Conference decide that the annexation of some of the islands is
desirable, Her Majesty’s Government would be willing to discuss all details fully with the Agents-General
or other Colonial representatives, and to consider whether and how far annexation would be justifiable
and practicable.
(3.) With respect to the last point raised in your letter, it does not appear to Lord Derby to be
possible to give an approximated estimate of the probable cost of strengthening the staff of the High
Commissioner on the coast of New Guinea, as proposed in the last paragraph of His Lordship’s despatch
to the Governor of Queensland, of the 11th of July.
If the authority and protection of the High Commissioner is to be effectively extended over other
important islands or groups of islands, as well as over the coasts of New Guinea, a considerable number
of officers, with adequate provision for their safety, and for means enabling them to communicate with
some Australian Colony, would have to be maintained.
The cost of such arrangements could hardly fail to amount to some thousands of pounds annually,
even if the area to be supervised were limited; but it is feared that any attempt to state it more precisely
might tend to mislead. 1 am, &c., ~a rr™
JOHN BRAMSTON.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4.
[3 <*•]


1883-4.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ILegtelatibe Council,
NEW GUINEA AND NEW HEBRIDES.
(FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE RESPECTING PROPOSED ANNEXATION OF.)
Ordered by the Council to le printed, 22 October , 1884.
No. 1.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies to His Excellency the Governor.
My Lord, Downing-street, 9 May, 1884.
Her Majesty’s Government have not lost sight of the Resolutions adopted by the Convention
of Representatives of the Australasian Colonies at Sydney in December last, and have considered the
provisions of the Draft Bill for constituting a Federal Council, which the Representatives pledged them-
selves to submit to the Legislatures of their respective Colonies. I had been led to believe that Addresses
in favour of this Bill would be adopted by the Colonial Legislatures in time to enable Her Majesty’s
Grovernment to introduce the measure during the present Session of Parliament with a good prospect of
its being passed; but the necessary action does not appear to have been yet taken in any Colony. As
therefore the probability of legislation during this year is diminishing it appears desirable to consider the
position of Her Majesty’s Government and of the Colonial Governments in regard to the proposals of the
Convention.
2. I had explained in my despatch of 11th July, 1883, to the Administrator of the Government of
Queensland, which was before the Convention, that, in order to place Her Majesty’s Government in a
position to consider proposals for the protection or government of New Guinea or other places in the
Western Pacific Ocean, it was desirable for the Australasian Colonies to combine together effectively,
and provide the cost of carrying out any policy which it might be decided to adopt, and that, in the mean-
time, Her Majesty’s Government must continue to decline proposals for large annexations of territory
adjacent to Australia, adding that if a reasonable annual sum were provided by the Colonies Her Majesty’s
Government would be prepared to strengthen the Naval Force on the Australian Station, and make the
High Coramissionership more effective.
3. The Convention does not appear to have taken this part of my despatch into consideration; but
it agreed that the Governments represented at it should recommend their respective Legislatures to make
permanent provision for the cost of the policy advocated, viz.:
(1.) To check, in whatever manner might be deemed wisest and most effectual, the further
acquisition of dominion in the Pacific south of the Equator, by any Foreign Power.
(2.) To secure the incorporation with the British Empire of so much of New Guinea and the
small islands adjacent thereto, as is not claimed by the Government of the Netherlands ; and
(3.) To if possible, the control of the New Hebrides in the interests of Australasia.
The Legislature of Queensland has recorded its entire concurrence in these resolutions, but no
Colony has taken measures to provide the requisite funds, as suggested by the Convention.
4. As, therefore, in the absence of any joint action by the Colonies,' Her Majesty’s Government are
not in a position to deal with these questions of policy to which I have referred, and some further delay
seems unavoidable, it may be desirable that your Government should consider, with the Governments of
the other Australasian Colonies, whether there may not be advantage in making provision for the intervenin'*
period in the manner suggested by me in paragraph 7 of my despatch of Ilth July last to Sir A. H°
Palmer. As I then stated, Her Majesty’s Government are confident that no Foreign Power contemplates
interference with Guinea; but in the absence of any controlling authority it is always possible that
the subjects of a Foreign Power might require the protection or intervention of their Government; and
British subjects also, by coming into collision with the natives, or by setting up claims to land, might cause
complication which would give much trouble hereafter.
5. Her Majesty’s Government are disposed to think that there should be a High Commissioner, or
at least a Deputy Commissioner, with large powers of independent action, stationed on or near the
Eastern Coasts of New Guinea, and that he should be furnished with a steamship independent of Her
Majesty’s Naval Squadron, and with a staff sufficient to enable him to exercise protection in the name of
the Queen on those shores. The cost of this arrangement cannot be accurately estimated, as I have
previously stated ; but if one or more Colonies will secure to Her Majesty’s Government the payment of
a sum of (say) £15,000 during the year ending Ist June, 1885, they will be prepared to take immediate
steps for establishing the High Commissioner’s jurisdiction, and will render to the contributing Govern-
ments an account of the expenditure incurred. It would be possible after some months to determine
* c 226 1047 whether


whether this arrangement should be further continued, and to consider with the Colonial Governments
(or with the Federal Council, if established) what arrangements should be made for the future supervision
of the labour trade, if it should be decided that it can continue to be allowed. Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment have come to no conclusion as to the recommendations of the Western Pacific Committee, in regard
to which the Colonies should first be consulted; but I think it doubtful whether it will be found
practicable to place the regulation of the labour traffic under Imperial control.
6. I may also state, in conclusion, that the annual expenditure of this country in the maintenance
of the Squadron on the Australian Station, including schooners and surveying vessels, is estimated as
amounting at present to about £157,000. I need hardly add that it is desirable that I should learn, as
soon as possible, the result of the careful consideration which I trust that this despatch will receive from
your Government, in conjunction with the Governments of the other Australasian Colonies.
I have, &c.,
DERBY.
Minute by His Excellency the Governor.—Colonial Secretary—A.L., 16/6/84.
No. 2.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
, . . . Sydney, 30 June, 1884.
Ims Colony joins in paying proportion of fifteen thousand New Guinea expenses.
ALEX. STUART.
No. 3.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
Sir, e 5, Westminster Chambers, Westminster, S.W., 4 July, 1884.
Referring to your telegram, of the 30th ultimo, as follows : —“ This Colony joins paying
proportion of fifteen thousand, New Guinea expenses,”—l have the honor to inform you that immediately
upon its receipt I communicated your message to Lord Derby ; and, by appointment, Sir Francis Dillon
Bell, Mr. R. Murray Smith, Mr. Hemmant, and myself, had on Wednesday an interview with his Lordship,
I regret to say without any definite result.
TV e informed Lord Derby that five of the Australian Colonies were prepared to guarantee the
payment of £15,000 (the amount named in his Lordship’s despatch of the 9th of May to the Governors
of the Australasian Colonies), on the understanding that a complete Protectorate would be established
over New Guinea, and, if possible, the islands adjacent thereto.
Lord Derby, after discussing the matter at great length with the Agents-General, stated that he
would at the earliest possible moment submit the whole question to the Cabinet, and communicate the
decision of the Government to the Agents-General.
I will address you more fully on this subject by next mail.
„ I have, &c.,
Seen.—A.S., 11/8/84.
SAUL SAMUEL.
No. 4.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
Sh, 5, Westminster Chambers, Westminster, S.W., 17 July, 1881.
Referring to my last letter of the 4th instant, reporting an interview of the Agents-General
with Lord Derby, relating to New Guinea, in which I promised further particulars, I have now the honor
to forward, for your information, a copy of a minute, which the Agents-General who were present at the
interview agree to as being substantially a correct statement of the conversation which took place between
Lord Derby and themselves on the 2nd instant. I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
Minute of an interview on the 2nd July, 1884, between the Secretary of State for the Colonies and the Agents-General for
New Zealand, New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland.
Present :—
Earl of Derby. Sir F. Dillon Bell.
Sir Robert Herbert. Mr. R. Murray Smith.
Sir Saul Samuel. Mr. W. E. Hemmant.
Sir F. Dillon Bell commenced the discussion by stating that the Agents-General had now been instructed by the
Governments of the Australasian Colonies to guarantee the payment of the contribution of £15,000 asked in Lord Derby’s
despatch of 9th May, but that there appeared some points which it was desirable to submit to Her Majesty’s Government for
consideration. Lhe Government of Aow Zealand being engaged in a contested election had been unable to join at present in
the undertaking given by the four Continental Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Queensland.
In the first place, the Colonies desired to ascertain whether the protectorate, promised in the despatches of 9th May last,
and 11th July, 1883, would only be exercised over New Guinea, or whether it would be extended over other islands of the
Western Pacific. Lord Derby here interposed with the observation that Her Majesty’s Government had never undertaken to
assume any formal protectorate even over New Guinea, upon which we referred to the following phrases from the despatches
above-named, the correctness of which was corroborated by Sir Robert Herbert.
“ 5. Her Majesty’s Government are disposed to think that there should be a High Commissioner, or at least a Deputy
Commissioner, with large powers of independent action stationed in or near the eastern coasts of New Guinea, and that he
should be furnished with a steamship independent of Her Majesty’s Naval Squadron, and with a staff sufficient to enable him
to exercise protection in the name of the Queen over those shores.”


um TTm . MmVsfv’a Government will be willing to take steps for strengthening the Naval Force on the Australasian
cf f ‘ f n Maiesty’s ships to be more constantly present than hitherto in that part of the Pacific. P *
“a:»to“Xd 7 OT.r L const tribe. would bo i£sble of meeting the principal regmremonta of the case for
some time come ” h N Guinea , owing to its proximity to the Australasian Continent, stood in a somewhat
of the islands which formed the subject of discussion, that Prince Bismarck’s declarations
different posi j ( i t ir er Maiesty’s Government felt in consequence the desirableness of taking some
WC re u^° u wliat^ther'Llamis tliTColomeJproposed should be dealt witll We mentioned the New Britain New
action now. - m Derby combated with some vigour the notion that the possession of these
Ireland, So map, and the position occupied by each group. We pointed out in answer
isiands could feet Australia. ?. • th those coasts, the danger of their being occupied by Foreign
to Lord Derby s objection the extent ot■ trade’ no P § t S he P ontrol of the labour traffic, which drew its principal supplies
Powers for convict stations, and , . {* 1 the cont rol of the labour traffic and the prevention of convict
from the groups in question. Lord said Colonie s, and was disposed to do everything in his power
establishments were concerned, he y g t he occupation of these islands for ordinary purposes, by other
any protection against injuricc which they
suffer. Thus we endeavoured to obtain some declaration from Lord Derby on two points.
° 1 The geographical extent of the protectorate to be assumed.
whi.cr£S^^
previously consulted; adding, tnat u ruey nac of An „ ra p eq uena, as showing that
™ s an undertaking with Her Majesty’s Government and that W Her
which we asked a dedsmn, We thus parted from his Lordship with an impression that it
jurisdiction in New Guinea
SeS WthatTn which they were understood by the Colonies when they agreed to make the contribution of £15,000.
No. 5.
Minute by Colonial Secretary.
Subject: Secretary of State for the Colonies’ Despatch dated 9th May, 1884, No. 27.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 23 July, 1884.
The passage through Parliament of one of the most important and difficult questions of Colonial legisla-
tion namely the readjustment of the land laws of the Colony, having absorbed nearly the whole time
since the Intercolonial Convention concluded its sitting, has prevented the resolutions of that body from
bein'*' considered, but it is the intention of the Government to submit them during the present session
° I have no hesitation in saying that, whatever may be the conclusion arrived at with regard to the
Federal Council Bill, I am confident there will be an almost unanimous agreement with regard to the
willingness of this Colony contributing its share of the £15,000 estimated by Lord Derby as the annual
expense of maintaining a High Commissioner, to be stationed in ISew Guinea, and furnished with a
suitable steamship for the purpose of exercising some protectorate power over that and adjacent islands
but at the same time I would take this opportunity of pointing out that while this Colony has always
been desirous that the labour trade in the South Sea Islands should be governed by wise regulations the
object of having a High Commissioner stationed at New Guinea is not solely tor the purpose ot a better
administration of such regulations, but for that which is deemed by the Australian Colonies generally of
even greater importance, viz, the carrying out of such protectorate over New Guinea as will secure the
Colonies from the great disadvantage and danger which it would be to these Colonies if the southern
shores of that island were to fall under the acquisition or dominion of any Foreign 1 ower. . „ .
ALEX. STUART.
No. 0.


No. 6.
The Colonial Secretary to His Excellency The Governor.
My dear Lord Augustus, > _ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 23 July, 1884.
I enclose you herewith a minute which I have made upon Lord Derby’s despatch of '9th May
on the subject of the contribution to the High Commissioner whom he proposes to appoint at New
Guinea.
will observe that I have taken the opportunity to point out that it is not so much for
administering regulations connected with the South Sea Island traffic as for the obtaining by the Imperial
Government of a footing in New Guinea, that the Colonies are in my opinion showing their readiness to
share in the expense. I have deemed it necessary to allude to this, because, in the latter part of his
despatch, Lord Derby seems inclined to make the regulation of the labour traffic the chief object.
I will be obliged by your telegraphing the main purport of my minute, viz.:—“ That important
legislation has prevented its being dealt with, but that I am very confident that that portion of the
suggestions of the Convention will be cordially approved whatever may befall the other portions.”
I am, &c.,
ALEXANDER STUART.
No. 7.
The Agent-General to The Colonial Secretary.
l^r > _ 5, Westminster Chambers, Westminster, S.W., 25 July, 1884.
In continuation of my letter of the 17tli instant, I have now the honor to forward for your
information copy of a joint letter which has been addressed by the Agents-General to the Eight
Honorable the Earl of Derby, asking His Lordship to be good enough to inform us as soon as possible
the decision of Her Majesty’s Government in reference to the proposals we laid before His Lordship, on
the 2nd instant, in regard to the Western Pacific. I have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL.
[Enclosure. ]
, The Agents-General to The Eight Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G.
My Lord, ... 8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W., 23 July, 1884.
At the interview which we had with your Lordship on the 2nd instant, you were good enough to say that you
would submit to the Cabinet the proposals then brought under your consideration in reference to the Western Pacific, and
inform us of the result. As the Parliaments of the Australasian Colonies are at present in session or about to meet, when
authority must be asked for the confirmation of the contributions of the respective Colonies to the guarantee of fifteen
thousand pounds (£15,000) given by their Governments in response to the proposals contained in your Lordship’s despatch
of the 9th of May, we hope we shall not be considered importunate if we request that the decision of Her Majesty’s
Government may be communicated to us as soon as possible.
We have, &c.,
SAUL SAMUEL,
Agent-General for New South Wales.
F. D. BELL,
Agent-General for New Zealand.
EGBERT MURRAY SMITH,
Agent-General for Victoria.
WM. HEMMANT,
Acting Agent-General for Queensland.
No. 8.
Minute by His Excellency tlie Governor.
The Governor begs to acknowledge the receipt of the Minute of the Colonial Secretary in reply to the
despatch of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, dated 9th May, 1884, on the subject of the contribu-
tion to the High Commissioner whom he proposes to appoint at New Guinea.
The Governor has forwarded a copy of this Minute to the Earl of Derby by the last mail, and he
has likewise informed His Lordship by telegraph of the general nature of it.
28/7/84.
Seen. —A.S., 28/7/84.
AUGUSTUS LOFTUS.
Sydney ; Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4
[3cf.]


1883-4.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SLerpslatffie Council,
NEW GUINEA AND THE UNAPPROPRIATED ISLANDS
OF THE PACIFIC.
(FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE RESPECTING PROPOSED ANNEXATION OF).
Ordered by the Council to be printed, 21 October, 1884.
No. 1.
Telegram from The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of
New South Wales.
Melbourne, 17 September, 1884,
Invite your attention to the still unsettled and unsatisfactory condition of the Islands question. We
have gained something as regards Guinea, but even that is imperfect, leaving out, as I understand, north-
west portion. As regards other islands, the policy of delay adopted by Lord Derby simply increases the
difficulty. Twelve months ago the islands might have been ours without difficulty ; now at any moment
another Pow T er may appear upon the scene. All considerations induce me to submit at the present
junction that we make united one more effort to prevail upon England to make a complete work by
establishing protectorate over unappropriated islands, respecting of course international obligations. If
you concur in this, the course I should suggest is that Colonies having an Agent-General should instruct
by telegram their Agents to consult and make one more united effort with Lord Derby, or even the Premier.
Colonies not having an Agent-General but concurring to authorize one of the other Colonies to speak for
them in this matter. To leave matter where it is would be an impotent conclusion to our efforts, but
more than that, we should be letting slip an opportunity that may never recur.
JAMES SERVICE.
Chairman of Conventions Committee.
No. 2.
Telegram from The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of
New South Wales.
x ~ . j. Melbourne, 19 September, 1884.
1 send tor your information the following telegram just to hand from Premier, New Zealand, in reply to
my circular telegram of which you had copy, namely:—Pacific Islands j quite concur : will instruct
Agent-General as you suggest ; telegraph me terms.
No. 3.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 20 September, 1884.
q a o Three days ago I received your telegram respecting the protectorate over the unappropriated
South Sea Islands. I regret to have to inform you that Ido not concur with the view you take of the
desirability ot again urging upon Lord Derby that immediate steps be taken to extend England’s protecto-
rate over all these islands as well as over the whole of New Guinea, notwithstanding the announcement
in your telegram of yesterday that New Zealand had signified concurrence.
As regards New Guinea, I do not think it was ever contemplated by the Convention to urge a
protectorate over the north-west portions. All that we desired to secure was that the portion not hitherto
claimed by the Netherlands— -i.e., the southern and eastern portions—should be thus protected or in some
way incorporated into the British Empire. The matter is, in my opinion, an urgent one, but I think we
have none enough for the present in the way in which we have represented this urgency. If this matter
bo not within a reasonable period carried out by the Imperial Government, I am sure that this Colony will
join with you and others in reiterating the views of the colonists, but at the present moment I think that
°]. u 80 would be open to an imputation of restlessness and impatience, as we know that grave steps
ot this kind, wherein questions of international character may arise, cannot be forced as those of minor
importance.
* c 222 1115— But


But however this may be, I find myself unable to join with you in urging such a departure from
the resolutions of the Convention as to agitate for a complete protection over all unappropriated islands.
All that the Convention did, as it appears to me, was to state broadly its view that further acquisition of
•dominion by any foreign Power over these islands would be highly detrimental to Australia and injurious
do the British Empire; but the Convention carefully guarded itself from dictating in any way to the
Imperial Government the mode by which such should be accomplished.
Personally, my own belief is that such a course as you favour would be at the present juncture
extremely injudicious, and that it probably would be better if the Imperial Government could see its Avay to
unite with other European Governments in coming to an understanding that none of these islands outside
New Guinea should be taken directly or indirectly by any one Power, but that the inhabitants of all
nations should be permitted to the freest trade and communication with all, and that such trading should
be under the joint protection of the nations.
I can conceive no time more unsuitable than the present, when the watchful, and it may be, in
some degree, the jealous, eye of foreign nations is fixed on these islands, for any such distinctly assertive
act as you suggest being taken by Great Britain; and I do not see that we would be acting a truly loyal
part to the Empire if we were to urge her to assume a position of embarrassment which would be likely
to provoke the hostility of foreign nations ; nor do I think that such a course would hasten that which we
really do want, and which alone the Convention urged, viz., a protectorate over the south-eastern portion
of New Guinea, and a friendly arrangement with other Powers as to the non-interference with the South
Sea Islands other than is involved in the regulation of the trade therewith by mutual arrangement.
In putting forth these views, I beg to assure you that I am not actuated by any wish to stand aloof
from co-operation with your or any other Colony, but solely from a desire to look upon the question in
the broad light of what is most likely to accomplish the object we have at heart, and to do that effectively,
but with the least embarrassment to the interests of the whole Empire.
I remain, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 4.
The Premier of Victoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
My dear Stuart, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 22 September, 1884.
Tour letter of 20th reached me only this afternoon at 5'30, but I had seen the text of it in our
newspapers this morning, and felt much regret at the view you take of the islands question, and of the
course these Colonies should now take in respect thereto.
Let me say first that, by a clerical error in my circular telegram, the word “ north-west” was used
instead of “ north-east,” which I did not observe when signing it. My object in referring to the northern
side at all was because, although there is a northern side to the eastward of the Netherlands line, Mr.
’Gladstone, in his recent remarks in the House of Commons, appeared to ignore that portion of the coast
altogether, and confined his remarks to the southern and eastern coast alone. Whilst nonp of us desire to
interfere with the Dutch claims, the Convention was unanimous in desiring “ the incorporation with the
British Empire of so much of New Guinea and the small islands adjacent thereto as is not claimed by the
Government of the Netherlands,” and I think we shall agree that to leave a part of the coast line on the
northern side open to be appropriated by a third Power would be most undesirable. In this opinion I
have no doubt you fully concur.
There are two points in your letter which I was sorry to read :
Ist, that the time has not come to further urge on the Imperial Government the necessity of
prompt action with respect to New Guinea,
and 2nd, that you describe the policy of agitating “ for a complete protection over all the unap-
propriated islands ” as “ a departure from the resolution of the Convention.”
With respect to the Ist point, of course the exact time to repeat our appeals to the Home Govern-
ment must necessarily be a matter of opinion. You admit the matter, as far as New Guinea is concerned,
is an urgent one, and yet you hesitate at present to say so a second time, lest we be charged with
“ restlessness and impatience.” I deem it of far greater importance to show our deep earnestness
in the matter by a frequent importunity, than to save ourselves from any small imputation of the
sort you deprecate. It appears to me that nothing but a continual knocking at the door will
arouse the Imperial Government to action. Patience is but a poor substitute for pressure in cases
like the present. You must not forget that it is now fourteen months since Lord Derby invited
the Colonies to unite for the express purpose of securing the objects we desire, an invitation emphasized
in His Lordship’s despatch of 9th May last in the following terms, viz , “ that in order to place Her
Majesty’s Government in a position to consider the proposals for the protection or government of New
Guinea or other places in the Western Pacific Ocean, it was desirable for the Australasian Colonies to
combine together effectively and provide the cost of carrying out any policy which it might be decided to
adopt.”
The Colonies have now combined together to provide the cost, and it remains for Lord Derby to
carry out his part of the contract.
But to my second point: I think all our Convention colleagues will be amazed at your describing
•our agitating “ for a complete protection over all the unappropriated islands” as a “ departure from the
resolution of the Convention.” In the resolutions of the Convention as finally passed, the special mode
of preventing “ the further acquisition of dominion in the Pacific south of the Equator by any
Foreign Power” is not suggested; but no one ever imagined what you now propose, viz., that this
could be best accomplished by placing all the islands except New Guinea (why do you except
New Guinea?) under the joint protection of the European nations. It takes one’s breath away to read
such a proposal. I thought it was an accepted principle with all the Colonies that the people of Australasia
had the best right to the islands of Australasia, and that when the Convention deprecated the further
Acquisition of territory by any Foreign Power they did not mean that the Avhole of the islands should be
handed


'handed over to the protection of all the European Powers. To my mind it is clear as day that the
only method of preventing Foreign Powers from acquiring territory is to take it ourselves ; and that this
was the view of the Convention I think must be admitted. You will remember that clause 2 of the
Resolutions (see page 13 of the proceedings), as originally proposed by Mr. Whitaker (see pp. 10 and 11)
indicated the means of preventing Foreign acquisition to be “ by a cession, annexation, or protectorate,’'
thus clearly indicating that England was by some means or other to secure the islands against all Foreign
acquisition, and the more colourless clause as finally passed was adopted because we had some difficulty in
ascertaining what a cession or a protectorate exactly meant, and we cared not how the islands were made
safe so long as they were made safe. But the proposal for the introduction of a dual control or a
plural control over these islands was certainly never mooted at the Convention, and contains within it, in
my opinion, the germs of infinite troubles.
I am very sorry that your views on these matters are so divergent from those held by the Govern-
ments of the other Colonies. Queensland, South Australia, New Zealand, and Victoria are all agreed
on the necessity for further action. Tasmania lam quite sure will join heartily, as soon as our present
tedious mode of communication by letter (owing to the breaking of the cable) will permit. Western
Australia I did not ask to join in this particular matter, because she is a Crown Colony. lam sorry New
South Wales cannot join—a pull altogether would almost certainly have gained pur object, and I fear that
if England delay much longer, tbe problem will be solved in a way none of us will like. I yield to no man
in a desire to preserve our Mother Country from “embarrassment,” and it is because “the further
acquisition of dominion in the Pacific by any Foreign Power” would be, to use the language of the
Convention resolution No, 1, “ injurious to the interests of the Empire,” as well as “ highly detrimental
to the safety and well-being of tbe British possessions in Australasia,” that I feel it imperative to strain
every nerve to prevent a consummation so devoutly to be deprecated.
I am, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE.
No. 5.
The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Victoria.
My dear Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 24 September, 1884.
I have to express my regret that my last letter to you was published in the papers in Melbourne'
before it reached you. This was a proceeding which, as you will readily imagine, I never authorized, and
for which I am in no way responsible.
Tour letter of yesterday informs me that the inaccuracy in your circular telegram, to which I
invited your attention, was a clerical error. It is consequently unnecessary to continue any correspondence
on the New Guinea matter, upon which we are agreed, save as to the necessity of any immediate appeals
to the Colonial Minister, a course which I deem alike inopportune and unnecessary. On this subject I
may be permitted to say that I have no doubt that in the course of a few days the necessary steps will be
taken by the Imperial naval authorities in these seas to give effect to the policy of the Imperial Govern-
ment in the protectorate of New Guinea. Our views have been already fairly and fully put before the
Imperial Government; and I do not think that instructions to our representatives in England to exercise
pressure by repeated importunities to the Colonial Office would have any beneficial result, even if I could
regard such a course as one which it would be proper under all the circumstances to adopt, of which I am
by no means satisfied. But my principal object in writing to you is to remove a misconception under
which you appear to be labouring, as to the committal of the members of the Convention to the steps
which you invite me to take. And in this matter I am obliged, not only on my own account but from a
consideration of what is due to my colleagues in the Government who sat with me in the Convention, to
question the precise accuracy of one of your statements, which, if allowed to pass unchallenged, might
seem to amount to an admission on our part that the course which I am now adopting was inconsistent
with that which the representatives of this Colony pursued in that body.
You say, “I think that all our Convention Colleagues will be amazed at your describing our
agitating for a wholesale protectorate over all the unappropriated islands as a departure from the resolutions
of the Convention.” In the resolutions of the Convention as finally passed, a special mode of preventing
“ the further acquisition of dominion in the Pacific, south of the Equator, by any Eoreign Power is not
suggested ; but no one ever imagined what you now propose, viz., that this could be best accomplished by
placing all of the islands except New Guinea (why do you except New Guinea P) under the joint protec-
tion of European nations. It takes one’s breath away to read such a proposal.”
I think I can recall to your recollection circumstances which will abundantly satisfy you that there
is no ground whatever for the amazement which you apprehend will be inspired by my statement. In
the first place I know of no single fact which could justify the belief that the Imperial Government ever
seriously contemplated the annexation of or the exercise of any general protectorate over the unappro-
priated islands of the Pacific. There were abundant reasons indeed for coming to a precisely opposite
conclusion. Neither the policy of the Imperial Government nor, as far as it could be gathered from the
Press and public discussion, the tone of English public feeling in any way favoured the idea that any
proposal to indefinitely extend the Colonial responsibilities of the Empire would be seriously entertained.
All that we knew, alike from the utterances of English statesmen and from the Press effectually
discouraged the idea that the Imperial Government ever contemplated such a course of procedure; but
the curious circumstance is that nothing was more clearly and distinctly recognized at the Convention
than this fact, and the whole course of action of the representatives of this Colony was openly and
avowedly governed by a recognition of this state of things. You will not fail to remember that at the
Convention the policy which you now suggest was emphatically protested against by one of my colleagues
(the Attorney-General) who, in these words, which I take from the Sydney Morning Herald of December
sth, 1883, expressed our entire dissent from a proposal to exercise a British protectorate over all the
unappropriated islands.
“It


“ It was known” he said “ that the Imperial Government had no desire to extend its Colonial
responsibilities. The representaive of the Imperial Government who sat in that Convention had, m
speech and writing, warned them against colonization in that sense. These islands, according to the
proposals, were not to be occupied for colonizing purposes, but so to speak as fortresses against the
occupation by any Foreign Power of any portion of the Pacific to which they belonged. They were not to 1 e
occupied except by the sentinels of Imperial authority, for the protection of the Colonial Empire Would
England undertake any such duty as that ? Was it consistent with her policy of colonization ? Above
all,"was it a practical thing to ask her to do ?” The honorable and learned gentleman proceeded to point out
the interests of Foreign Governments in that matter, and reminded the Convention that it was not to be
expected that the Foreign Powers, particularly those interested in those islands would calmly regard and
permit the appropriation of such vast tracts, with smh an enormous population, by any Power wine pro-
fessed that it had no immediate intention of using the territory for colonizing purposes but simply to pro-
tect it against the possibility of being appropriated by other Powers. He thought that an 7
as that would involve the Imperial Government in the greatest difficulties ot diplomacy with the Core b i
Powers of Europe ; but he did not suppose for a moment that England could entertain any such proposal.
Mr. Dailey referred at length to the various despatches from the Colonial Office in support of the views
to which'he gave expression. It was also clear, he said, that even it England were permitted to
take that unprecedented step in the way of annexation of territory, she would not undertake the
responsibility at her own cost of maintaining the necessary powers in those islands to preserve order and to
hold them against adventurers. It was manifest that the cost of the maintenance of the possessions,
whatever that might be, should be borne by the Colonies. He referred to various State papers m
support of that view. He asked, could they honestly represent to England that the Legislatures of the
various Australian Colonies would be prepared to undertake so indefinite and possibly so enormous an
expenditure. They would be proposing, in the first place, if they adopted those resolutions, a system
of colonization with which England had been hitherto unfamiliar. It was not a characteristic of her
Colonial history to colonize by symbol-to plant a flag simply as a mark of her authority, tor the
purpose of warning any trespassers who might have their own prospects of beneficent colonization if she
had P not taken their place. When England colonized she gave the protection of her flag to those who
occupied her Colonies, and brought in her train the blessings of civilization whichi she>
It was intended by those resolutions that she should do nothing of the kind ; but that she should
practically reverse her Colonial policy, and only hold that vast territory against ail the rest of the
world. Other great nations of Europe had large interests in these seas. A\ as it to be expected that
they would sanction that policy, even were England disposed to adopt it? He thought there would be
no hope of such representations as those being attended to by the Imperial Government, and with that
conviction he deprecated their being forwarded, because they would render practically valueless all the
other representations which this Conference deemed it to be to the interests of the Australasian people to
make to the Mother Country. Their primary duty was to protect themselves ; but that duty ought to be
discharged with a due regard to the interests and difficulties of the Empire, with a fair consideration of
her Colonial policy, and without placing in the way of her assenting to our views, difficulties which, con-
sidering her place amongst the Nations, might prove to be insurmountable These were the views which
have been consistently held by this Government on this question ; and the reference °t the'Atto ey
General to Sir AYilliam Des Yoeux was significant, because His Excellency had at the very same sitting o
the Convention suggested an International jurisdiction over the islands to be exercised by the G ea
Powers interested which would be universally applicable ; and he had, as you are aware, cited bistor■ c
examples to justify his proposal which he had previously m a formal way submitted to the Convention
I fe A sure, when you have carefully considered all these circumstances, you will perceive that there will
not be the slightest ground for any feeling of amazement at my statement that the resolutions of the
Convention did not in anyway warrant your proposal to appeal to the Imperial Government for a
complete protection over all the unappropriated islands But whatever might have been the state o
things with which we had to deal in December last and I have pointed out—l think yeiy clearly that at
thaAime what you now suggest was never thought reasonable or possible—you muso be P erfe c% well
aware that, at present, to attempt to press such a proposal upon the Imperiial ’would be
singularly inopportune, and certainly unsuccessful. You can readily understand that I have not the
slightest Sympathy with any course of Colonial action which would seriously embarrass the Imperial
Government, without the faintest hope of accomplishing any advantage to the Colonies And judging
from the present attitude of Continental Governments towards England, on her Colonial policy and its
development, I can conceive no course more embarrassing and more fruitless than that m which you
invite my acquiescence. I regret as much as you can do that lam unable to act, as I would sincere y
desire to do, in accord with your government; but lam compelled to take that course which is a one in
agreement with views which I have repeatedly expressed with my conviction ot
state of things at present, and with that duty which we all owe both to our respective Colonies and to
the Empire of which we are citizens. am ’ uy STUART
ALEX. STUART.
No. 6.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 24 September, 1884.
Disagree with Service’s proposal urging Derby hasten Guinea and extend protector over all Pacific.
Forwarding own correspondence.
No. 7.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
° London, 26 September, 1884.
Have delivered your message re New Guinea to Secretary of State.
No. 8.


No. 8.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary, Queensland, to Colonial Secretary, New South
Wales.
Brisbane, 28 September, 1884.
I have wired Service as follows : —I cannot agree to your proposed telegram ;I am willing to send one as
follows : —“ Consult other Agents-General, and unite in urging immediate action in fulfilment of Lord
Derby’s promise, but think that any pressure for further action just now would be inexpedient, and rather
likely to retard than expedite action.” Do you see any objection to join in such a telegram to Samuel 1
Submitted, 30/9/84. Seen.—A.S., 28/9/84.
No. 9.
The Premier of Yictoria to The Colonial Secretary of New South Wales.
My dear Stuart, Premier’s Office, Melbourne, 29 September, 1884.
I duly received yours of the 24th instant, and have given it very careful consideration. Eirst,
as to my use of the word “ Protectorate.” I still cannot agree with you that my circular telegram of the
16th instant in any way suggested a departure from the resolutions of the Convention. The main object
of that telegram was to urge the necessity of some immediate action on the part of the Imperial Govern-
ment, rather than to indicate the precise mode of that action, and in using the term “Protectorate” I
naturally adopted the word which has become associated in the public mind and in the Press with the
movement for preventing the acquisition of further dominion in the Pacific by any Foreign Power, and
which, indeed, has been used by Lord Derby himself. And now as to your suggestions of an inter-
national control. There is no hint in Mr. Dailey’s speech of such a thing; and in turning to Sir
William Des Yoeux’s memorandum which he tabled at the Convention, and to which you appeal, I find that,
whilst he barely alludes to an international jurisdiction as a possible alternative, he brushes it aside alto-
gether as undesirable, if not impracticable, and boldly advocates annexation or a Protectorate. (See pp.
117 and 122 of Proceedings.) Not only so, but the idea of an international jurisdiction has never been in
the public mind at all; and the only question has been whether England should annex or protect. But
annexation, Protectorate, or international control, whichever we might prefer, is not the question at this
moment. My anxiety is, by some means or by any means, to attain the object which the Convention
had in view, viz., the prevention of the “further acquisition of dominion in the Western Pacific south
of the Equator by any Foreign Power,” and if you could join the rest of the Colonies in assisting
towards this end—l don’t care how you do it—if you could send a telegram to your Agent-General in the
sense of that which you sent on the Bth June, 1883, it would suffice to complete the Australasian concert.
One word more, and I have done. You repeatedly refer to Imperial considerations as influencing you in
dealing with this matter, I would ask, are we in any such position as can qualify us to judge the situation
from an Imperial point of view ? I think not, because we are, and must be, without any complete
knowledge of the considerations which influence Imperial policy. We all admit that the Imperial
Government must take into account, in dealing with this matter, other than merely Australasian
considerations, but it seems to me that our business and duty is, while saving international obligations (as
my circular telegram clearly proposed), that we should place in the strongest manner before the Imperial
Government the paramount importance of securing the islands from all possibility of foreign dominion,
and if hereafter the Imperial Government can show to us that Imperial considerations prevented their
doing so, we can loyally, even if sorrowfully, bow to their decision. I still cling to the hope that you may
yet see your way to cast in your lot with the rest of us.
I am, &c.,
JAMES SERVICE.
No. 10.
Tlie Colonial Secretary of New South Wales to The Premier of Yictoria.
Mj dear Service, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 3 October, 1884.
A press of work in Parliament has prevented me from earlier acknowledging your letter of
29tb ultimo.
We seem unlikely to agree as to the views expressed by members of the Convention; but we
are left in no doubt as to the conclusions at which the Convention after mature discussion arrived, for the
resolutions show very distinctly that while, as regards New Guinea, annexation or protection was unani-
mously desired, yet, as regards the Western Pacific generally, the Convention declined to commit itself
to any such overt step on the part of England ; but on the contrary, contented itself with urging that
they be not permitted to become the property of any other nation.
This is precisely what I desire ; and I am not inclined to go further, and join in urging upon Lord
Derby to annex or appoint a protectorate over those wide-spread islands as the means of accomplishing
that end. I consider that the prudent course, because the more likely to obtain that which we laid down,
is to leave the matter in England’s hands just as the Convention left it.
With regard to New Guinea protectorate, I have as much desire as you to see it done, and done
speedily; but as I believe it to be in process, Ido not think that we hasten it by continually urging it,
unless we had some ground for believing that England had only got our promise to contribute without any
intention of carrying it out. I am, &c.,
ALEX. STUART.
No. 11.


No. 11.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 6 October, 1884.
Bell and Murray Smith press me to join in seeking interview with Lord Derby in order to ascertain?
decision regard New Guinea. Bell instructed to act vigorously with Victoria, and is anxious we should
not be separated. Instruct me ; seems desirable we should act in concert here on this question, unless you
have reason contrary.
No. 12.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 7 October, 1884.
We are not, under present circumstances, favourable to exercise of any undue pressure on Imperial Govern-
ment which may if persisted in seriously embarrass Mother Country in its relations with other Governments
while it cannot accomplish any advantage to the Colonies. Adhere to telegram 24th September.
No. 13.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 7 October, 1884.
Referring to last telegram, while abstaining from pressure on Lord Derby, represent our earnest desire
that no delay should take place in the matter of New Guinea Protectorate, in establishment of which we
are as deeply interested as other Australian Colonies.
No. 11.
Telegram from Agent-General to Colonial Secretary.
London, 9 October, 1884.
Ask if there is any prospect of early consideration of Convention resolutions by your Parliament..
* * * * Instructions are being sent to Commodore to proclaim a British protectorate on the southern
shores of New Guinea and the immediately adjacent islands, in accordance with Mr. Gladstone’s answer
to Sir William McArthur, 11th August.
No. 15.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 10 October, 1884.
The Convention resolutions will be submitted to our Parliament immediately. I hope to be able to
report result within a fortnight. Much gratified to hear of the intended proclamation of the Protectorate
of southern shores of New Guinea and immediately adjacent islands.
„ No. 16.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier of Victoria.
Sydney, 10 October, 1884.
Dear Mr. Service, — I have just received a telegram from our Agent-General, asking if there is any
prospect of an early consideration by our Parliament of Convention resolutions, and informing me that
instructions are being sent to the Commodore to proclaim a British Protectorate on the southern shores
of New Guinea and immediately adjacent islands. In reply, I have informed him that the Convention
resolutions will be submitted immediately, that I hope to be able to report result within a fortnight, and
that we are much gratified with the intended proclamation of the Protectorate.
No. 17.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria, to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales.
Melbourne, 15 October, 1884.
I have just received telegram from our Agent-General which I deem it my duty to transmit to you, and
will be glad to know whether you concur in the suggestion made as to joint protest. Telegram as
follows: —“Disturbing reports to-day, projected arrangement, Germany, England, Western Pacific;
inquiry rather confirms suspicion. Australian Governments should protest strongly against any settlement
without their knowledge and concurrence.”
No. 18.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier of Victoria.
Sydney, 16 October, 1884.
lam unable to concur in any protest against the diplomatic action of the Imperial Government. I think
our representations would be promptly resented, and would be wholly useless, and with limited informa-
tion possessed it is at least probable that the united action of Germany and England may be in entire
accordance with the views of this Government to which we gave expression in the Convention.
No. 19.


No. 19.
Telegram from Premier of Victoria to Colonial Secretary, New South Wales.
Melbourne, 16 October, 1884.
London telegram in to-day’s papers regarding our A gent-Generals urging introduction Enabling Bill
•during autumn session must be incorrect. The situation remains exactly as stated in my long telegram
to you last week, but Herbert has asked Agents-General to formally address Derby requesting intro-
duction, and they are desirous Samuel should be instructed to withdraw opposition. The situation is
peculiar. Can you give me any hope that Sydney will pass address for Federal Council ? Are the
■chances sufficient to justify all other Colonies delaying ? * * * *
No. 20.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary, New South Wales, to Premier of Victoria.
Sydney, 16 October, 1884.
Impossible for this Government to authorize our Agent-General to do what is desired, until the deter-
mination of Parliament is known. The Eesolutions will probably be submitted next week. * * *
No. 21.
Telegram from Colonial Secretary to Agent-General.
Sydney, 20 October, 1884.
Abstain from joining in any protest as to Imperial diplomatic action concerning Islands, Western
Pacific. Imperial Government not to be embarrassed. Probably its action in accordance with our views
at Convention.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4.
16*.]


