



J. THORNES,
HOUSE, LAND, & ESTATE AGENT,
81, QUEEN STREET,
AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND.
ESTABLISHED
1873.
LONDON ADDRESS: 7 & 9, FINSBURY STREET, E.C,
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: THORNLEIGH, AUCKLAND.
POSTAL ADDRESS; BOX 36, G.P.0., AUCKLAND.
BANKERS: BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
SPECIAL ATTENTION GIVEN TO SALES OF PROPERTIES
and Businesses of Every Description.
PARTNERSHIPS NEGOTIATED,
Send for Printed Lists of FARMS, LAND, HOUSES, Etc.,
for Sale and To Let. Fresh Lists printed every week.
MONEY INVESTED FOR CLIENTS ON FIRST-CLASS FREEHOLD
SECURITIES.
Estates Managed for* Jlbsentees Tvittx every care.
PROMPT SETTLEMENTS.
CT. THORITES,
81, Queen Street, A.uekland, N.Z.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiinifiiiiiiiiiinr
HAVE YOUR PRINTING DONE IN THE COLONY,
AND SAVE MONEY!
T 1 aru infect' Ca lu’l TU ii rfe T (HSM rjt
Engraved Headings and General Stationery of Every Description.
ACCOUNT BOOKS, ON HAND AND MACHINE PAPER, IN
CALF, RUSSIA, BASIL, ETC.
Before ordering Labels and Stationery from England or America
send for Samples and Quotations to
WILSONS & HORTON,
“HERALD " AHD “WEEKLY HEWS "
PBINTING- +
■m a|o c 1L Jl 13 B.
— lO
SUPPORT NEW ZEALAND MANUFACTORIES.


BANKERS: BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
SPECIAL ATTENTION GIVEN TO SALES OF PROPERTIES
and Businesses of Every Description.
PARTNERSHIPS NEGOTIATED,
Send for Printed Lists of FARMS, LAND, HOUSES, Etc.,
for Sale and To Let. Fresh Lists printed every week.
MONEY INVESTED FOR CLIENTS ON FIRST-CLASS FREEHOLD
SECURITIES.
Estates Managed for Jlhsentees witlx every care.
PROMPT SETTLEMENTS.
CT. THORNES,
81, Queen Street, A.uekland, N.Z.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiii
lllllllllllllillilllllllllllllilllltlllllilllllllllltKli
HAVE YOUR PRINTING DONE IN THE COLONY,
AND SAVE MONEY!
(s —■—
Engraved Headings and General Stationery of Every Description.
ACCOUNT BOOKS, ON HAND AND MACHINE PAPER, IN
CALF, RUSSIA, BASIL, ETC.
®- ‘-- J
Before ordering Labels and Stationery from England or America
send for Samples and Quotations to
WILSONS & HORTON,
“mBXALD" AMD MBWB ”
3? B I ZEST T 11ST G- + WORKS,
SUPPORT NEW ZEALAND MANUFACTORIES.


TThi: ilcln .Jxalanb 1) era lb
Is the only Morning Paper published in Auckland, the most
populous City in the Colony.
It possesses a
VERY LARGE AND VALUABLE CIRCULATION
Amongst the Commercial and Industrial Classes in the
North Island.
THE HERALD
Is the
LARGEST DAILY PAPER ISSUED IN THE COLONY,
Consisting of a double sheet of 8 pages every morning,
and 12 pages on Saturday, whilst the Summary
for Europe frequently consists of 16 pages.
SUBSCRIPTIONS :
Delivered in Auckland and Suburbs, Qd. per week.
Country, 705., or if booked , 725. 6d. per quarter. If posted,
3s. 6d. additional.
THE MONTHLY SUMMARY
Prepared for each outgoing European Mail, via San Francisco,
contains carefully written reviews of
General, Monetary, Commercial, Mining, and Political Affairs,
with full reports on matters of special interest
PRICE » TWOPENCE.
Annual Subscription, post paid, 4s. 6d.


I;fl4 3\nd(lam(
ILLUSTRATED, 48 PAGES, 240 COLUMNS,
Is the largest and best Agricultural Journal and Country Settler’s
Family Newspaper in the Colony,
EVERYTHING OF INTEREST TO THE NEW ZEALAND FARMER,
POULTRY FANCIER, CATTLE AND HORSE BREEDER, IS DEALT
WITH IN ITS PAGES.
It also possesses every feature of a First-class Weekly Paper,
contains all the Local, Sporting, and Foreign News of the Week,
and is the authorised Calendar for all Racing Clubs in the North
of New Zealand.
Its Circulation in the J\orth Island is unequalled,
as it finds its way into the home of nearly every settler.
Terms (in advance), 225. 6d. per Annum, or 6s. per Quarter;
Booked, 6s. 6d. per Quarter, in the Colony.
The NEW ZEALAND HERALD M AUCKLAND WEEKLY NEWS
Are the only Newspapers in the Colony which are printed and folded
hy MESSRS. HOE & CO.’S WEB MACHINERY, from reels of paper, run off
at a speed of 24,000 an hour.


LONDON & BERLIN PIANO 00.
OPPOSITE POST OFFICE,
SHORTLAND STREET, AUCKLAND.
W. B. WIBBI - Manager.
Lb
cn
O
CD
3
o
o
jy
CD
cn
Cf-
hs
go
i—i
O
0Q
P
P
cn
Lb Lb
00
O On
w
hd a 3
o ®
3 ?
CD o
£ p
o o
gy
pi a<3
p
o P
ty _
ro
? °
0Q CO
CD CT-
§ £
Lb
cn
O
Lb Lb
co
O or
APPLY POE MAKimS’ ILLUSTRATES CATALOGUES
Organs can be purchased on Hire System from
Ten Sliillings pmw l^ipntfo*.
PERSONAL. — Mr. W. H. Web be continues to give Music
Lessons {Piano, Organ, Singing ) at his Residence, Karanga-
hape Road —Mornings before y, Evenings after 6.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiniiimiiiiniiimiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiii
J. W. SHACKELFORD,
life? ill iiili 1 ilifiif*
MANUFACTURER AND IMPORTER OF
HATS & CAPS of EVERY DESCRIPTION,
mmm mmtb itociii, stc.
SHIRTS, UNDERCLOTHING,
SCARVES, PYJAMA SUITS, TIES,
HOSIERY, BRACES, UMBRELLAS
ETC., ETC., ETC.
210, QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND,
Opposite MESSRS, McARTHUR & CO.’S WAREHOUSE.


piakos.
Berlin Cottage Model -
£ s. d.
32 10 0
©116 AM!
Little Gem -
9s
£
- 10
s.
0
d.
0
New Iron Cottage Model
35 0 0
Parlour Organ, 7 stops -
- 20
0
0
New Iron Overstrung Piano -
40 0 0
New Model, 10 stops
- 25
0
0
High-class Cottage Grand -
45 0 0
Chapel Organ -
- 30
0
0
Upright Grand (large model)
50 0 0
Beethoven 20 stop Organ
- 35
0
0
Highest Class Upright Grand
60 0 0
Church Organ -
- 40
0
0
Boudoir Horizontal Grand -
80 0 0
Orchestral Organ -
- 50
0
0
Most Costly Upright Grand -
126 0 0
Connoisseur Organ -
- 75
0
0
In stock, Pianos from
£20.
In stock, Organs
from £10.
iONDON AND |eRLIN fIANO fo„
DIRECT CASH IMPORTERS,
Opposite Post Office, Shortland Street, Auckland.
100 PIANOS AND ORGANS IN STOCK 100
50 Different Models to Select from 50
By Tweaty of the Best Makers.
sss~ APPLY FOR ILLUSTRATED AND DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUES.^
Organs from - - .£lO to £75
Pianos from - - £2O to £l2O
3N©w Shipments Arriving Everj Month.
The London and Berlin Piano Company are Sole Agents and Wholesale Dealers for
nearly Twenty of the Leading Piano and Organ Makers.
Pianos can be purchased on Hire System from 20s. a month.
Organs ~ ~ ~ ~ 7 os.
APPLY FOR MAKERS’ ILLUSTRATED AND DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE.
NO CH ARGE FOR CASE AND PACKINGrf
Old Pianos, Organs, and Harmoniums taken as Part Payment.
W. H. WEBBE, Manager.
PERSONAL. — Mr. Webbe continues Professional Tending (Piano, Singing ,
Organ, Theory), at his Residence, Karangahape Road. Lessons — Mornings,
before 9 a.m.; Evenings, after 7 o'clock.


lllllllllillllltUllUllHlllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilll
llllllllllllfHUllll
Co
<0 Co
CO N-
Uo Co
£
is
-5 §
§ -I
I
.42 §
$ CD
co 03 .tr
~ k.
so os
CO £
ss*i
NEW ZEALAND TWEED 15s.
r ■ I
Trousers w Measure I 18s. 6


tiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
ijgfggggi i§ nmg
120, Queen Street,
NEW ZEALAND.#
JOHN WHITE,
UNT ID
LADIES 5 COSTUME MAKER.
ALI New and Popular Styles in Ladies
and Gentlemen s Garments received
Monthly ,
fV -IB Y 1M1.A.1 L.'-Vf-i




CAPTAIN WILLIAM HOBSON, TLN.
OUR FIRST GOVERNOR.


|SeaCan6’£ Datdifcc,
1840-1890.
THE
FIRST FIFTY YERR
OF OUR HISTORY,
HE ARIED OF THE jCoLONY.
A WONDERFUL RECORD.
Reprinted from “The New Zealand Herald.”
;
WILSONS AND HORTON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS, QUEEN AND WYNDHAM STREETS.
MDCCCXC.


WILSONS & HORTON,
Engravers, Lithographers, General Printers, and Account Book
Manufacturers,
Queen Street and Wysdham Street,
AUCKLAND, N.Z.


NEW ZEALAND’S JUBILEE, 1840-1890
THE EARL! 7 DAYS
OF NEW ZEALAND.
One of the principal features of the nine-
teenth century has been the enormous strides
made by Great Britain in the direction of
colonisation, and the last fifty years has been
specially remarkable as a colonial epoch.
Without reference to the other great colonies
of the Empire, fifty years ago the whole
population of Australasia numbered only
some 345,000; now it amounts to more than
three and a-quarter millions. Even more
extraordinary has been the increase in the
trade, the revenue, the wealth of these colo-
nies during the same period.
The seeds of this great era of progress are
to be found in the immortal discoveries of
Watt, Arkwright, the Stephensons, and other
great discoverers of the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries. The use of steam in manu-
factures and locomotion, the textile revolu-
tion, the growth of the factory system ; all
these combined led up to a marvellous and
sudden change in the material and external
life of the people such as history affords no
other example of. This result has been an
enormous growth of population, vast expan-
sion of sea-power, of commerce, of manufac-
tures, all leading to the portentous growth of
the Empire.
The most astonishing proof of this marvel-
lous expanding power is afforded by this our
colony of New Zealand, founded here fifty
years ago, whose jubilee we lately cele-
brated, and the early history of which we
here sketch for our readers.
EARLY COMMUNICATION WITH
NEW ZEALAND.
In the year 1788, just a hundred and one
years ago, there landed at Botany Bay 757
convicts with 200 marines in charge of them,
and a few women. This was the first Euro-
pean settlement in Australasia, others follow-
ing at intervals; and in 1801 settlement at
New South Wales had increased to about
5500 souls. At present the entire European
population of these colonies is over three and
a-quarter millions —more than the entire popu-
lation of the American States when they de-
clared their independence and cut themselves
adrift from the British Empire. And it is to
be noted that these three and a-quarter
millions do not consist of such a mixture of
races as is to be found in America: the
population is mainly composed of English-
speaking people. In the year 1839 the in-
crease in the population of the Australasian
colonies had been but slight, and New Zea-
land did not exist as a colony. Discovered
in 1642 by Abel Jansen Tasman, the latter
place had been lost sight of until redis-
covered our great navigator, Captain
Cook, in 1769. At first his opinion was that
he had found the Terra Australis Incognita,
and it was only later that he ascertained he
was merely in the wake of an earlier dis-
coverer.
FIRST SETTLERS.
The navigator's accounts of New Zealand
are too well known by all readers of his
admirably w ritten voyages—and wbo has not
read them ? —to need any recapitulation by
us. Reference is only made to this voyage
because the discoveries of Captain Cook in
the South Seas led to the formation of the
penal settlement in New South Wales, to
which we have already referred. From this
voyage sprang the first colonisation of Aus-
tralia.
In 1788 European communication with
New Zealand became frequent by the exten-
sion of the South Sea whale fishery to the
New Zealand coast, and the anxiety of com-
mercial men to obtain Maori-dressed phor-
mium flax, the silk-like softness of which was
much admired. But the growing confidence
(at first disturbed by the dread of cannibal-
ism) between Europeans and natives, was
interrupted in the year 1809 by the massacre
at Whangaroa of the passengers and crew of
the ship Boyd, and for some years there was
a state of intermittent warfare between
whalers and Maoris, which prevented any
settlement in the country, caused the natives
to be looked upon as a race of monsters, and
justified in the eyes of the whalers the cruel-
ties and murders committed on them. Every
vessel approaching the coast had boarding
nets, and it is said that in the three years
ending 1817, one hundred New Zealanders
were slain by Europeans in the immediate
vicinity of the Bay of Islands. Whenever
they had a chance the natives retaliated.
Thus, in 1816, the brig Agnes, with fourteen
men on board, stranded at Poverty Bay, and
all the crew excepting John Rutherford were
killed and eaten. A whaling ship was cast
ashore at Wanganui, and all the crew were
killed and eaten except one European and
one negro. Meanwhile a change was being
effected which was gradually to smooth down
these differences, and to lead to intimate re-
lations between Maoris and Europeans, and
this change was to be effected by two very
different agencies, viz., the advent of mis-
sionaries and the introduction of firearms.
In 1814 the Rev. Samuel Marsden, the
senior chaplain of the colony of New South
Wales, met Hongi Hika, the great Ngapuhi
chief, who had accompanied his cousin, Rua-
tara, to Sydney, and obtained from the chief
a declaration that he would protect all mis-
sionaries, in virtue of which promise Mr.
Marsden, accompanied by Messrs. Kendall,
Hall, and King, their wives, several me-
chanics, Hongi, and Ruatara, with a few sheep
and cattle, embarked for the Bay of Islands.
There they purchased 200 acres of land at
Rangihu, and here they first preached the
“Rongopai’ or good tidings. From here
other missions were planted—at Kirikeri, in
1819; at Whangaroa, in 1822; at Bahia, in
1823; at Waimate, in 1830; and at Kaitaia,


iHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiitiiiiiiiiiniiiiiitiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiißiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiH
in 1834. In 1834 also stations were formed
on the Thames and Waipa rivers ; in 1835 at
Tauranga, at Rotorua, at Kawhia, and at
Whaingaroa, while in 1839 the missionaries
penetrated to Cook’s Strait and the South
Island.
But Hongi, the friend of the missionaries, [
proceeded to England, where he charmed the |
religious world by acting the part of a devout j
Christian. Presents were showered on him, |
all of which he sold just previous to his re- \
turn to New Zealand, and with the proceeds I
he purchased 300 muskets and stores of j
ammunition. With these he carried on de- I
vastating wars throughout the islands. Other I
tribes, to avoid extermination, had to open I
up trade with Europeans, to procure the ;
much-needed powder and lead. The erstwhile j
hated pakehas became valued friends and |
allies, and gradually European settlers be- i
came pretty numerous in the land.
Between 1816 and 1826 one hundred settlers
were permanently settled in New Zealand.
In 1832 there were one hundred white
settlers located at Kororareka, in the Bay
of Islands, and in 1838 it was the most
frequented resort for whalers in all the South
Sea Islands, and its European population
was estimated at a thousand souls. It had a
church, five hotels, numberless grog shops,
a theatre, several billiard tables, skittle
alleys, finishes, and hells, while the chief
Pomare kept a harem of ninety-six slave
girls for the use of whalers. In fact, from
all accounts it must have been a perfect
pandemonium. But such was the first settle-
ment that can be dignified with the name of
a town that was established by the British in
New Zealand.
In connection with Kororareka it must
not be forgotten that here New Zealand re-
ceived the first act of official recognition
from the English Government, though the
islands had previously been named in more
than one Act of Parliament, and albeit this
recognition took the form of dealing with
the future colony as an independent foreign
State. In consequence of representations
from the New South Wales authorities as to
the lawless state of the place, and of a letter
addressed to King William IV. by thirteen
New Zealand chiefs, praying for the protec-
tection of the British Crown, Mr. Busby was
despatched to the Bay of Islands as British
Resident. He arrived on the sth May, 1833,
in H.M.s. Imogene, which fired a salute as he
was landed from it. He had, however, no
powers, and, arriving among the roughs of
Kororareka in a state of legal and adminis-
trative helplessness, he was hailed by them
as a man-o’-war without guns. One act of
Bis, however, served still more clearly to fix
the independence of New Zealand. In 1834
Baron de Thierry, a French adventurer,
claimed to have acquired, by purchase, im-
mense tracts of land in the North Island,
and endeavoured to get himself proclaimed
King of the country. The Resident, in order
to checkmate the Baron, set up a native
Government under a confederation of chiefs.
Through Sir R. Bourke, Governor of New
South Wales, he transmitted to the English
Government a proposal for establishing a
national flag for the New Zealand tribes in
their collective capacity, together with other
proposals for placing the independence of the
| country on a firm basis. All these proposals
| were approved, and a flag having been
| selected, and declared to be the “ National
| Flag of New Zealand,” this flag was hoisted
| at the Bay of Islands, and saluted with a
| salvo of 21 guns by H.M.s. Alligator, which
| happened to be there at the time,
j This clearly proves that up to and including
| the 28th January, 1840, the Islands of New
| Zealand constituted an independent foreign
| State. It seems impossible that the signiti-
| cance of these facts can have been overlooked
| in the recent squabble of Wellington in re-
| spect of its position with regard to the colony.
| Clearly until the issue of Governor Hobson’s
| proclamation of England’s sovereignty at the
| Bay of Islands on 29th January, 1840, no
| place in New Zealand, neither Kororareka,
| by far the oldest in point of date, nor the
j later band of adventurers at Britannia, as
| Wellington was then named, had any more
| right to assume that its settlement consti-
| tuted these islands a British colony, than, for
| the same reason, could the swarm of British
| exiles and settlers at Boulogne assume that
| their domicile in that town acquired to Great
| Britain the sovereignty over France as a
| British colony.
THE MAORI IMMIGRATION.
| Amidst some variations in detail, the
| general account given by the natives of their
| first arrival in the islands constitutes a gene-
| rally harmonious narrative. Some of their
| traditions state that before the arrival of the
| Maoris there were no men in the land, which
| was covered with forest. According to
| others, when their forefathers came to New
| Zealand they found the land thinly popu-
| lated with a race short and plump, but
| physically inferior to themselves, called
| Moriori, and many circumstances tend to
I show that this latter tradition is the most
correct one. All tradition is consistent on
| three points, viz., that the Maoris came from
| a place called Hawaiki; that their departure
| from the latter place was caused by a great
| civil war; and that they found a race of
| gigantic birds in Aotearoa, as New Zealand
| was first called by them.
| There is also a general consensus as to the
| names and number of canoes in which the
| migration was effected, especially with re-
| gard to those which conveyed the progeni-
| tors of the Auckland contingent, viz., the
| “Arawa,” “Tainui,” “Kurahaupo,” and
| “Matatua,” The Arawa, which carried the
| renowned Tama-te-Kapua, left a few persons
| at Maunganui, at the mouth of the Tauranga
| harbour, and the remainder proceeded to
j Maketu. This canoe is said to have brought
| over from Hawaiki certain stone images and
| other objects of great renown, and held in
| the highest veneration, one of which, the
| smaller, was given to Sir George Grey some
| years back, and is now in the Auckland Art
| Gallery among the other art and archseo-
| logical treasures presented to the city by Sir
| George Grey. Another, the largest, _ was
| buried on the island of Mokoia, in the middle
| of Lake Rotorua, and was the occasion of
| some little excitement when disinterred in
| 1883; while of the other two, one was de-
| stroyed by Hongi Hika in his Rotorua raid,
| and the other is said to have been ca rr iedoff
| at the same time by a tohunga, who escaped


the Mokoia massacre, and by him hidden
away somewhere in the fastnesses of the
Horohoro range. The Tainui immigrants
became the progenitors of the Waikato,
Ngatimaniapoto, Ngatiraukawa, Ngatitoa,
and other tribes occupying the country from
the W aikato to the West Coast of the
island.
The Kurahaupo carried the ancestors of
the Poverty Bay tribes, and those of the
natives occupying the country around and to
the north of the Bay of Islands.
The Matatua canoe was dragged on shore
at Whakatane, in the Bay of Plenty, and
from her crew sprung several of the Bast
Coast tribes. With regard to the time which
has elapsed since the migration of the Hawai-
kians to New Zealand, Tawhiao is said to be
the sixteenth in direct descent from Hoturoa,
who landed at Kawhia from the Tainui, and
the genealogies of the principal chiefs whose
forefathers came in the various canoes will
all be found to cover a similar period.
DECLINE OF THE MAORI RACE.
The isthmus of Auckland is one of the most
remarkable volcanic districts of the earth.
It is characterised by a large number of ex-
tinct volcanic cones with craters in a more
or less distinct state of preservation, and
with lava streams forming extensive stone
fields at the foot of the hills, or with tuff-
craters surrounding, like an artificial wall,
the cones of eruption piled up of scoria and
volcanic ash. These cones are promiscu-
ously scattered over the isthmus and the
neighbouring shores of the Waitemata and
Manukau.
Upon a rectangle twenty miles long and
twelve broad, or within a radius of ten miles
from Auckland, Hochstetter counted no less
than 63 separate points of eruption. Each
of these volcanic cones was, some hundred
years ago, a fortress terraced by the hand of
man, and more than a score of very strong
fortresses of this description, varying in
height from 150 to 642 feet, were within six
miles of the centre of the isthmus.
Maungawhao, now known as Mount Eden,
was the highest, and the most important of
these fastnesses, occupied by “Nga-iwi,” so
called from being formed of the scattered
remnants of several tribes which had been in-
dividually all but exterminated in wars by
tribes of other districts, and which thus con-
solidated for mutual protection. Next in
strength was Maungakiekie, now called One
Tree Hill, which in 1720 was the fortress of
the great chief Kiwi, who ruled in the neigh-
bourhood. In 1740 he fell in battle with in-
vaders from Kaipara, and from this time to
the era of colonisation destructive warfare
was kept up in the district almost without
interruption.
Maungawhao was a pa of extraordinary
strength. The sides of the hills were ter-
raced, and high palisades with inner fences,
and pits for concealment, rendered each sepa-
rate terrace a separate fortress. On the
northern face, the people had their cultiva-
tions in the rich warm scoria soil. Piles of
stone still show the division walls of the
kumara and taro grounds, and in the caves
and crevices of the rock may still be found
the bones of the people who lived there. The
amount of labour that must have been ex-
l[|]|l!llll!llllilllllllil|[|||]|l!llllllllllN|[|||llll[||[|||||||||||[|j||i||H|||j||||||||||j||l||[|j|||[|||{||;[|[||||||||||||]||l|||||||||||[|j||g|jl|][lHf
pended in trenching, terracing, and fencing
such a gigantic fortress as this, and all with-
out iron tools, is a proof that the natives
were much more numerous in former times
than they were when they first became known
to European voyagers, even long ere the era
of colonisation.
These forts were also of such an extent
that, taking into consideration the system of
attack and defence used necessarily in those
times, they would have been utterly unten-
able unless held by at least ten times the
number of men the whole surrounding dis-
tricts, for two or three days’ journey
could produce a century ago. And yet,
when we remember that in those times
of constant war, which include at least
the two centuries preceding the arrival
of Europeans, the natives always, as
a rule, slept in these hill forts with closed
gates, bridges over trenches removed, and
ladders of terraces drawn up, we must come
to the conclusion that the inhabitants of the
forts, though so numerous, were merely the
population of the country in the close
vicinity.
War was indeed the chronic state of the
island, war springing from any and every
imaginable cause, the most fertile being land
and women, but also frequently resulting
from violation of the tapu, personal insult, or
the mere ambition of a chief. Every offence
but the destruction of life had some commer-
cial equivalent, but for murder there was no
compensation but the taking of another life,
either that of the murderer or one of his
tribe.
CANNIBALISM.
What earned the Maoris such a terrible
name among the earlier visitors to the shores
of New Zealand was not so much their repu-
tation for ferocity in war as their cannibal-
ism, and this also caused the Maoris them-
selves to be very timid in casual meetings
with alien tribes and with strangers. This
dreadful custom, whatever might have been
its origin, was, at least during historic times,
not caused by the promptings of revenge or
the gratification of hatred, but by an actual
love for human flesh as an article of diet. A
Maori of the old school would eat anyone but
a blood relation.
The earliest visitors to the islands had sad
experience of this dreadful practice. One of
Tasman’s sailors was eaten in 1642: Captain
Cook had a boat’s crew eaten in 1774; Marion
duFresne, and many other navigators, met this
horrible end, as also did the passengers and
crew of the Boyd, in 1809, and there were
many other instances. Pioneers of civili-
sation and missionaries all bear witness to
the universal prevalence of cannabalism in
New Zealand up to the year 1842. These
cannibal feasts in some instances assumed
gigantic proportions. In 1822 Hongi’s army
ate three hundred persons after the capture
of Totara on the river Thames.
In December, 1831, a taua of nearly 4000
Waikatos made a descent on Waitara, in-
habited by Ngatiawa._ Several small parties
of these latter fell into the hands of the
enemy, and were killed and eaten ; while the
bulk took refuge in the strong pa, Puke-
rangiora. There they held out for twelve days,
and then, overcome by famine, the wretched


iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
garrison tried to break out and escape. Un-
fortunately this was attempted in the day
time. The Waikatos perceiving this, pur-
sued and captured numbers of half-famished
wretches. Mothers threw' their children oyer
the precipice which surmounts here the Wai-
tara River, and leaped after them to avoid a 1
more dreadful fate at the hands of their
sanguinary foes. The captives were driven
into whares, and guarded by sentries armed
with sharp tomahawks. On that day the Wai-
katos glutted themselves with the flesh of the
slain, and on the following morning nearly
200 prisoners were brought out. Those who
were well tatooed were beheaded on a block
for the sake of their heads ; some of the re-
mainder were slain by a blow or cut on the
skull; on others every refinement of cruelty
was practised, particularly the thrusting of
a red-hot ramrod up the bowels. Children
and youths were cut open, eviscerated,
spitted, and roasted over fires made from the
defences of the dismantled pa. In the after-
noon a similar massacre took place, and so
greedily did some of these monsters gorge, that
they died from the effects of their gluttony.
The feast was graced with the tatooed heads
of the slain, which were stuck on short poles
and placed vis-a-vis to their captors, who
would at times pause in their feasting to
address them with the most insulting ex-
pressions.
In 1836, during the Rotorua war, sixty
human beings were cooked and eaten in tw'o
days. The last cannibal feast was in 1842,
when Taraia, with forty picked warriors,
crossed from the Thames to Tauranga, sur-
prised the pa Engaro, and killed or enslaved
its people, of whom two were eaten. On
hearing of this, Governor Hobson gave orders
for the embarkation of soldiers in the Govern-
ment brig to seize Taraia and bring him
to trial. Taraia thereupon addressed a
letter to the Governor, asserting that the
matter was no business of his, that he had no
right to interfere in a purely native quarrel,
and that any attempt to arrest him (Taraia)
would only make matters worse. The
Governor evidently thought so too, and so
the matter ended.
J udge Maning’s friendly chief, “ Lizard i
Skin,” killed and cooked several men in what I
is now Shortland-street, and forced three I
more of the enemy to jump over the cliff,
which, in the early days of Auckland, was
known as Soldier’s Point.
EXTERMINATING WARS.
It is not only in the traces of Titanic forti-
fications which the earliest settlers found on
every hill that we find proof of the steadily
diminishing number of the population. There
is also most unmistakeable evidence that vast
tracts of country which the first European
visitors found bare and desolate had once
been fully cultivated. Ditches for draining
the land were still traceable, large pits were
to be seen in hundreds in which kumaras
were once scored, and that in {daces which
had lain wild time out of mind. Those most
competent to form an opinion have calculated
that long before the era of colonisation,
the population had at one time been very
dense.
Among other most striking proofs of this
we may instance the road leading from
111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 iiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiifliiii!iniuniiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiii>iiiiiiiii>miiiiiiiiiiiiiiin!ii>iiiiii
Tauranga to Oropi, on the way to Ohinemutu.
For miles after leaving Tauranga every hill
bears the marks of former extensive fortifica-
tions. but what strikes the observer even
more forcibly is the immense accumulations
of shells which cover large patches at short
intervals until the bush is reached at Oropi,
some thirteen miles from Tauranga, and all
these heaps of shells represent the_ cooking
places of harms which have long since van-
ished from off the face of the earth.
As an instance of the rapid rate at which
extermination was carried on, in 1828, when
the missionary schooner Herald, in which
were Messrs. H. Williams, Hamlin, and
Davis, visited Tauranga, the place was
densely populated. There were three large
pas, Otumoetai, Maungatapu and Te Papa.
The fighting men of the tribe Ngaiterangi
mustered at least 2500, and a thousand
canoes, great and small, were counted on the
beach between Otumoetai and Te Papa.
When the missionaries returned to Tau-
ranga, after an absence of ten days only,
they were surprised to find Te Papa de-
stroyed, its chief killed, and about one-third
of the Tauranga people annihilated. The
Ngatimaru chief Te Rohu had been there
with a strong force of Ngatimarus. Only
twenty-five persons, who managed to slip
out of the pa when the attack was made,
escaped.
But of all the curses with which New Zea-
land was afflicted,, in the era immediately
preceding that of colonisation, the greatest
was the famed chief Hongi Hika, he who,
we have already seen, first introduced mis-
sionaries into the country. Born in the year
1777, near the Bay of Islands, Hongi was a
chief of illustrious descent of the great
Ngapuhi tribe. He early distinguished him-
self in battle, and was soon known as the
greatest fighting chief of the Island. Even
while protecting the Rev. Mr. Marsden, and
encouraging the spread of Christianity, he
was immersed in warfare, and successfully
ravaged the Bay of Plenty, Rotorua, Whan-
garoa, and Hokianga.. In 1820 Hongi and
the chief Waikato embarked for England.
There he made great outward professions of
Christianity, assisted Professor Lee, of Cam-
bridge, in the construction of a vocabulary
and grammar of the New Zealand language,
and created a favourable impression on all
who met him.
Before returning he collected large stores
of guns and ammunition, and in 1822 he con-
verted the greater part of the North Island
into vast shambles by his slaughters.
Scarcely a tribe escaped his attacks.
It has been computed that at least 30,000
lives were sacrificed in Hongi’s great raids
between the years 1822 and 1827, and he left
behind him the fame of having been the
greatest warrior that New Zealand had ever
seen.
The last great intertribal war of the Maoris
before the colonisation of the country was
the Rotorua campaign of Te Waharoa of Nga-
tihoua against the Ngatiwhakaue, which
lasted from 1836 to 1839, with varying suc-
cess and great slaughter on both sides.
There were many most exciting and even
romantic incidents in this great campaign,
but sufficient space has been devoted to the
blood-stained annals of Maori warfare.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiJiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiniiHiiiiiii
THE WHALERS.
Reference has been made to the European
settlement in the Bay of Islands now bearing
the name of Russell, then known as Korora-
reka, a little hell that spread its contaminat-
ing influence over the whole surrounding
country. But even before the time of Koro-
rareka many Europeans had settled on the
coast who must not be confounded with the
ruffianly rabble of idlers, beach-combers, and
whalers, landed from their ships merely to
enjoy riotous living for a few days, such as
constituted the population of this Alsatia of
the Southern Seas. The sealers, whalers,
and even the runaway convicts who cast in
their lot with the Maoris, were the first to
implant the seeds of civilisation in the
native race, and of these the whalers
are generally allowed, to have exer-
cised the most beneficial influence They
came in after the sealers, and in 1827 the
first whaling station was established at Pre-
servation Inlet, near the south end of the
South Island, and in a few years there were
twelve stations between that place and
Banks’ Peninsula. In Queen Charlotte’s
Sound, in Cloudy Bay, on the Island of
Kapiti, and at other places in Cook’s Strait,
w r ere large "whaling establishments. On the
North Island there were whaling stations in
Poverty Bay, in the Bay of Plenty, and at
Taranaki. These whalers were living in the
country long before the missionaries ever
visited the districts, and they purchased
from the natives the exclusive right of fishing
along a certain line of coast. Three hundred
whalers were settled in New Zealand in
1840--meu, as we have before stated, not to
be confounded with the riotous liberty men
of Korarareka.
Most of these whalers possessed native
wives, many of them selected from the best
families of the laud, and from a tact peculiar
to native women, these whalers’ wives gener-
ally obtained strong influence over their hus-
bands ; they often acted as mediators in
drunken quarrels, promoted good feeling
between the two races, and occasionally
turned the tippler into a sober man. The
whalers, on the other hand, are acknow-
ledged to have exercised a beneficial in-
fluence on' the aboriginals, by creating new
wants and introducing new customs. Every-
thing used by them was coveted by the
natives, and pigs, flax, labour, and land were
readily given in exchange for tea, sugar,
tobacco, blankets, and dress. Canoes were
superseded by whaleboats. Chimneys, beds,
and glass windows were introduced in native
huts. The wffialers taught their wives to
sew, cook, and keep themselves clean, and
they in turn invariably took a laudable pride
in decking themselves out for their hus-
bands’ admiration. Impartial witnesses in
1840 admitted that the civilisation intro-
duced by these men was more practically
useful than that around the missionary
stations. The whaler natives (says Thomp-
son) could not read and write, but they knew
more English, were better clad, and were
more industrious than Christian natives.
Bishop Selwyn also expressed the obligations
that the cause of civilisation among the
Maoris owes to the lessons taught by these
pioneer settlers.
iOiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiinniiiiiii!ii!iiiiiiiiiiiniiiuiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiii(iiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiii
THE MISSIONARIES.
The first missionary, Marsden, landed in
the Bay of Islands in December, 1814; but
although he and the other missionaries who
followed him were treated kindly by the
natives, for a long time their preaching was
attended with but scant success. In six
years they had not made a single convert.
In 1825 the Rev. Henry Williams stated that
the natives were “ as insensible to the neces-
sity of redemntion as brutes,” and in 1829
the Wesleyan Mission contemplated with-
drawing their establishment from want of
success.
But when Christianity did take root it
grew rapidly, and soon after 1830 the efforts of
the missionaries seemed to be rewarded with
success. In 1838 the Church Missionary Society
had 54 schools, attended by 1431 scholars;
2476 persons attended church, and 178 were
communicants; and as the Wesleyan mis-
sionaries had 1000 scholars and church-goers,
the Christians at that era numbered 4000
souls. This was the result of twenty years’
labour and the expenditure of £200,000.
If the missionaries in the early days were
unsuccessful in making converts, they were,
at least, eminently successful in acquiring
land. In fact such facilities did they find in
purchasing it, they being at first almost the
sole buyers, that, having acquired some
hundreds of thousands of acres, they pro-
fessed to fear lest unscrupulous Europeans
might buy up the whole country, and reduce
the natives to beggary. To prevent this dire
misfortune —or at least such was the reason
alleged—in December, 1835, the Rev. Henry
Williams forwarded “ a deed of trust of land
belonging to natives” to the Governor of New
South Wales, and to the Secretary of the
Church Missionary Society, with a request
that the missionaries at the Bay of Islands
might be appointed trustees for all the lands
of iSlew Zealand, in order to “preserve it
from the intrigues of designing men.” As a
matter of course, neither the Governor nor
the Church Missionary Society would sanc-
tion any such arrangement.
Even as late as 1860, we find a write'" in
the long defunct New Zealand Magazine
stating of the Auckland country districts :
“ The country about is held in large tracts—
thousands of acres —by the old missionaries
or their immediate descendants, who, in most
cases, remind one of the fable of the * dog in
the manger,’ neither using theland themselves,
nor allowing others to do so. It is a great
misfortune to the colony, and a great dis-
grace to the Missionary Society that such a
state of land-grasping should have been
allowed to grow up. This state of things
keeps back the district, both by the semi-pre-
occupation of the lands, and the peculiar short-
sighted and antiquated ideas of the semi-
occupiers, who appear imbued with a horror
of all change, and above all things, of new
settlers —or, as they call them, intruders.
Instead of looking upon the settlement of
neighbouring lands as an advantage, giving a
value to their otherwise useless acres, they
consider each lot of land taken up and actu-
ally occupied as the deprivation of so much
feeding ground for their cattle.”


lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllilllilllllilirillllillllllllllllllliHlllllllllllliilllllllllllllllllillll
NEW ZEALAND A BRITISH COLONY
In the years 1825 and 1837 attempts were
made by public companies in England to
colonise New Zealand, but these were firmly
resisted by the English Government. In
1839 the New Zealand Company was formed,
and, while still unrecognised by Government,
despatched on 13th May, 18.30‘ its first ship,
the Tory, with its agent, surveyors, and na-
turalist. On the 7th November, 1839, Mr.
Somes, deputy-governor of the still unrecog-
nised company, wrote to the Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, Lord Palmerston, urging the
immediate assumption of sovereignty over
New Zealand by the British Government, on
the grounds that France might and probably
w f uld obtain sovereign jurisdiction over New
Zealand, this letter having been written some
time after the despatch of the Aurora with
the first batch of company’s emigrants to Port
Nicholson.
There are two claimants for the honour of
being the place in which the act of establish-
ment of New Zealand as a colony, he., an in-
tegral part of the British Empire, took place
—to wit, Auckland and Wellington. In an
earlier section we have shown how futile
the claims of Wellington are. But were
further proof needed it is afforded in the
following unanswerable sketch of events :
By a commission bearing date 30th July,
1839, Captain William Hobson, R N., was
appointed to be Lieutenant-Governor “ over
any territory which may be acquired in
sovereignty by Her Majesty in the islands of
New Zealand.” Captain Hobson sailed for
Sydney in H.M.s. Druid, and on his arrival
there he took the oaths of office and set sail
with a small party of subordinate officers for
New Zealand in H.M.s. Herald, on the 19th
January, 1840, arriving at the Bay of Islands
on the 29th of the same month. He at once
issued two proclamations, one announcing
his commission and the other the refusal of
the Queen to recognise any titles to land not
derived from or confirmed by herself. Al-
though the ship Aurora, with certain emi-
grants sent out by the New Zealand Company,
arrived in Port Nicholson on the 22nd Janu-
ary, yet, as we have already shown another
and earlier settlement already existed at
Kororareka. Moreover, as against the New
Zealand Company being colonising body, it
is sufficient to state that its charter was only
granted on the 12th February, 1841, i. e., more
than 12 months after the landing of Governor
Hobson, and, in fact, some five months after
the selection of Auckland as the capital of
the colony.
Clearly the date of the jubilee of the colony
is January 29, the date of the anniversary
as a colony, as distinct from the several pro-
vincial anniversaries, interesting as these
latter are in the history of the settlement of
the colony. _ These latter run as follows,
viz. Wellington, January 22, 1840; Auck-
land, January 29, 1840 (leaving Kororareka
outside the question); Taranaki, March 31,
1840; Nelson, February 1, 1841; Otago,
March 23, 1847; Canterbury, December 15,
1848.
THE SETTLEMENT OF AUCKLAND.
The town of Auckland has a history dis-
tinct from that of the settlement of tlie dis-
trict, and the proclamation of the colony
| within its bounds. Governor Hobson was
J landed at the Bay of Islands, and originally
| intended to fix his capital at the spot now
| occupied by the town of Russell. The site
| was, however, found unsuitable, and he
| finally chose a site for ffiis chief town on the
| right bank of the Waitemata River, a spot
| which in 1769 Captain Cook had pointed out
| as a good place for a European settlement.
| Under the Governor’s instructions, Captain
| W. Symonds, the Surveyor-General, pur-
| chased the land from the natives, no diffi-
| culty being experienced in the transaction.
J On Tuesday, 15th September, 1840, the barque
| Anna Watson having on board several offi-
| cers of the Government, mechanics, labour-
j ers, etc., anchored in Waitemata harbour.
| The Surveyor-General proceeded to select the
j site for the intended settlement on its
| shores, and on Friday, the 18th September,
the ceremony of taking possession in the
| name of Her Majesty was duly performed.
| The whole party having landed, the British
y flag was hoisted on a staff erected on a bold
| promontory commanding a view of the whole
y harbour (afterwards crowned with Fort
| Britomart), and the flag was immediately
| saluted with 21 guns from the Anna Watson,
| followed by a further salute of 15 guns from
| the barque Platina, which, together with the
| Planter, were likewise lying at anchor in the
| harbour. Her Majesty’s health was drunk at
| the foot of the flagstaff and greeted with three
| times three hearty cheers. The Anna W T atson
y then fired a salute of seven guns in honour of
| the Governor, and luncheon was done j ustice
| to on board. In the afternoon was held the
| first regatta which ever took place on the
| waters of the Waitemata, particulars of
| which are given elsewhere.
| The first sale of Crown lands in the new
| town took place in April, 1841, when town
| sections sold at an average of £525 per acre.
| Meanwhile the most frantic indignation had
| been aroused in Wellington by the founda-
| tion of Auckland, the Wakefields and other
| agents of the New Zealand Association as-
g sorting the Governor should have established
| his capital there. The early volumes of the
| reports of the New Zealand Association are
| mainly taken up with these squabbles and
| charges against Governor Hobson. The latter
| was worn out with the weight of care and
| the persistent calumny of his enemies, and
I died on the 10th September, 1842, aged forty-
| nine years. His body lies in Auckland ceme-
| tery, and in St. Paul’s Church, lately de-
| molished, stood a marble tablet to his
| memory. The town of Auckland will, as
| Thompson remarks in his “ Story of New
| Zealand,” better perpetuate his fame than a
| pillar of stone or a statue of brass.
THE PILGRIM FATHERS.
| The colony was established, but there were
| yet many vicissitudes, many difficulties to be
| surmounted, many hardships to be under-
| gone by the dwellers in the infant settle-
| ments. It should be noted that from the
| first moment of its being proposed as a
| British colony, New Zealand was expressly
| guaranteed an exemption from convicts, and
| so escaped the infliction of this curse of Aus-
| tralian colonisation. Emigrants chose it
| from its first establishment in preference to
I Australia or Yan Dieman’s Land for this


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiirmiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
very reason. Lord Normanby, in a despatch
to Captain Hobson, dated 14th August, 1839,
says : —“ The character of a penal settlement
shall not be extended to INew Zealand.
Every motive concurs in forbidding this,
and it is to be understood as a fundamental
principle of the new colony that no convict
is ever to be sent there to undergo his pun-
ishment.”
Taken as a whole, the early reports of the
infant settlement were cheerful and hopeful.
Pork and potatoes, we are told, was the
staple dietary for all classes of the com-
munity. Complaints are to be heard of the
price of clothing, but —happy days ! —we read
that “ there are no taxes in New Zealand, nor
any rates nor dues; ” and, moreover, money
can be safely invested in real security at the
rate of 10 per cent, per annum. The main
complaints are about communications. The
town of Auckland was a morass overgrown
with small tea-tree; beyond that again, for
about a mile and a half, was a dense thicket,
so dense in fact, that in order to find one’s
way through it, it was necessary to take the
bearings of some of the loftier trees. Some
four years after the foundation of this settle-
ment, the main road leading out of Auck-
land was hardly passable in the winter
season for the distance of a mile. Epsom
consisted of three tents ; the land beyond,
stretching across the isthmus, was a treeless
open country, clothed with a sombre cover-
ing of brown fern. Onehunga was unoccupied
save by the small remnant of a neighbouring
native tribe, and the Bay of Manukau was a
lone expanse of unfrequented water. In
those clays of “ the streets before they were
made ” —as Swainson calls them after the old
distich —when the infant capital was built of
reeds and rushes, when drays were abandoned
for weeks together in the principal street,
buried axle-deep in mire and clay, and when
a native whare did duty fora police court
six days in the week, and for a place
of worship on the seventh, locomotion
by night was difficult, and in the win-
ter season decidedly uncomfortable along
these streets which existed only on paper.
But then, as now, dancing was enjoyed with
great zest, and though to attend a ball on a
dark, wet night was, indeed, the pursuit of
dancing under difficulties, yet, in the worst
weather, its votaries were never daunted—
the ladies gallantly wading through mire and
water—their “twinkling feet” and “light
fantastic toes,” as the old chronicler we have
before us gallantly terms them, encased in
men’s jack boots ; their would-be partners—
for life or for the dance —being carried high
and dry on the back of some friendly Maori.
From the very earliest period of the settle-
ment lovers of dancing had an opportunity of
gratifying their taste at a ball given by the
Queen’s representative on the occasion of
Her Majesty’s Birthday. In these, the dark
ages of the colony, a piano, played by the
gracious hostess, the wife of the Governor,
with a violoncello accompaniment, vamped
with all due gravity by the Queen’s Attorney-
General, formed the modest orchestra at
Government House, reminding us of the days
of simplicity recorded in Gray’s “Long
Story,” when—
‘ My grave Lord-keeper led the brawls,
The seal and maces danced before him.”
lllilllllllllfllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllHllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllll
Yet the balls in tliose olden days of the
colony were said to have been probably as
enjoyable, and certainly as much enjoyed, as
the Gubernatorial Birthday Ball of to-day,
with all its state and ceremony.
EARLY STRUGGLES.
The relations between the natives and
the settlers in this, the Northern settlement,
were at first most harmonious. Strange to
say, the first serious difficulty arose from the
operation of a measure which had been de-
vised in the interests, as it was supposed, of
the Maori race, viz., the treaty of Waitangi.
Under this no settler could legally purchase
land from the natives after 1840. Governors
Hobson and Shortland had no funds to pur-
chase with, and consequently had been able
to buy but very little on behalf of the Crown.
The natives being thus deprived of their
usual supply of money from this source, com-
plained of the injustice of the arrangement;
the Governor, they said, would neither pur-
chase land from them himself nor suffer
others to purchase.
The murmurs of the natives became louder
and louder, the situation was menacing and
Fitzroy gave way. In March, 1844, a procla-
mation was gazetted authorising people to
purchase land direct from the natives, on the
purchaser paying 10s an acre to the Govern-
ment. But this was looked upon as too high
a price by the European purchaser, and only
1795 acres of land were purchased under the
proclamation. The settlers were disgusted,
and busied themselves in exciting discontent
among the Maoris. They represented to the
latter that as the Government claimed such a
heavy price for the land, they were unable to
give the owners of the soil the fair value they
were enttitled to; that by the Governor’s
proclamation the Treaty of Waitangi was re-
duced to a mere deception, and that their land
was virtually taken from their control. The
Maoris around Auckland, who were most im-
mediately concerned in the law, determined
to strike a moral blow by a display of
strength. A great gathering of the tribes
was summoned to assemble at a hakari, a
feast, in the vicinity of Auckland, and crowds
of armed warriors intimated to the Governor
that unless the law were modified there might
be a of the whole native race. The
feast was given to the Waikato tribes, and
the place of assembly was about two miles
from the town on a fern plain between
Mounts Hobson and St. John, a spot now
covered with villas and gardens. Here a
shed four hundred yards long was erected,
and covered with Witney manufacture, and
fifty yards from it there was a breastwork of
potatoes, surrounded by a fence loaded with
dried shark. As the warriors congregated,
an uneasy feeling spread through the town.
On the 11th May the Governor visited this
Gargantuan feast by invitation. At the ban-
quet there were given away to the guests
11,000 baskets of potatoes, 9000 sharks, 100
full-grown pigs, 1000 blankets, and large
quantities of wheat, rice, sugar, and tobacco.
At a given signal each tribe seized the food
portioned out for it.
Then came a grand war-dance, the greatest
exhibition of the sort that Auckland has ever
seen. Seventeen tribes took part in the
pageant ; sixteen hundred men armed with


io New Zealand's Jubilee, 1840-1890.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHMiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiinniiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii^
guns and tomahawks. The adverse bands
occupied hills a mile apart. With muskets
glittering in the sun, their tomahawks and
clubs waving in the air, they stamped their
wild war-dance, and then, alternately, rushed
thundering down the slope. Halting as one
man in front of their opponents, each party
again defied the other in dances and shouts
and yells. Then one body, the strangers, fled
up the hill, halted, danced, rushed down
again at their utmost speed and again halted,
like soldiers at a review, at the word of their
chief, within pistol-shot of the adverse party,
who were crouched to receive them with
spears, the front rank kneeling, the mass
behind, about forty deep, having muskets and
other weapons in readiness. Each body con-
sisted of about eight hundred men in a com-
pact mass, twenty in front, and forty deep,
their movements absolutely simultaneous,
like well-drilled soldiers.
One incident in connection with this great
war dance is worthy of record. A native
war dance is the most curious sight to be
witnessed in New Zealand, and will soon be
among the things of the past. A few of our
country women on the occasion in question
were unwittingly compelled to become spec-
tators of a scene—as Mr. Swainson_ says—
“ hardly to be equalled in the uncivilised
world.” Many Aucklanders, including a few
ladies desirous of witnessing- the manners
and customs of the natives, made holiday and
walked out to pay a visit to the great Maori
camp. It was not then generally known that
a Maori war dance of the olden days was an
entirely undress performance. A feather
adorned the head, a patch of red ochre the
cheek, and a handsome tatooed scroll was
frequently embossed upon the hip; but the
mat and blanket were thrown aside as cum-
bersome superfluities.
As soon as it was announced that a war
dance was about to be performed, the space
allotted for the purpose was immediately
walled in by the eager and expectant by-
standers, the ladies being politely accommo-
dated with front places. Closely hemmed
in by their countrymen behind, their escape
or retreat was impossible; and when some
hundreds of the tattooed warriors, with
frantic shrieks, wild gestures, and hideous
grimaces, rushed yelling into the arena, the
ladies evidently thought that a New Zealand
war dance was more honoured in the breach
than in the observance, says our authority.
The soldiers in Auckland sunk into no-
thing before this display; and the settlers,
for the first time, admitted that they lived
in New Zealand on sufferance. Two hundred
chiefs and men of influence returned the
Governor’s visit, and requested that their
lands should be secured to them. After this
interview the assembly dispersed.
The display produced the desired effect;
terrified by the one race, and cajoled by inte-
rested parties of the other, Captain Fitzroy
rescinded the ten shilling an acre proclama-
tion, and issued another allowing purchase
from the natives on the payment of Id per
acre to the Crown. Nor was this the last
panic. After the destruction of Kororareka,
consternation spread through the town of
Auckland. When the penniless and haggard
inhabitants of Kororareka, packed like slaves
in Guinea ships, landed on the beach, the terror
of the settlers, apparent to the friendly Wai-
kato tribes, increased when the people heard
that Heke was to attack Auckland next full
moon. Out-settlers, dreading a war of races,
congregated about Auckland; several colonists
left the country, and property could be bought
at a nominal price. Britomart Barracks were
entrenched, and two blockhouses built; a
militia ordinance was hastily passed, and 300
men trained to arms. Fort Ligar, an earth-
work near the Roman Catholic Chapel, was
thrown up, and the windows in St. Paul’s
Church were barricaded. Every day Heke
grew more terrible in people’s minds. A sentry
was posted on the roof of the barracks to catch
the first glimpse of his army. One night the
firing of musketry was heard, the drumsbeat,
the Governor and troops ran to arms, the
officers and men of Her Majesty’s ship Hazard
landed, and all remained in attitudes of defence
until day light, and then much merriment arose
when it was found that the alarm originated
in the firing of guns at Orakei to celebrate a
chief’s death. Te Wherowhero, seeing the
terror of the inhabitants, offered to defend
Auckland against Heke.
Again, after the defeat of the troops a l }
Okaihau and Ohaeawai, yet deeper ter”or
was struck into the hearts of our pilgrim
fathers. With disorganised finances, a
bankrupt treasury, and a defeated defence
force —a body of troops seemingly quite
unable to cope with the foe —matters did
indeed look hopeless.
But there was a silver lining to this dark
cloud. Captain Grey landed, and sunshine
again beamed on the colony. Our disasters
on the field were retrieved, our troops vic-
torious, the enemy sued for peace, our credit
was restored and finances were placed on a
proper footing. Peace once more reigned
over the land, and there was plenty in the
town and settlement. What wonder that
Sir George Grey should have been hailed as
the saviour of the country, and that his name
is still a power in the land.
AFTER FIFTY YEARS.
All the heartburnings and jealousies which
came into play in the early days of the colo-
insation of New Zealand have passed away,
even to their very memory, except in the
minds of some of our earliest settlers. Euro-
peans and natives, laymen and missionaries,
Government immigrants and Company’s set-
tlers, now work together as one harmonious
whole, all equally having the interests of
the colony at heart, and equally priding
themselves on the glorious progress it has
made.
Looking back through the vista of years to
the year 1840 (fifty years ago), but little will
be found with which the Government of the
colony, whether under Imperial regime or as
a self-governing colony, has to reproach it-
self, and never was a colony established in
which the interests of the aboriginal race
have been considered and cared for as they
have been in New Zealand.
It is far too general an opinion that the ad-
vent of the colonists has proved fatal to the
native race, and that they are slowly
dwindling away owing to their contact with
Europeans, We venture to express in the
most emphatic manner a contrary opinion,
viz., that the colonisation of the colony ha s


arrested the destruction of the Maori race.
Their losses in wars waged with the colonists
were as nothing compared to the wholesale
destruction that had been raging among
themselves for generations, and which was
finally put an end to on their subjugation by a
stronger race. The true state of the case is, we
think,putforthin the following words of an old
chief, as related by Mr. Barstow in a lecture
which he delivered some years ago in the
Auckland Institute. Mr. Barstow put the
question : “ Suppose the white people had
never come here ? ” The aged warrior paused,
and then apostrophised : “1 see an old man
standing on the look-out post of lofty Te
Ranga’s pa. He strains his eyes, peering in
every direction; no sign of human being, no
uprising smoke meets his gaze, and then he
cries to himself: ‘ Nobody, nobody; alas,
not one! Days have passed since last I
tasted the sweetness of human flesh. Is it all
finished ? One thing at least—no one survives
to consign my body to the hangi (cooking
oven).’”
Standing on the summit of Maungawhao,
the old frowning fortress of the man-eaters —•
A SUMMARY
It was fifty years ago on 29th January since
Captain Hobson landed in the Bay of Islands,
bearing Her Majesty’s Commission as Lieu-
tenant-Governor of New Zealand. He had
taken the necessary oaths of office on the 14th
day of January previous as Lieutenant-Gover-
nor before Sir George Gipps, the Governor of
New South Wales, as New Zealand had
been included in the domain of New South
Wales on the 15th day of June, 1839, by
letters patent under the Great Seal. He was
accompanied to New Zealand in H.M.S.
Herald by five civilians and five troopers of
the Mounted Police force of New South
Wales. There were about 4000 British and
European residents in the colony when
Captain Hobson landed at the Bay of Islands,
inclusive of the 204 officers and immigrants
of the New Zealand Land Company, who
had been sent to Wellington. These 4000
souls were scattered along the seaboard of
the islands, from the North Cape to Stewart’s
Island, though the principal grouping of the
people was at Kororareka, Hokianga, and
Mangonui,_ on the North Island, and at
Cook Straits, Akaroa, and Purakauuui —a
whaling station between Port Chalmers and
Waikouaiti—on the Middle Island,
Those who resided in the Middle and
Stewart’s Islands were almost wholly em-
ployed in whaling pursuits.
On the day after the arrival of the Lieu-
tenant Governor at the Bay of Islands he
met the principal inhabitants of the chief
settlement at the Church of Kororareka,
where he obtained some forty of them to sign
a declaration as witnesses that he had that
day published two commissions, one under
the Great Seal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland dated the 15th
day of June, 1839, by which the boundaries
of the colony of New South Wales were
“ Where the startled wilderness beheld,
A savage conqueror stained in kindred blood,
rang,
Sloping and smooth the daisy-spangled lawn,
Offering sweet incense to the sunrise smiles.”
All the liquid world is one extended Thames.”
iiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiniuuiii
OF HISTORY.
Exports.
£435,403
Imports.
£158,622
Imports.
£257,793
And from 1835 to 1839, inclusive—
Exports. Imp
£236,233 £2s'
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiit
now Mount Eden, the centre of smiling gar-
dens and handsome villas —looking down
upon the great city which lies spread at our
feet, with its crowded thoroughfares, its
bustle of commerce, and its wealth of ship-
ping ; while to the horizon extend fair home-
steads, trim fields, and lowing herds; when
we turn to the country we are reminded of
Shelley’s lines —
While shouts and bowlings through the desert
While the evidence before us of the great-
ness of England’s colonising power, and of its
enormous expansion in trade, in commerce,
in all that constitutes national greatness
during the last fifty years, shows that the
dictum of Cowley still holds true, and that
still more so than when he wrote it —
enlarged and extended so as to embrace and
comprehend the islands of New Zealand in
the South Seas; and the other dated the
30th day of July, 1839, by which Her Majesty,
by Her Royal signet and sign manual, did
constitute “ William Hobson, Esquire, cap-
tain in Her Majesty’s Royal Navy,” to be
Lieutenant-Governor “over such parts of
the Islands of New Zealand as should be
ceded to Her Majesty in sovereignty.”
On the Monday following, the 3rd of
February, forty-five of the inhabitants of
Kororareka presented an address to His
Excellency, pledging themselves to aid His
Excellency with their best exertions to
establish order, law, and security for life and
property, “ in this improving and important
colony,”
The address, it may be said in passing, was
drafted by the Hon. Dr. Pollen, on whom his
years sit as easily as those on men whose
days have been fewer, less actively and use-
fully spent.
Previous to the establishment of British
authority in New Zealand by the arrival of
Captain Hobson, a considerable trade with
New South Wales, Great Britain, and
America prevailed. The British and Ameri-
can statistics have never yet been obtained,
and those of New South Wales only par-
tially. The exports consisted chiefly of
whaleoil, sealskins, flax, timber, pork, and
potatoes; and the imports of ordinary mer-
chandise, firearms, powder, and ball. Thus,
from 1823 to 1832, the value of the exports to
and from New South Wales was as follows :


grave suspicion.
The population for 1889 is computed by the
Registrar-General to 31st December.
The excess of immigration over emigration
has varied largely in different years. Two
epochs are, however, well marked, namely,
those of the gold discoveries in Otago and
Westland; and when the Public works and
Immigration policy was developing itself
fully, from 1861 to 1866, and from 1874 to
1880, the population was increased largely
from the operation of the causes mentioned.
At the end of the year 1860, the population
of the whole colony was 79,711; at the end of
the year 1866, it amounted to 204,114. The
immigrants introduced under the operation
of the Immigration and Public Works Act
1870, and the amount expended on their in-
troduction, may be summarised in the manner
following ; —
Per- Expendi-
sons. ture.
1871 to end of 1875 .. .. 63,891 £1,071,451
Expenditure by the Provincial
Governments between 1871 and
1876, the numbers not stated — 74,409
1876 to end of 1880 33,100 815,617
1881 to end of 1836 11,691 185,763
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
In the four years—lB36, 1837, 1838, and
1839 —the vessels trading to and from New
South Wales, were in number and tonnage as
follow : —To New South Wales, 166; tonnage,
23,569. From New South Wales, 201; ton-
nage, 30,369. It must, however, be remem-
bered that the bulk of the export trade of
New Zealand, at this time, went to England
and the United States.
The expenditure from the mission stations
and the whaling vessels frequenting the coast
was considerable. There were no harbour nor
Customs duties to j>ay. The sperm and black
whales frequenting the shores of the two
Islands caused large number of whalers
every year in the summer months to congre-
gate in the New Zealand waters. The Maoris
sold large tracts of land, for which they ob-
tained both money and goods, and the sale of
their lands, coupled with the barter of their
produce to the traders and whaling vessels,
caused them to enjoy a rude kind of abun-
dance, different from that which they
possessed before they were brought into con-
tact with Europeans.
The missionaries had imported sheep as
well as cattle into the northern portion of
the North Island, while at Mana and Kapiti
speculators from New South Wales had
formed small sheep and cattle stations.
There were of course no roads in the
country, and the boat and canoe formed the
chief mode of transit from one place to
another. The doctor visited the sick, and
the priest the dying, when their services
were required, by water.
The early statistics of the colony were not
carefully classified, and for the first 14 years
of the life of the colony are somewhat imper-
fect ; but such important matters as popula-
tion, imports and exports, shipping and live
stock, can be obtained from the earliest
dates. The first general census of the Euro-
pean population appears to have been taken
in 1851, but in the Census Act of 1858 it was
enacted that an account shall be taken in the
month of December in the year 1858, “and
in the same month in every third year suc-
ceeding, of the number and condition of per-
sons, and of the live stock, and of the land
in cultivation within the colony.” The census
periods were the years indicated below, and
for the purposes of population, may be con-
veniently used to ensure accuracy :
Europeans. Maoris. Chinese.
1851 ... 26,707 ... ...
1858 ... 59,305 ... 56,049 ...
1861 ... 99,021 ... 55,330 ...
1864 ... 172,158 ... ...
1867 ... 218,668 ... 38,540 ... 1,219
1871 ... 266,986 ... 37,502 ... 2,641
1874 ... 341,860 ... 45,470 ...
1878 ... 432,519 ... 43,595 ... 4,433
1881 ... 500,910 ... 44,097 ... 5,033
1886 ... 589,386 ... 41,969 ... 4,550
1889 ... 620,545 ... ...
The military and their families are not in-
cluded in the above figures.
An incomplete return exists for the year
1843, from wdiich it was estimated that the
European population in that year was 13,128,
but no great reliance can be placed on its
accuracy,
The figures relating to the Maori people are
hose of the Government, but Maori experts
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiii
outside the Native Office view them with
There were not in 1886 any immigrants
whose passages were wholly paid for by the
Government, and some of those enumerated
above were only partially assisted, having
been nominated by friends in the colony; but
in 1886, several families came out under re-
gulations made for the immigration of farmers
and agriculturists possessed of small capitals.
The regulations were thus framed.
“ The Agent-General will provide passages
for a limited number of persons who may be
desirous of taking up land in New Zealand
at the same rates as are required to be paid
by persons nominating their friends in the
colony, namely, £lO for each adult, and £5
for each child between the ages of 1 and 12
years.
“ Before passages will be provided, however,
each head of a family must prove to the satis-
faction of the Agent-General that he is pos-
sessed of £lOO in cash, and that he is also
possessed of cash equal to the sum of £5O for
each member of his family over 12 years of
age.
“ Persons desirous of doing so can arrange
to come out in the second-class on the above
terms, by an additional payment equal to the
difference between the cost of steerage and
second-class passages.”
Forty-one farmers arrived under these
regulations in 1886, bringing their families
with them, the total number of persons being
192, viz., 60 males and 49 females over 12
years of age, 42 males and 35 females between
one and 12 years of age, and six infants. For
each nominated immigrant being_ an adult
£lO was paid in the colony by their friends,
and £5 for each child between the ages of one
and 12 years. In the three years, 1886, 1887,
and 1888, for the introduction of farming
people and those nominated in the colony the
following sums were expended: £4590,
£18,832, and £14,168.
The total expenditure by the Government
on Immigration from the passing of the
Immigration and Public Works Act, 1870,
to the 31st December, 1888, has been
£2,109,972 11s 9d.


1840 to 1849 ...
—
£63,672
1850 to I860 ...
1,802,800 ...
969,256
1860 to 1870 ...
4,120,027 ...
3,311,841
1870 to 1880 ...
4,318.203 ...
6,535,531
1880 to 1888 ...
769,723 ...
1,032,440
The public lands have also been dealt with
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Auckland
13,887,000
4,169,495
9,717,504
Hawke’s Bay ..
6,063,000
1,441,819
4,621,180
Taranaki
2,429,510
703,524
1,725.985
Wellington
6,993,650
2,594,765
4,398,884
N elson
7,000,000
2,560,000
1,163,872
5,836,127
Marlborough ..
963,320
1,596,679
Westland
3,045,760
127,897
2,917,862
Canterbury
8,693,000
3,661,324
5,031,675
Otago ..
9,071,808
2,538,108
6,533,699
Holdings.
Number of
Free-
Lease-
Over
Holdings.
hold.
hold, &c.*
Total
1 acre to 10 ac es 9,172
24,406
18,160
42,566
10 to 50 ..
.. 7,507
140,870
78,548
249,418
iillilllllllliliillillllililiililliiilliiiiiiiiiiiiiillillliiiliiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
The year 1888 stands marked, in the table
of the statistics in the general summary,
“ Immigration excess over emigration” by a
minus sign before the figures 9175 and the
letters “ Dec.” after them, which means that
in that year alone since the foundation of the
colony, more people left New Zealand by
emigration then came into it by the number
stated, 9175. The loss by emigration, how-
ever, in 1889 was only 904.
It is one of the most curious facts of life in
New Zealand that the artisan and the labour-
ing classes should migrate to the Australa-
sian colonies. Life perhaps in exceptional
cases may be easier there, but it is far less
pleasant; as of all the British colonies in the
domain of the Crown New Zealand is without
doubt the most pleasant and easiest place to
live in. Those who know it best love it best.
It is a land not only pleasing to behold, but
fruitful beyond most others. It contains
large stores of hidden mineral wealth, and
those elements of usefulness that conduce so
much to the welfare of a people. Its surround-
ing waters are as pregnant with abundant fish
as are the waters of Newfoundland. Those
who grow grain in the South reap the heaviest
harvests of any reapers in the world. In the
North fruits of almost all climates find con-
genial environments. Sheep and cattle all
through the colony grow fat, fearing no
drought. Peace has been secured with the
native race, and the manifold fruits of in-
dustry can be gathered without fear or
danger. Many of the appliances of civilisa-
tion are spread all over the land, which
throughout its length and breadth has been
made habitable. Yet the people, unattached
to the soil, wander away to other countries.
LANDS.
The revenue the Government of New Zea-
land obtained from the sale of Crown lands
was very small indeed, as for several years
it had really no land to sell or money to pur-
chase with. Thus, from 1840 to the end of
1850, both years inclusive, all the land the
Governor sold only amounted to £63,672 in
value, inclusive of the site of the city of
Auckland, which realised some £21,500;
while the land sales of the New Zealand
Company to July, 1850, realised no less than
£360,500 Among other land sharks, the New
Zealand Land Company was entitled to exult
at its premier position. As the Company
rendered no account of its transactions, the
amount obtained by the sale of the public
lands will have to be credited with the un-
known sums the officers of the Company re-
ceived in place of the Crown. Alone among
British colonies, New Zealand had no lands
to sell but what were first purchased. She
had no waste lands, and from 1840 to 1850,
out of her narrow means, had to expend over
£10,300 in native land purchases. After 1850,
the Canterbury Association sold 31,172 acres
of land, realising £109,740. With these addi-
tions, and some returns lacking from Otago,
the sales of Crown land may be summarised
as follow :
Dates. Acres. Cash.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiimuiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiuiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiia
under the deferred payment system, and by
perpetual lease. The statistics of the first-
named are compiled from 1876, and the latter
from 1882. The returns to the end of the
year 1888 total thus : —Lands finally alienated
under the deferred payment system, 335,455
acres ; let on perpetual lease, 361,302 acres.
The official statistics say, “The waste or
Crown lands sold in each year prior to 1856
cannot be accurately stated. The total gross
quantity of land disposed of up to the end of
1888, including lands sold and lands disposed
of without sale, was 19,244,344 statute acres.
The figures under the head of ‘ Free Grants’
(4,515,648 acres) represent in each year the
total quantity of free grants to immigrants
and naval and military settlers, grants for
public purposes, native reserves and old land
claims; also, from 1872, grants to natives
under provisions of the (Native Land Acts.”
The colony is divided into ten land dis-
tricts, enumerated below, with their total
raceage and the area of Crown lands sold or
otherwise disposed of from the foundation of
the colony to the 31st December, 1888.
T and Histrioba Area of Land sold or Lands
i.ana instncts. districts- disposed of. unsold.
Southland .. 6,966,592 1,880,315 6,086,276
Totals .. 66,710,320 19,244,344 47,465,885
Of the land not disposed of some 13 or 14 mil-
lion acres belong to the aborigines or to the
Europeans who hold it from them, leaving
some 33 million acres of Crown lands to be
dealt with. Some 15 millions are open grass
or fern country, 10 millions are forest, and
nine millions are barren mountain - tops,
lakes, and worthless country.” Of the open
grass country, some 11,000,000 acres are held
for depasturing purposes, yielding an annual
rental of over £150,000.
According to last census land is shown to be
occupied in manner following, and though a
number of small holdings have been since
taken up, they will not affect the general view
as to the manner in which the land is occu-
pied, excluding Crown pastoral leases :
50 to 100.. .. 5,014 262,299 128,444 390,743
100 to 200 .. 5,926 604,752 299,598 904,350
200 to 320 .. 3,161 533,891 292.625 826,516
320 to 640 .. 2,804 899,881 376(140 1,276,021
640 to 1000 .. 977 548,176 239,159 787,335
1000 to 5000 .. 1,396 1,980,719 994,376 2,975,095
5000 to 10,000 .. 222 1,179,667 438,218 1,617,885
10.000 to 20,000 170 1,866,215 652 953 2,519,168
20.000 to 50,000 106 2,246,064 824,496 3,070,560
50.000 to 100,0U0 26 1,120,836 715,121 1,835,957
Upwards 100,000 4 320,460 291,000 611,460
Totals .. 36,485 11,728,236 5,348,838 17,077,074
| * Under Leasehold,” &c., are included lauds re-
-1 turned by their occupiers under the following heads ;
| —1 rented from private individuals ; 2 rented from
| public bodies; 3 rented from natives (including
| reserves rented); held from Crown for other than
= pastoral purposes,


Land under Horses.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Pigs.
Crop.
1851
29,140
2,890
34,787
333,043
16,214
1858
140,988
14,912
137,204
1,523,324
40,734
1861
226,621
28,275
193,285
2,761,583
43,270
1864
882,655
49,469
249,760
4,937,273
61,276
1867
676,909
65,715
312,835
8,418,579
115,104
1871
1,140,279
81,028
436,592
9,700,629
151,460
1874
1,651,712
99,261
494,113
11,674,853
123,741
1878
3,523,277
137,753
578,430 13,069,333
207,337
1881
4,768,192
161,736
698,637
12,985,035
200,083
1886
6,845,177
187,382
853,358 16,564,295
277,901
1889
—
—
—
15,468,860
—
Date.
Imports.
Exports.
C’tms Rev.
1841-1850
£1,893,542
£641,725
£206,839
1851-1860
8,247,734
3,441,719
1,094,973
1861-1870
52,080,558
37,034,837
6,641,237
1871-1880
69,007,653
57,275,471
11,195,711
1881-1889
64,427,687
64,164,137
11,181,473
urn mi HI I mm mm
AGRICULTURAL RETURNS AT
CENSUS PERIODS.
The earlier figures are taken from those
prepared for the Indian and Colonial Exhi-
bition. The sheep are the number certified
to by the Live Stock branch of the Crown
Lands Department, as existing in the colony
in May, 1889.
The next census will probably be taken in
the early part of the year 1891, when the
British Census will also be taken, and it
appears not improbable that the people of
the Empire may be numbered simultaneously
all over the world.
The statistics of the census periods are of
course fuller than those of the years when no
census is taken, and from the returns of 1886
several matters can be gleaned that cannot
found in the years following.
SHIPPING.
the Bay of Islands, but until the New Zea"
land records are obtained by the Government
from New South Wales this interesting field
of inquiry is under lock and key.
A difficulty arose about 1832 with the Cus-
toms authorities at Port Jackson, when ves-
sels built in New Zealand traded to British
ports. As New Zealand at that time was not
regarded as a British colony, they could not
be registered as British vessels, _ though
built, owned, and manned by British sub-
jects, until a flag had been approved and se-
lected as a national emblem by the chiefs of
New Zealand, nor could they trade between
Port Jackson and New Zealand while owned
by British subjects, without being liable to
seizure. The difficulty, however, was got
rid of by the adoption of the New Zealand
flag.
After 1840 vessels were built at the Great
Barrier and Coromandel, as well as _ at_ seve-
ral other northern ports. The official figures
relating to shipping follow :
Vessels belon’g.
Inwards. Outwards. to colony.
Vessels. Tons. Vessels. Tons. Vessels. Tons.
1845.. 114 16,960 126 15,837
1850.. 188 49,747 194 48,531
1855.. 378 88,614 341 79,825
1860.. 398 140,276 398 140,293 238 8,527
1865.. 862 295,625 783 283,020 466 24,484
1870.. 756 273,151 766 265,407 384 26,745
1875.. 926 416,727 940 417,820 502 42,027
1880.. 730 395,675 786 424,041 559 66,316
1885.. 706 519,700 780 513,000 597 95,885
1888.. 683 526,435 7ul 531,478 524 '65,323
Several vessels had been built in New Zea-
land of the timber of the country before Cap-
tain Hobson’s arrival. The first was con-
structed by a sealing gang at Dusky Bay
some 95 years since, and named the “ Provi-
dence.” She was taken to Norfolk Island,
and thence to India. What became of her
is not recorded, but as she was most pro-
bably the first vessel built on the Australian
waters, her subsequent history would be a
matter of much interest. The year follow-
ing the “ Assistance,” of 60 tons burthen, was
built at the same place, and taken to Sydney
and sold for £250.
And here, perhaps, it may be pertinent to
state that the sealskins caught in New Zea-
land waters by the gang who built the “ Pro-
vidence” at Dusky Bay was probably the
first export from Port Jackson of the pro-
duce of Australasia, as well as being the
commencement of the great sealing industry
which thence took its rise, and flourished in
the first quarter of this century, but had
almost ceased to exist before the arrival of
Captain Hobson in these seas.
The missionaries built several boats at the
Bay of Islands, and several vessels were con-
structed at Hokianga. One, in 1835, was built
at Poverty Bay, but burned by the natives
before completion. An old-fashioned, high-
sterned, wall-sided cutter of some 50 tons
burthen was built on Queen Charlotte’s Sound
by“ Jacky Love,” the father of the half-
caste family of the same name at Picton, and
laid in the Wellington harbour for years
after the New Zealand Company sent out
some of its immigrants ; while another was
built by “ Bloody Jack” at Stewart’s Island,
and stolen from thence by a man named Mac-
gregor, who ran her to Wellington, and thence
to Whanganui. We know, however, that for
several years over 100 whalers a-year entered
EXPORTS AND IMPORTS.
The import and export tables that were
prepared for the Indian and Colonial Exhibi-
tion in London commence with the year 1841,
while the statistics of the Registrar-General
only begin with the year 1853. For the sake
of simplicity the totals are added together
for the periods of ten years :
The Registrar-General has published in the
broad sheet attached to the volume of statis-
tics for 1888 the figures of Dr. Thomson, in
his “Story of New Zealand,” which, he says,
“ is stated by Sir George Grey to have been
supplied from official sources when he was
Governorbut the official figures of the
Customs differ very widely from those pub-
lished by Dr. Thomson,
The exports for 1889 were the largest re-
corded, being £9,131,373.
Customs duties were first levied in Auck-
land and Russell on Ist July, 1841, and in
Wellington on 25th August of the same year.
They were abolished by Governor Fitzroy on
28th September, 1844, by an ordinance im-
posing a rate upon real property, which
ordinance was repealed on the Bth April,
1845, when Customs duties were again levied.
The first tariff was as follows : Spirits or
strong waters, not being the produce of the
United Kingdom, or any British possession
in America, or of New South Wales, or Van
Diemen’s land, per gallon, ss; spirits or
strong waters, being the produce of British


miiiiiiiniiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiinHniiiiiiMniiiiniiniiiiiiiiii*^^
possessions, 4s per gallon ; wine, for every
£lOO in value, £l5; tobacco, per lb, unmanu-
factured, 9d; ditto, manufactured, Is ; cigars
and snuff, 2s; tea, sugar, flour, meal, wheat,
rice, and other grain and pulse, for every
£lOO in value, £5; on all other goods (ex-
cept goods the produce and manufacture of
the United Kingdom, or of New South Wales,
or Van Diemen’s Land), for every £lOO in
value, £lO.
SHEEP AND WOOL.
The original stock of sheep in this colony
was nearly all drawn from New South
Wales. The missionaries were the first
sheepowners in the Bay of Islands, though
Captain Young may be considered the
second in the field, as he brought both sheep
and cattle to Hokianga with him when he
settled at One-Tree Point, on the river,
though the sheep were soon scattered and
killed by the dogs of the natives and settlers.
The missionaries exported perhaps the first
wool to Sydney, though a Mr. George Bell,
of, Dundee, took up Mana Island, in Cook
Straits, in 1832, and put a small flock of
sheep on it, beside some cattle, making a
kind of farm and whaling station there. Mr.
Jerningham Wakefield, who was on the
island in 1839, states how Mr. Bell’s widow,
quite mad, lived among the natives, and had
acquired all their habits and ways of living,
from which we can gather that Mr. Bell had
been dead some years. Rangihaeta, who
laid claim to the island, used to kill the
sheep for their fleeces, and Mr. Wakefield
says that at a late feast some fifty had been
sacrificed.
New South Wales herself started her herds
and flocks from small beginnings, as the
whole of the stock which accompanied the
expedition of 1788 consisted of only 1 bull, 4
cows, 1 calf, 1 stallion, 3 mares, 3 foals, 29
sheep, 12 pigs, and a few goats. Mr.
King, however, the grandson of Governor
King, gives us some interesting informa-
tion concerning the introduction of fine-
woolled sheep into Australia, which, con-
sidering the sheep of New Zealand came
thence, cannot be wffthout interest to our
colonists. He says Captain McArthur,
with whose name the sheep of Australia are
imperishably connected, was the first man,
we are told, who, in the year 1795, first broke
Australian soil with a plough—all previous
cultivations having been carried on with a
hoe. The sheep brous'ht by Captain Phillip
came from the Cape of Good Hope, and their
numbers were subsequently reinforced by
sheep brought from India. Mr. King says :
—“ Except for wool of the roughest kind
both the Cape and Indian breeds were use-
less. Their fleece was justly called ‘coarse
hair,’and was converted at once into blanket-
ing for local use.”
Captain McArthur established a homestead
at Parramatta with the Crown grant of 100
acres, and bought in 1794 60 Bengal ewes and
lambs, and “ two ewes and a young ram of
the Irish race, which had been brought out
in a transport ”
In 1796 Captain Kent and Captain Water-
house were sent in two sloops of war, the
Reliance and Supply, with a transport, the
Britannia, to the Cape of Good Hope to get
live stock and provisions for the settlement
at Sydney, and on leaving Port Jackson these
officers were “ begged ”by Captain McArthur
to procure if possible any wool-bearing sheep
they might And there. It fortunately hap-
pened that at the period of the visit of those
officers to the Cape a flock of pure Spanish
sheep, of the Escurial breed, which had been
presented by the Spanish authorities to the
Dutch Government, but Nvhich was not
appreciated at the Cape, probably for the
reason that the carcase was too small, was
for sale by the widow of Colonel Gordon,
who had them in charge.
A portion of the flock was purchased by
Captains Kent and Waterhouse (the Govern-
ment Commissary having refused them) at
four guineas a head. There seems to be some
uncertainty as to how many reached Sydney,
but it is understood that Captain Waterhouse
landed only a few; yet for as many as there
were Captain McArthur still following up
his views, when he begged his friends to bring
back woolled sheep, immediately offered 15
guineas a head for the whole lot.
With the new and valuable blood of the
pure merino, which Captain McArthur had
thus acquired, he commenced to cross his
hairy sheep, and whilst others were devoting
their attention to the production of carcases
he steadily persevered in the attainment of
his original object.
Captain McArthur being in England at the
commencement of the present century, pur-
chased nine rams and a ewe from the Royal
flock of pure Spanish merino at Kew. Four
of the rams, however, died on the passage to
New South Wales, where he found his breed-
ing flock had increased during the four years
of his absence to 3,277 ewes, and this number
was soon afterwards augmented by a pur-
chase from the Government flocks of 100 of
the finest woolled sheep he could select.
The foundation, Mr. King says, of a pure
Australian merino flock being once laid,
and good prices obtained for fine wool in the
London market, the settlers soon took up
the profitable speculation, and Captain Mc-
Arthur’s sheep became the source from which
the whole industry emanated.
For the successful prosecution of the enter-
prise on which he had engaged, the Govern-
ment gave Captain McArthur a grant of
5000 acres of land in any locality he chose to
select as being most suitable in his judgment
for pastoral purposes.
As showing the many sided character of
the Reverend. Samuel Marsden, it is related
that when he was in England in 1808 he was
introduced to George the Third through Sir
Joseph Banks, that he requested as a special
favour a gift of two merino sheep, of which
he heard nothing further until the ship was
ready to sail, when he wwites “We are at
this moment getting underweigh, and soon
expect to be upon the ocean. I have received
a present of five Spanish sheep from the
King’s flock, which are all on board. If lam
so fortunate as to get them out, they will be
a most valuable acquisition to the colony. ”
Wool is the most important production of
New Zealand. It is divided into two classes :
combing wool and clothing wool. The first
comprises the long-stapled wools of the Lin-
coln, Leicester, Cotswold and Romney Marsh
breeds of English sheep ; the second the short-
stapled wool grown by the Southdown and


1853-1855
304.911
142,363
1856-1860
393,733
126,616
1861-1865
46,985
12,297
1866-1870
2,200,551
386,327
1871-1875
5.008,972
1,001,875
1876-1880
14,619,011
2,682,651
1881-1885
26,689,678
4,420,935
1886-7, and 8
12,426,579
1,522,251
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiililiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiil!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiininiiliiiililiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!|!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiilliliilliiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiHiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Shropshire Down breeds of English sheep,
and the merino from which are manufactured
woollen goods.
Though the Leicester breed has received great
attention in New Zealand and in the Auckland
provincial district especially, the merino is
the most valuable and important breed fos-
tered in the colony, “and of sheep of this
class the flocks of the colony are chiefly com-
posed.” Dr. Hector says : “ They are of the
Australian merino variety, improved through
the importation of pure Saxon merino rams
from Germany.”
The published exports of the wool of the
colony commence at 1853, and the quantities
and declared value are given below of the
number of years stated :
lbs. Value.
From 1853 to 1860... 23,879,437 ... £1,590,556
Do. 1861 ~ 1865 ... 66,153,331 ... 4,201,207
Do. 1866 „ 1870 ... 143,644,304 ... 7,526,482
Do. 1871 „ 1875 ... 222,666,191 ... 13,079,384
Do. 1876,, 1880 ... 312,685,994 ... 16,643,300
Do. 1881 „ 1885 ... 360,534,526 ... 15,515,327
Do. 1886 „ 1888 ... 282,636,923 ... 9,509,053
GRAIN.
Under the head of “ Grain,” the following
quantities and values are tabulated for the
periods stated, as having been exported from
the colony :
Bushels. £
It may, perhaps, here not be out of place |
to quote a few paragraphs from the report of |
Mr. Proctor Baker, who was appointed by (
the Royal Commissioners to report on the |
grain sections in the Colonies and Indian |
Exhibition of 1886.
“ The average produce of over 26 bushels |
of wheat per acre, and over 32 bushels _of |
barley, places New Zealand in the position |
of being among the most prolific countries in |
the world The samples of wheat |
shown in sheaf by the Canterbury Associa- |
SIIUWH 111 Kfy VUKs Viwiuviouij Ej
tion are so remarkable as to be placed on |
record. ... In fact, nothing finer than |
these wheats has probably ever been seen. |
The wheats of commerce which are shipped |
to England do not approach in quality these |
fine specimens The samples of j
barley were simply magnificent, and such |
barley as the Chevalier would bring enor- |
mous prices in England In the |
quality of its oats, again, New Zealand is in |
the front rank. The samples of potato oats j
are unsurpassable. ... In all the chief |
grains, New Zealand has shown by these |
samples a production of superb quality and |
iu prolific quantities”
FROZEN MEAT.
Dr. Newman, M.H.R., for Thorndon,
writes “ What must strike every student
is this country’s wonderful power of adapting
herself instantly (sic) to suit the ever-varying
tides of the ever-varying foreign marts.
When wheat suddenly ruled high in London
our , farmers quickly increased the yield.
Oats were in moderate sup-
ply ; prices abroad jumped up, and next har-
vest farmers garnered three times the
quantity. 30,000,000 feet of hewn timber
were exported ; prices tended upward, and
the amount swelled to 4.3,000,000 feet. . . .
Indeed, the most hopeful feature of New
Zealand’s future is the wonderful elasticity
of her resources. Show her people a profit
on any single article, and, to use an Ameri-
canism, ! they jump at it baldheaded.’ This
quickness of response, this great capability
of soil and climate, constitutes a lasting rock
of prosperity.”
When dealing with the wonderful increase
and development of the trade in frozen meat
the above extract came to recollection, with
the further statement of the same writer
that “ Formerly runholders looked to sheep
to yield a wool-clip once a year only; now
they reap another harvest once every month
in the year, by freezing so many that in a
year one-third of the whole flock, on a good
run, will go through the slaughter-yards.”
So rapid has been the development of the
trade in its short career that no excuse is
needed for quoting the official figures in full
of the quantity exported and its declared
value :
Quantity in cwts. Value.
1882 ... 15,244 ... £19,339
1883 ... 87,975 ... 118.238
1884 ... 254,069 ... 345,090
1885 ... 296,473 ... 373,857
1886 ... 346,053 ... 427,193
1887 ... 402,107 ... 455,870
1888 ... 552,298 ... 628,800
FLAX,
New Zealand flax was one of the earliest
exports from N ew Zealand, and for a number
of years in the first part of the century was
an object of diligent native manufacture.
No New Zealand trade was so full of haz-
ardous adventures as that of the resident
flax-trader, as there was the constant danger
of his losing his life if he offended the natives
among whom he lived. The Customs returns
of New South Wales of 1828 give sixty tons
valued at £2600 as the quantity exported
from Sydney to London in that year. In
1830 eight hundred and forty-one tons were
exported, v hile 28 vessels engaged in the
flax trade made in the aggregate 56 voyages
to New Zealand. The export in 1831 was
one thousand and sixty-two tons, when the
trade began to decline from the inferiority of
the manufactured article, but from 1828 to
1832 the exports from Sydney were valued at
£50,000. At Grimsby, in Lincolnshire, a
manufactory was established in the latter
year for the production of articles of New
Zealand fibre.
Sir James Hector in his “ Handbook of
New Zealand” writes : “From 1853 to 1860
the average annual value of the fibre exported
was nearly £2500, reaching as high as £5OOO
in 1855; but up to that time the only fibre
exported was that prepared by native labour,
no machinery of any kind being employed in


1853
to
1860...
506
12,894
1860
to
1870...
8,422
195,012
1871
to
1880...
21,275
454,515
1881
to
1888...
14,681
261,077
llllllllinillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllltlllllllllllllHllllltllllllllilliniinillilllllHlllllllllllllllllillllililllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllHllllHlJlinilllilllllllltlllilltllllllllillllllllilllllllllllillNllillllllSlHlillllililliliillllllllllilltl
producing the article. In 1860, therefore,
when the native disturbance affected the
Waikato and other interior districts in the
North Island, the preparation was confined
to the native tribes north of Auckland, so
that the average export value was only £l5O
per annum. Attention was then directed
towards the contrivance of machinery with
the aid of which the fibre could be profitably
employed by European labour. In 1861 the
increasing demand for white rope, and the
limited quantity of manilla (which fibre de-
p#nds for its production on native manual
labour in the Philippine Islands) led to a
rise in its value from £2l to £56 per ton,
and even to £76 per ton in America,
during the late civil war. These high
prices stimulated the endeavour to introduce
phonnium fibre to compete with manilla, and
several machines were invented for rapidly
producing the fibre from the green leaf.
With these machines the export trade again
increased so that from 1866 to 1871 the yearly
average was valued at £56,000.
It was stated some time since on good
authority that New Zealand flax was being ex-
tensively cultivated in the Azores Islands,
and that a company had been established
there holding a concession from the Govern-
ment of a monopoly for the manufacture of
this article throughout all the Portuguese
possessions. Within the last year or two
the price of flax has considerably hardened,
and the commodity has been in much greater
demand. This improvement has arisen from
two or more causes, and the increased price
promises to become permanent. Various
reasons have been given for this “ harden-
ing,” but the supply of manilla hemp falling
short would almost account for it alone. The
natives of the Philippine Islands have been
afflcted with an epidemic, and a great mor-
tality has overtaken them, while the fibre
that competes with manilla has also de-
creased in its yield. But, beyond these cir-
cumstances, which may be only of an
ephemeral character, a new and increasing
use has been found for the fibre of the flax.
This is the manufacture of twine for use in
the harvesting machine —the flax fibre answer-
ing all the conditions for twine-making re-
markably well. While a new use has been
found for the phormium, machinery has been
brought to a more efficient character for
cleansing it from the mucilage that at one
time it seemed almost hopeless to expect.
The quantity exported since the com-
mencement of 1853, and its declared values,
are as follow :
Tons. Value in £’s.
GOLD
Gold, Dr. Hector writes, was discovered in
New Zealand in 1842, less than three years
from the foundation of the colony, but it was
not practically worked until 1852, when the
mines at Coromandel first attracted attention
to the district of Cape Colville Peninsula.
Alluvial diggings were discovered at Colling-
wood in 1858, in Otago in 1861, and in 1864
the goldfields of Westland commenced to offer
great attraction to the mining population.
In June 1861, gold was found at Gabriel’s
Gully in Otago, and when the first escort took
away over 50000z5., not only the Northern
Island but crowds from Australia caught the
infection, and exhausted every available
means of procuring conveyance to Otago.
The Dunstan and the Lake goldfields were
soon opened after Gabriel’s Gully, and the
population of Otago, which in 1860 was 12,691,
in the December of the year following was
considered to have been more than 30,0u0.
The small province of Southland, under in-
fluences which had magnified Otago, increased
its popidation from 1876, in the year 1861, to
8085 in 1864.
In 1865 Westland was“ rushed,” and settled
wholly by a gold mining community. At that
period there was not more than 100 people in
the district, while in December 1871, when
the census was taken, the population was
ov r er 15,000. Prom the wide distribution of
gold over its entire area —from the mountain
top to the sea beach —the difficulties it pre-
sents to the traveller and prospector, West-
land would appear to be the most enduring of
all the alluvial goldfields of the colony. A
late writer on the history of New Zealand
remarks of this district: —“ It is difficult to
grasp the wonderful change which has been
made within 25 years by the industry and
enterprise of this West Coast population of
settlers who, it must be borne in mind, came
there at their own cost.”
The Thames goldfield was opened in August
1867, and soon obtained a large population,
although a reefing district, from the richness
of the early claims, which may be gathered
from a few well-known facts. The six owners
of “ Hunt’s,” one of the first claims taken up,
obtained 25,0000 z. of gold by a few days’
work. The Golden Crown paid £200,000 in
dividends in twelve months; and the Cale-
donian subsequently yielded ten tons of gold
in about the same period of time, and distri-
buted £572,000 among the fortunate share-
holders.
GOLD EXPORTED
From New Zealand from Ist April, 1857, to
end of the year 1888 :
Ounces. Value.
District of Auckland... 1,578,957 £5,883,522
District of Wellington 188 706
Dist’ct of Marlborough 55,919 214,057
District of Nelson ... 228,522 907,992
District of Westland 4,902,457 19,463,721
District of Canterbury 48 192
District of Otago ... 4,656,126 18,421,817
In order to show how the export of flax
fibre has increased of late, we give the fol-
lowing figures : —ln 1885, there were ex-
ported, 1063 tons ; in 1886,1112 tons ; in 1887,
1578 tons ; in 1888, 4042 tons, of the value of
£75,269. For the quarter ended 31st March,
1889, there were exported, 2103 tons, value
£46,258; for the quarter ended 30th June,
3922 tons, value £86,563; for the quarter
ended 30th September, 4662 tons, value
£97,027.
Total 11,374,522 £44,843,642
Whole colony, 1889 ... 203,211 £808,549
Whole colony, 1888 ... 201,219 801,066


1853 —1855
... £148,373
1856-1860
101,154
1861—1865
91,411
1866-1870
96,742
1871-1875
176,022
1876—1880
226,782
1881—1885
645,135
1886-1889
441,018 1
NiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiminiiuiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiimniiiiiiiuiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuniiiniiiiiiiiiiu
KAURI GUM.
Kauri gum is essentially an Auckland
article of export. It is the turpentine of
the Dammara Australis,_ found in a solid form
as far south as Taranaki, and it is excavated
from the sites of old kauri forests. The first
export of the article is said to have been
made by Captain Mair, a resident of the Bay
of Islands, before 1840, but his venture
proved unprofitable, as the price realised
was only some £5 a ton. At first the exports
were small, and the price unremunerarive,
but when it became an established article of
commerce it was more earnestly sought and
competed for, the selling price ranging from
30s to 50s a hundredweight. A large portion
of the produce of the gumfields is sold to
American buyers, principally for New York
and Boston, whither it is generally carried in
sailing vessels; or it is sent to London, for
transhipment to the American cities.
It first appears in the export tables for the
year 1853, and the quantities exported and
the values declared are as follow :
Tons. Value.
From 1853 to 1860 ... 11,671 £153,793
From 1860 to 1870 ... 22,625 461,609
From 1870 to 1880 ... 36,414 1,877,359
From 1880 to 1889 ... 49,972 2,492,386
TIMBER.
The timber trade from New Zealand is
older than the century, although there is no
record of machinery being erected for its
manipulation until after the arrival of Cap-
tain Hobson. Timber was exported in bulk
from the Thames before the end of the last
century, but as it was described as different
from the Norfolk pines in having the turpen- |
tine in the centre of the tree instead of be- |
tween the bark and the wood, Mr. Cheese- |
man was led to conclude that the spars |
shipped by the Fancy, as the vessel was |
called, were other than those of kauri. The |
Fancy was the first vessel that is recorded |
as having taken timber from the Northern |
Island to India, though that cut from Dusky |
Bay had previously obtained commendation |
at Port Jackson.
After Mr. Marsden’s time (1814), the timber
of the North, handout by the natives into
junk and boards, was common in Sydney.
In 1820 the navy sent two store ships to New
Zealand to load with spars for topmasts;
and after Captain Deloitte —subsequently
Lloyd’s agent at Port Jackson —came to the
Hokianga in 1825, the timber trade between
New Zealand and New South Wales expanded
into large dimensions.
The published exports of timber reach back
to 1853. They are given in five yearly periods,
generally in money value :
COAL.
The output from the coal mines of the
colony is rapidly increasing, and from the
fact that there is in the Middle Island a
large quantity of the best bituminous steam
coal that is known to exist south of the
Equator, in the close vicinity of harbours
capable of accommodating steam colliers of
500 tons burthen and upwards, a well-founded
hope exists that the future of coal mining in
New Zealand will be the source of great
wealth to the whole community. Time is
the chief factor in all modern mercantile
transactions, and the steamer that makes the
fastest passage as a rule, most other things
being equal, is the greatest favourite. The
quickest passage most people consider the
best. As with the passenger, so with the
owner. A day or two saved in an ocean
passage means a considerable saving in the
cost of the voyage. The best coal for raising
steam is a great consideration both with the
owner and master, as the shorter time the
steamer is on the water the risk as well as
the expense of running is lessened. It is only
a matter of time when most of the coal for the
British navy used south of the Equator will
be drawn from New Zealand; and that the
Southern Imperial coaling stations will also
be largely supplied from the same source,
seems equally certain, as the engineers of
steamers esteem the bituminous coal on the
West Coast of the Middle Island 20 per cent,
better than the best New South Wales coal
for steam purposes. Until petroleum takes
the place of coal the country that has the
largest supply of steam coal of the best
quality convenient to harbours can hardly
fail of being “rich beyond the dreams of
avarice ”in the near future. Of this bi-
tuminous coal of superior quality the Mount
Rochfort mine, in Nelson, alone contains
140,000,000 tons.
Output. Export. Value of
Year. Tons. Tons. Export.
1881 ... 337,262 6,849 £5,610
1882 ... 378,272 4,520 2,380
1883 ... 421,764 7,952 4,879
1884 ... 480,831 7,020 4,461
1885 ... 511,063 50,248 51.257
1886 ... 534,353 47,037 52,133
1887 ... 558,620 44,312 44,083
1888 ... 613,895 69,040 61,367
WHALING.
The whaling exports are very imperfect,
but they show that the greater portion of
the products of the fishery were not exported
from New Zealand, but must have gone to
New South Wales, and that whalers of
foreign countries took their cargoes away
without their quantities being known to, or
recorded by, the Customs authorities. Thus
in the season of 1843-4 there were sent to
England from Wellington alone 850 tons of
oil, while 230 tons went from New Zealand
to Port Jackson. But early in 1841 Ameri-
can and other foreign vessels engaged in the
whaling trade, and wanting repairs or sup-
plies in the colony, and being destitute of


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiniiniiiiiiiiNiMnniiiiiiiniiiiiiiiitiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiimiiiiiiin
any other means of providing for their dis-
bursements than by selling a portion of their
oil, had to pay a duty of 10 per cent, ad
valorem on what they either sold or ex-
changed. The operations of this tax with-
out doubt restricted the amount of oil cleared
from the New Zealand ports. From the
founding of the colony until the year 1853
whalebone has no place among the returns,
though it is evident that a large amount of
bone must have been obtained during these
years from the large quantity of black whale
oil exported of which an account is kept.
In one or more years the oil is reckoned as so
many casks, and when in this manner re-
corded has no money value attached. The
same thing occurs with the bone, which in
some years is entered as so many packages
instead of hundredweights, without the
value stated. For some half-dozen years
scarce any oil appears in the exports, save
some 600 gallons of sperm oil, while the
whalebone is regularly entered. The value
of the whaling products are given as recorded
from 1841 onwards Sperm oil, £167,458,
and 38 casks; whale oil, £165,309, and 256
casks ; whalebone, £48,863, and 15 packages.
Total whaling product recorded from 1840 to
the end of 1888, £381,630.
FISHERIES.
From whaling to fishing seems but a short
stride, andyetthe industries are widely apart.
Fishermen rarely become whalers, while
whaling crews are composed of men of all
conditions and all classes. And, though
edible fish swarm all around the New Zea-
land coast (several known varieties not yet
being classified), with its 5300 miles of coast-
line, serrated with numerous bays and inlets,
there never has been any really steady supply
of fish at any one of the centres of popula-
tion in either Island. Not enough, even, for
local consumption, let alone for steady ex-
port. The explanation is simple, as are most
other things when known. Fisher folk are
bred and are not trained. Our Legislature
passed a measure for the establishment of
fishing villages, but they did not transport
fisher-folk to fill them. Fishermen form a
class that live apart nearly all the world
over. They certainly do so, at least in
Europe. They live in hamlets by themselves,
aud* the calling seems hereditary. They
rarely intermarry. The fish women are as im-
portant as the fishermen. They sell the fish
which the men capture. In some places
they also make and mend the nets while
their husbands or fathers repair and paint
their boats. Some time since, when the late
Mr. Waddel was Mayor of Auckland, a
number of citizens signed a letter which was
drafted and sent to Mr. Davitt, of Home
Rule notoriety, asking him to use his influ-
ence to induce some fisher- folk from the West
Coast of Ireland, who were in sore straits
for sustenance, to migrate here to form a
fishing village in the Hauraki Gulf, stating
that homesteads would be provided for them
if they came, and that the Government
would be moved to grant them free passages,
but Mr. Davitt never thought it worth his
while to reply to the letter, though the pre-
sent acting-Premier of New Zealand, the Hon.
Mr. Mitchelson, was among the persons sign-
ing the document. It was the lack of fish in
Auckland, with which its surrounding waters
swarm, with the knowledge that if a fishing
village was wanted here a village would have
to be imported—young and old, grandparents
and grandchildren—before a regular supply
of fish could be obtained. A fishing export
trade has yet to be established, as neither
fish, fishing, nor fisheries have as yet found a
place in the copious index of our volume of
statistics.
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.
The first portion of the revenue and expen-
diture figures are taken from the Comp-
troller’s balance-sheets of the colony, com-
mencing as they do with the year 1840 —a
date that has not often appeared in the
former portion of this condensed abstract.
The terms used by Mr. Fitzgerald are here
employed. Shillings and pence are omitted.
In dealing with this portion of the financial
history of the colony the years have been
given from 1840 to 1852 inclusive, when the
“Receipts in aid” ceased to appear in the
balance-sheets. In 1853 the accounts are
tabulated by the Registrar-General, and from
this date onwards will be used, as more con-
venient than those compiled by the Audit
Office, running as they do from January to
December, and not confusing the general
reader with the varying dates of financial
periods.
The “ Receipts in aid” in the earlier years
comprise advances by the Government of R ew
South Wales, and receipts from the Imperial
Treasury in the form of Parliamentary grants
and drafts on the commissariat chest. They
ceased at the date when the Constitution Act
was passed. It is curious to compare the
figures of the Audit Office in the “ Balance-
sheets of the colony,” with those issued by
the Registrar-General from Dr. Thomson’s
“ Story of New Zealand”—the Registrar-
General in a memorandum telling us—
“ Which is stated by Sir George Grey to have
been supplied from official sources when he
was Governor.” The “ Receipts in aid,” ac-
cording to the Audit Office, amount to
£297,240, whereas in Thomson’s tables they
are set down as £1,517,967, being Parliamen-
tary grants of £304,432, and appropriations
from the commissariat chest of £1,203,536.
There are no expenditure returns prior to
1874 in the Registrar-General’s statistical
summary, and though there are returns of
the expenditure of the various provinces
prior to that date, as far back as 1853 in the
columns of the statistics, they are so en-
tangled with the accounts of the general
government, that those who have tried to see
their way through the maze have become be-
wildered or abandoned the task in disgust.
The late Mr. Macandrew some years since
asked Sir Julius Vogel if he could find his
way through the tangle, but Sir Julius, after
spending several days over the matter, gave
it up in hopeless perplexity.
The expenditure “ out of revenue” for the
years 1884, 5,6, 7,8, are exclusive charges
for sinking fund, which was met by the
issue of debentures to an equivalent amount.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitHiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiniiiiiiiiiuiiiiiHiiuißiiiniiiuniiiniiinniiiiniiiiiiiiinm
Dates. Revenue. Receipts in Expendi- | present time, without a very large amount of
Aicl - ture - | research, coupled with the assistance of the
1840 ... £2,757 ... £lB,OOO ... £21,741 | officers of the Treasury, to learn how the
1841 ... 41,462 ... 8,500 ... 40*101 I loans before 1870 were expended. But from
1842 ... 35,759 ... 13*972 ... 51*697 I 1870 onwards a large amount of the public
1843 ... 26,235 ... 9*563 ... 41*127 I debt can be shown to have been disbursed for
1844 ... 17,221 ... 28*477 ... 38*627 | the following purposes
or/f-o ■” oc’lvf "■ fo’rcv I Railways, 1777 miles £14,875,187
1846 ... 25,852 ... 30,674 ... 48,587 = Telegraph —miles of line, 4790 .. .. 558,345
1847 ... 42,493 ... 37,753 ... 87,722 i Lighthouses, Harbour Works, and De-
-1848 ... 52,339 ... 49,250 ... 89,501 I fences 620,210
1849 ... 44,909 ... 21,067 ... 86,850 I Public Buildings 1,469,716
1850 ... 56,009 ... 11,500 ... 64,992 I departmental Expenditure on Public
1851 ... 69,915 ... 9,200 ... 75,276 I w'ter Supply on Goldfields " " Ks
1852 ... 74,942 ... 15,538 ... 88,738 | immlgratFon V. /. 2 ,0?9’972
Water Supply on Goldfields .. . 496,788
Immigration 2,019,972
Roads 2,847,558
Land Purchases 1,113,680
Purchase of District Railways .. .. 361,688
Contingent Defence 435,970
Thermal Springs development .. .. 11,254
Rates on Native Lands 42,334
Miscellaneous Public Works .. .. 557,278
Expenditure in Raising Loans .. .. 1,023,073
Transfer under Roads and Bridges Con-
struction Act to Main and District
£503,996 ... £297,239 ... £773,800 |
REVENUE. EXPENDITURE. 2
Out of Revenue. Out of Loan.
piocoon 1 Miscellaneous Public Works .. .. 557,278
1000 ±488,829 ... ... n Expenditure in Raising Loans .. .. 1,023,073
1860 464,739 ... ... I Transfer under Roads and Bridges Con-
-1865 1,525,827 ... ... 1 struction Act to Main and District
1870 1 384 639 I Roads, and River Works Accounts .. 224,677
1874 3 068 612 2 960 710 2 725 893 1 Loan money expended in aid of revenue 3,822,533
1875 2,8131928 T.'. 3,431,972 3J07,’867 I Total £30752026
1876 3,580,294 ...4,305,337 ... 2,066,104 | ’ ’
1877 3,916,023 ... 3,822,425 ... 1,827,904 | The above details are from official figures
1878 4,167,889 ... 4,365,275 ... 1,287,869 | published at various times, and are to be
.1879 4,134,905 ... 3,845,035 ... 1,973,239 | found in the Appendices to the Journal of
1880 3,285,042 ... 4,019,850 ... 2,228,990 = the House of Representatives, and in the
1881 3,757,493 ... 3,675,797 ... 1,069,927 | volume of Statistics for the year 1888 ; while
1882 3,917,160 ... 3,824,735 ... 821,976 | the loan money expended in aid of revenue
1883 3,871,267 ... 3,924,005 ... 1,191,784 | is from a return moved for by Mr. Barron,
1884 3,707,488 ... 3,853,628 ... 1,565,748 | on 27th June, 1889, “ That there be laid upon
1885 3,859,996 ... 4,045,901 .. 1,178,884 | the table a return showing the amount of
1886 3,688,016 ... 4,170,465 ... 1,583,723 | loan money expended in aid of revenue in
1887 3,463,495 ... 3,954,290 ... 1,487,850 i each year since 1875.”
1888 4,109,815 ... 3,962,912 ... 739,674 I
1889 .. ... ... |
CIVIL SERVICE,
PUBLIC DEBT.
The public debt of the colony on 31st De-
cember, 1888, deducting the accrued sinking
funds, was £36,971,771, bearing an annual
charge for interest of £1,750,751.
A large portion of this amount of liability |
has been expended in reproductive works, or |
x 1 L V7 Vt. LIV VI V V VV V/i XvO j vi ~
works of expediency, so as to render the |
country habitable for persons accustomed to |
the wants of civilisation. At the end of the
Maori War, though the Middle Island was |
tolerably provided in some portions with |
i/uici duly piuv IU.LU in oUiiit/ jjoi Lions wirn =
ordinary roads, it was almost deficient in |
railways, while the North Island was defi- |
cient in both roads and railways, and wanted |
moreover the special means for making them I
in the lack of public land to supply the funds. |
A large portion of the colony was difficult to |
open—perhaps three times as difficult and I
expensive as any of the Australian colonies. |
Even in the open country which prevails in |
Otago and Canterbury railway and road con- |
struction have been difficult and costly, from |
the bridging of the many wide and rapid |
rivers with which the land abounded ; while |
in the other districts of the colony great diffi- |
culties are encountered from the density of |
the vegetation, and the uneven contour of |
the country. In 1870 the public debt was |
£7,841,891, bearing the annual charge of |
£479,761. It would be hardly possible at the |
The growth of the cost of the Civil Services
from the Balance-sheets of the colony, issued
from the Audit office, is here given in quin-
quennial periods :
Cost of Civil Service. Pensions.
1840 ... £6,551
1845 ... 17,953
1850 ... 30,161
1855 ... 22,695
1860 ... 60,025 £1.700
1865 ... 147,342 2,901
1870 ... 203,861 5,884
1875 ... 306,824 8,619
1880 ... 380,510 17,873
1885 ... 570,286 30,195
1888 ... 475,247 27,876
27,876
What is included by the Comptroller in
the Civil Services does not appear clear, as in
the “ Introductory Remarks” it is stated that
“ Postal up to the year 1846 is included in the
Civil Services“ Marine in the earlier
years is included in the Civil Services and
“ Under the head of Lands is comprised
all the expenditure on surveys and on the
goldfields,” but as most people would regard
the postal authorities, the surveyors and
draughtsmen, and the marine officers as Civil
Servants, it would seem that a very large
number outside the “ Civil Service” roll
obtain Civil servants’ salaries and Civil ser-
vants’ employment.


Real property
116,376,659
Personal property
82,540,315
Railways £13,458,363
Telegraphs 523,727
Lighthouses .. .. .. 150,895
Buildings 2,250,000
Harbours .. .. .. 2,500,000
Water Supply, Goldfields .. 500,000
19,377,959
Total
£218,294,955
Liabilities.
Debt of the colony, de- 1
ducting sinking fund / £31,688,849
Debts of local bodies .. 5,616,273
Mortgages ... .. .. 31,821,109
Indebtedness exclusive of
mortgages .. .. 20,365,593
89,491,324
Surplus
£128,803,635
European population, March, 1886, 578,482;
surplus per head, £223.
The real property was thus made up : —
Crown Lands
£13,675,516
Native lands within five miles of a road,
suitable for horse traffic ..
5,847,105
Education, Church, Municipal and
other reserves
7,252,273
Taxable real estate
47,277,142
Non-taxable real estate
42,324,623
Total
£116,376,659
iiiiiraiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii
The total of the pensions paid to 31st
March, 1888, amounted to the sum of
£658,087 Us 3d, without any regard to sums
paid for compensation for loss of office or
gratuities to the bereaved or injured. It is
no uncommon thing, however, to find among
the public accounts the names of men re-
ceiving compensation for loss of office on two
or more different occasions, having been
“retrenched” more than once when an in-
coming Ministry wanted to appear to set the
finances in order.
For compensation for loss of office two
periods in the last decade are notable, those
of 1880 and 1888, when some £20,000 on each
occasion was paid away to discharged
officials.
WEALTH OF THE COLONY.
The Property Tax Department supplied
the following information concerning the
assets and liabilities of the colony, made up
to 31st March, 1886, the last census period:—
Assets. £
It must be borne in mind that in this esti-
mate of the wealth of the colony the unalien-
ated lands, (after deducting 9,000,000 acres f
which are held to be worthless, as being
“barren mountain tops, lakes, and worthless
country”), are only computed as being worth
some 10s an acre, whereas in New South
Wales the unalienated Crown lands are corn-
puted as being worth 13s 3d in the estimate
of the public wealth in “The Wealth and
Progress of New South Wales,” published
under the Government auspices, and compiled
by the Government Statistician.
LOCAL INDUSTRIES.
As already stated, the particulars of the
various industries can only be obtained at
census periods, and those of that time must
be used at the present occasion. It will be
most satisfactory to place the details in a
lllllllllllllllillllllllilllllllll[lillllillllil!llll!IH1llil|[|llll
1111111111111111111111 l
'llllllllllllllllllllllll
tabular form after the manner of the
trar-General, adding such information
the table as is most expedient for tt
most expedient for
appreciation of the work done
3 Regis-
-311 after
the full
Printing establishm’ts
For machines, tools,
and implements
Coach buihiing and
printing
Ship and boatbuilding
Fur’iture nianuf ctories
Chemical works
Hematite paint maim
factories
Woollen mills
Boot factories
Clothing factories
Hat and cap factories
Flaxmills
Rope and twine works
Sail factories
Cheese and butter fac-
Grain mills
Breweries
Boiling - down, meat-
freezing, and preser-
ving works
Soap and candle works
Fellmong’ring, ta’ning,
and wool-scouring ..
Sawmills
Collieries
Brick, tile, and pottery
works
Iron and brass fo’ndries
Gold and quartz min-
ing works
Hydraulic goldmining
Other industries
Totals
a
3
.g
©
O
u
©
-Q
a
£
S .
©
u P*
.o
a
s
A
© © £
£ ce og
t «&
ns *£'2
o> a 3
32
.§ '3
■B-°
381,723
66,025
128,346
17,094
93,032
30,409
6,175
203,279
70,395
37,530
14,790
18,016
56,413
15,370
<D. o 5
©
§5
o §
So I
S cS
|*a
w
273,886
126,663
106,238
56,132
162,375
34,283
2,178
194.311
276,725
237,781
13,695
20,059
49,821
25,574
47,513
329,304
323,756
43,094
754,830
325,182
44 838 442,932 543,878
18 204 75,928 130,475
97 1,093 138,750 634,915
268 5,042 964,095 1,179,713
79 1,448 148,773 255,326
126 598 151,411 91,797
5s 1,748 239,938 351,379
101 1,166 £11,021 374,837
124 617 224,787 74,190
563 3,310 1,310,742 1,099,312
9268 25,655 5,697,117 7,436,649
I
WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES,
In the woollen manufactures the increase
of production and the consequent consump-
tion of native wool is both remarkable
and gratifying. In 1887 the quantity pur-
chased by the local woollen mills was
2,001,1551b5, a larger amount sold than
in any previous year, whereas in 1888
4,079,5631bs was consumed —nearly double the
quantity of the previous year. The Regis-
trar adds, in connection with these figures,
the folio wing remark ; —“ It may be observed
that the Customs duties on imported woollen
piece-goods was increased on the 30th May,
1888, from 15 to 20 per cent, ad valorem, and
it is presumable that this increase in the
tariff has stimulated the local production of
these goods, but it should be added that the
mills export their manufactures to New
South Wales, where the Customs duties are
light compared with those in this colony.”
DAIRY PRODUCE.
_ Dairy produce has made a large expansion
since the census report of 1886. The exports


Capital paid up.
Bank of New Zealand
£1,125,000
Union Bank of Australasia (ltd.)
1,500,000
Bank of New South Wales
1,250,000
Bank of Australasia
1,600,000
National Bank of New Zealand (Ltd.)
250,000
Colonial Bank of New Zealand..
400,000
Bank of N. Zealand..
Union Bank of Aus-
4,341,038
7,125,420
4,767,791 |
tralia
Bank of New South
2,342,671
2,641,235
2,462,577 I
Wales
1.682,573
2, f 37,255
1,785,189 1
Bank of Australasia..
National Bank of N.
966,947
1,402,936
1,039,050 |
Zealand
Colonial Bank of New
1,140,655
1,918,791
1,248,959 |
Zealand
1,187,573
2,247,721
1,298,852 |
iniiiiiniiiniiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiii
of butter and cheese were greater in value
in 1888 by £87,685 than in 1887 —the export
of butter increasing from £54,921 to £118,252,
and of cheese from £54,562 to £78,918. The
country and climate are eminently adapted
for dairy farming, and this industry has a
great future before it, as there is a very large
area of forest land in the colony capable of
being converted into grazing ground for
stock. As the official pamphlet on the
manufacture of cheese, butter, and bacon
in New Zealand, dedicated to Sir Frederick
Whitaker, remarked : “Themildness of the
climate and the fertility of the soil conduce
to render New Zealand for all practical
dairy purposes preferable to either England
or America.”
BEER.
New Zealand brewed beer appears at
length to be driving the imported article out
of the market, as the quantity imported in
1885 was valued at £102,229, while in 1888 it
had decreased in value to £47,852 ; and the
decreasing amount imported, from the excel-
lence of that of native manufacture, pro-
mises to increase in proportion to the care
employed in our own breweries. Brewing
would appear to be one of the oldest of our
industries, as Polack writes : “In 1835 we
introduced the first foreign manufacture in
New Zealand—viz., a brewery as a preventa-
tive to the rapid spread of deleterious spirits
that were consumed less probably from taste
than from the want of an invigorating substi-
tute. ” He goes on to state how a house was
erected for the purpose at Kororareka, how
hops were imported from Sydney and a
brewer from Tasmania ; that tine water was
well adapted for brewing, and “ the natives
after some little practice in quaffing, soon
began to relish it, and baskets of potatoes,
packages of fish, etc., soon found conveyance
to the brewery in exchange for Pierian
draughts of New Zealand beer. That
Northern beer continues to please the public
is plain, as _ Messrs. Brown and Campbell’s
beer_ stood distinguished for its merits at the
Exhibition in Melbourne in the year 1888.
BANKS.
There are six banks doing business in New
Zealand, with the following paid -up
capital:—
Deposits. Assets. Liabilit’s.
£ £ £
Their deposits, assets, and liabilities in the
colony at the end of September, 1889,
were as follow :
nnininiiiniiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniHiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
BANK OF NEW ZEALAND.
| This Bank was founded in Auckland in
I 1861, but its promoters were uncertain
I whether it should be incorporated by Royal
| Charter or established by an Act of the
| General Assembly. Its capital was to consist
| of £500,000, in shares of £lO each. Its paid-
j up capital was to be £250,000, to be called up
| as follows : —2s 6d per share on application,
| 17s 6d on signing the deed of settlement, and
j 20s a share after signing the deed, and the
| balance of 60s per share, making the total of
| 50 per cent., if required, in calls of not less
i than three months thereafter.
The provisional trustees were —for Auck-
land : Messrs. J. L. Campbell, Thomas Hen-
derson, James O’Neill, Thomas Russell, and
James Williamson. For Wellington : Messrs.
A. I). Brandon and W. B. Rhodes. For
Nelson t Mr. H. E. Curtis and Hon. E.
VV. Stafford. For Canterbury: Hon. F. A.
Weld and Mr. J. Cracroft Wilson. For
Otago : Messrs. E. M. Glashan and John
Jones. For Hawke’s Bay ; Mr. J. Watt. For
Marlborough : Messrs.' W. H. Eyes and J,
Sinclair. The prospectus stated, “inter alia:
—“ltis manifest to those who have devoted
attention to the subject, that the banking
establishments in New Zealand have derived
immense profits, which are payable entirely
to a foreign proprietary, from a trade carried
on with the funds of the colonists, a circum-
stance which must lead to the consideration
whether the colonists of N ew Zealand are not
now in a position to enjoy, and entitled to
receive, whatever advantages can be derived
from the employment of their own capital.”
The people of Auckland manifested much
interest in the proposed Bank, and when the
share list was opened it was found that 10,000
shares, representing £lOO,OOO, were taken up
in what was then known as the capital of
New Zealand. An equal number was re-
served for London, where a board of directors
was to be appointed at an early date. All
the shares that were allotted to Sydney were
taken up, while in Wellington and Christ-
church the proposed Bank was greatly in
favour with the public.
A special general meeting of the share-
holders took place at the Mechanics’ Insti-
tute, Auckland, on Ist October, 1861, to
appoint directors and auditors. There were
one hundred and eighteen shareholders pre-
sent. On the motion of Mr. Buckland,
seconded by the Hon. E. W. Stafford, Mr,
James Williamson presided. The directors
chosen were Messrs. J. L. Campbell, Thomas
Russell, James O’Neil, Thomas Henderson,
G. Burgoyne Owen, C. J. Taylor, and James
Williamson. Captain Daldy and Mr. Samuel
Browning were appointed auditors, and Mr.
Alexander Kennedy general manager.
Business was opened at Auckland, where
the head office was fixed, on the 16th October,
1861; at Taranaki, on November 11; at
Dunedin, on 2nd December, and at Welling-
ton and Nelson on 15th January in the new
year.
The first half-yearly meeting was held at
Auckland, on 30th April, 1862, when it was
stated that “only 1175 shares remained un-
appropriated.” The paid-up capital amounted
to £108,785, and a dividend at the rate of 6
per cent, per annum was declared, £3OOO was


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin
carried to the formation of a reserve fund,
and £726 13s, the balance, was carried for-
ward to open the profit and loss account.
The day after the meeting the New Zealand
Government account was transferred from
the Union Bank of Australia to that of the
Bank of New Zealand. Mr. Fox was at the
time the Premier of the colony.
The second half-yearly meeting was held
on 30th October, when the paid-up capital
amounted to £179,468, and a dividend at the
rate of 10 per cent, per annum was paid,
£6,000 was added to the reserve fund, and
£894 carried forward.
At the same half-yearly meeting the direct-
ors met the shareholders with a London
Board of Directors appointed, and a branch
there in full operation.
At the third meeting the paid-up capital
amounted to £239,592. A dividend of 10 per
cent, was declared, the reserve fund was in-
creased by £24,000, and amounted to £33,000.
At the October meeting of 1863, a dividend
of 10 per cent, per annum was declared on
the paid-up capital of £249,373, the dividend
amounting to £12,468 ; the reserve fund was
increased by £27,000, and the balance of £1724
carried forward.
A sixth call of £1 per share was made for
21st January, 1864.
At the April meeting of 1864 the paid-up
capital of the Bank was £313,842, on which a
dividend of 10 per cent, per annum was paid,
while the reserve fund was increased by
£35,000, and £2259 was carried forward. At
the next two meetings, beside the 10 per
cent, dividend that was paid, a bonus of
per cent, per share on the half-year, making
for the 12 months a payment of £61,030,
beside an increase to the reserve fund of
£20,000, and £2691 carried forward. At the
last meeting in April, 1865, the directors
initiated a guarantee and provident fund for
the officers of the Bank by a donation of
£l5OO, which was supplemented by at least
three other donations of £5OO each.
From the meeting held in October, 1865, to
that held in October, 1867, both meetings in-
clusive, a dividend of 10 per cent, per annum
was paid, and a bonus of 7s per share on a
capital paid up of £500,000, being at the rate of
£42,500 per half-year, the reserve fund standing
at £150,000, with a balance carried forward at
the last-mentioned meeting of £116,118.
From the April meeting of 1868 to the Oc-
tober meeting of 1870, an uniform dividend
of 10 per cent, per annum was paid, and a
bonus of 5s a share on the capital of £500,000,
the reserve fund standing at £150,000.
The year following, 10,000 new shares were
issued at £3 premium, which increased the
capital to £600,000 and the reserve fund to
£180,OCX). A sum of £45,000 was paid in
dividend and bonus at the April meeting,
while £7389 was carried forward. The ordi-
nary dividend and bonus were not declared
until the October meeting of 1872, when the
bonus was reduced to 2s 6d per share, and
this rate of bonus obtained for two years,
when, at the October meeting of 1874, £15,000
was again distributed among the share-
holders. In 1876 the capital was increased to
£700,000, and the reserve fund to £250,000,
the increases being provided for by the issue
of new shares at £5 premium and the accu-
mulation of profits.
ii|yiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
In 1875, the capital was further increased to
£725,000, and the reserve fund to £275,000,
the increase to capital being premiums on
2500 new shares issued to the Fiji Banking
Company, while the reserve fund, which at
the October meeting of 1877 was made
£300,000, the Chairman (Dr. Campbell) say-
ing, “ This sum, shareholders will be pleased
to learn, does not arise from any adventitious
source, but from profits, the result of increas-
ing business.”
During the next eighteen months the capi-
tal of the Bank remains at £725,000, while
the reserve fund increases £25,000 ev'ery six
months. The usual dividend of 10 per cent,
is paid, and the bonus of 5s a share. In
October, 1879, the Bank’s capital is made a
million less £19,700, the par value of 1979
shares of £lO each held in reserve, while the
reserve fund was announced to be made
£555,000.
At the meetings of 1880 a dividend of
£50,000 and a bonus of £25,000 were declared,
which rate of dividend and bonus obtained
throughout 1881.
| At the April meeting, in 1882, the reserve
| fund was increased by £25,000; and at the
| October meeting of the same year a like ad-
| dition was announced to commemorate the
| Bank’s attaining its majority, which the pre-
| sident stated had dispensed £1,862,000 in
| dividends during its career.
| The year following, at the October meeting
| of 1883, the president said the balance of
| profit-and-loss account is greater than the
| circumstances . . . might have led us to
| expect, and, with the balance brought for-
| ward from last half-year, enable us to main-
| tain our dividend and bonus to make the
| handsome addition of £25,000 to our reserve
| fund, and to open the new half-year with a
| balance of £8,900 10s 4d.
| Up to the October meeting of 1886 the
| usual dividend and bonus were paid when
| only 2s 6d a share bonus was declared instead
| of 5s through, the chairman said, the Bank
1 “ having sustained exceptional losses in Aus-
| traliaand he added, “but for the visible
| improvement in our future prospects we fur-
| ther had it in contemplation to transfer
I £50,000 from the reserve fund.”
| In April, 1887, a sura of £125,000 was taken
| off the reserve fund; and in the October
| meeting it was stated that the directors did
| not feel warranted in declaring a dividend.
| In April, 1888, a dividend at the rate of 7
| per cent, was declared, and a shareholders’
| committee was appointed to confer with the
| directors and to report on the state of the Bank.
| At the October meeting in 1888, the capital
| of the Bank was written down to £700,000,
| and reserve fund transferred to the “ bad
| and doubtful debts account.” A dividend
| was paid for the half-year of £24,500, and
I the sum of £33,968 carried forward.
| In April, 1889, a dividend at the rate of 7
| per cent, per annum was declared on a capi-
| tal of £1,125,000, made up as follows :
100,000 shares written down to £7 per £
share .. .. .. .. 700,010
25.000 new shares, £lO each paid up .. 2 ,0,000
25.000 new shares, £7 each paid up .. 175,000
£1,125,000
I At the October meeting of the same year a
§ like dividexrd was declared.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiillliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiliiliiiiiiiiiiililiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniii
COLONIAL BANK OF NEW ZEALAND.
This Bank was incorporated by Act of the
General Assembly in 1874. The authorised
capital of the corporation is £2,000,000, and
the subscribed capital is £1,000,000 in 200,000
shares of £5 each. The paid-up capital is
£400,000; reserve fund, £49,000; and the
unappropriated profits, £4,419. The head
office is in Dunedin, and the general manager
is Mr. H. Mackenzie, Mr. W. Watson being in-
spector. The directors are Messrs. John Hislop,
Hon, W. H. Reynolds, Hon. G. McLean,
Percival Clay Neill, Hon. Richard Oliver,
John Macfarlane Ritchie, and John Roberts.
The bank has branches in all parts of the
colony, the managers of the principal branches
being Auckland, Mr. A. J. Denniston;
Christchurch, Mr. B. H. Burns; Wellington,
Mr. E. J. Reid; and Dunedin, Mr. L. 0.
Beal. The London office is at 13, Moorgate-
street, London, E.C., and the London direc-
tors are —Mr. A. G. Anderson, Right Hon. L.
H. Courtney, M.P., and Mr. Geo. Cowie is
managing director.
NATIONAL BANK OF NEW ZEALAND.
This Bank was established in London in
1872 and in New Zealand in 1873, and is in-
corporated under the Companies Acts of 1862
to 1886, and the New Zealand Act of 1873,
with a capital of £1,900,000 in 200,(XX) shares'.
The first issue was £900,000 in 100,000 shares.
The head office of the Bank is in 71, Old
Broad-street, London, E.C. The chairman
of directors is Mr. Edward Brodie Hoare,
M.P., and the deputy chairman Mr. Edward
Chas. Morgan, the other directors being Sir
Chas. Clifford, Messrs. Wm. SmellieGrahame,
John Morrison, James Rattray (New Zea-
land), Dudley Robert Smith, William John-
stone Steele, Philip Yanderbyl, and Sydney
Young, and Mr. Richard Maxwell is the
general secretary. The head office in New
Zealand is at Dunedin, and the general
manager is Mr. William Dymock. There
are branches and agencies in all the centres
of population in the colony, and agencies in
the Australian colonies. The Auckland
branch manager is Mr. James Coates ; Dun-
edin branch, Mr. A. Michie ; Wellington
branch, Mr. H. R. Glegg ; and Christchurch
branch, Mr. A. Ferguson.
POST OFFICE SAVINGS BANKS.
In 1867 Post Office Savings Banks were in-
stituted, and during the year 46 branches
were opened. At the end of 1872 there
were 91 offices in operation, and a total
of deposits was left amounting to over
£490,066 to the credit of 13,566 depositors.
The depression of trade in 1879 had com-
paratively little effect on its deposits, which
have gone on annually increasing up to the
end of 1888, when the total amount standing
to the credit of all open accounts, inclusive
of interest, amounted co £2,048,441, the
average amount standing to the credit of
each open account being £24 4s lOd. The
years 1883 and 1886 were the less prosperous,
as the excess of withdrawals over deposits
amounted to £117,245 and to £87,881 respec-
tively.
SAVINGS BANKS.
There are seven Savings Banks other than
those connected with the Post Office in the
colony, which were established at the places
named, in the years mentioned ; —Auckland,
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiHiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
in 1847; New Plymouth, in 1850 ; Nelson, in
1860; Napier, in 1864; Dunedin, in 1864;
Invercargill, in 1864; and Hokitika, in 1866.
The total amount to the credit of the deposi-
tors on 31st December, 1888, was at the dif-
ferent banks as follow : —Auckland, £471,057 ;
blew Plymouth, £6270; Napier, £10,230;
Nelson, £20,396; Hokitika, £10,605; Dune-
din, £111,166; Invercargill, £13,527. Total,
£643,251.
AUCKLAND SAVINGS BANKS.
A brief record of the Auckland Savings
Bank (it being the oldest and richest in the
colony) may be given. It was founded in
1846 by Dr. Johnson, Rev. Thomas Buddie,
Rev. J. F. Churton, Messrs. J. J, Symonds,
J. L. Campbell, J. McDougall, David
Graham, R. A. Fitzgerald, T. S. Forsaith,
J. I. Montefiore, J. Dilworth, A. Kennedy,
W. S. Grahame, A. Sinclair (Colonial Secre-
tary), A. Shepherd (Colonial Treasurer), D.
Rough, and W. Connell. The first meeting
of the promoters took place on the 3rd De-
cember, 1846, in the store of Messrs. Brown
and Campbell, when rules and regulations
were arranged to be drawn up for the guid-
ance of the embryonic institution, and the
task fell to the lot of Dr. Campbell.
The Bank was opened for business on the sth
June, 1847, in the Mechanics’ Institute, and
on the 19th of the same month the first de
posit of £lO was made by Mr. Matthew
Fleming. On 29th May, 1848, the business of
the Auckland Savings Bank, as a Govern-
ment institution—the Savings Banks’ Ordi-
nance, 1847, having been passed in September
—was carried on in the office of the Union
Bank of Australia; and the first investment
was made in Government 8 per cent, deben-
tures, purchased at a discount of from 10
to 12| per cent.
In October, 1850, the trustees asked the
Governor for a temporary loan, not ex-
ceeding £3OO, to avoid selling their de-
bentures, to enable them to meet the de-
mands of their customers wishing to with-
draw their savings.
In 1853, the Bank advertised that it was
prepared to purchase Government deben-
tures at par; and in the same year it noti-
fied that not more than one member of afamily
could become depositors, from the difficulty
of obtaining investments. No Government
debentures and no mortgages being obtain-
able, the rate of interest was reduced to 8
per cent. It was about this period that Dr.
Thompson wrote that “ Beggars and bank-
rupts were unknown, and that the settlers
were heaping up money rapidly, by their ex-
ports to Australia.” This was before home
rule and the constitution were in operation.
In March, 1854, the trustees of the Bank
invested £4OO at 8 per cent, on 60 acres of
land at Mount Eden, and in the following
month, the manager of the Union Bank of
Australia gave notice to the trustees that it
would no longer be convenient to afford ac-
commodation for the Savings Bank in his
premises, when the Government gave the
use of a room adjoining the Colonial Bank
of Issue. In December, 1854, £3OO was
lent at 10 per cent, per annum.
In October, 1855, the Bank invested in
Provincial Government debentures, bearing
10 per cent, interest for 10 years, paying 1
per cent, premium for the sum of £lOOO, and


miiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiii
on the 30th January, 1856, the interest on
mortgages was raised to 10 per cent. Under
the operation of the Provincial Council the
population was largely increased by the
forty-acre land grant system, which intro-
duced an excellent class of settlers, who
brought money with them, and became
customers of the bank. In 1860 the war at
Taranaki broke out, which led to a large in-
flux of British troops and some 4000 military
settlers, “and as in times of war military
savings banks are closed, the deposits of the
regular troops, which amounted to a con-
siderable sum, were paid into the Auckland
Savings Bank.”
With the withdrawal of the troops came a
season of depression, and the Bank was com-
pelled to realise some of its securities in
order to meet the demands of the depositors.
The discovery of gold on the Thames re-
vived the prosperity that had been waning,
and in 1869 there was a slight increase in the
business of the Bank, which increased year
by year, until it was opened daily in October,
1872, and in February of the next year on
Saturday evenings from seven to nine. In
1876 the Penny Bank was opened in connec-
tion with the Savings Bank, which stimulated
business largely by the parents following
where the children led. In 1880 the hours
for banking were made from ten to three,
and the trustees considered it expedient to
erect new premises.
In 1857 and 1858 applications were made to
the Provincial Government for a site in
Queen-street, and apieceof land beingpartof
that now occupied by the Bank was granted by
the Government in August, 1859. In August,
1860, a section contiguous to that granted
was also purchased for the sum of £375. In
February, 1860, the Bank rented premises in
Queen-street at £BO a year, and in May of the
same year the trustees “decided to erect a
building not to cost more than £l6OO on their
own site, and resolved to borrow £l2OO at 10
per cent, for five years.”
In 1880 the walls of the Bank building were
injured by a fire, and as before stated a new
building was decided to be erected, and pre-
miums being offered for the best designs,
Mr. Bartley was awarded the first prize and
Mr. H. G. Wade the second.
Mr. Bartley was directed to prepare plans
and specifications and to call for tenders,
when that of Mr. J. Heron was accepted.
The cost of the structure, which is handsome
and convenient, was about £lO,OOO. That
the Bank continues to prosper is evident
from the fact that the amount on deposit at
the end of the year 1889 was £488,521.
FOREIGN BANKS.
The Foreign Banks doing business in New
Zealand are the Banks of Australasia, New
Sonth_Wales, Union Bank of Australia, each
of which have establishments in all the prin-
cipal centres of the colony.
THE NEW ZEALAND LOAN AND MER-
CANTILE AGENCY CO. (LIMITED).
This company has, comparatively speak-
ing, a distinct sphere of operations almost
wholly its own as a company, and was in-
augurated in London in 1865, the original
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiriiiiiiiiiiniiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiii
memorandum of association bearing date sth
of April of that year. It has long since, it
will be seen, attained its majority. The
capital was originally £500,000, consisting of
£20,000 shares of £25 each, and has been
gradually increasing, until the authorised
amount stands at £4,500,000, of which £4OOO
has been subscribed. The Reserve Fund was
in 1867 (two years after commencing busi-
ness), £5OOO. This was doubled the next
year, and the amount has been systematically
built up at frequent intervals since. The
sum now at credit in this connection is no
less than £270,000.
These figures tell a tale of great and rapid
progress, and indicate something of the mag-
nitude of the company’s operations. During
the first eight months of its existence, the
company paid a dividend of 6 per cent.; from
1866 to 1870,10 per cent.; from 1871 to 1874,
10 per cent., with a bonus of 2h per cent.; and
from 1875 to date (15 years), 10 per cent., with
a bonus of 5 per cent.
Owing to the growth of the company’s
operations, it was recently found expedient
to effect a change in its constitution, by
dividing the Australian and New Zealand
business, and the establishment of a head
office in Melbourne for Australia, leaving the
New Zealand head office in Auckland, as
before, with Mr. Battley in charge; also of
concentrating the control in the London
Board, thus dispensing with the necessity
for a colonial Board of Directors.
The company has its branches and agencies
at every important centre in this colony. Its
large and comprehensive business embraces
general financing and agencies of almost all
kinds ; dealing as brokers in all varieties of
colonial produce; shipping on consignment
to London, America, and elsewhere. Natur-
ally enough, in a colony like New Zealand,
which is chiefly pastoral and agricultural in
its pursuits, the company’s principal hand-
lings have consisted of wool, grain, and frozen
meat, and latterly of hemp. It is worthy of
note that during last season the company
passed through its hands no less than 186,000
bales of wool, a larger quantity than any
other single institution in the world. It is
yet too early for its record of the current
season to be known.
The company has a strong London Board,
including, as it does, Sir James Fergusson
(one of our New Zealand Governors), Sir B. W,
Stafford, Sir George Russell, the Right Hon.
A. J. Mundella, and Messrs. Thomas Russell
and Falconer Lark worthy. The last-named
gentleman is managing director, and is the
only one of those whose names appeared on
the original articles who is now on the direc-
torate He recently passed round the colony
on an official tour of inspection.
NEW ZEALAND AND RIVER PLATE
MORTGAGE COMPANY.
This company was established in 1883,
with a capital of £2,000,000 in £lO shares,
£200,000 being paid up, and £78,000 having
been paid in dividends. The head office is
in London, and the chief local office is in
Auckland, with agencies in Blenheim,
Christchurch, Invercargill, Napier, Nelson,


i
Society 1,681
£473,341
=
The Colonial Mutual Life Assur-
i
ance Company 1,098
344,400
=
The Equitable Insurance Associa-
i
tion of New Zealand .. .. 2,472
50,941
i
The Equitable Life Assurance
=
Society of the United States .. 225
77,252
=
The Mutual Assurance Society of
=
Victoria 264
62,650
i
The Mutual Life Association of
1
Australasia 781
193,552
=
The National Mutual Life Associa-
i
tion of Australasia .. .. 3
92,772
i
The New York Life Insurance
i
Company 87
37,025
|
The following gives the grand total of the
i
number of policies and amount assured on
i
the books according to the last sworn re-
i
turns :—
=
Number of
Sum
i
Names of Office. Policies.
Assured.
i
Australian Mutual Provident .. 14,432 £4,630,531
i
Mutual Life Association of Aus-
i
tralasia 2,553
679,967
National Mutual Life
.. 1,939
505,902
Mutual of Victoria
.. 1,05*5
272,319
New York Life
151
65,200
Colonial Mutual
.. 2,689
905,873
Equitable of United States
930
521,652
Illlllllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiriiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiniiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
New Plymouth, Wanganui, Wellington, and
Dunedin. The London Board of Directors
are Messrs. H. J. Bristow, W. K. Graham,
Falconer Larkworthy, Arthur M. Mitchison,
Sir William T. Power, K.C.8., Thomas Rus-
sell, C.M.G., Sir Edward W. Stafford,
G.C.M.G., Mr. Mitchison being managing
director. The New 7 - Zealand Board consists
of Hon. Sir Frederick Whitaker, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C. (chairman), and Messrs. T. Buddie,
J. L. Campbell, J. M. Clark, D. L. Mur-
doch, and G. B. Owen, J. L. Wilson. Mr. T. J.
Brassey is the local secretary.
NATIONAL MORTGAGE AND AGENCY
COMPANY.
This is a company with the head office in
London, the total capital being £1,000,000,
the paid-up capital £lOO,OOO, and the reserve
fund £21,567. The general manager is Mr.
J. M. Ritchie, and the New Zealand head
office is in Dunedin, with branches in Christ-
church, Timaru, Invercargill, Melbourne, and
Sydney.
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE.
An Act was passed in 1669 empowering
the Governor to grant life insurances and
annuities on the security of the colonial reve-
nues, and the business was commenced in
March, 1870. The progress of the institution
during the first ten years of its life, and the
motives inspiring its establishment, can be
told by Sir H. A. Atkinson, who is reported
saying: “ Intimately connected with the
subject of the prudential savings of the com-
munity are the questions of life assurance and
the growth of the Government insurance
Department. Established in 1870, at a time
when public confidence in many English as-
surance companies was severely shaken, and
with the avowed object of giving to the as-
sured the absolute security of the colony,
the department has since exhibited a pro-
gressive advancement which warrants the
statement that the experiment sanctioned
by the Legislature twelve years ago has now
been proved a complete success.”
This scheme may be justly described as the
only successful institution of the kind set on
foot by any Government, and the example
thus offered has attracted the attention of
various other colonial Governments, and also
the Indian Government. The premiums
were from the first fixed at what were
deemed the lowest rate commensurate with
a prudent regard to safety, and without any
idea of profit-bonuses. But notwithstanding
these low charges, careful management, to-
gether with the favourable influences of a
healthy climate and comfortable social con-
ditions, have produced results more sat-
isfactory than was anticipated. The busi-
ness of the department in the first ten years
of its existence produced a profit of £77,000,
as shown by the valuation report of the
London actuaries.
The advantages of the scheme have been
thus summarised: —1. The security offered
to the assured. 2. The division of profits,
which are wholly divided among the policy-
holders. 3. The low scale of premiums. 4.
Policies containing no restrictive condi-
tions.
iiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
The following tabular statement will show
the growth and extent of this department; —
Year Ending. Number of Sum Assured.
Polices.
1881 ... 1,790 ... £550,351
1882 ... 13,259 ... 1,335,968
1883 ... 8,718 ... 1,077,457
1884 ... 5,988 ... 821,442
1885 ... 4,379 ... 859,769
1886 ... 3,456 ... 713,182
1887 ... 3,124 ... 766,952
1888 ... 2,944 ... 785,092
LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
The foreign insurance companies operating
in New Zealand are in number following,
and the extent of their business may be
gauged by the annexed detail for the year
1888 :
Number of Sum
Policies. Assured.
The Australian Mutual Provident
| Perhaps no better evidence of the pros-
| perity of the colony exists than the number of
| life assurance institutions transacting success-
-11 ful business in our midst. The life assurance
| institutions of Australasia _ may be looked
| upon with pride by all colonials, inasmuch as
| no society established in these colonies has
| ever failed to meet its engagements, and of
| all these societies there is not one which is
| not in a properous condition at the present
| day. Australasia leads the world in respect
| to life assurance. No other country carries
| a larger amount of assurance per head of the
| population, neither are the liberality of the
| conditions of the policies and returns to
| policyholders surpassed.
| The pioneer company in New Zealand is
| the Australian Mutual Provident Society.
| Established in the year 1848, and commenc-
| ing business in a small office over a grocer’s
| shop in George-street, Sydney, this society’s
| business for the first year consisted of the
| granting of certain deferred annuities. Ap-
| parently satisfied with this tremendous
| windfall of business, the society rested upon
I its oars until the next year, when the first
I life assurance policy was issued on the life


of the secretary for £3OO. About 28 years
ago this society included New Zealand in its
field of operations, making a name for itself
by strict attention to sound business, and
the New Zealand business of this company
has largely contributed to swell its profits in
the past, more than one-eighth of its entire
business being held in this colony. The
principal office for the colony is in Welling-
ton, Mr, E. W. Lowe being in charge of the
colony, Mr. C. W. Hemery in charge of the
Auckland office.
Taking the companies in their order, the
next to commence business in New Zealand
was the Mutual Life Association of Austral-
asia, established in (Sydney in the year
1869. This company selected Auckland as
its headquarters, and began business under
the management of our popular townsman,
Mr. W. T. J. Bell. It has erected magnifi-
cent new offices in Queen-street, and is now
vigorously expanding its business through-
out the colony. Pursuing a conservative
policy, for which it has always been noted,
the company has not, until of late years,
vigorously pushed for business. Notwith-
standing this, the company holds risks in
New Zealand to the extent of £679,967.
The National Mutual Life Association of
Australasia, which is distinguished as being
the first office in the world to apply the
surrender-value of policies to paying over-
due Dremiums, began operations here about
ten years ago. This company has a wider
popularity in Australia than in New Zea-
land, the majority of its business being held
there, New Zealand only contributing a
small proportion of the total. The head-
quarters of this company are located at
Wellington, and the New Zealand branch
is under the control of Mr. S. G. Martin.
The year 1884 was marked by the advent
of the Colonial Mutual Life Assurance
Society and the Mutual Life Assurance
Society of Victoria, both companies making
Dunedin the centre of their business. It is
a strange fact that Dunedin had found so
little favour previously for this purpose.
Although one of the latest arrivals, the Colo-
nial Mutual has not allowed the grass to
grow under its feet, and now possesses the
third largest business in the colony.
The latest additions to the ranks consist of
the two mammoth American companies, the
New York Life and the Equitable Com-
panies, with whom millions are but as
thousands with other people. Their busi-
ness here is not of large amount, together
equally only 4 per cent, of the total business
of the colony.
The total amount of assurances in force in
the colony (exclusive of policies held in Eng-
lish offices) is now £14,613,598, total funds
being £2,865,409, and the annual new busi-
ness transacted last year £2,065,985, nearly
half-a-million a year being collected in pre-
miums.
When we- consider that the population of
New Zealand only now amounts to 650,000,
that this accumulated business and funds
really represents only twenty years’ actual
work, and that these figures indicate a cer-
tain secure provision for the future of our
people, well may the colony at this Jubilee
of its existence be congratulated on the
wisdom and foresight thus displayed.
iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiimiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
NEW ZEALAND ACCIDENT INSURANCE
COMPANY.
The .New Zealand Accident Insurance
Company was established in 1879, but no
business was transacted in Auckland till
1880. In the year following they were firmly
established throughout Australia, and took
over the business of the Australasian Acci-
dent Assurance Association. In 1887 they
acquired the business of the Accident In-
surance Association of blew Zealand. The
company has a total capital of £lOO,OOO,
£20,000 being subscribed. It has now com-
pleted its first decade, and has paid 7000
claims amounting to £60,000. The head oflice
is in Auckland, and there are agencies
throughout New Zealand and Australia.
The directors are—Messrs. D. B. Cruick-
shank (chairman), G. B. Owen, T. Buddie,
C, B. Stone, and F. Battley. The general
manager is Mr. P. A. Edmiston.
FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
NEW ZEALAND INSURANCE COMPANY.
This is a Fire and Marine Insurance Com-
pany established in 1859, being the first local
insurance company in the colony. It has a
capital of £1,000,000 in £lO shares, £200,000
being paid up, and a reserve fund of £135,000
and re-insurance fund of £lOO,OOO, the total
dividends being close on half-a-million ster-
ling. The head office is in Auckland, with
local branches in Wellington, Christchurch,
Dunedin,Napier, Wanganui, New Plymouth,
Nelson, Blenheim, Invercargill. There are
also foreign branches throughout the world.
The directors are Messrs. J. Logan Campbell
(chairman), Thomas Buddie, J. McCosh
Clark, G. B. Owen, Thomas Russell, C.M.G.,
James Russell, Robert Rose, and J. L. Wilson,
The inspector of branches is Mr. Warwick
Weston; the general manager, Mr. George
P. Pierce; the local manager, Mr. T. J.
Brassey ; Wellington manager, Mr. R. M.
Simpson ; Christchurch manager, Mr. David
Craig; and Dunedin manager, Mr. James
Edgar.
SOUTH BRITISH INSURANCE COMPANY.
The South British Fire and Marine In-
surance Company was established in 1872. It
has a capital of £2,000,000, in £2O shares,
£1,292,560 being subscribed, and the paid up
capital being £129,256. The reserve fund is
£81,160, and the total amount paid in divi-
dends £145,590. The head office is in Auck-
land, and there are branches in Wellington,
Christchurch, and Dunedin, agencies in
Greymouth, Hokitika, Nelson, Taranaki,
and W anganui, and foreign agencies all over
the world. The directors are —Messrs. W.
C. Daldy (chairman), R. 0. Barstow, Alfred
Buckland, T. Peacock (M.H.R.), R. Hobbs
(M.H.R.), J. Batger, and W. S. Wilson. The
general manager is Mr. G. Johnston, and the
local manager Mr. A. S. Russell.
NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY.
This is a fire and marine insurance com-
pany, established in 1873. It has a capital of
£2,000,000, the amount paid up being £98,037,
and the reserve fund £117,252. The total
dividends paid amount to £158,975. The head
office is in Dunedin, with branches in Christ-
church, Wellington, and Auckland, and
numerous agencies in Australia and Europe.
The Board of directors are: —Messrs. J.


1880-81 ...
£271,766
1881-82 ...
270,984
1882-83 ...
307,784
1883-84 ...
319,979
1884-85 ...
340,446
1885-86 ...
365,555
1886-87 ...
371,602
1887-88 ...
368.798
1888-89 ...
377^858
1889-90 ...
369,331
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiinnmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiKiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiHiiiii!ii
M. Ritchie (chairman), Keith Ramsay (vice-
chairman), Robert Wilson, Edmund Smith,
Alex. Burt, R. Glendining, Hon. W. J.
M. Larnach (C.M.G , M.H.R.), Bendix
Hallenstein, and Thos. W. Kempthorne.
The general manager is Mr. A. Hill Jack,
and the manager of the Auckland branch,
Mr. William Tait.
UNION INSURANCE COMPANY.
This also is a fire and marine company. It |
was established in 1878, with a capital of j
£2,000,000, in £2O shares, the paid-up capital |
being £lOO,OOO, and the reserve fund £74,082. |
The total dividends paid amount to £101,875. |
The head office is in Christchurch, with |
branches in all ports. The board of directors |
are : Hon. J. T. Peacock, M.L.C.. (chairman), |
Mr. G. G. Stead (deputy-chairman), and |
Messrs. J. Anderson, Joseph Parker, Hon. |
W. Reeves, M.L.C., and H. R. Webb. |
The general manager is Mr. W. Devenish |
Meares, and the manager of the Auckland |
branch Mr. B. Kent.
COLONIAL INSURANCE COMPANY.
The Colonial Insurance Company was |
established in 1878, with its head office _in |
Wellington, the authorised capital being |
fixed at £20,000, and the subscribed capital |
£lOO,OOO, in 200,000 shares of £lO each. The |
paid-up capital is £50,000, and branches have |
been established in the four principal cities, |
and agencies throughout the colonies, as well |
as in Launceston, Melbourne, and Sydney. |
The general manager is Mr. F. Allen, and the |
directors are Messrs. J. B. Harcourt, E. W. |
Mills, G. M. Kebbell, Jacob Joseph, and J. |
Kircaldie. Mr. J. B. Graham is manager of |
the Auckland branch, Messrs. Cuff and |
Graham managers of the Christchurch |
branch, Rice, Stead and Co. managers of the |
Dunedin branch, and Mr. James Harlroe |
manager of the Dunedin branch. Dividends |
amounting to 3 per cent, of the capital have |
been paid since the incorporation of the |
company.
STANPARD FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE
COMPANY OF NEW ZEALAND.
This company, the head office of which is |
in Dunedin, has for its general manager Mr. j
Thos. Fisher. The capital of the company is |
£1,000,000, and the directors are: Messrs. |
John Reid, William Royse, James Anderson, |
James Curie, David Baxter, Maurice Joel, |
and William Scouler. The company has |
branches in London, Melbourne, Sydney, |
Brisbane, and Adelaide, as w r ell as in all the |
principal cities and towns of New Zealand, |
and sub-agents in all districts. Mr. F. |
Nutter is manager of the Auckland branch, |
Mr. Archibald Scott manager at Christ- |
church, and Mr. William Evans manager at |
W ellington. 0
FOREIGN COMPANIES. h
The following foreign insurance offices are |
also doing business in the colony;—Baden |
(Marine), New Zealand manager, Mr. C. |
Reynolds, Dunedin; Victoria (Fire and |
Marine), New Zealand office, Dunedin, Mr. |
J. W. Bradley, resident secretary; United |
(Fire and Marine), Sydney, Thames, and |
Mersey (Marine), Phoenix (Fire), North |
Queensland (Marine), North German |
(Marine), North British and Mercantile |
(Fire), Hamburg and Magdeburg (Fire), Nor- |
wich Union (Fire), Imperial (Fire), Royal |
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiii
(Fire and Life), Northern (Fire and Life),
Globe (Marine), Sun (Fire), North German
(Fire), Liverpool, London, and Globe (Fire),
Guardian (Fire and Life), London and Lan-
cashire (Fire), and Alliance (Marine).
PUBLIC TRUST OFFICE.
The Public Trust Office, established by
Act of the Legislature in 1872, has been very
successful in its operations. Its object was
the administration of intestate estates, the
executorship of wills, and the administration
of trusts under settlements and deeds. A
permanent officer is appointed, who can, at
the option of those who leave property, be
substituted for guardians, and administer the
property in their place. The estates of
lunatics are vested in the public trustee, as are
many native reserves. The investments
are under the control of an official Board.
EDUCATION.
The education provided by the State for
the instruction of its children is secular and
free. Opportunities are afforded to clergy-
men and others to give religious instruction
to the children outside the four hours a-day
for five days in the week, which are devoted
to secular teaching, but the opportunity is
more observed in the breach than in the per-
formance. The secular subjects taught are
reading, writing, arithmetic, English gram-
mar and composition, geography, history,
elementary science, drawing, object lessons,
vocal music, and for girls, sewing and needle-
work, and the principles of domestic economy.
No child whose parents or guardians object
need be present at the teaching of history.
There are also at the chief towns of the
colony superior or secondary schools, most of
which have been endowed with lauds and
money out of the public estate. Some of the
endowed secondary schools, and the endowed
collegiate institutions in Canterbury, Otago,
and Auckland “are affiliated to the New
Zealand University, which is an examining
body having power to confer degrees and to
grant scholarships. The New Zealand Uni-
versity, which has a Royal Charter, is main-
tained by an annual grant from the Consoli-
dated Fund.”
Separate public schools are provided for the
education of the children of the native race.
The expenditure for the decade has been
for the financial years as follows :
At the end of the year 1888—the latest date
at which the educational statistics was pub-
lished —there were 1128 public schools open,
employing 2839 teachers in the instruction of
112,685 children. From education reserves
and other local sources of revenue—extra-
neous to the amount tabulated above —they
received the following additional sums for the
year;—Education reserves, £31,882; other
local sources, £3206; making a total expen-


diture for that year of £400,145. In the same
year it should be stated that 213 scholarships
were held in connection with the public
primary schools —124 for boys and 89 for girls
—ranging in value from £4 to £52 10s per
annum.
The secondary schools were 22 in number,
employing 114 regular and 51 visiting in-
structors. The number of students was 2004,
and the annual rate of fees ranging from £lB
to five guineas. There were 244 boarders at
the various institutions, tire charge for whom,
exclusive of day school tuition, varied, ac-
cording to localitv, from £3B to £52 10s per
annum The total income of these secondary
schools for the year was £55,017, or nearly
£27 10s per pupil, 82 of whom were over 18
years of age. Of this amount of income
£20,186 came from fees, the remainder princi-
pally the rents of secondary school reserves,
and the annual sum voted by the General
Assembly.
The total number of undergraduates on the
books of the New Zealand University, Ist
May, 1889, was 943.
The private schools in the colony are 299 in
number, employing 723 teachers in the in-
struction of 15,853 scholars. The Roman
Catholics out of this number of private
schools have 96 and 9346 scholars.
In the native schools, attended by 2592
pupils, there were 100 teachers employed,
whose salaries and allowances amounted to
£12,086. The total expenses for the native
schools for the year 1888 was £17,148.
BUILDING SOCIETIES.
The number of registered Building Socie-
ties (the Registrar-General states) in the
colony on 31st December, 1888, was 51. Of
these two only were terminable societies ; the
rest were permanent. Returns had been
received from 47, while the other three had
not yet completed the first year of their
existence. The total income ot these 47
amounted during the year to £754,935, of
which the deposits amounted to £306,312.
The assets at the end of the year amounted
to £1,043,980, and the liabilities to £1,044,349,
of which the liabilities to shareholders, re-
serve funds, &c., amounted to £742,121;
those to depositors, £271,546, and the balance
to other creditors.
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
The Registrar of Friendly Societies re-
ceived returns for the year ending the 31st
December, 1887, from 347 lodges, courts,
tents, &c., of various Friendly Societies
throughout the colony. The number of
members on that date was 24,928.
The total value of the assets of these
societies was £383,515 9s 2d, equivalent to
£l5 7s 8d per member. Of the total assets
the value of the sick and funeral benefit
funds amounted to £339,614 0s lOd, an in-
crease of £43,946 18s 7d on the value of these
funds at the end of 1886.
Of the funds, only £244,072 were invested
at interest, of which the amount lent on
mortgages of freehold property was £165,567,
at an average rate ol interest of 7"7 per
annum ; £56,044 were with the Post Office
Savings Bank and other banks, at an average
of 4‘9 per cent, interest; the residue was
variously invested at rates averaging 6‘9 per
cent.
llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillNIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIllllllllllil)
The receipts during 1887 on account of the
sick and funeral funds amounted to £55,436,
and the expenditure to £35,804, of which the
sick pay amounted to £20,847. The sum of
£4216 was paid as funeral donations.
In addition to sick pay out of the benefit
funds, the sum of £23,645 was expended out
of the medical and management expenses
fund for medical attendance and medicine.
CONCLUSION.
| The events we have thus rudely sought to
| summarise are those of a lifetime only.' The
| Hon. Dr. Pollen landed at the Bay of Islands
| in January, 1839, and, with the exception of
| a short visit to Port Jackson in the same year,
| he has been inNew Zealand ever since. Better
| fifty years in Maoriland than a whole cycle
| of Cathay. In the half-century closing around
| us this day men have seen Governors and
| Governments pass away in rapid succession ;
| our first representative of the Crown sleeps
| in God’s acre in Symonds-street, the city of
| Auckland his monument. It is not given to
| many men—even captains in the British
| navy —to found such cities as Auckland and
| Sydney. But the watchword of both Phillips
| and Hobson was “ Duty,” and when men do
| what they ought to do, their actions generally
| are crowned with honour. Captain Hobson
| was sent by the Crown to found a colony,
| and to render subservient to the common
| weal the proceedings of the New Zealand
| Land Company. He was insensible to the
| threats or blandishments of the agents of the
| company, and when the end of his warfare
| came, Te Wherowhero, the future Maori
| King, recorded his opinion of the dead man
| in a letter to the Queen, which ran thus :
I ‘ ‘ Mother Victoria, —My subj ect is a Governor
| for us, the Maori, and tor the pakeha in this
| island. Let him be a good man. Look out
| for a good man, a man of judgment. Let not
| a troubler come here. Let not a boy come
| here, or one puffed up. Let him be a good
| man, as the Governor who has just died.”
| It was a difficult matter to go vern a country
| inhabited by two warlike races ; the one of
| the Stone Age, the other the heirs of the
| knowledge of Tubal Cain. The Maori held
| all the land of the country, and the pakeha
| all the money and the objects of desire to
| Maoridom. Each beheld with covetous eyes
| the possessions of the other. Heartburnings
| naturally sprung out of those diverse con-
II ditions, and only a strong and wise rule
| could cause these conflicting interests to be-
| come reciprocal and work in concord. When
| Parliamentary Government arose, in which
| the Maori race had no sufficient representa-
| tion, war ensued, and the Maori, beaten but
| not subdued, had to be conquered by roads
| and railways passing through his domain,
| and by the introduction of immigrants in
| such sufficient numbers as to preclude the
| idea of his ever fighting again.
| In thus establishing the rule of the Queen
| many blunders would necessarily happen,
| but we are entitled to point with pride to the
| results of our colonisation. We are a loyal,
| contented, and prosperous people, anxious
| above all other things to aid in the cousolida-
| tion of the Empire, and to bequeath to our
| children and their descendants the priceless
| blessings of British freedom, and to aid in
| the future domination of the Anglo-Saxon race.


illllllllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllilllll
lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllliillllliillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllltll
FIRST ATTEMPT
THE KORORAREKA SETTLERS’
ASSOCIATION.
The first attempt to form a sort of Go-
vernment in New Zealand, to replace the an-
archy which had been prevailing, in which
every man did as seemed good in his own
eyes, was on Tuesday, the 23rd May, 1838,
by the formation of the Kororareka Associa-
tion, formed of householders of the township
of Kororareka (Bay of Islands) audits vici-
nity. The preamble of the scheme which
was formed says :
“ This Association has been formed in con
sequence of the absence of any magisterial
authority in the Bay of Islands to frame laws
for the better regulation of matters connected
with the welfare of the inhabitants, both Eu-
ropean and native. The limits of this Asso-
ciation are thus defined From Malony or
Brind’s Bay in a straight line across the land
to Oneroa, or the long sandy beach, and all
the land that is bounded by the coast from the
beach to the Bay.” The first resolution pro-
vided that in the event of any act of aggression
being committed on the persons or pro-
perty of the members of the society, by
the natives of New Zealand or others,
the individuals of he Association, should
consider themselves bound to assemble
together (armed, if necessary, on being called
upon to do so) at the dwelling of the person
attacked; any member refusing to respond
was to be fined £5, but if the person attacked
proved to be in fault, he was to be fined £l.
The following resolution provided for fines
for enticing sailors to leave their ships, for
refusing to assist in recapture of runaway
sailors, for punishment of robberies, etc. The
Bth resolution states that if any inhabitant
of Kororareka, or its vicinity, refuses to con-
form to the foregoing resolution, he not being
a member of the society, the members shall
unite to oblige him to abide by the law, a
fine of £lO was to be inflicted on members
who refused to co-operate. By the 9th re-
solution householders and landholders were
obliged to enter into an agreement with
their tenants to abide by the laws, under
a penalty of £2O, and members refus-
ing help to landlords to enforce rhe laws
AT GOVERNMENT.
| were to be fined £lO. In disputes between
| landlords and tenants the decision of an arbi-
| tration committee of five members was final.
| The 11th resolution required that the Associ-
| ation should meet monthly in the house of
| one of the members, and the chairman,
| deputy-chairman, and two other persons then
| chosen, were the four officers for the ensuing
| month, to take cognisance of any matter com-
| ing under the foregoing resolutions. No offi-
| cer was to receive any emolument for his ser-
| vices, so that the first Government started
| very fairly. For the better enforcement of
| the resolutions, the 13th provided that every
| member of the Association should provide
i himself with a good musket and bayonet,
| a brace of pistols, a cutlass, and at least
| thirty rounds of ball cartridge, the arms
| and ammunition to be inspected by an
| officer appointed for that purpose. The
| consolidated revenue of the Association
| was made up of a payment by members of
| 10s at the general meeting, and 2s a month
| afterwards. Happy taxpayers to get off so
| easily ! One of the “ leading lights” in the
| formation of the Association was the late
| Mr. Benjamin Turner, of Newmarket, Auck-
| land. A list of donations is appended to the
j document, showing that there were men of
| public spirit in those days in connection with
1 the Association. The “ roll of honour” is as
I follows :
| Alexander Gray, 10s; Thos. Spicer, 10s ;
| Robert Edney, 10s ; John Johnson, 10s;
J John Roberton, 10s; George Russell, £l Is;
| John Evans, 10s; James Jones, 10s; Hugh
| McLiver, 10s; George Hemmings, 10s; David
| Salmon, 10s; Thos. Fairclough, 10s; Joseph
| Meyrick,los; Samuel Stephenson, 10s; Thos.
| Grenville, 10s; Win. Jones, 10s; Thomas
| Graham, 10s ; Win. Alexander, 10s ; Captain
| Starbeck, Merrimac, £2; Captain Apsey,
| Haricott, £1 ; Mr. Lake, first mate Haricott,
| £1; Chevalier Dillon, a book ; contributed
| by the members on a former occasion, £1 2s ;
| Captain Riley, of barque Hope, £l. The
| printed document of the Constitution is
| dated June 11, 1838, and the imprint shows
| that if was printed at the office of the Sydney
I Morning Herald, Sydney.
OUR FIRST GOVERNOR: THE LATE CAPTAIN
HOBSON, R.N.
Captain Hobson, our first Governor, was
a man whose record in the navy and in the
service of his country was a bright one. He
entered the navy in 1811, and became lieu-
tenant in 1813. He was serving as a lieutenant
at Jamaica in 1822, when it was found neces-
sary by Sir Charles Rowley, the Coramander-
in-Chief of that station, from the swarms of
pirates annoying our trade in those seas,
especially near the island of Cuba, to fit out
two schooners to go in search of them. Lieu-
tenant Hobson volunteered, and was put in
command of the Lion, on which service he
distinguished himself by taking several pira-
tical vessels with their crews and most noto-
rious chiefs, whom he brought to punish-
ment. Subsequently he himself fell into the
hands of these dangerous gentry, but the re-
putation of Lieutenant Hobson in respect of
the generosity and courage, which forms
so remarkable a feature in the character
of a British seaman, saved himself and


his comrade from a violent death at
the very moment it appeared inevitable,
and he was permitted to return to the ser-
vice in which he was so useful. Some of
the incidents in that episode furnished some
of the most popular passages in the well-
known novel “ Tom Cringle’s Log.” A short
time after, for remarkable bravery, he was
made a commander, and re-appointed to
H.M.s. Ferret, sent on the same service,
when he was again very actively employed.
In paying off H.M.s. Scylla, to which vessel
he was removed, he was promoted to post-
captain. He then commanded H.M.s. Rattle-
snake, detached from the East India station
to New Zealand, and it was greatly owing to
the intelligence and enthusiasm of Captain
Hobson, when in the Rattlesnake, that the
British- Government adopted the scheme of
New Zealand colonisation in which we are all
engaged.
DECLARING THE INDEPENDENCE
OF NEW ZEALAND.
The New Zealand Government Gazette,
published at Kororareka, Bay of Islands, on
May 6th, 1841, gives an account of the decla-
ration of the independence of New Zealand,
and the appointment of His Excellency Cap-
tain William Hobson, R.N., as Governor-in-
Chief over the same.
THE CAPITAL.
It says: “By the latest accounts from
Auckland we learn that the James had
arrived from London —[Among the sur-
viving passengers by the James in Auck-
land, to-day, are Mr. Corbett, ex-Chief
Postmaster, Mr. Joseph Newman, share-
broker, and Rev. W. Gittos, Wesleyan
Missionary],—bearing his Excellency’s com-
mission as Governor-in-Chief in and over
the Islands of New Zealand, and Her
Majesty’s Order-in-Council for their separa-
tion from New South Wales. His Excel-
lency was pleased to appoint Monday last
for proclaiming the same, and shortly after-
wards a levee was to have been held. In the
evening His Excellency was to have given a
grand dinner at Government House, to which
all the elite of Auckland and the surrounding
country had received invitations.”
KORORAREKA.
“ Early in the morning of Monday last, the
day appointed for proclaiming His Excel-
lency as Governor-in-Chief, etc., we were
proud to observe the ships in harbour
decorated with numerous flags. At noon
.they tired a salute in honour of the occa-
sion. The Union Jack floated in front of the
stores of Messrs. Henry Thompson and Co.,
over the premises of Messrs. Edney and
Hemmings, and also at the Flagstaff Hill.
It is impossible for us in our limited space to
describe the demonstrations of joy which the
inhabitants manifested in the evening on
the happy occasion. Illuminations, fireworks,
burning of tar-barrels, firing of muskets and
pistols from the hills and all parts of the
town, the parading of a band of music
through the streets, the rejoicing of the
Maoris, their* war and other dances, all
tended to make it one of the happiest
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii»iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiii:iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiii
possible. Among the illuminated premises
we noticed the Russell Hotel, which was
very brilliant, as were those of Messrs.
Edney and Hemmings, on the beach, Mr.
Dunn’s inn, York-street, Wood’s Hotel, the
Gazette Printing-office, Captain Clayton’s
new house, Mr. Fenton’s, &c. The night was
remarkably clear, the reflection of the red
blaze from the town mingling with the
softened light from the ‘ young May moon’
falling upon the sparkling waters of the Bay,
produced a charming effect. There could
not be less than 200 Maoris on the beach
during the evening. We regretted that
His Excellency had not witnessed the
fervour of this rejoicing. Several of the
men carried muskets and powder-flasks
- —many Maori boys carried small flags
on handsomely-carved battle-axes, and the
females also vied with their partners in their
manifestations of delight. The entire pro-
ceedings happily passed off without the
slightest accident”.
THOMPSON’S DINNER.
A party of gentlemen were entertained at
dinner by Henry Thompson, Esq., at his resi-
dence, Kororareka, and the editor gives away
himself and the staff by stating “ for the par-
ticulars of which we are indebted to a gentle-
man who was present.” They forgot the
Press in those days when the dinner was
on, but availed themselves of its services for
their puffs when the fun was over. Why
these early settlers might have lived
in 1890 instead of 1840, or thereabouts.
The party, it is stated, consisted of Mr.
Thompson’s own friends, “yet it was a
purely public dinner, and it was given by him
in honour of His Excellency’s appointment,
to be Governor-in-Chief of New Zealand.”
Mr. Thompson’s “ own friends at the purely
public dinner ” appear to have been Captain
Beckham (Police Magistrate), Robert Fitz-
gerald (newly-appointed Police Magistrate),
Fred. Whitaker, Esq., Captain Amenyl, John
Scott, Esq., Captain Peil, Alexander Ken-
nedy, Esq., Eugene Cafler, Esq., Daniel
Pollen, Esq., M.D., and John Hoggard, Esq.
Mr. Thompson acted as chairman, and Mr.
Grahame as vice-chairman. The various
loyal and patriotic toasts were proposed and
honoured, one of them being “ The Queen
and the Infant Princess,” the “ infant prin-
cess” being the Princess Royal, now the
widowed Empress Frederick of Germany.
The toast of the day was proposed in a fer-
vid speech by the chairman, “ The Health of
His Excellency Captain Hobson, our Gover-
nor and Commander-in-Chief.” The toast
was drunk with honours, and received with
applause. Captain Beckham replied. Then
followed the toast of “ The Colonial Secre-
tary and Other Public Officers in New Zea-
land,” to which Mr. Fitzgerald replied. The
Chairman proposed the toast of “Mrs. Hob-
son and the Ladies of the Colony,” to which
the irrepressible Fitzgerald again responded,
stating that as an Irishman “He was not
likely to lack enthusiasm when dear, lovely
womer was the theme.” Among the other
toasts was the health of Lady Franklin. Several
songs enlivened the evening, and the party
separated at midnight, highly delighted with
the harmony which had prevailed.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiuiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiii
DEATH OF GOVERNOR HOBSON.
At that banquet, reference was made to
Governor Hobson’s health, but no one
thought that his public career was so soon
to be cut short. During the period he held
office he was under every disadvantage,
which impaired health and novel position
could impose upon him. At midnight on the
9th September, 1842, he passed away peace-
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiii
The first regatta which took place on the
waters of the Waiteraatacame off on the 18th
September, 1840. Three days previously the
Anna Watson cast anchor in the harbour,
bringing some Government officers, me-
chanics, and labourers to inaugurate the in-
fant settlement of Auckland, which was se-
lected on the 18th, and the formal ceremony
of taking possession in the name of the Queen
gone through on that day. So far as can be
gathered from the description of the lo-
cality, the British flag was first unfurled
at Soldiers’ Point (old Fort Britomart),
where it was greeted with a royal salute
of 20 guns. The day was also commemorated
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiini
SOME ANNIVERSARY REGATTAS.
It may be interesting to our readers to re-
call some of the incidents of Old New Zea-
land in connection with our anniversay
regattas and the commemoration of the
anniversary of the colony, 29th of January.
The New Zealand Herald and Auckland
Gazette of February 2, 1842, gives an account
of our
FIRST ANNIVERSARY REGATTA, 1842.
That journal says Saturday last being the
anniversary of the arrival of His Excellency
Governor Hobson a regatta was got up at a
few hours’ notice. The vessels in harbour
hoisted their flags, and the day was very
beautiful. About one o’clock guns were fired,
which was a signal that His Excellency and
suite were about to go on board the Govern-
ment brig Victoria. At this time the river
looked remarkably well, as there were a great
number of boats and a quantity of canoes
rowing in every direction. The harbour-
master, Mr. D. Rough, then gave the signal
for whaleboats to take their stations, when
five boats started for the prize, which was
easily won by the boat steered by Mr.
Merriott. The second race, for gigs pulled
by amateur crews, next came off; three boats
started on the signal being given. The Black
Angel (4 oars) and the Leander (5 oars), the
property of Mr. Felton Mathew, took the
lead, followed in their wake by Mr.
Weavill’s 6-oared gig, pulled by the
gentlemen of the Survey Department. The
ll|iJlllilllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllil|[l!lllllllllllllllllllllllilllNIIIIIIIIIII!llIlllillllII!lillIlllilll!lllll
FIRST REGATTA ON THE WAITEMATA.
| fully, the wearied victim of a disease which
had long preyed upon the naturally vigorous
resources of his mind and body. All that
is mortal of William Hobson, our first
Governor, lies in the Anglican Symonds-
street Cemetery. Lady Hobson still survives
in the mother country, and has a substantial
interest in Auckland in landed property in
Albert, Victoria, Chapel and Hobson Streets.
by the holding of a regatta, an account of
which is given in the New Zealand Ad-
vertiser and Bay of Islands Gazette of
September 24, 1840 “ There were three
events : Ist, race between a five-oared gig
belonging to the Surveyor-General and a six-
oared gig belonging to the Anna Watson ;
2nd, match for a purse of five sovereigns
between two whaleboats ; 3rd, race between
two large canoes paddled by natives.
Among those present were : —The police
magistrate, the colonial surgeon, the harbour
master, superintendent of works, sub-pro-
tector of aborigines, surveyor-general and
lady.”
race was admirably contested down to
the buoy, the Leander pressing the Black
Angel hard on her larboard quarter, for the
purpose, we supposed, of taking the inner
berth on rounding it. On arriving at the
buoy, the two leading boats were stem and
stem, the Leander having decidedly the better
berth on rounding it, when the crew of the
Black Angel, finding she could not turn so
quickly as their opponent, backed water with
their larboard oars, consequently making a
foul stroke, and threw themselves athwart
the bow of the Leander. This forced the
Leander either to run into her adversary, or
take the outside berth (as a matter of cour-
tesy the latter was taken), in doing which
she got aground, and in the confusion the
other boat grounded also. The Black
Angel was immediately got off by one
of her crew jumping overboard and push-
ing her off the mudbank (this was, how-
ever, contrary to the laws of aquatic sports),
and got nearly six ship’s lengths ahead of her
adversary before she could possibly be
pulled off by her crew. In the meantime,
the 6-oared gig, which was a long way astern
when the confusion occurred, rounded the
buoy safely, and seeing what was the matter,
kept in deep water, and was abreast of the
Leander before she got headway again. The
Black Angel of course, came in first, but
although the Leander’s crew were much
fatigued by getting her off the sandbank, they
were not so great a distance from the Black
Angel in coming in as when they got


l!IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIII!llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
way on the gig after striking. It was con-
sidered by the greater majority, on the
matter being explained, that the race should
be run over again. The Leander’s crew
protested, but the result of the protest
is not recorded. In the usual course of
events, it is the Black Angel that “ scoops
the pool.” The third race was the
canoes, which was well contested by natives.
After the Regatta, Captain Fraser, of the
Parthenia, invited the amateurs who pulled
in the second and third boats to dinner. This
seems to have “ squared” them for the loss of
the prize. The Black Angels were ‘ ‘ out of
it.” The dinner was got up in good style.
After dinner several loyal toasts were given,
among which were “ Captain Hobson, and
Prosperity to New Zealand”’ which was
drunk amidst loud applause. It says much
for the morals of this primeval period in
the history of the colony that though there
were "a number of “three-bottle men” in the
gathering the Herald historian feels bound
to record that “the company broke up at an
early*hour, after spending a very pleasant
day.” In the evening the Governor Hobson
Hotel was brilliantly illuminated.
It will be seen that our first anniversary
regatta was the “ day of small things,” there
being only three races; and the regatta of
to-day, almost half a century after, will serve
to show by contrast the progress of the port
and of the colony.
It seems that this anniversary regatta was
“ another injustice ” not only to Wellington
but to Ireland, for on St. Patrick’s Day an
Auckland regatta had to be got up under the
immediate patronage of His Excellency the
Governor, the stewards being W. Shortland,
Esci., R.N,, W. F. Porter, H. Tucker, Esq.,
R.N., and David Rough, Esq,, harbour-
master. There were five races, including
gig, whaleboat, and canoe races. Subscrip-
tions were received at S. A. Wood’s, Royal
Hotel; Watson’s, Exchange Hotel; Crummer
and Phillipsthal’s, Victoria Hotel, and the
office of the New Zealand Herald.
THE ANNIVERSARY REGATTA
SUPERSEDED BY HORSE-RACING.
So far as the old files at our disposal enable
us to judge, the Anniversary Regatta fell into
desuetude, being superseded by a race meet-
ing. The N ew-Zealander of January 31 says :
“ On Monday last New Zealand entered the
tenth year of her colonial existence, and—as
is now the established custom on such occa-
sions—her anniversary was welcomed with its
fete. If the idea of commemorative festivals
be copied from our colonial neighbours, we
confess it would have afforded us more satis-
faction to_ have beheld that idea effectually
imitated in all its bearings; for, whatever
our equine predilections, in a maritime
colony of the greatest maritime nation the
world ever* saw, we are of opinion that a
regatta would be a much more national and
appropriate annual sport, one which, if
properly conducted, would afford quite as
much pleasure, and very probably much
more colonial benefit. We have no desire to
disparage the sports at Epsom, but merely
to show what we consider are the superior
claims of a regatta as an anniversary fete
upon our own metropolitan attention. We
iiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiimiiiiiiimiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiu
think such a pastime, so essentially English,
should take precedence of all others in cele-
bration of our natal day.”
HORSE-RACING IN YE OLDEN TIME.
At a meeting of the inhabitants of Auck-
land and Manukau (says the New Zealand
Herald and Auckland Gazette, of November
27, 1841), held at Wood’s Royal Hotel, on the
3rd November, 1841, W. Young, Esq., in the
chair, it was resolved that the Auckland
Races take place on the Epsom Racecourse.
The first _ day’s programme, January 5, 1841,
was a “ big bill,” consisting of the Auckland
Town Plate, in specie, by subscription of
3sovs. each; and the Valparaiso Stakes
(handicap) heats, once round the course,
gentlemen riders. The second day’s racing
consisted of_ Ladies’ Purse, Hurdle Race,
and Consolation Purse. The amount of prize
money is not given. The stewards were :
Lieutenant Smart, 28th Regiment; Dr.
Gaumie, 80th Regiment; W. Young, Esq. ;
J. Coates, Esq., treasurer; Lieutenant
Best, 80th Regiment. Clerk of the Course,
R. Benson, Esq. Among the conditions
were: Publicans could erect booths on
the_ racecourse on paying £1 to the
racing fund; private matches taking place
on the days of the races to pay one guinea
entrance to the funds for use of the course.
No false start allowed. Jockey costume
must be worn. Subscriptions for the races
were received at the Bank, Wood’s Royal
Hotel, Watson’s Exchange Hotel, Hill’s Yew
Tree Inn, Mason and Baton’s auction mart,
and at the office of the Auckland Printing-
Company. The betting rooms—for human
nature was just the same in 1841 as in 1890—
were at Watson’s Exchange Hotel.
THE ANNIVERSARY RACES (1849).
The anniversary races, 1849, are thus ad-
vertised in the New Zealander, of January 24,
1849 : -“ Anniversary of the foundation of the
colony. Auckland races, 29th and 30th Janu-
ary, 1849. Patron, His Excellency the Gover-
nor ; clerk of the course, Mr. H. Hardington ;
treasurer, Mr. Hyam Joseph.” It will be
seen from the above quotation from the
advertisement that neither His Excellency
the Governor nor the early settlers of Auck-
land had any doubt as to the date of the an-
niversary of the colony. Racing had pro-
gressed since 1841, for the programme for the
first day consisted of Maiden Plate, Inn-
keepers’ Purse, Pony Race, Ladies’ Purse,
Produce Stakes, Native Race, the last being
for horses the bona fide property of, and
ridden by, aborigines—catch weights. The
second day’s events comprised the Metropoli-
tan Plate, Hack Race, Garrison Plate, Cart-
horse Race, Consolation Stakes, and Hurdle
Race. The prize-money ranged from £5 to
£4O.
From the files we learn “ the sports at
Epsom were remarkably well attended. His
Excellency the Governor-in-Chief, Sir George
Grey, was present to enjoy them. The editor,
apparently, undertook to do the first day’s
racing, and he gets the report into about a
dozen lines, as follows For the Maiden
Plate the first horse, Cantab, was distanced in
tlm first heat, his rider being thrown before
arriving at the weighing stand. In the next,


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimfliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHi
Pensioner, the winning horse, was disquali-
fied, his rider having lost three-quarters of a
Eound weight. The race was eventually won
y Mr. Wynyard’s Gussey. The Innkeepers’
Plate and the Ladies’ Purse were both taken
by Mr. Hargreave’s grey gelding, Zaccho,
which proved to be quite a Jorrocks’, junior.”
He ignores the Pony race, Produce Stakes,
and Native race altogether.
The road to the scene of action is des-
cribed “as strewn with vehicles of all sorts
and sizes, and covered with equestrians _ and
pedestrians of all hues and complexions.
The course was in excellent order save the
keeping of a few mounted policemen being
required to apprehend the drunken ruffians
who got up extemporary races for their own
amusement, but the endangerment of other
people’s lives.”
On the second day the “ Phaeton” of the
period relieves the editor, and devotes
thirteen lines to the day’s races, or one more
than his chief. He says: “Yesterday’s
races afforded great sport. The Metropoli-
tan Plate was taken by Mr. Crammer’s bay
mare Verjuice, the only real blood that
showed, and that, consequently, left every-
thing else hopelessly behind. The Hack
Race was won by Mr. Young’s Alderman.
The Garrison Plate by that capital gelding
Zaccho. The Carters’ Race was such a glorious
higgledy-piggledy that we have not heard
which won. The Consolation Stakes were
taken by Mr. Codlin’s bay gelding Jack; and
the Hurdle Race was also won by the same
high mettled racer.” He gives the editor
away about the “drunken ruffians,” etc., by
stating that the races passed off with the
greatest decorum, and that the 58th, who had
extensive leave, “conducted themselves in a
most orderly and honourable manner.” A
number of men-of-warsraen from H.M.s. Fly
chartered sundry carts (for hansoms and
omnibuses were unknown in those days), and,
with banners flying, made the trip out and
home in ship-shape and truly characteristic
style.
REVIVAL OF THE ANNIVERSARY
REGATTA.
When the anniversary of the colony ap-
proached next year (1850), the previous
year’s protest in favour of a regatta instead
of horseracing bore fruit. The horse races
seem to have been discredited from a pub-
lished letter in the New Zealander by the
Rev. Thos. Buddie, in which he says :
“ Being at Epsom yesterday in the course of
ministerial duty, I was greatly shocked at
the utter disregard of the Holy Sabbath
which I saw manifested by certain parties
training their horses for the approaching
races.” As the outcome, the Southern Cross
of January 22, 1850, contains the following :
—“ At a meeting held at the Masonic Hotel
for the purpose of considering the best
means of celebrating the anniversary of the
foundation of this colony, Mr. Herbert, 58th
Regt. in the chair, it was proposed by Mr.
Woodhouse, and seconded by Mr. Gray,
‘ That the most appropriate way to celebrate
the anniversary of the foundation of the
colony is by a regatta.’ Proposed by Mr.
Young, and seconded by Mr. Coates, ‘ That
the following gentlemen be requested to act
as a Committee of management, with power
piiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuniiiiiniiiiiiHiuiiiiiiiiiiiiKiiiinniin
| to add to their number : Major Bridge, 58th
| Regt., Mr. Cooper, 58th Regt., Mr. W. S.
| Grahame, Major Gray, Mr. Thomas Lewis,
| Captain Laye, 58th Regt., Mr. John Me-
| Dougall, Mr. F. W. Merriman, Captain Sol-
| man, Mr. Woodhouse. Proposed by Colonel
| Wynyard, and seconded by Mr. Woodhouse,
| ‘ That Mr. Merriman be requested to act as
| secretary and treasurer. ’ ”
| The New Zealander makes the following
| comments on the subject, which read curi-
| ously in the light of present events ; —“ The
| proposal to celebrate the anniversary of the
| colony by a regatta is about to be acted
| under auspices which promise well for its
| proper arrangement and efficiency. _ This
| amusement, we need scarcely say, is free
| from many of the objections which have been
| urged (in our opinion justly), against horse-
| racing, and, moreover, is better suited to a
| colony like ours, where strength rather than
| fleetness is desirable in horses which are,
| with comparatively few exceptions, employed
| in farm work, but where —from our insular
| position and maritime engagements and
| prospects, and from the fact that so large a
| portion of our communication with the inte-
| rior is carried on through our coasting
| vessels —everything that tends to the con-
| struction of better and safer boats is especi-
| ally valuable. Our regatta, therefore, may
| be found not only an agreeable recreation,
| not necessarily involving anything which
| should offend the most fastidious moralist,
| blit also the means of doing much practical
| good by stimulating to augmented taste,
| liberality, and effort in the designing and
| building of boats.”
| The advertisement of the regatta is headed
| “ Auckland Regatta, in Commemoration of
| the Tenth Anniversary of the Colony, J auu-
| ary 29,1850,” and was under the patronage of
| His Excellency Major-General George Lean
| Pitt, K.H. The flagship was the Josephine,
| Captain Smith, and the committee —Major
| Bridge, 58th Regiment; Major Gray, Captain
| Laye, 58th Regiment; Mr. Cooper, 58th Re-
| giment; Captain Salmon, Captain Smith ;
| Messrs. W. S. Grahame, Thomas Lewis,
| John McDougall, Woodhouse, and F. W.
| Merriman (hon. sec.) The three races of the
| regatta of 1842 expanded in the regatta of
| 1850 to twelve races, with prize money raug-
| ing from £2 to £l5. The cargo-boat race was
| won by Mr. Osborne’s Polka ; whaleboat
| race, by Major Bridge’s Parewa ; sailingboats,
| by Mr. Waite’s Jerry; gigs, by Colonel
| Wynyard’s Anne ; watermen’s boats, by An-
| gelo Peragi’s British Queen ; dingies, by Mr.
| Carr’s Alert ; duck and drake race, won by
| the duck, Angelo.
THE CANOE RACES.
The Southern Cross thus describes the canoe
races “ The tenth and eleventh matches
proved to be the most attractive and promi-
nent of the day. These were the native races,
and were intended to have been contested,
the first by canoes manned by twelve Maoris
only ; the second by canoes containing an un-
limited crew. Such, however, was the eager
excitement of the native competitors, and so
anxious were they to exhibit their prowess,
that it was found impossible to carry out
such a plan. They were, therefore, all per-
mitted to come to the scratch at once, and a


niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiEiiiiiiiiiiuuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiuiiiiiiiiiiii
more animated scene it would be difficult to
conceive, much less to depict. _ It was at
once wild and imposing, presenting a picture
of native energy and enterprise both laudable
and ludicrous. Seven canoes having taken
up their stations, off they bounded amidst the
smoke of the signal gun and the shouts of their
chiefs, tearing the water with their paddles,
labouring with might and main to attain the
goal. There were no sluggards in these long
suake-like vessels, the fuglemen, who by
extravagant gestures and vociferous tones
animate the pullers, having probably fully as
arduous and as exhausting duties to perform
as those whose part it is to propel the rush-
ing boat. These painted, feather-decked,
half-naked gondoliers, giving free and un-
fettered vent to their desires, exhibiting
animal passion in all their might and majesty
of manly exertion, were indeed objects of
no ordinary consideration, and it is little
wonder that they should have contributed
so largely to the successful issue of our
Auckland Regatta. The course they had to
folloV was the same as that which had been
traversed by the whaleboats, but the dis-
tance was performed in 25 minutes by the
victorious canoe, or in 12 minutes less than
the winning whaleboat. The prize was
awarded not to the canoe which came in first,
but to that under the direction of Kawau’s
son Reuiti, it being the only one that had
rounded the buoy, for the most of the com-
petitors were prone to ‘ the ways that are
dark, and the tricks that are vain.’ A sub-
sequent race was won by a canoe called the
Mokewitiwiti, guided by the chief Arapui.
There were four canoes started, and so closely
was this magnificent race contested that the
competitors might have been covered with
a blanket, through its entire course.”
The same journal in its editorial on the
tenth anniversary says “ With this morn-
ing’s dawn we hail the return of the day on
which ‘ the shadow of the land’ was conceded
to the Sovereign of the Isles.” From that day
out the anniversary of the colony (the 29th
January) has been commemorated by a
regatta.
THE REGATTA OF 1851.
The following year’s regatta (1851) was re-
markable for one or two features, more espe-
cially the canoe races, which were the best
ever held on the waters of the Waitemata.
At noon the beautiful barque ISlovelty deli-
vered a Royal salute in honour of the day.
The events recall some well-k nown names.
The first race, for decked boats under 25 tons,
was won by the Gnome, Pilot 2, Napi 3.
Sculling Race (Amateurs), won by Adjutant
Cooper, 58th Regiment, whose Enigma beat
Mr. Hay’s Sandfly and Captain Daldy’s
Union. ‘There was no watermen’s race, the
appearance of a new and beautiful boat,
Union (Langley’s) causing them to throw up
the sponge. In the watermen’s boats race
(pair sculls) the Union beat Wright’s
Charlotte and Hawke’s Nancy. In the
race for cargo boats or boats working
for hire, not under six tons, six boats
were objected to by some of the fastest
cargo boats as having half-decks and hatches,
and they refused to compete in consequence.
Only one open cargo boat (Mr. Henderson’s
John and Rebecca) had the hardihood to try
her powers, and won the prize, for fortune
favours the brave. The Four - oared Gig
Race (amateurs) was exciting, a new gig, the
Sylph, having been built by the Waitemata
Club for the express purpose of beating the
Alphabet. The former was defeated. The
Alphabet was pulled by Messrs. Brath-
waite, T. Lewis, A. and J. Johnston, —cox-
swain, Mr. C. Young ; the Sylph by Messrs.
Thompson, Schultz, Smith, and Budden, —
coxswain, Mr. Garris.
A GRAND CANOE CONTEST.
The Wakatiwai Canoe Race was won by
Hemi Pateora, of Orakei, and Paora, of
Orakei. But the Wakataua Race was
emphatically the race of the day, and is
thus described: —“It was a magnificent
one, and such as New Zealand only could
show. Five large and powerful canoes,
beautifully carved, and highly decorated
with pigeons’ feathers, and manned by an
unlimited number of fine athletic natives,
formed line to compete for the prize. It was
a picture to look at these craft and their
ardent and excited crews, who, like hounds
in the leash, sat ready to dart towards the
appointed goal. Away they sped the instant
the musket shot announced the period of
trial had arrived. Their fleet canoes actually
bounded over the tide, which foamed and
hissed under the nervous rapidity of then-
strokes. Every ship cheered, and a shout of
admiration and delight was mingled with the
energetic outcries of the native conductors,
who with voice and gesture kept time, and gave
encouragement to the close-packed paddlers
of these flying race boats. The speed with
which they pushed onwards was perfectly
surprising, far surpassing that of the whale-
boats, over whose course of four or five miles
they swept in 37 minutes, being 13 minutes
less than that which the whalemen had con-
sumed. The two leading canoes came in
neck-and-neck, the foremost being scarcely
half-a-length in advance of the other, and the
remaining three together and at a very
trifling distance behind. It were a study for
a painter to have caught the triumphant
attitude of the leading chief (Te Whero-
whero, Tawhiao’s father), as with dilated
nostrils, arms outstretched, eyeballs rolling
in their sockets, he gave expression, amidst
the shouts of the spectators, the thunderings
of the American and English ships, and the
exultation of his fellow countrymen, to the
unbounded delight of the moment. It was an
incarnation of the triumph of the savage com-
bined with the innate energy and ardour
so characteristic of the British sportsman.
The attitude was intensely classical, a Maori
realisation of Ajax defying the lightning. A
voyage to Auckland would almost be repaid
by beholding such a contest. The first canoe
was called the Wharepuhuuga. She is the pro-
perty of the celebrated chief Te Wherowhero,
and was paddled by his tribe. The name of
the second was theTamahu, of the Thames.
She was paddled by the Ngatipaoa tribe,
with their chief Hauaru at their head.”


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiii
The following was the canoe song chanted
on the occasion
Tena! toia,
Tena, te aia,
Tena, kumea,
Tena, ka riro,
Tena, ka puta,
Tena, ka u, u, ka u,
Tena, kia ngoio, ngoto, kia ngoto,
Aha ! ka riro,
Ka riro kei mua, mua, kei mua.
[TRANSLATION.]
Be quick ! pull away—
Be quick ! dig deeply,
Be quick ! now she goes,
Now she shoots ahead !
Now she arrives —arrives !
Now then, plough deeply, deeply, deeply,
Ah ! now she shoots ahead—
Shoots ahead to the front,
To the front, to the front!
The keenness of the contest was intensified |
by tribal jealousies. As the canoes shot un- |
der the signal gun as it blazed out its con- |
tents at the close of the race, the sweating, |
excited crews leaped into the sea to cool |
themselves. They afterwards came ashore |
in Commercial (or Town) Bay, and on a sand |
bar on the beach, a little eastward of where |
now stands the Imperial Hotel, Fort-street, |
danced the war dance and got their prize |
money. In subsequent regattas the canoe |
races fell into desuetude or were poor affairs, |
owing to the Maoris of a later date caring |
more about money than aquatic sports, and |
wanted a prize of inordinate amount, which |
probably would be run for as ‘ a put-up job ’ |
and divided ! The revival in canoe contests |
now brought about at the Jubilee will be |
hailed with satisfaction by all old colonists, |
as well as by the Maori people themselves. |
The best poetical description of a Maori
war-canoe race is that given in the following
verses by Mr. Alfred Domett in his “ Hanoi!
and Amohia” ;
Then rose the single voice in prouder strain,
Just as the lightning flashed again :
“ Had you died the death of glory
On the field of battle gory—
Died the death a chief would choose,
Not this death so sad and gloomy—
Then with tuft and tassel plumy,
Down of gannet—Sea-king’s feather—
Gaily-waving, snowy-flecking,
Every deep-red gunwale decking—
Then a hundred brave canoes,
With elated
Warriors freighted,
Tike one man their war-chant chiming,
Fierce deep cries the paddles timing,
While the paddles’ serried i ows,
Like broad birds’ wings, spread and close—
Though the whit’ning
Waves, like lightning
Had been starting altogether,
Forward through the foam together,
All in quest of vengeful slaughter,
Tearing through the tor ured water.”
And from dusky figures seated round,
AVith savage satisfaction in the sound—
A stern deep pride with sadness shadowed o’er
Like volleys fired above a soldier’s grave,
Kang out the chorussed thundering groans once
more
il)llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllilllllllllllillilillllllllllllllllllllllil1lll|[|]|l!lll1llllllllllllllllillllllllil!l]|||||ll
“ Ha ! A hundred brave canoes—
Crowding, crashing,
Darting, plashing,
Darting, dashing through the wave !
Forward—forward all together,
All in quest of foemen’s slaughter !
They had cleft the foaming water,
Seeking vengeance for the brave
For the brave—the brave—the brave !'
The late Mr. C. 0. Davis, an accomplished
Maori linguist, published the following on
the subject of Maori war-canoes and their
i uses :
“It was not customary with the Maoris in
ancient times to appoint regular days for
canoe races as is now often done. Some-
times a great chief would proceed on a visit
to a neighbouring relative or ally, or on a
foray or a hostile expedition. If he went by
land he was usually accompanied by a large
retinue befitting his rank, often numbering
100 followers, and if he went by water he
was escorted by as many as half a dozen
large war-canoes all fully manned, and orna-
mented in the highest style of native art.
The principal war-canoe was called the
‘ Tararo.’ It was elaborately carved and
ornamented with tufts and plumes of the
pigeon, albatross, and other birds. Some-
times the carved board rose to a height of
twelve feet, all splendidly decorated. Two
streamers of white albatross feathers de-
corated the bows. In the spaces between
the gunwales and topsides beautifully carved
pieces were let in. The spaces between the
thwarts were partly covered over with twigs
so as to form a platform upon which the
warriors were enabled to sit in regular rows ;
in fact, they displayed a wonderful unifor-
mity and precision, both in regard to posi-
tion and motion, so that the war-canoes ap-
peared like some vast antennse instinct with
life. Another name for these war-canoes
was Waka Taua, from waka, a canoe, and
tana, war party. In manning a canoe two
men known to be skilful in handling the
large steer-paddles were placed at the bow
and stern, and co-operated with each other
in guiding the canoe. Two or three other
persons well versed in the chants and songs
used on such occasions would relieve each
other as fugle-men, standing up in the canoe,
beating time with a paddle or taiaha (orna-
mental spear) and chanting a song, the
chorus of which was sung by the rowers,
who were bare to the waist, with heads
beautifully decorated with huia and alba-
tross feathers. Sometimes they wore over
the brow topknots composed of feathers, and
ribbons of tapa (native cloth), and the tuki
or carved comb, which gave to the heads of
the rowers an appearance of savage grandeur
in singular harmony with the decorations of
the canoe itself. They also often wore white
or black tufts of albatross feathers (Puhoi)
in the ears. These latter ornaments were
only worn by men of distinction. Races
sometimes occurred in this way. A number
of canoes_ would set out together, the rowers
would stimulate each other to put on speed,
and in the emulation there would be a
struggle for the lead, which would result in
a hardly-contested race.”


llllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillilHlilllllllllllllllllllllllllli
EARLY PROCLAMATIONS,
In a despatch, Governor Hobson narrates
his action at Kororareka on his landing. He
says:—
“ Bay of Islands,
‘ 1 February 4,1840.
“ Sir, —I have the honour to acquaint your
Excellency that, immediately on my arrival
in the Bay of Islands I issued an invitation
to all British subjects to meet me at the
the church at Kororareka on the following
day, there to hear read Her Majesty’s Com-
mission under the Great Seal, extending the
limits of the colony of New South Wales, and
Her Majesty’s Commission under the Royal
signet and sign manual, appointing me
Lieutenant-Governor of such part of the
colony as may be acquired in sovereignty in
New Zealand.
“5 have now to report that on the day
appointed—namely, the 80th ultimo, the
ceremony of reading the above Commissions
was performed in the presence of a concourse
of persons, forty of whom subscribed the
document, a copy of which is annexed.
“ The proclamations framed by your Excel-
lency and the Executive Council of New
South Wales were then read and published
—the first announcing that Her Majesty’s
authority had been asserted over British
subjects in New Zealand; the second,
acquainting the public that Her Majesty
does not deem it expedient to acknowledge
as valid any titles to land in New Zealand
which are not derived from, or confirmed by
a grant from the Crown.
“ I have, &c.,
“ W. Hobson.
“ His Excellency Sir George Gipps,
&c., &c., &c.”
The document referred to states that the
commissions have been published. The fol-
lowing are the signatures of those who were
present: —
James Busby Alexander McGregor
John Mason (clerk) . E. McLennan
v James R. Clendon John Garwood
v Charles Baker J. A. Wood
Robert Edney W. Scott Buckham
is- Benjamin E. Turner William Turner
George Russell M. Bowey
John Kelly Black
John Scott G. T, Robin son
JohnWeasell Thomas Spicer
Moko Edward Waterton
David Fitzpatrick G. T. Clayton
Adam Keir George Greenway
P. M. Moody Charles John Cook
Andrew O’Brien t- William Motion
Jeremiah McCrohen Alexander McGuier
Robert Evans t-Alexander Marshall
Edmond Powell Donald Mackay
Baker William Dodds
James Cosgrove John McLeod
William Wilson
The first proclamation referred to in
Governor Hobson’s despatch was as fol-
lows :
[PROCLAMATION.]
“By His Excellency William Hobson, Esq.,
Lieutenant-Governor of the British set-
tlements in progress in New Zealand,
etc., etc., etc.
“ Whereas Her Majesty Victoria, Queen of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, has been graciously pleased to direct
that measures shall be taken for the estab-
lishment of a settled form of Civil Govern-
ment over those of Her Majesty’s subjects who
are already settled in New Zealand, or who
may hereafter resort hither. And whereas Her
Majesty has also been graciously pleased to
direct letters patent to be issued, under the
Great Seal of the said United Kingdom,
bearing date the fifteenth day of June, in
the year 1839, by which the former bound-
aries of the Colony of New South Wales are
so extended as to comprehend any part of
New Zealand that is or may be acquired in
sovereignty by Her Majesty, her heirs or
successors. And whereas Her Majesty has
been further pleased, by a commission under
her royal signet and sign manual, bearing
date the 30th day of July, 1839, to appoint
me, William Hobson, Esq., Captain in Her
Majesty’s navy, to be Lieutenant-Governor
in and over any territory which is or may be
acquired in sovereignty by Her Majesty, her
heirs or successors, within that group of
islands in the Pacific Ocean commonly called
New Zealand, and lying between the lati-
tude 34 degrees 30 minutes and 47 degrees
10 minutes south, and 166 degrees 5 minutes
and _ 179 degrees east longitude from the
meridian of Greenwich. Now therefore I,
the said William Hobson, do hereby declare
and proclaim that I did, on the 14th day
of January instant, before His Excellency Sir
George Gipps, Knight, Captain-General and
Governor-in-Chief in and over the territory
of New South Wales and its dependencies,
and the Executive Council thereof, take
the accustomed oaths of office as Lieutenant-
Governor aforesaid. And Ido hereby further
proclaim and declare, that I have this day
opened and published the two commissions
aforesaid, that is to say, the commission
under the Great Seal extending the boun-
daries of the Government of New South
Wales, and the commission under the Royal
Sign Manual appointing me Lieutenant-
Governor as aforesaid. And I do hereby
further proclaim and declare, that I have
this day entered on the duties of my said
office as Lieutenant-Governor as aforesaid,
and I do call upon all Her Majesty’s subjects
to be aiding and assisting me in the execution
thereof. Given under my hand and seal, at
Kororareka, this 30th day of January, 1840,
and in the third year of Her Majesty’s reign.
“ William Hobson,
“ Lieutenant-Governor.
“ By His Excellency’s command,
“ George Cooper.
“ God Save the Queen !
“ (True copy). “ E. Deas Thomson.”


3 8 New Zealand's Jubilee , 1840-1890.
niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiH
Another proclamation respecting the titles |
to land is dated the 30th of January, 1840, |
which Governor Hobson felt himself con- |
strained to issue in regard to the proceedings |
of the New Zealand Company’s settlers at |
Port Nicholson. In a despatch in reference |
to their proceedings, Governor Hobson |
aid: — |
“ Those persons who have settled at Port |
Nicholson under the auspices of the Com- |
pany are, from their ramt, their numbers, |
and their wealth, by far the most important |
in the colony. But it is to be regretted that, |
from the impunity with which they have |
heretofore, in defiance of the Government, |
encroached on the land, they assume a tone |
of dictation and authority which is totally |
subversive of all Government, and which |
must evenntually be overcome, or the sole |
management of the affairs of the island must |
be surrendered into their hands. On a recent |
occasion Sir George Gipps gave them the per- |
missory occupation of 110,000 acres around |
Port Nicholson, on condition of their con-
fining themselves to that limit, with a pro-
mise to recommend to your Lordship to ob-
tain for them from Her Majesty a free grant
to that extent, in return for the expense the
Company had incurred in importing immi-
grants into the colony. But almost coinci-
dent with that act of grace, they spread
themselves over the land of Wlianganui.
to a distance of 90 miles, in direct opposition
to a notice simultaneously published both
by Sir George Gipps and myself respect-
ively. ... It is quite evident, notwith-
standing the extraneous matter introduced
into the Port Nicholson petition, that the
whole matter resolves itself into the simple
fact, that I have not studied the exclusive
advantage of the company, by fixing the seat
of Government at Port Nicholson, and it is
equally certain that the counter petition
must be attributed to my having chosen my
position on the Waitemata.”
iiininimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
FREEDOM OF THE NEW ZEALAND PRESS IN
OLDEN
We have before us a circular dated De-
cember 15, 1840, in which Messrs. Eagar and
Co., the proprietors of the New Zealand Ad-
vertiser and Bay of Islands Gazette, inform
their subscribers that they are obliged to
suspend publication for a week or two under
the following circumstances ; —They had re-
ceived a notice from the Colonial Secretary,
Mr. Shortland, that the Acts of New South
Wales regarding the printing and publish-
ing of newspapers were to be enforced.
These were that “ the true and real name,
addition, and abode of the editor, printer,
publisher, and proprietor of every news-
paper be printed in some part thereof,
under a penalty of £lOO. Affidavits to re-
late to the identification of the parties
whose names were so printed for the more
easy bringing them to justice in any case of
libel.” The proprietors of newspapers then
were in as bad a way as their successors
of to-day as regards the libel law's.
The editor, printer, or publisher had to
enter into recognizances of £3OO, and £3OO on
the part of sufficient sureties, which was to
be considered forfeited in case of any con-
viction under the Act. The penalty for
omission of this requirement before the pub-
lication of the newspaper was £2O. Persons
convicted of “ seditious or blasphemous
libels,” tending to bring the Government into
hatred or contempt , were to be punished at the
TIMES.
discretion of the Court, as in cases of high
misdemeanours, or by banishment from the
colony for a number of years.” Well might
Messrs. Eagar and Co. pause, and state in
their circular that “ one thing has become now
manifest, the Government of the British colony
of New Zealand does not wish a free press,
while, on the other hand, our feeling is—A
FREE PRESS OR NONE AT ALL. How Could
any paper here, the amount of whose income
would be averaged by £lO or £l2 per week,
with its expenses deducted, endure recog-
nizances of £6OO, to say nothing of fines and
penalties ad libitum of every Government
servant who might happen to feel wounded
by an editorial remark.” It appears
that a meeting of subscribers and of the
public, was called in a day or two at Jones’s
Royal Hotel, for, as Robert Burns says,
“ Whisky and freedom gang thegither ! ”
Messrs. Eagar and Co. urged ‘ ‘ promptitude,
unanimity, moderation and determination.”
These qualities will effect our triumph. In
New Zealand the Press must be to all in-
tents and purposes in public matters un-
chained as air.” Bravo, Eagar and Co. ! It
is satisfactory to learn that the New Zealand
Advertiser and Bay of Islands Gazette was
resuscitated, and ran its course, for with
journals, as with men, “ It is appointed once
to die, and after death, the j udgment. ”
ii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiii
ll!llllllllllll!llllll!lillllllllilUIIII!llllllllll»lll!lllllllll


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiii!iiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiiniiiniiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
THEN AND NOW.
[from a contributor.]
Among all the colonists of New Zealand few
probably could say with the late Mr. Swain-
son, that they came out in the year One of
the colony; still fewer would be able to
narrate the events of that year as matters of
personal recollection. Half a century ago
such adventurous emigrants left their homes
in Great Britain, and after long, wearisome,
and often painful voyaging, arrived in, what
to them must have seemed like a new world.
Since that date a marvellous transformation
has been effected, not only here, at the ends
of the earth, but in every country under
heaven ; a transformation so thorough, that,
to realise the conditions of life in the year
1840 requires an effort of imagination which
may safely be said to be beyond the reach of
the young, and to present considerable diffi-
culty even to the old.
Fifty years ago the railway engine had
already shown that the Quarterly Review
had been mistaken in declaring that the idea
that a train might be drawn at the rate of
fifteen, or even twenty miles an hour, was
“ a gross exaggeration of the powers of the
locomotive steam-engine.” Already, also, it
was evident that the same writer had been
without the spirit of prophecy when he thus
summarily disposed of the question : —“ As
to those persons who speculate on making
railways general throughout the Kingdom
. . . we deem them and their visionary
schemes unworthy of notice.” Still, at the
period referred to, railway travelling was
only in its infancy with regard both to com-
fort and to speed. Third-class carriages were
hardly better than New Zealand cattle trucks
of the present day, being not only seatless,
but roofless. The second-class were mere
wooden boxes, with seats indeed, but without
cushions, blinds, or the least attempt to
make traveling anything but a painful
penance. The first-class were slightly en-
larged copies of the stage coach, cramped,
close, and stuffy. The mail train, as English
people know it now, with its stately sweep
into the stopping stations, its almost fearful
flight through the country, doing for instance
the 400 miles between London and Edinburgh,
in something less than nine hours, all this
was yet in the future, while the electric tele-
graph was regarded by the few who had heard
of it beyond its promoters, as merely a
scientific curiosity, not in the least likely to
have any appreciable effect upon the world.
Wires had been laid between the Euston
Square and Camden Town stations, a distance
of a mile and a-quarter, but their removal
had been ordered. In 1839 the patentees
received permission to establish their dis-
covery on the Great Western Railway, and
thirteen miles were laid down, but the pro-
posal to extend the lines to Bristol met with
much opposition from the directors, and
again the telegraph had notice to quit. Mr.
Cooke, one of the patentees, was, however,
allowed to retain the line of wires at
his own expense, on condition of adding
another five miles, and of sending railway
signals free, for public messages he might
make a charge of Is. But the public looked
with indifference on such a means of com-
munication, and the shillings were few. In
1845, however, a murder was committed at
Slough. There was no doubt that the guilty
person was a Quaker named Tawell, who, it
was found, had caught the express train for
London, and knowing that this could not be
overtaken, probably considered that he had
made his escape, and -would be able to lose
himself in the great city. Some one suggested
a trial of the telegraph. There was no
symbol for Qu, but this difficulty was over-
come, and the clerk in London was puzzled
by a message desiring him to “ Stop the
Kwa!” At this point he stopped the
message, and gave the signal for repetition,
reasoning with himself that no word in the
English language began with those letters.
Again came the peremptory order “ Stop
the Kwa,” which again was promptly
stopped. This went on until the sender
suggested that he should be allowed to finish,
when the receiver took means to “ Stop the
Kwaker,” who afterwards suffered for his
crime. The utility of the electric telegraph
was proved, and by the end of the year 500
miles of wires had been laid, and were in ope-
ration. For many years past, wherever civili-
sation has gone, the telegraph has been its
companion or its forerunner; the last mail
from England brought news of the esta-
blishment of perhaps the youngest and
evidently one of the shortest of lines,
on mission premises on the Congo River in
Africa, a little difficulty at starting having
been overcome, in a manner with which
colonists can sympathise. The insulators
were found not strong enough to act as
terminals for the wire, so a couple of old
filters were fastened to the posts, and the
wires terminated on them, and the arrange-
ment answered very well. Fifty years ago
Africa was almost a blank on the map. Now,
natives of that country, whose horizon a
short time since was bounded by their im-
mediate surroundings, are beginning to find
that a very wide world is opening before
them, and lads to whom the art of reading
was a mystery are taking lessons in the use
of the telegraph, while one of their number
can already read the Morse code fairly well.
Half a century ago the British nation, by
the abolition of slavery in the British West
Indies, in 1838, had at last purged itself from
the crime of slavery, some incidents of which
were described as follows before a London
audience by an eye-witness of its horrors—
William Knibb, a Baptist missionary:—“I
call upon children by the cries of the infant
slave whom I saw flogged. ... I call
upon parents by the blood-streaming back of
Catherine Williams, who, with a heroism
England has seldom known, preferred a
dungeon to the surrender of her honour. I
call upon Christians by the lacerated back of
William Black, of King’s Valley, whose
back, a month after a flogging, was not
healed.” Driven from a few islands of
the Atlantic, slavery was still supreme


iHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin
in America among a people of British
race and tongue. Yet even then, hopeless
as seemed the prospect, not from the slaves
only, but from many a noble soul chafing
against the intolerable evil, agonised at the
thought of the national guilt, there went up
the cry, “ How long, 0 Lord, how long r
And the Lord hearkened and heard. A few
years earlier the New England Anti-slavery
Society had been formed at a meeting of
fifteen persons. An adjourned meeting, held
in the schoolroom of a Baptist Church, took
place during a fierce storm of snow, rain,
and hail, in the midst of which, as the small
company stepped out into the dark, Mr,
Garrison impressively remarked :—“ We
have met to-night in this obscure school-
house, our numbers are few and our influence
limited; but, mark my prediction, Faneuil
Hall shall ere long echo with the principles
we have set forth ; we shall shake the nation
by their mighty power !” How this predic-
tion was more than fulfilled when the great
nation bore the punishment of its iniquity,
the reward of its own hands being given it,
until the evil thing was cast out, nearly
rending the nation as it passed away, is
matter of history full of instruction for those
who have eyes to see.
Americans, when reproached with their
“ peculiar institution,” would sometimes re-
taliate by pointing to the glaring injustice
of many social conditions in England, and
their statement was unanswerable, though
it could hardly avail as an excuse for another
wrong. The land was at that time mostly
let out in farms by the great owners, who
considered the tenant’s vote as much the
landlord’s right as was the rent; and the
vote, of course, was to be given in support of
the “landed interest.” The farmers gener-
ally acquiesced, either through indifference,
or fearing to lose the farms already held
under various vexatious and hurtful restric-
tions. As for the labourers, their part was
to till the ground and mind the flocks ; they
did not therefore need much “book learn-
ing,” and it was doubtful whether it would
really be a good thing for them or their chil-
dren to learn to read and write. But the
privileged class, whose mountain seemed to
stand so strong, have had, like the American
slaveholders, to eat the fruit of their own
doings; great changes have been brought
about by the rising tide of righteousness, and
the end is not yet.
In England, in the year 1840, and during
the succeeding quarter of a century and
more, church rates were levied upon mem-
bers of all denominations and of none, for the
support of a sect otherwise richly endowed
by the State, and those who refused payment
were deprived of their goods and sometimes
of their liberty. The same sect had seized
the national universities and shut and closely
barred the gates of every one of their col-
leges against those who could not pronounce
the sectarian shibboleth. Until 1854 no one
not a member of the established denomina-
tion could so much as take a degree at either
Oxford or Cambridge, and when the degree
was reluctantly granted, all offices of honour
and emolument, all share of the government
of the Universities, were still retained and
guarded with desperate determination. It was
not until the abolition of University Tests in
1871 that the doors so long closed were at last
flung open, and even then there remained
the abomination by which men were often
tempted to declare that they trusted that
they were “ inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost,” when they knew, and in many cases
it was well known that they only “took
orders ” in order to obtain or to retain the
comfortable income of a clerical fellowship.
How that this also has been done away, and
that with the exception of one or two offices
whose income depends on ecclesiastical pre-
ferment, all sect distinctions have been
swept from the Universities, it is hard to
realise that such exclusiveness can have
existed at so recent a period. There still
reinains, however, the question of the ad-
mission of one-half of the nation—that is to
say of women, to the rights and privileges of
the two great national Universities, and iWg
interesting to remember that a stage Ims
already been reached which, much less than
half a century ago, would have been regarded
as the mere dream of a lunatic, or at best, as
an amusing romance. If, at that time, it
sometimes occurred to a woman that medical
attendance from one of her own sex would be
a natural and modest arrangement, it was
but as a hopeless longing for the unattain-
able. Not only were there no qualified medi-
cal women, but there was no possibility of
any such being trained, and when at length
an attempt was made in that direction,
medical students, doctors, professors, ex-
amining and licensing boards, all joined in
placing every imaginable obstacle in the w T ay
of the enterprise. Now there are seventy-
three registered lady doctors in Great Britain,
though the lady students are still obliged to
seek the completion of their course in foreign
countries.
In his impassioned protest against slavery,
William Rnibb dwelt on its especially cruel
effect upon women. “ Must I then,” he
asked, “plead for woman? If anyone
refuse to advocate her cause—if he decline to
lift his voice in her favour, . . I say he is
less than man.” When the British nation
acknowledged the justice of this plea and
decreed liberty to the slaves, it was a step
upward for the whole human race, for—
“ When a deed is done for freedom, through the
broad earth’s aching breast,
Runs a thrill of joy prophetic trembling on from
east to west—
For mankind are one in spirit, and an instinct bears
along,
Bound the earth’s electric circle, the swift flash of
right and wrong.”
The enfranchisement of the poor black
women was a happy omen for women every-
where, and if for women then for men, since
the degradation of one sex keeps back both
alike from the fuller, freer life awaiting
them in the future, and towards which, how-
ever, much remains undone, great strides
have been made in the past half century.
In or about the year 1848, by order of an
Austrian general, Haynau by name, Hun-
garian ladies of noble birth were publicly
flogged for the crime of helping in the
struggle for the liberty of their country.
In 1850, General Haynau visited England.
Among the sights of London he went to
the great brewery of Barclay and Perkins,
and as w r as usual, entered his name in the


lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUIIIIIII^
visitors’ book. He had a letter of introduc-
tion from one of the Rothschilds, and was
apparently serenely unconscious of having
done anything unworthy of a man. One or
two clerks were observed to slip from the
room, and in a few minutes it was known all
over the place that the woman-fiogger was in
the building, and somehow or other a hint
got about that the big whips of the draymen
might serve to do to him in a measure as he
had had done to the ladies, and with wonder-
ful speed a crowd gathered to give effect to
this hint, those who had no whips being
furnished with brooms. Particulars of the
Iright and the flight of the coward, of how
he was at last rescued by the police in a boat
on the river, into which he nearly tumbled in
his scared haste, may be found in the Free
Library, in the Illustrated London News of
September 7, 1850. It was reported that
Messrs. Barclay and Perkins had dismissed
the ringleaders, but the firm declared it to
be impossible to fix the responsibility of the
affair, and that such a thing not being likely
to occur again, they had not thought in
necessary to take any action. Many thought
and said with pride that a lesson had been
given to the foreigner; and yet Britons hardly
proved themselves to have a right to hold up
their heads in that way. Fifteen years later,
one of those scares which are apt to arise
where righteousness is not the rule of the
governing class, broke out in Jamaica, a
martial law was proclaimed by Governor
Eyre. The proceedings of the military courts
were described among others, by a young
officer of Her Majesty’s Navy, who sat
as one of the judges, and wrote home
an account of his experiences. “We
are flogging,” he said, “ and hanging
like fun.” In the number of the flogged
were both men and women, and, lest the
punishment should not be sufficiently painful,
piano wire was twined into the whip lashes
by order of English officers and gentlemen,
who thus outdid the despised Austrian. The
friends of the young officer apparently thought
his letters so admirable that they sent them
for publication to one of the daily papers;
other witnesses confirmed his statements,
and a storm of indignation was aroused which
resulted in Governor Eyre’s being brought to
trial. But the dead could not be restored to
life, and no compensation was granted to the
living.
Could such_ things be done now, in this
year 1890?. We may confidently answer, No.
There is evidence certainly that there are
still men of our nation who think it needless
to regard justice in their dealings with what
they are pleased to term an inferior race, but
in these last days when the prophecy of
Daniel is fulfilled that many should run to
and fro and knowledge be increased in the
earth, deeds of cruelty can no longer be done
openly, and hardly privately without bring-
ing upon their perpetrators the swift and
sure vengeance of public opinion. The tele-
graph, the printing press, and the locomotive
make concealment impossible, that which
was done in secret is now told upon the
housetops, and the light is slaying the dark-
ness, and will continue to do so
“ Till morning tread the darkness down
And night be swept away.”
Half a century ago, to return to the year
one of our colony, our countrymen came
hither with a blank sheet on which to write,
if they would, the history of such a nation as
the world has never yet seen. Physical diffi-
culties there were no doubt in plenty, but
the far more serious moral and social diffi-
culties only existed by the will, or by the care-
lessness of the colonists themselves. All old
nations were, and are, weighed down by the
accumulated burdens of many generations by
privileged classes, and by established cus-
toms, which have pushed aside the great
principles of truth and justice, the only sure
foundation for any community. Here, on the
contrary, untrammelled by the baleful legacy
of the past, protected from unfriendly, and
also from friendly interference by the vast
expanse of ocean, with a favourable climate,
with a native race capable of appreciating
honourable treatment —here was an oppor-
tunity for building up a State by righteous-
ness ; a free country, where every one would
have had liberty to make the best he could
of his own life, to earn, and to spend his
earnings, and where the functions of Govern-
ment being small, taxation also would have
been of the smallest. Such a country would
have attracted the best from every nation,
because the fame of its happiness would have
gone everywhere, while the baser sort would
have been kept away by the dread of an
enlightened public opinion, which would
have made all attempts at unjust privilege
at unrighteous gain practically hopeless.
Bishop Butler, in his famous “ Analogy,”
describes the possibilities of a nation
founded on righteousness ;—“ln such a
State there would be no such thing as
faction, but men of the greatest capacity
would of course all along have the direc-
tion of affairs willingly yielded to them;
and they would share it among themselves
without envy. Each of these would have the
part assigned him to which his genius was
peculiarly adapted; and others, who had not
any distinguished genius, would be safe, and
think themselves very happy by being under
the protection and guidance of those who
had. Public determinations would really be
the result of the united wisdom of the com-
munity, and they would faithfully be exe-
cuted by the united strength of it. Some
would in a higher way contribute, but all
would in some way contribute to the public
prosperity; and in it each would enjoy the
fruit of his own virtue. And as injustice,
whether by fraud or force, would be un-
known among themselves, so they would be
sufficiently secured from it in their neigh-
bours. For cunning and false self-interest,
confederacies in injustice, ever slight, ana
accompanied with faction and intestine
treachery ; those on one hand would be found
mere childish folly and weakness, when set
in opposition against wisdom, public spirit,
union inviolable, and fidelity on the other. Add
the general influence which such a kingdom
would have over the face of the earth, by
way of example particularly, and the rever-
ence which would be paid it.”
All this and more was open to New Zea-
land. Why is the reality so different ? Those
who came hither brought with them a chart
by which they might have been safely
guided, but they said, “ Nay, but we will


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiim
take a shorter road ; make us a debt to rule
over us like all other nations.” And now,
ruled by that debt, smothered with laws,
hampered by w’hat is facetiously called pro-
tection, presenting few attractions to those
whom we should be glad to attract, we are
far enough from realising the grand ideal
which we have despised. The Bible gives us
the history of another highly-favoured peo-
ple, to whom was offered a glorious future
on one condition —that they served the God
of Righteousness. They refused, and wor-
shipped instead the gods of the nations, the
Baalim and the Asherah —force, money, lust,
and amusement—for which reason they never
once touched the perfect prosperity set before
them, but, turning the back upon it, sank
lower and lower, and at last were cast out
from their land, a warning for all time, to all
nations, and especially to the more highly
favoured.
The devotion of several days to mere
amusement, and the consequent upsetting of
business and of public traffic, may be a
suitable way of celebrating the birthday
of this State, but it will hardly satisfy those
who, having at heart the true welfare of
the country, realise in some measure the
noble possibilities of the future, possibilities
iihiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
which can only be grasped by a noble
people of high aims and principle. As long
as there are among us “ the treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked, the
scant measure that is abominable, the wicked
balances, and the bag of deceitful weights,”
or any other devices for robbery more or less
disguised, the land cannot know true pros-
perity. It follows that the cheat, little or
big, is the enemy, not only of himself, but of
his country. To search and try ourselves,
and if there be in our hands the gain of
oppression, to give back such unjust gain to
the person wronged, would make of this
somewhat unsatisfactory Jubilee a starting
point towards better things, a period to be
looked back upon with thankfulness for ever.
The debtor who, though shielded by bank-
ruptcy, lately sought out and paid his credi-
tors in full, this honest gentleman has set
an example of how to keep the J übilee, for
the promise of Him who cannot lie is per-
fectly definite —“ Seek good and not evil, that
ye may live, and see now if I will not pour
you out a blessing that there shall not be
room enough to hold it See, I have set
before thee this day life and good, and death
and evil, therefore choose life, that both thou
and thy seed may live ”
lllllllllllillllElllllllljlUlllillllillllllllit
CELEBRITIES OP THE OCCASION,
We give below portraits of those whose
names were most intimately connected
with the Jubilee celebrations in Auckland.
Cranley, second son of Thomas Viscount
Cranley, and Earl of Onslow. He is thus
grand-nephew to his immediate predecessor,
LADY ONSLOW.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
Auckland has already welcomed the Earl of
Onslow when he landed here as Governor, and
he was cordially received amongst us when he
conmfor a more leisurely visit. Since he has
been in the colony Lord Onslow has shown him-
self deeply interested in all that concerns it.
The Right Hon. Sir William Hillier On-
slow, Bart., Knight of St. Michael and St.
George, fourth Earl of Onslow, was born
March 7, 1853, son of George Augustus Cran-
ley, who was grandson of the Hon, Thomas
Arthur George, third Earl of Onslow, who
died without surviving male issue in 1870. The
earldom was created in 1801, but the barony
of Onslow in 1716. The first baronet was Lord
Mayor of London in 1649, and the baronetcy
was conferred on him at the restoration of
Charles 11, Several of this family, in the


Illllllllllllillllllllll]llilllllllllllllllllllllillillllll!llll!llllllllll!lllllllll1llllllllilllllllllllllli[|[|||||||||l]||||l!||[|llll'ltlllllllll|[||||l!]
18th century were distinguished in Parlia-
mentary life, and Ministerial offices, and one
was Speaker of the House of Commons from
1727 to 1761. The present Lord Onslow was
educated at Eton, and at Christ Church, Ox-
ford, succeeded to the Peerage in 1870, and
was twice appointed a Lord-ln-Waiting of
the Queen’s household. From February,
1887, till his- appointment as Governor of New
Zealand in 1888, he occupied the useful post
of Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies
in the Administration of Lord Salisbury.
He married a daughter of the late Lord
Gardner, and has three children, the eldest,
Lord Cranley, being thirteen years of age.
LORD CARRINGTON.
The Right Hon. Lord Carrington,
G.C.M.G., Governor of the colony of New
South Wales, is Charles Robert Carrington,
third Baron Carrington, who was born in
1843, at High Wycombe, in the County of
Buckinghamshire, England. He was edu-
cated at Eton and at Trinity College, Cam-
bridge, taking the degree of B.A. in 1863. In
1865 he entered the Royal Horse Guards, be-
came lieutenant in 1867 and captain in 1869.
He is a captain in the Buckinghamshire
Militia and the Deputy - Lieutenant and
Magistrate for that County. He was in the
House of Commons from 1865 to 1868,
as member for High Wycombe, and suc-
ceeded to his father’s peerage in 1868.
The first peer of this family was Mr. Robert
Smith, M.P., who was created Baron Car-
rington, of Upton, Notts, in 1797. His son,
the second baron, in 1839 assumed the name
of Carrington by Royal license, instead of
Smith, and married, a daughter of Lord
Willoughby D’Eresby. By right of his ma-
ternal ancestor Lord Carrington holds the
office of Joint Hereditary Lord Great Cham-
berlain to Her Majesty, and was aide-de-
camp to the Prince of Wales during his visit
to India, and has been a captain in the corps
of Gentlemen-at-Arms. He married in 1878
the Hon. Cecilia Margaret, eldest daughter
of the fifth Baron Suffield, and succeeded
Lord Loftus as Governor of New South Wales
in 1885, He is wealthy, possessed of broad
IIIIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIItllllllllllllllllllllIIIIIIIII!IIIIIIUIIIIIIIinilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll(|llllllllllll|l||||||||||||||||||U||||||||||||||
liberal views, and since his arrival in New
South Wales lias, by his unflagging energy
and participation in every good cause, en-
deared himself to all.
LORD CHARLES SCOTT.
Rear-Admiral Lord Charles Douglas Scott,
C. 8., is a brother of the Duke of Buccleuch.
He served as a midshipman on the St. Jean
d’Acre in the Baltic and Black Seas in
1854-56, and was rewarded with the Baltic,
Crimea, and Turkish medals, and was after-
wards in China and Hongkong, receiving the
China medal and Fatsham clasp for his ser-
vices in the Canton river and other places in
1857. In 1858 he was specially mentioned,
and awarded the Indian medal for his ser-
vices in Indian waters. He was appointed
commander of the Rinaldo, and was se-
cond in command of the naval forces
under Captain Heneage, which landed to
XjADY SCOTT.
protect British subjects and interests at
Yangehow in 1868; and later in that year he
was commander of the flotilla of boats which
assisted Commodore 0. J. Jones and the
Naval Brigade to destroy some walled pirati-
cal villages on the Outing-Poi Creek, near
Swatow. Lord Charles Scott was in com-
mand of H.M.s. Bacchante in 1881, when she


visited Australia with the two sons of the
Prince of Wales on board as midshipmen.
He received the decoration of C.B. in 1882,
and in the following year again visited Aus-
tralia, when he married Miss Ada Mary
Ryan, second daughter of Mr. Charles Ryan,
of Melbourne and Mount Macedon (Victoria),
by whom he has two sons. He has lately
been attached to one of the Navy steam
reserves in Britain and was created a Rear-
Admiral in 1888.
SIR JOHN THURSTON.
Sir John Thurston, K.C.M.G-., F.R.G.S.,
F.L.S., Governor of Fiji, High Commis-
sioner and Consul-General for the Western
Pacific (whose portrait we give from
a photograph by Farley, of San Francisco),
was born in the year 1836, is a mem-
ber of the old Gloucestershire family
of that name descending from Richard
Turstin, who, in the year 1389 was Lord of
the ancient Manor of Cheveringuarde, near
Thornbury, where the family still live. The
earlier part of Sir John’s life was spent at sea,
chiefly in East Indian waters. Leaving India
in consequence of severe illness, Sir John
visited Australia, over which he travelled
extensively. In 1866, Sir John Thurston
was appointed by Lord Derby (then Lord
Stanley) to act as Her Majesty’s Consul for
Fiji and Tonga, which post he occupied for
about four years. Upon the earlier political
difficulties in Fiji reaching a climax, and
upon the resignation of the first Ministry
formed under the native king and chiefs, the
subject of our memoir was called to office by
the united voices of the natives, settlers, and
foreign consuls, and entered the Govern-
ment as Chief Secretary and Minister for
Foreign Relations. The following account
of Sir John Thurston’s subsequent career is
taken from the Colonial Office Record of the
public services of its officers : —“ March, 1874,
w r as appointed ‘ chosen and special adviser’ of
the native king and chiefs of Fiji, to confer
with Her Majesty’s commissioners as to the
annexation of the islands to Great Britain;
upon the offer of cession became Chief Secre-
tary under the ‘ ad interim Government;”
was again nominated as special adviser to
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii[iiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii[iiiiiiii[iii]iiiiiiij]jiii]iiiiiiiiiiiii]ii[iii]iiiiiiiiiiiiiii[]i]iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiijiiiiiiiiiiii!iiii[iiiiiiiiiiiii[iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii[iiiiiiiiiiiiii!i]iiii[iiiit
the king and chiefs in September, 1874, for
the purpose of conferring with His Excel-
lency Sir Hercules Robinson as to the act of
cession; Colonial Secretary and Auditor-
General of the colony, October, 1874 ; and
also secretary to the High Commissioner for
the Western Pacific, September, 1879; ad-
ministered the government of Fiji from the
16th November to 20th December, 1880; in
1880 and 1881 sent on special duty connected
with treaty negotiations to the Friendly
Islands; Deputy-Governor of Fiji, October,
1882, during absence of the Governor on duty
as High Commissioner for Western Pacific ;
administered the government November,
1883, to July, 1884 ; Assistant High Commis-
sioner for the Western Pacific, November,
1883; acted as Consul-General for the West-
ern Pacific, April to June, 1884; summoned
to England in connection with the joint com-
mission appointed to inquire into the claims
LADY THURSTON.
of German subjects to lands in Fiji, March
21,1885; British Commissioner on the Anglo-
German Commission for the discussion of the
interests of German and British subjects re-
spectively in the South Seas, and for the
more precise demarcation of British and
German spheres of influence in those regions,
August 3, 1885 ; sgain administered the
government in 1885-6 ; Lieutenant-Governor,
1886; Governor of Fiji, High Commissioner
of the Western Pacific, and Consul -
General, 1887.” In 1883 Sir John married
Amelia, the youngest daughter of the late
John Berry, Esq., of Albury, New South
Wales, who, with her children, is now visit-
ing Auckland for change of scene and
climate. The portrait of Lady Thurston is
from a photograph by Mr. Charles Hemus,
photographer, of Auckland.
MR. J. H. UPTON, MAYOR OF
AUCKLAND.
In such a matter as this, an important part
was taken by the chief magistrate of the city,
Mr. J. H. Upton, who had but recently
taken office.


Mr. J. H. Upton, our present Mayor, is an
Englishman. He arrived in Auckland in
1866, and went into partnership with his
brother as a bookseller and stationer. The
business prospered, and it has now devel-
oped into a large and flourishing concern,
known as “ Upton and Co.” For twenty
years Mr. Upton has taken great interest in
church matters. He has been a member of
the Diodes an Synod for many years and a
member of the General Synod when held in
Christchurch, Auckland, and Dunedin. He
is also a member of the General Trust
Board and of the Melanesian Mission Trust
Board. Among public positions which he.
has held are: Trustee of the Auckland
Savings Bank for ten years, member of the
Board of Education for the last six years
(and chairman for two years), member of the
Grammar School Board (elected by the mem-
bers of the Upper and Lower Houses resident
in the district), and member of the City Coun-
cil four or five years ago. Mr. Upton can
thus show as good a record in the public ser-
vice as any gentleman in Auckland, and, as
a fitting climax, he has recently been elected
Mayor of Auckland.
MR. DEVORE, PRESIDENT OF THE
JUBILEE COMMITTEE.
Mr. A. E. Devore, President of the Com-
mittee, has played the most active part in
connection with the Jubilee celebration.
The proposal to have a grand celebration of
the Jubilee was conceived during his occupa-
tion of the Mayor’s chair, and all through he
has kept the object steadily in view, sparing
no trouble or exertion to make it a success.
His services to the Jubilee celebration will
be gratefully remembered by the citizens of
Auckland.
Albert Edward Tyrell Devore, our ex-
Mayor, was elected without opposition to the
Mayoralty of Auckland in 1886, and served
for three terms in succession unopposed.
Mr. Devore was born in Wiltshire in 1843,
and was educated at Devizes, in the same
county. He came out to Melbourne in
1859 while a lad of sixteen, and commenced
the study of the law in the office of Mr.
Fleetwood, solicitor. In 1862 he came to
New Zealand, and having been seized with
the “ yellow fever,” he worked as a digger
for six months on one of the goldfields in
Otago. Becoming tired of his occupation, he
returned to the law, entering the office of
Messrs. Howarth and Graham, solicitors,
Dunedin. He continued there till 1866, when
he, with Mr. W. L. Rees, went to Hokitika.
Mr. Devore had the management of Messrs.
Rees and Tyler’s business for several years
till they came to Auckland, and he accom-
panied them here. In 1871 he was admitted
to practice, and went into partnership with
Mr. J. B. Russell, which lasted eleven years.
In 1883 Mr. Devore entered into partnership
with Mr. Theophilus Cooper, who had been
a member of the firm of Russell, Devore, and
Cooper, and the present firm of Devore and
Cooper is the result. About this time he
stood for Pousonby W ard in the City Coun-
cil, and was returned at the top of the poll.
His election as Mayor came in due course,
and he fulfilled the duties of his high office
with efficiency and ability. At the close of
his Mayoral career Mr. Devore determined to
see the Jubilee celebrations through, and to
that business he has latterly devoted the
greater portion of his time and attention.
Much of the success attending it is due to his
prudence, foresight, and business capacity.
REWI MANIAPOTO.
| The most illustrious of our Maori visitors is
| Rewi Maniapoto, the famous leader of the
| Maoris at the fight at Orakau pa. Rewi is
| now a very old man, and we scarcely expected
| to see him with us in Auckland again, but
| the ancient warrior said he had heard that at
| this time there would be a number of ranga-
| tiras (or chiefs) assembled at Auckland to
| celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the
| beginning of the colony, and therefore he
| must come, if it were for the last time. Rewi
| was from the first one of the most fiery
| spirits in the warlike section of the King
I natives. It was he who led the party who


llllilllllllllilllllllllllillllliilllilllllllilllllllllllllllilliilllllllllllllllillilllliilllilillllllllilllllllllllililllll
routed Mr. Gorst, the magistrate, out of Te
Awamutu. He attended the great meeting
at Ngaruawahia when it was resolved to
elect Te Wherowhero as king, and he hoisted
the king flag on the pole. Rewi fought
against us at all the great fights, finishing off
with the defence of Orakau, and his famous
saying when asked to surrender, “Ka wha-
whai tonu, ake, ake, ake!” (“ We will fight
on, for ever, for ever, for ever !”). But Rewi
was always a fair fighter; no massacre was
ever laid to his charge, and he would not
carry out old Maori customs when these were
inconsistent with humanity. During the
siege of Orakau, a tohunga, or priest, pro-
I rosed to tear out the heart of a dead soldier
ying within the fence, so that they might
not be deserted by their Maori gods. Rewi
said: “I forbid you to mutilate the bodies
of the dead. I care not for your Maori god.
We are fighting in Christian times.” The
performance of the ancient rite by the priest
might have inspired courage, but Rewi
was no longer a heathen, but clung to
the faith the Europeans had taught
him, although he wanted to cast off
their rule. But hunger and thirst did
their work amongst the defenders of the pa.
A scanty meal of potatoes was distributed to
the survivors, but the men could not get the
food over their throats, which were burning
with thirst. Rewi’s resolve was taken. He
said : “ We shall now have to leave the pa,
but not as the Waikato left at Rangiriri (that
is, as prisoners). We shall go from here as
free men, or leave our bodies on the land.”
Hapurona, a Urewera chief, proposed that a
white flag should be hoisted, and when the
troops came close up to the pa, to fire a tre-
mendous volley, and in the confusion to
charge through them and escape. This pro-
posal Rewi overruled. Then Major Mair
called out to them a message from the Gene-
ral that at least the women and children
IlllllllllillWlllllllllilllllllliilllilllllllllilllllllllllillllllilllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllililllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillliil
should be sent out. Then Ahumai, sister of
Hitiri, said: “If our husbands and our
brothers are to die, of what profit is it to us
that we should live ? Let us die with the
men.” Then came the reply to Major Mair
from Rewi ; “ Ake, ake, ake.” The rush out
of the pa was made shortly after, during
which so many fell. Rewi escaped, but his
warfare was accomplished. He has come to
visit us on this our Jubilee, and in all proba-
bility we will never see him again.
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.B.
Sir George Grey, K.C.8., was born at
Lisbon, Portugal, in 1812, three days after
the death of his father, Colonel Grey, who
fell bravely leading his regiment (the 30th)
at Badajoz. Sir George was educated at
Sandhurst College, and a successful course
there gained him a captaincy in the 83rd
Regiment before he was 24 years old. He
soon after retired, and in 1839 he took a
leading part in exploring the interior of
what is now denominated Western Australia,
I his expedition suffering great hardships. In
| 1841 he was appointed Governor of South
I Australia, and held that post till 1845, when
| he was of IN ew Zealand.
| He in November, 1845, when the
| Northern War was dragging its slow length
| along, and within two months after his
| arrival Ruapekapeka pa was taken, Heke’s
| power broken, and the war ended. Sir
| George returned Home in 1853, and was
| afterwards appointed Governor of Cape
| Colony. In 1861 he was again despatched to
| New Zealand to succeed Governor Gore
| Browne. His subsequent career as Premier
| of the Colony, a member of the General
| Assembly, and as a colonial statesman is so
| familiar to all our readers that it is un-
| necessary to recapitulate it. Is it not written
| in the chronicles of New Zealand —Hansard ?
| Sir George would have been present at the
| Jubilee festivities, but the state of his health
| rendered it necessary that he should have
| rest and quiet, and he went to the Waiwera
i Sanatorium to obtain it.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin^
ZEALANDIA :
A SONG OF FIVE DECADES.
iiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiitniiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiniinii
There’s a mighty tone moves round us, uncon-
trollable, supreme,
Folding all things in the euphony of its compelling
theme.
Whence its grandeur and completeness? its sub-
lime, majestic grace ?
Why surroundeth it with sweetness our bright
island dwelling-place ?
’Tis the keynote, full, resistless, for an anthem of
the free!
For a hymn of loud thanksgiving to the glorious
One in Three!
For the song of fifty Summers, fifty Winters, fifty
Springs,
And of fifty Autumns laden with the riches Nature
brings;
For the stately march of minstrels, bearing each
his gifted lyre,
Struck by magic from a flame of inextinguishable
fire,
For the patriot’s kindling paeans, full of holiest
desire;
Yea, for South’s sublimest music, sung in poet’s
nob est lays,
Clothed in self-created beauty—great with honour,
love, and praise;
For the lordly swell of voices ’mid these fair isles of
the sea—
The triumphal hallelujahs of their splendid Jubi-
lee !
Five decades! how swiftly compassed! like to
shadows flit away!
For almost a mortal’s life-span barely sums a
nation’s day!
’Twas a day of stern vicissitudes—now joyous,
now forlorn
Mantled oft in thund’rous midnight—soon again
like glorious morn ;
Full of pulsings, and life-breathings, strangely shot
with joy and pain,
Stained with War’s blood-crimsoned girdle, graced
with beauteous Peace again.
And ’tis Peace’s kind autocracy—a gentle sceptre’s
sway—
That our hearts, O fair Zealandia, can glory in
to-day!
Hark! in strains of gath’ring grandeur from the
far exultant North,
And from sturdier South, in loud response, one
Amen cometh forth !
T ull of potency in childhood, Princess Royal of the
Sea,
Now as Southern Queen we crown thee—thus pro-
claim thy Jubilee!
Swift as sky’s far-flashing signals, borne on light-
ning’s fiery wings,
Down the range of ten times five of years, come
Hist’ry’s foremost things ;
Deeds and words alike immortal, from the hands
and lips of men,
Who have built the stirring city, who have tracked
the wildest, glen;
And our souls are fed to fulness with the ceaseless
sound of years,
Voiced in mighty spoken tribute to our dauntless
pioneers 1
V.
Stand we thus upon our vantage, gazing back
along the past,
Lauding those heroic spirits who were faithful to
the last
Sires and grandsires—queenly mothers—royal souls
of days agone—
Dead, yet living in a ripened fame the present
shines upon.
Not an empty panegyric is the honour that we
pay—
’Tis a grateful nation’s homage in our Jubilee
to-day!
To such fitly modelled yeomen be our sterling
praises sung,
For their prowess when the century, and they with
it, were young!
Nor alone of Anglo-Saxon speaks the deep, soul-
moving tone,
For the dusky Maori has his seat on Manhood’s
broad’ning throne;
Full of courage as a foeman, large of nature as a
friend—
Once an ally,, true and steadfast—uncorrupted to
the end.
Great and brave departed spirits ! now the voices of
the free
Chant above thy honoured sepulchres a grateful
Jubilee !
VI.
Count we quick ten fertile lustrums, whose heroic
days are gone,
Ripe with each sun-mantled noontide which upon
their progress shone ;
But our amplest mem’ry faileth, and our tongues
are stricken dumb,
At the marvels they have brought us, and their
deeds’ untotalled sum,
From the days when pious Marsden came, and
Christian message bare,
And in God’s vast open Temple prayed his soft
proemial prayer,
To the cogent times when Wakefield, and his stern
intrepid band,
Strode across the ocean wilderness to this new
Goshen land;
From the rule of gallant Hobson, and the potent
spell of Grey,
To the sway of Drummond Jervois and the Onslows
of to-day !
Gladsome task indeed is ours this day to rise o’er
paltry blame,
To rejoice in better things and ways, to keep in
worthy fame
All that hist’ry yields of goodness—all that noblest
is and best.
In the lives whose toil is ended, who in slumb’ring
greatness rest,
Or the few in age surviving, whose white, venerable
brows
Tell of days and vigour extra kindly Providence
allows.
VII.
O the hands, the hearts, the bold emprise, the
valour of the past!
O the muscle, mind, and chivalry which made and
held us fast!
O the penetrating searchings, and the keenly-
whetted glance,
Whose prophetic sight lit pathways for a nation to
advance!
The indomitable will which tamed the mountain’s
frowning brow,
And then pierced its stubborn sides, through
which the fire steed plunges now !
And the might which high erect upflung its
columns in the flood,
Quickly spanned the yawning breaches with Go-
liaths of the wood,
Till, ’mid vict’ry’s rending cheers, complete, a
splendid structure stood!
Sound we, too, the praise of tireless arms, stript to
naked strength,
While their gleaming axes echoed through the
forest’s breadth and length,
And like iron besoms swept the breast of undulat-
ing miles,
Where our teeming cities flourish, and uprear their
solid piles—
Merchant-mansions, halls of knowledge, sacred
fanes with dome and spire.


mum mum mm mi it
Tell their brightest tale of progress, and a people’s
high desire;
While the boom of heating furnace, and the hiss
and roar of steam,
Break the silence of the morning, rouse the slug-
gard from his dream ;
And the merry chink of anvil, and the drone of
busy mill.
Gird the day with sounding triumph from the
valley and the hill!
But our vision, still ambitious, seeking larger van-
tage ground,
Scans the nation’s vast estate, untouched by city s
outmost bound ;
Sees the fire-fed steed of mighty strength, and
vap’rous, flaming mane,
With his rushing din of trailing wheels, speed o’er
the quiv’riiig plain—
Where unsullied leagues all-forth-ward spread their
fatness to the morn,
And prolific nature panteth ’neatli the burden of
her corn—
Where the herds with lazy carelessness their fleshy
wealth increase,
And the sheep’s profuser tresses tell the richness of
her fleece;
And the many sounds come near us from the dis-
tant swarming mine,
When the toilers count their treasures, and behold
their trophies shine.
Multison uis hymns of Industry ! loud may your
strains uprise,
Like a thousand rolling harmonies returning
through the skies,
To Creation’s wondrous Centre—God—august, su-
preme, sublime—
Who Himself made labour sacred in the infantide
of Time!
Tell we, too, of lightnings conquered, and the
noiseless message sped
Over mountains’ rugged shoulders, through the
deep sea’s chartless bed ;
Of the tameless waste of waters sloping forth to
east and west,
Speeding hither lordly prows across its broad,
majestic breast,
From the older northern portals, where the keener
Winter I flows,
To this newer, brighter haven, where the light of
Freedom glows ;
Where perennial founts of healing play, in match-
less beauty still.
And the panoply of grandeur clothes each high, sky-
cleaving hill;
Where the opened arms of Commerce welcome ev’ry
ocean keel,
And the mighty bonds of Empire prove the unity we
feel.
Heralds these of Federation, telling of the coming
sway—
Twilight yearnings for the sunrise, and the ampler
blaze of day!
Courage, trembling patriot brothers! tread each
forward footstep sure!
Building up a great Dominion, make its bulwarks
stand secure !
Yea, our march is ever onward, and the Future’s
purple morn ”
Bids us rise to greater greatness—scions so be-
nignly born —
Children from a splendid ancestry—a grand paren-
tal tree —
Offspring worthy of our birthright may we prove
ourselves to be,
Full of dignity in impulse as our world of progress
moves,
With its urgent wheels impatient of our dead
forefathers’ grooves.
| Let us work with constant earnestness, with heart,
1 and voice, and pen,
I To erect a peerless model for a kingly race of if
| men,
i Ever higher our ambition, be our glory none the e
1 In the holy flame which ever lights the feet of if
| righteousness—
|ln the love that makes a nation great—the truth h
1 which makes it free—
| Be it these which tune our souls to sing our song g
i of Jubilee !
Lo ! again we hear a sighing round the ramparts ofof
the isles,
Like a mother’s am’rous murm’ring when her shflessss
infant smiles;
But these faint uncertain tremors from the bor-'r-
ders of the sea
Centre vigour in their sweetness as they stealal
athwart the lea;
And the softness mellows fuller, and the faintnesses
i waxes strong—
| Faster, clearer, louder gathereth this Southernrn
| Ocean song! * .
| Through the aisles of untrod forests, on the wingsgs
| of rushing wind,
| ’Mid the roar of avalanches, whose incessant thunm-
| ders grind—
| Through the flood of merging waters, sped fiomm
| dizzy foaming falls
1 Sheer adown to deep’ning caverns, and abysmaial
| gloomy halls—
| Swift anon up mounting spurs, the song soarars
| round each glist’ning spire,
| Knitting distant lonesome peaks as one, witlth
| happy golden wire,
i Strung aloft o’er dreaminess of vale, where list’ninjng
| lakelet lies,
| Peering ever into lustrous depths of cloudless sajxp-
| phire skies!
g Plashing cannons loudly bellow ! thousand trumpetets
1 blare and bray !
| Clanging bells rejoice ! and leaping fires in festetal
' frolic play!
| And in ever y heart is earnestness and happinesess
| to-day!
IX.
| Thus the isles hold highest festival, and sound witith
| righteous pride,
i Anthems great with praise and gratitude, and fu'ull
| as ocean’s tide.
| Yea, the pent-up voice of fifty years—it swelleth-h—
-1 swelleth still—
Closes round u-, in us, o’er us, dominating ev’v’ry
will —
Thrilling ev’ry soul that moveth on the mountaiain
and the plain—
Universal, irresistible, tumultuous refrain !
Make our joy, O God, Thy glory, and Thy smile o'our
recompense ;
Make our hiding-place Thyself alone, throned I in
Omnipotence;
Make Thy Fatherhood our Brotherhood ; Thy i.oovk
our charter long ; . .
And our guerdon Thy bright Afterland of servivice
and of song!
Great Jehovah! God of Goodness ! Thus o our
prayer flows forth to Thee !
Look in gracious benediction down upon c our
Jubilee !
S. Clarke Johnsonin.
Auckland, January 29, 1890.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiininiiiiiiiii


lllllllllllllllilllllMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIiillllIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll!IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
NEW ZEALAND’S JUBILEE.
I. (1840.)
Children of England ! far from the Motherland,
Raise we her banner yet over another iand !
Long o’er our heads may it proudly wave !
Long ’neath its folds may the t >yal and brave
A guardian phalanx stand !
Oft has it led o’er the hard-fought field
Dauip with the dews of death ;
Charged thro’ the drift when the foeman reeled
Under the cannon’s breath;
Or, laid at rest, when the people rejoice,
In the cathedral’s gloom,
Stirred by the swelling organ’s voice,
It has wept o’er the hero’s tomb.
But now, on the wings of a sun-kissed breeze,
Here on this Austral shore,
Wave, brave flag, o’er slumberous seas
That know not the battle’s roar,
And brood o’er the land like the spirit of Peace
For ever and ever more !
11. (1890.)
Once more the crimson blossom-showers
Have fallen around the Island Bay,
As wreathed with smiles and crowned with
flowers
The year has softly died away.
And there was England’s banner set
Fifty golden years ago,
And, while it floats in triumph yet
And loyal bosoms beat below,
In this glad hour shall we forget
The grateful tribute that we owe
To those stout-hearted pioneers,
Who raised it yonder on the hill,
Upheld it thro’ the troubled years,
And kept it England’s still!
See! how each youthful city strives
To celebrate the natal day.
Lo ! there the Southern halls display,
Marshalled in bountiful array,
What Nature gives or man contrives.
See here, and there, and everywhere,
The joyous multitudes that meet
In pleasure-park or crowded square,
Where flowers embower the sounding street
In gay festoon, and verdant arch
With flags and trophies hung ;
Hark to the loud triumphal march,
The loyal anthem sung;
The roll of drums, the trumpet call,
The dance, the civic festival,
And the grim voices from the fort
Thundering their jubilant retort,
Till far the city’s tumult fills
The land where many an answering heart
Is listening on the lonely hills
Or in the forest shades apart,
When loud her frantic bells proclaim
The morning from her topmost spires ;
Or, when the heavens are all aflame
At midnight with her festal fires.
When the night winds call to the ships on the sea,
Rejoice with the land in her Jubilee !
And.the voice of the sea, and the voice of the shore
To the voice of the city their answer outpour.
Is this the inhospitable shore
To which the intrepid Tasman came ?
These fertile plains, were they the same ?
These glowing fruits, the fruits they bore
When England’s greatest Argonaut
Lay anchored in the lonely sound,
Or," scattering wide his bounty, sought
To dower the waste uncultured ground ?
It is the clime ! It is the soil!
But fifty years of stubborn toil,
With steadfast heart and tutored hand,
Have tamed the plains and mountains wild,
And charmed the deserts till they smiled,
And changed the aspect of the land.
The conquered forest giants reel,
Cleft thro’ by die invader’s steel;
While the kind earth, at last set free,
Rejoices in her liberty ;
And casts her tribute full and sweet
Before her bold deliverer’s feet;
Returns his gifts an hundredfold,
With wealth of herds and wealth of flocks—
Nay, mure, tier treasure-vault unlocks
And pours him all her gold !
Our children’s Land ! The Land we made!
A dreaded land ere we subdued
The sagging swamp, the endless shade
Of gloomy, vast, primeval wood,
And sullen pa, with triple palisade,
In every hideous form of savage art arrayed.
Ere yet the city of the plain.
Or cities by the encircling sea,
Like sparkling jewels in the train
Of wonder-working Industry,
Bose, as if Orpheus sang again,
And Nature heard the Enchanter’s strain,
And stones moved to his minstrelsy.
Where drifting down the moonlit bay
The wild chant sank or rose anew—
Where from the inlet, like a bird of prey,
Darted the war canoe,
Now, careless of the fickle breeze,
Come the giant argosies—
Fairy, floating palaces—
And, halting scarce a breathing space,
Renew with Time the unwearied race ;
Take Summer captive from her place,
And bear her in their cold embrace
To wintry skies and stormy strands,
Where eager millions stretch their hands
To share the fruits of happier lands.
Behold the work of fifty years !
Proud of her children, Freedom cries,
Behold ! a second England rears
Her stately form to softer skies !
Tho’ set in vaster seas, caressed
By freer winds, and strangely nursed
Close to the planet’s fiery breast,
She bears the impress of the first.
Daughter of England, you may trace
The mother in her fair young face.
Nor in the outward form alone,
But, with each parent grace imbued,
Be her high lineage ever known
By closer still similitude.
Heir to the ancient memories
That fire the eye and thrill the soul,
Be hers the higher hope that sees
And strives for a diviner goal,
When Wisdom, from her sovereign seat,
Shall sway the world by gracious words ;
And earth shall ring, as at her feet
The gathered nations cast their swords,
When kindlier influences mould
The spirit of each growing year,
Till happier eyes than ours behold
The perfect morning drawing near
To that bright goal, O favoured Land!
Heaven be thy conduct day by day
And light thy feet, and lead thee by the hand
Still forward on the upward, arduous way,
Till, in the record of the coming age,
Thine, too, shall be the emblazoned page,
Where noble thought and deed of high emprise
Win thee the name and fame which never dies.
Alex. M. Ferguson.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiintiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiriiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiitiHniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiii
THE JUBILEE FETES.
The fetes promoted in celebration of the Jubilee of the Colony, and which werere
carried out by a large and energetic committee, at the head of which was Milr,
Devore, commenced on the 29th of January, Jubilee Day, and extended over tlxhe
three subsequent days. They proved a brilliant success, and were attended bby
the largest masses of people ever before congregated together in Aucklaimd.
Additional eclat was given to the festivities by the presence of His Excellency tithe
Governor, the Earl of Onslow ; Admiral Lord Charles Scott, in command of tithe
Australian Squadron ; His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales, tithe
Earl of Carrington ; Sir John Thurston, Governor of Fiji, and High Coramissionmer
of the Western Pacific ; and other distinguished personages. The Australiaian
Naval Squadron was represented in port by the Flagship of the Station (H.M.J.S.
Orlando), H.M.S. Opal, and H.M.S. Lizard. Lords Onslow and Carrington arrivtved
in Auckland on January 28th, and were accorded an enthusiastic reception by tithe
populace. The weather on Jubilee Day, and indeed throughout the week, proveved
exceedingly favourable for the fetes, full particulars of which, taken from the verery
complete reports published in the New Zealand Herald, will be found below. ■.
1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 l
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIII
FIRST DAY:
The Jubilee celebrations to-day were a
grand success, the weather being favour-
able, and Auckland poured out her thou-
sands to witness the magnificent spectacle
presented. Numbers generate magnetism,
and never in the history of Auckland, since
her foundation as a province, were such
masses of people to be seen in her streets.
On all hands was to be seen the flag of
New Zealand on the flagstaff's, and those
who looked upon the symbol of the Southern
Cross did so with feelings of gratification
and pleasure, for they felt that after the
scenes of to-day we had made a new
departure—the first pulses of life in the
young nation had begun to throb.
THE DAY.
The morning broke looking dull and
gloomy, but as the day strengthened the
clouds rolled away. As Captain Edwin
very properly stated, there might be bad
weather from the eastward, but it would
not come further than Tiritiri. By eight
o’clock the whole city was alive, the tram-
cars bringing into town crowds of passen-
gers, and the members of the various
Friendly Societies hurrying to and fro. At
nine o’clock the streets were crowded with
sightseers.
THE WHARVES, &c.
The shipping in port was gaily decked
with bunting from stem to stern. Special
notice was taken of the splendid appearance
of the men-of-war—H.M.s. Orlando, Opal,
and Lizard being elaborately dressed with
JANUARY 29.
flags. Holiday reigned on board these shipips,
and the crews and their friends watchdied
with keen interest the different events. A All
the principal establishments in the vicinihity,
the Northern Roller Flour Mills, t the
Waverley, Thames, and Waitemata Hotetels,
made a good display of flags. The Harbooour
Board Offices were similarly adorned, wlvhile
the New Zealand flag was gaily flying for
the first time from the turret of the ntnew
Custom House.
STREET DECORATIONS.
A string of flags stretched across Queeeen-
street from the Civil Service Supply A As-
sociation Stores to Messrs. Cruickshaiank
and Co.’s warehouse, conspicuous in t the
line being the Union Jack flanked 1 by
the Stars and Stripes and the Rojoyal
Standard. Another line of flags wwas
thrown across from Firth’s old mm ill
to Mr. Gabriel Lewis’s auction - rooDom,
and to Morrin and Co.’s (late H. F.
Anderson and Co.’s) chandlery premisdses.
The flagstaff of the Victoria Arcade w was
bedecked with bunting, one of the flaflags
having upon it the words “New Zealaland
Insurance Company,” while from the offbffice
of the American Consulate on the fli first
floor, prominently hung the Stars a and
Stripes. At the adjacent window was si sus-
pended the Belgian flag, at the office of tf the
Consul, Mr. Arthur Masey. All the veraran-
dah posts of the handsome building wevere
adorned with nikau, which, in front of A Mr.
Wildman’s premises was relieved wwith


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!l
bunches of scarlet flowers. The National
and South British Insurance Companies’
offices also displayed flags. Perhaps the
fagade of the Bank of New Zealand
was about the most tastefully decorated.
Along the top cornice of fagade was sus-
pended a wreath of foliage with British en-
sign and Union Jack at flanks. Along the
windows were bannerettes, and underneath
one in centre the flags of all nations. At
base of windows of first floor were placed
tufts of pink and white toi grass, and at
intervals bannerettes, which had a very
pretty effect. On the flagstaff floated the
New Zealand flag. The D.I.C. Com-
pany’s establishment displayed a flag.
Another string of flags crossed Queen-street
from Morrin and' Co.’s warehouses to the
British Hotel. The Royal Standard
floated from the Union Bank of Aus-
tralia. At the Albert Park the city
flagstaff was adorned with bunting, while
the Free Public Library had its minarets
adorned with parti-coloured bannerettes,
and the firebell tower, at the Albert-street
Fire Brigade Station, was likewise taste-
fully decorated. Messrs. Choyce and Co.’s
premises displayed a flag, as also did
the United Service. Perhaps the most
conspicuous flag during the day was one
displayed on one of the windsails of Par-
tington’s old windmill, Symonds-street,
which has been a land mark to shipping for
forty years past. In Victoria-street, Sar-
good, Son, and Ewen, Victoria Hotel, Royal
Mail Hotel, and Mr, Keesing, plumber, dis-
played flags; Mr. Parkinson, confectioner,
tastefully decorated his premises with foli-
age, nikau, etc., and bannerettes; while
the Prince Arthur Hotel, and some of
the private residences in Upper Pitt-street,
were decorated.
THE JUBILEE PROCESSION.
This, the earliest and most imposing
feature of the day’s proceedings, took place
at half-past nine. For some time previous
to starting the streets along the route of
march were thronged with thousands of
spectators anxious to secure every point of
vantage for sightseeing. The streets were
gaily decked with bunting. As the various
societies marshalled into procession in re-
galia, headed by their banners, the spec-
tacle presented was an animated one in the
vicinity of the rendezvous at Ponsonby
Reservoir, Karangahape and Ponsonby
Roads; When the procession moved off
several thousands of people were congre-
gated at the junction of the above thorough-
fares.
Shortly after the time appointed (half-
past nine a.no.) Marshal T. Cole had suc-
ceeded in arranging the procession, and it
moved off headed by two mounted troopers
of the Armed Constabulary Constables
Walker and Kelly—followed by Marshal
Cole in a carriage, and then succeeded the
Artillery Band (Bandmaster R. Hunter),
iiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
playing a lively military q uickstep. First
in the procession was a carriage containing
His Worship the Mayor (Mr. J. H. Upton),
the Town Clerk (Mr. P. A. Philips), and
Mr. A. E. Devore (president of the Auck-
land Jubilee Committee); second carriage ;
Councillors D. Goldie, C. Atkin, J. J Hol-
land, J. Swales, and P. Dignan ; third car-
riage : Councillors Grey, Trenwith, Warren,
and Davies : fourth carriage, Councillors D.
F. Evans, Hewson, J. Patterson, and
Lavers ; fifth carriage contained represen-
tative members of the Auckland Jubilee
Committee : Dr. Campbell, Captain H. F.
Anderson, R. Cameron, and A. S. Russell.
Then followed the various societies and
organisations in the order hereunder
named as drawn by lot: —
The Loyal Orange Institution mustered
strongly, 36 lodges being represented, and
to prevent the procession being unduly ex-
tended, were ordered to “ form fours,” the
rest of the procession marching two abreast.
They were preceded by a carriage in which
were Grand Master, R. Farrell ; Deputy
Grand Master, J. Jamieson ; Grand Trea-
surer, W. Hazard ; Grand Secretary, C.
Carnahan ; Grand Chaplain, Rev, A. J.
Smith. Then followed an officer, the Bible-
bearer, Bro. Nesbitt, bearing an open Bible,
supported by two officers with drawn swords.
Lodges : —City of Auckland, No. 1 : R. W.
Sharp, W.M.; J. Little, D.M.; A. C. Riggs,
secretary; R. Nesbitt, treasurer. Royal
Albert, No. 2: J. Boone, W.M.; J. Scott,
D. ; C. Bush, secretary; W. Sherson,
treasurer. Loyal Inniskillen, No. 3; J.
Jamieson, W.M.; T. Ward, D.M.; S.
McMaster, secretary; C. Coulter, trea-
surer. Young Diamond, No. 10: T. W.
Henderson, W.M.; J. McCammon, D.M.;
S. Harper, secretary ; A. Johnston, trea-
surer. Otahuhu, No. 14; T. Massey,
W.M.; J. Jones, secretary. Newmarket
True Blue, No. 19: A. Whisker, W.M.;
E. King, D. M.; Craig, secretary ; C. C.
Crozier, treasurer. Pukekohe, No. 26 :J.
Hewitt, W.M.; J. Morrow, D.M.; A. Tan-
sett, secretary ; C. Craig, treasurer. Barton
True Blues, No. 32, Papakura : W. Hall,
W.M.; J. Watkinson, D.M.; I). Hall,
secretary ; R. Tomlinson, treasurer. Star
of Eden, No. 36: H. H. Seabrook,
W.M. ; J. Nutt, D.M. ; J. Hill, secre-
tary, J. Patterson, treasurer. Monaghan
True Blues, No. 46 : J. Moorhead, W.M. ; J.
Little, D.M. ; 0. 0. Wright, secretary;
Whangarei, No. 25; S. Austin, P. M. ; J.
James, P.M. Forty arrived from Pukekohe
by train, and joined the procession in Govern-
ment House grounds, as did some other
country representatives, making the total
number present 260. The marshal of the
order was Captain C. Robertson.
American Order of Oddfellows, 25 mem-
bers :—Officers : H. Keesing, P.D.D.G.M. ;
Wheeler, N.G., F. Hune, N.G., Kawakawa ;
P.G.’s Birdsall, E. Morrison, McCulsky,
Fell, Falconer, Cobley, and J. H. Philpott.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiipiii ilium
Manchester Unity OddfellowsLoyal
Good Intent (52 members.) Officers ; In
carriage, —Luge, P.G.M.; Trayes, D.G.M.;
and C. Smith, corresponding secretary;
and W. E. Lewis, N.G. ; J. A. Pennalligan,
N.G. ; D. N. Carter, G.M. ; the marshal
was Mr. E. Lewis.
Newmarket Band, under Bandmaster W.
R. Hunter.
Fire Brigades and Salvage Corps :
Thames Brigade, 20 men, under Captains
Williams and Patterson, with hose reel lent
by the Auckland Fire Brigade. Auckland
Fire Brigade, 37 men, under Superintendent
Hughes and Foremen Hurley, Clarke, Glad-
ding, Brannigan, and Wilkie. Suburban
brigades present w*ere : Parnell, Captain
Cowan ; Newmarket, Captain J. Wilson ;
Eden Terrace, Captain E. Strong ; Newton,
Superintendent Fenton ; Mount Eden,
Captain Keyes. Auckland Salvage Corps,
8 men, under Captain Field, making a
grand total of firemen, etc., of about 120 men.
The Auckland Brigade had a hose reel, a
manual fire engine, as used in the olden
time, a horse reel, and the suburban fire
brigades had also their fire apparatus. All
the reels were beautifully decorated with
bannerettes, garlands of flowers, ferns, foli-
age, &c., in chaste designs. The decorations
of the Fire Brigades attracted general at-
tention, and constituted one of the features
of the procession.
Newton Band, under Bandmaster West.
Foresters, 192 members:—Mr. Jones,
C. who acted as marshal ; District
Executive in carriages, W. T. Webb,
G.C.R.J., Webley, treasurer, H. T. Garratt,
D. Court City of Auckland was repre-
sented. Court Pride of Onehunga ; Officers
Aichram, C.R., Massey, P.C.R. Foresters
carried the weapons emblematic of their
Order.
Rechabites, 35 members: —Carr, C.R. f
R. French, D.C.R. ; R. H. Hughes, secre-
tary ; Crowe, Guardian. There w’ere repre-
sentatives from Aratapu and Thames.
National Independent Order of Odd-
fellow’S, 79 members : —Officers : Adey,
G.M. ; McKenney, N.G. ; Hitchcock, D G.;
Thorne, secretary. Officers of the Llnited
Brothers and Huntly Lodges were also pra-
sent.
Hicks-Sawyers’ Minstrel Band, under
Drum-Major Speed, escorted by Zouaves.
Hibernians, 40 members Officers ;W.
Beehan, President; P. O’Kane, Y.P. ;T.
H. White, Secretary ; W. Kane, Treasurer ;
D. Flynn, P.P. The officers of the Dis-
trict Executive also marched.
Good Templars, 58 members : Officers :
Captain Leßoy, G.D.D., and T. W. Glover,
G.C.T. General members of country lodges
were present, also a number of ladies.
Auckland Band of Hope Union : There
were 115 children, 50 girls dressed in w'hite
being in one of Winstone’s vans drawn by
four horses, and 65 boys in a lifeboat on one
of Craig’s trollies drawn by four horsess.
The decorations of the van were very beauu-
tiful, consisting of a bower of evergreenss,
garlands, and flowers, with the followinpg
mottoes conspicuous : “ Water, God’s Gif ft
to Man,” “ Why Not Abstain ?” “ Wine lls
a Mocker.” Both the van and boat werce
decorated by Messrs. W. J. Macdermottb,
C. G. Hill, and A. E. Perkins. The children!
sang temperance hymns and songs tin
route, and the sweet voices of tine
little girls, as they sat embowered iin
foliage, were pleasant to listen to. Tine
children were ruddy and happy, and a goood
specimen of “ Young New Zealand,” whoim
they worthily represented. The van amd
lifeboat attracted general attention, and tine
Band of Hope Union display was one of thie
most interesting features of the process-
sion.
New Zealand Federated Seamen’s Uniom,
40 members. The Union had a lifeboat ora
a trolly. The trolly was decorated with tine
Union Jack and other flags, and in the bosat
were a crew' with oars up, the crew beinig
seamen from the Union Steamship Co., ome
of the officers of the local Union acting sas
coxswain. The other officers were VW.
Vines (president), J. W. Duthie (secretary'),
J. Gallagher (treasurer), and Nixon, rnair-
shal. In the boat was displayed the Neiw
Zealand flag, and the house flag of thie
Union Steamship Company. The Unioon
had also a large banner with the mottto
“ Unity is Strength,” “ Defence Not De-
fiance.” The lifeboat, with its stalwairb
crew, attracted a good deal of attention.
Federated Wharf Labourers’ Union, £5B
members : Officers —E. Coombes, president;
Dobson and Niblocke, vice-presidents ; WV.
Bines. Each of the members, as also of tlhe
Seamen’s Union, wmre a rosette, the reed,
white, and blue. The banner of the Whairf
Labourers’ Union contained a representa-
tion of harbour and shipping, with pictuire
of a lumper trucking goods to a wharf shecd.
Pei haps the most unique feature of tlhe
whole procession was the appearance <of
the Rarotongan Jubilee Singers. Theey
were preceded by two carriages, the firrst
containing the chief Tepou and his wiffe,
and Tea, wife of the Crowm Princte ;
Mr. A. H. Brown, interpreter; Mir.
H. J. Ellis, secretary ; and the secomd
Crown Prince James Tepou, Mr. HI.
Nicholas and family. All of the Rarco-
tongans wore pieces of crape as mounding
for the Rarotongan Ngataitautai, who dieed
the previous day, and for the same reason
they did not utilise their band. Men amd
women w r alked alternately, the former claad
in white clothing, with straw* hats, and tlhe
latter in white flowing robes, with halts
garlanded with flowers, and wearing aroumd
their necks coloured silk handkerchiefs. Tlhe
olive complexions of these children of “tlhe
summer isles of Eden,’’relieved by thefiowecrs
and bit of colour, the graceful appeair-
ance of the women, and the manly, athlettic


Illlll!ll[llllll[lill[lllillll[|!llllil!lill!lill[1ilil|[lll1llllllill[lllllllllilllllliilllllllil!lllllillllillllilllllllllllll[j[||lillllllllllllllllllj||||[
physique of the men, in their tasteful
costume, made up a charming picture, and
the tout ensemble was complete. Their ap-
pearance in the procession was the feature
of the day, and all eyes were directed to
the Rarotongans, for the incident was one
which will become historic, in these children
of the Isles of the Seas on Jubilee Day giv-
ing the hand of welcome to their brethren
the Maoris and to the colonists of New
Zealand.
The procession was closed with a number
of private carriages, making the total esti-
mated number of persons in the procession
about 1500. The procession was over a
mile long, and as the whole route along
Karangahape Road and Symonds - street
to Government House gate was crowded
with spectators on the footwaj's, and
on the verandahs, it is estimated that
the pageant was witnessed by 40,000 people.
Some idea may be gained of the pro-
portions of the procession by stating that
as the head of it turned out of Karangahape
Road into Symonds-street the last of the
column had not moved from the rendezvous
at the junction of that thoroughfare and
Ponsonby Road.
The procession moved into Government
House grounds, and took up a position in
rear of the Volunteers, who formed the
guard of honour. The avenue was lined
with Volunteers, who also assisted the police
in regulating the crowd. In compliment
to the Rarotongans, they were allotted
specially the place in front, opposite the
platform wdiere His Excellency was to re-
ceive the addresses. After the presentation
of the addresses, the line of march was
resumed by the Waterloo Quadrant gate,
along Princes-street, down Wellesley-street
and Queen-street to the wharf. The scene
in Queen-street was the most effective of
the day, as the street was occupied from
end to end by the procession itself, which
was flanked by great crowds along the
roadway and side walks, the traffic being
temporarily suspended. The view from the
upper storeys of Queen-street premises
showed a sea of faces, only relieved by the
banners, the uniforms of the bandsmen,
and the bunting across the street. On
either hand the buildings were gaily deco-
rated with flags, bannerettes, foliage, etc.
Every verandah was crowded with groups
of sight-seers, and almost every window
was occupied by ladies and children.
The procession broke up at the Queen-
street Wharf, the rear being brought up
by six tramcars laden with passengers,
who had been blocked in getting down the
street.
At the end of Queen-street, and before
the procession disbanded, the Mayor called
for three cheers for the president of the
Jubilee Committee, which were heartily
responded to.
Mr. Devore addressed the people and
said he felt honoured at the kindly refer -
lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllliai
ence made to him by the Mayor at Govern-
ment House and now, and that when he
first mooted the idea of this celebration he
received cordial sympathy and support
from many citizens ; and with their assist-
ance and that of a hard working and enthusi-
astic committee, and the warm assistance
of the press, the present successful gathering
had resulted. It was a people’s celebration,
with their own moneys, without any Govern-
ment assistance, and would be carried out
by their own exertions, and was in honour
of the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation
of the colony and of this province, and it
was intended as a token of gratitude that
we lived in this favoured colony, and as
a tribute of affection to our Queen and
flag.
Everything having gone off without a
single hitch or accident, the Orangemen,
headed by the Newton band, re-marched
up Queen-street and Grey-street to the
Protestant Hall, Newton, where they
formed in a circle, while a few appro-
priate remarks were made by Grand
Master Farrell and Past Grand Master
Goldie, M.H.R. Three hearty cheers were
given for the Grand Master, after which
the refreshments provided were partaken
of in the hall.
VOLUNTEER MUSTER.
The Volunteers mustered at the drillshed
shortly after nine o’clock, and fell in by
companies under their respective officers,
but, as might have been expected, the mus-
ters were not very large, as a great number
of Volunteers are members of the various
Friendly Societies which took part in the
procession, and others are members of the
Fire Brigades, and Rowing Clubs. How-
ever, there were about 200 men in the
ranks. The two naval companies were
paraded as one under the command of
Captain Miller, and the two artillery com-
panies also paraded as one under the com-
mand of Captain Geddes. The engineers
had a fair muster under Major Anderson,
and the other companies on parade were
the Victorias (Captain Cooper), City Guards
(Captain Kohn), Newton Rifles (Captain
Robertson), Royal Irish (Captain Leahy),
and the Onehunga Rifles. The rifle com-
panies were formed into the guard of
honour, and were placed under the com-
mand of Captain Kohn, and the navals,
artillery, and engineers were placed under
the command of Major Anderson to line the
entrance to Government House. Colonel
Shepherd, of course, was in supreme com-
mand, and Major Skinner was adjutant.
Surgeon-Major Dawson and Staff-Surgeon
Erson were also present in uniform. The
No. 2 Garrison Band was in attendance,
and after Colonel Shepherd had given his in-
structions, the troops marched to the eastern
gate of Government House grounds. The
Navals, Artillery, and Engineers lined the
drive from this gate to the main entrance


iiiiiHniiiimnmiiiimmiiHmmmmmiiimimmmimiuimiimu'miinimiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiimmHMimm
at Princes-street, and the guard of honour
was drawn up in front of Government
House, and on His Excellency appearing on
the balcony, accompanied by Lord Car-
rington, Sir J. B. Thurston, and other
guests, he was received with a Royal salute.
At the close of the ceremonials, the troops
returned to the drill-shed, and were dis-
missed.
AT GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
His Excellency the Governor received
the addresses on the terrace in front of
the main door of Government House.
Amongst those who were on the terrace
were Admiral Lord Charles Scott (Ad-
miral of the Australasian Squadron),
Lord Carrington (Governor of New
South Wales), Sir J. B. Thurston (Go-
vernor of Fiji and High Commissioner of
the Western Pacific), Lady Thurston,
His Worship the Mayor (Mr. J. H. Upton),
Mrs. Upton and Miss Upton, Captain
Savile (A.D.C. to Lord Onslow), Mr.
Meysey Thompson (A.D.C. to Lord
Onslow), Sir Frederick W'hitaker (Attor-
ney-General), Hon. E. Mitchelson (Native
Minister), and Mrs. Mitchelson, Hon.
T. W. Hislop (Minister of Education),
Bishop and Mrs. Cowie, Captain Barlow
(Commander of H.M.s. Orlando), Captain
Bosanquet (Commander of H.M.s Opal),
Captain Trench (A.D.C. to Lord Carring-
ton), Lieutenant Fitzgerald, R.N. (Flag
Lieutenant to the Admiral), Mr. Pullen
(Private Secretary to the Commander-in-
Chief), Mr. Spence (Private Secretary to Sir
John Thurston), T. Thompson (M.H.R.), D.
Goldie (M.H.R.), Dr. J. L. Campbell,
Mr., Mrs., and Miss Devore, Mr. J. Dil-
worth, Rev. G. Smales, Rev. C. M. Nelson,
Mr. J. Macandrew (Mayor of Thames), Mr.
L. J. Bagnall (member of Thames County
Council), the members of the City Council,
the Jubilee Committee, and two delegates
from each of the societies taking part in the
procession.
THE ADDRESS.
His Worship the Mayor (Mr. J. H.
Upton), addressing His Excellency, said :
“Your Excellency, I have the honour to
request that you will permit me, in the
name of the citizens of Auckland, to present
you with a loyal address.”
The Town Clerk (Mr. P. A Philips)
then read the address as follows :
To the Right Honourable the Earl of Onslow,
Grand Cross St. Michael and St. George, Gover-
nor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of
New Zealand.
May it please Your Excellency.—On this the
fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the
colony of New Zealand, we, the Mayor and
Councillors, representing the citizens of Auck-
land, desire to offer Your Excellency our hearty
congratulations on the state of advancement
which tlie colony has reached, and we most
respectfully request that Your Excellency will be
good enough, on our behalf, to convey the same to
Her Majesty the Queen. On this day fifty years ago
Captain Hobson arrived at the Bay of Islands with
Her Majesty’s commission as the Eirst Lieutenant
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiininiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Governor of this Colony, as part of Her Majessty’s
dominions. The life of this colony is almost coiinci-
dent with the reign of our gracious Queen, ancd we
venture to hope that Your Excellency will giwe to
Her Majesty such an account of the natural beaiuties
and of the material condition and resources off our
country as will enable her to regard it as one off the
most bountiful and happy of Her Majesty’s posses-
sions. At the time of the proclamation of the
Queen’s sovereignty, the European settlers were
few in number and weak in resources, and the work
of colonisation was carried on in the presence of a
numerous and warlike native population. Since
that time fierce wars have raged between the two
peoples, but now, happily, all is peace, and we live
111 the most friendly relationship with the native
race. Under Her Majesty’s beneficent rule we enjoy
complete political freedom, and the highest offices
in the colony are open to all citizens who, by their
ability and integrity, may deserve to attain thereto.
Our system of primary education is absolutely free
to all. No child in New Zealand is permitted to be
left without the elements of a sound education,
while by means of secondary schools and university
colleges, the advantages of higher education are ob-
tainable in every part of the colony. Though
placed at the Antipodes, we earnestly cultivate
feelings of attachment to our mother country, and.
we respectfully request that Your Excellency will
be so good as to convey to Her Majesty the assur-
ance of our affectionate regard for her royal person,
and of our unswerving loyalty and devotion to her
throne.
Signed on behalf of the City Council,
(L.S.) J. H. Upton, Mayor,
P. A. Philips, Town Clerk.
Auckland, New Zealand, January 29,1890.
His Worship the Mayor said :—“ Your
Excellency, this address from the city of
Auckland contains no word of welcome to
you as Her Majesty’s representative, we
thought it would be more appropriate per-
haps if I uttered the words of welcome to
your Excellency which express the feel-
ings that animate our minds to-day. To
utter words of welcome to one whom we
all respect so much as we do the Gover-
nor of the colony in the formal words
of an address would, it was thought,
perhaps hardly give a clear enough expres-
sion of our feelings, therefore I have to say
to you, in the name of the citizens, that we
otter to you a hearty welcome to our city,
and not only to your Excellency do we offer
that welcome, but also to the distinguished
guests who accompany you. There are
amongst those guests two whom I should
like to name. There is the Governor of
New South Wales, the Governor of that
great colony which is the mother
colony of this group; and I desire, on be-
half of the citizens, to offer to His Excel-
lency Lord Carrington our warm welcome.
Again, there is present amongst us as a guest
of yours to-day the Governor of the youngest
colony of this group —namely, the colony
of Fiji. We have here His Excellency Sir
John Thurston, whom we also desire to wel-
come. Always in Auckland—and lam sure
in every part of New Zealand —but I think
especially here, we are always glad to wel-
come the Admiral of the fleet, and there-
fore I have very much pleasure in also
especially stating that I offer, on behalf of
the citizens, a hearty welcome to Rear-
Admiral Lord Charles Scott. (Cheers.) Your


Excellency, with these words of welcome I
have also to utter in a minor chord a word
of regret. That regret is that Her Excel-
lency Lady Onslow is not able to accom-
pany you. I know, and we all know, that
but for duties which it was impossible for
her to ignore, she would be standing by
your side to-day. (Cheers.) This day has
been from the foundation of the colony a
holiday in Auckland. I have, as Mayor of
Auckland, to thank your Excellency for
having proclaimed it a holiday through-
out the colony, for having proclaimed
what will, I am sure, be the great
national holiday of this colony in future.
I bid you welcome to the entertain-
ments which have been provided for you,
mainly by the energy and foresight of
my predecessor, Mr. Devore. (Cheers.) I
trust they will give you gratification which
lam sure he hoped they would do. Your
Excellency, I should like to make one or
two remarks on this occasion. The great
nations of Europe mark their progress by
wars and revolutions. We desire to mark
our progress by 50 years’ of peaceful pro
gress. This is the first jubilee of this
colony. I would like to compare for one
moment the condition of things to-day
with what they were 50 years’ ago. Fifty
years ago—in the course of a few
minutes from now probably—this colony
consisted of a few Englishmen, a few
British subjects, who found their way here,
and their trade was necessarily very small,
the communication with England was very
uncertain, and the only means of communi-
cation then existing was by sailing vessels,
which were very uncertain in their time
of arrival and departure. Now, how
different it is. To-day we have communi-
cation with London by means of the great
lines of steamers. By means of the tele-
graph we have instant and daily communi-
cation with our mother country, commu-
nication as prompt and as certain as
between London and Edinburgh. There is
another thing I would like to say. Fifty
years ago, when this colony was proclaimed
by the first Governor, Captain Hobson,
the news of that proclamation reached Her
Majesty after probably four or five months
of a long sea voyage. Before the expira-
tion of this morning Her Majesty will read
an account of the proceedings which are
taking place on this terrace. (Cheers.)
I would like to look forward for a moment
and imagine what it may be fifty years’
hence. It is less a flight of fancy to
imagine that on an occasion like this at a
similar function to this, when my successor
may be presenting an address to your suc-
cessor, that the sovereign of a Great British
confederation may not only hear the very
words that are uttered, but may by the ad-
vance of science be able to witness the
scene and be himself seen by us. That, I
say, is less a flight of fancy to-day than it
would have been fifty years ago to have
j
1
iiiijiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
predicted that Her Majesty would have
been able to receive an account of these
proceedings on the very morning on which
they took place. Your Excellency, I have
the honour to present you with this ad
dress from the City Council, and to beg
your acceptance of it. (Cheers.)
his excellency’s reply.
His Excellency the Governor (the
Earl of Onslow), on coming forw r ard to
reply to the address, was received with
loud and prolonged cheering. He spoke
as follows : Ymur Worship and gentle-
men : I receive with very great pleasure
the address which you have just presented
me. The day is one of which you may well
be proud, and the proudest feature of it is
the presence here of some of those pioneers
of colonisation who witnessed the first hoist-
ing of the British flag in Her Majesty’s
name—(loud cheers)—an act which secured
to them and to you all the privileges which
are enjoyed by those who live under her con-
stitutional rule. (Cheers.) Finding as I
do in this country all the modern require-
ments of civilisation now constantly at
hand, it is difficult for me adequately to
appreciate the courage, the self-reliance,
and the physical stamina which must
have been possessed by these men and
by others who set themselves the task
of turning a wilderness into a garden, and
opening up to their fellow countrymen such
a land of promise. On a previous and some-
what similar occasion, I pointed how vividly
the contrast between the condition of the
colony to-day and fifty years ago strikes a
resident among you, and a student of
your history, I refrain therefore from
again calling attention to that which
must be patent to every careful ob-
server. (Cheers.) It has never been
the policy of the British Government
to foster colonising enterprise by artificia
aids, or pecuniary assistance, and as a re-
sult our countrymen look upon their con-
quests of the axe and the plough as essenti-
ally their own, and can claim the right to
a complete freedom for their institu-
tions. (Loud cheers.) Whatever may
be thought of this policy, if it be true that
nothing succeeds like success, it may be
claimed for it that the colonial policy of no
other nation has been attended with similar
results. It has been shown that an attempt
to import into a new country a ready-made
system of government, with a host of offi-
cials for its administration, has failed to
win for any nation such an Empire as that
which is scattered over every sea, but is
bound together by the Crown of Eng-
land. (Prolonged cheers.) That Empire
owes its rise to the marvellous power
of self - government, the special attri-
bute of the Anglo-Saxon race, which is
capable of being adapted to all circum-
stances and to every climate.. No English-
man can claim a knowledge of his country


who has not studied this development of
Greater Britain, and none have studied it
more closely than Her Majesty the Queen
(loud and prolonged cheering)—and her son
the Prince of Wales. (Renewed cheers. It is
no empty compliment to say that Her
Majesty wall learn with interest of our pro-
ceedings to-day, but it is a fact that I should
be held grievously wanting in my duty
were I not faithfully to record so important
an event in this distant, but beautiful and
fertile part of Her Majesty’s dominions.
The expression of loyalty to Her Majesty’s
throne and person, which this celebration
has evoked, will be received at home wdth
the same feelings of gratitude and satisfac-
tion by the Queen, that they have called
forth in her representative in this colony.
(Cheers.)
Replying to the personal welcome ex-
tended by the Mayor to himself and the
other representatives of Her Majesty pre-
sent, His Excellency said that unfortunate
circumstances in his family prevented the
fulfilment of the promise made when he
passed through Auckland, that he would
return to visit them again at the con-
clusion of the session of Parliament, but
he was glad that his first stay should be
ushered in by so auspicious an event
as the celebration .of the Jubilee of
the colony. (Cheers.) Referring to the
Mayor’s expressions of gratitude to His
Excellency for declaring the day to be an
official holiday throughout the colony, he
pointed out that the days on which
holiday should be made ought essentially
to be selected by the representatives of the
people, and in such matters he deferred en-
tirely to the advice of his Ministers, who
were doubtless desirous to abide by tradi-
tional and long - established custom.
(Cheers.) He thanked the Mayor for his
kind expressions respecting Lady Onslow—
(cheers) —who was endeavouring to take his
place in fulfilling the duties of hospitality
towards another of Her Majesty’s represen-
tatives in Australia at the other end of the
colony. (Cheers.) Indeed, the only diffi-
culty which he experienced in the adminis-
tration of the Government was that none of
the centres could see what the Governor
could possibly want to do in any other, jyid
each of them pointed out that his duty was
to spend twelve months out of every year
in their city. (Laughter and cheers.)
Even Sir Boyle Roche never claimed that
his bird could be in more than two places at
once, but the wildest flight of Celtic imagi-
nation had never conceived such divisibility
as w r as expected of the Governor of New
Zealand. (Laughter and prolonged cheers.)
MESSAGE FROM THE QUEEN.
His Excellency then said ; —Before I do
anything else, allow me to read to you two
telegrams which I have received from Eng-
land. The first is from Her Majesty the
Queen. (Loud cheers.)
lIIIIIIINIIIKIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII I 1111111111111111111111111 l lllllllllillllllflilllillllllllillllllllll
“London, January 28, 18900.
“You are directed by Her Majestyy to
make this announcement :
“I have received Her Majesty’s commaands
to offer congratulations to the peoplee of
New Zealand on fiftieth year of prospeerity
and good government, and warm wisishes
for continued welfare.”
The reading of this message, Avhich caame
upon everyone as a surprise, was follovwed
by prolonged cheering.
His Excellency then called for thhree
cheers for Her Majesty the Queen, whhich
were given most enthusiastically.
CONGRATULATIONS FROM THE IMPERIAAL
GOVERNMENT.
His Excellency then said ; —Now I a will
read to you one more message which I hhave
received from Her Majesty’s Governmennt —
from the Secretary of State :
“ London, January 28, 18900.
“It gives me much pleasure to comvey
congratulations on behalf of Her Majestety’s
Government on the occasion of the fifttieth
anniversary of Her Majesty’s acquisitioim of
of New Zealand.
“Knutseord.”
lord Carrington’s speech.
His Worship the Mayor then saiid:
Before this ceremony is concluded I shoiuld
like to give expression to what I am surce is
your wish, that we should hear a few wojrds
from His Excellency Lord Carringtton,
Governor of New South Wales. (Cheerss.)
Lord Carrington, on advancing to ad-
dress the people, was greeted with koud
cheers. He said : With great respeclt I
return my best thanks for the complimient
paid to me by this vast assembly : a ccom-
pliment which I value all the more becaiuse
I know that it is due to no personal nuerit
of my own, but that it is an earnest of the
good-will felt by the people of Auckkand
towards the colony of New South Walles,
with which it is my good fortune and my
pride to be so closely associated. (Cheesrs.)
I believe, sir, that it is a recognised tlning
that when strangers and travellers coome
into a country they consider themsellves
privileged to instruct and to teach. A
three-days’ visit entitles a man to makke a
speech —(laughter)—seven days to writte a
book —(renewed laughter and cheers).. I
cannot claim to be one of those gifted beiings
who think that they can take in a naticon’s
future at a glance; yet, in a happy fortni jght
spent in this happy country, I can cleaarly
see that you New Zealanders, by yvour
industry, your frugality, and your pecrse-
verance, are teaching the great lesson tbhat
life is not to be lived by proxy. (Cheeers.)
I have seen Milford Haven (one of t the
winders of the world), the Hot Lakces ;
your four cities of Dunedin, Christchurrch,
Wellington, and Auckland; your grreab


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiui
grazing grounds, your cornfields, and,
what is far more interesting than
your mountains, the men who hold
this glorious country. (Loud cheers.)
Surely, Mr. Mayor, your position at the
end of the first fifty years of your national
life is a grand one. After your early
struggles you are now at perfect peace
with the gallant native races. (Cheers.)
By the exercise of a sage economy, without
any loans, you expect a surplus at the end
of the year ; all your productions are fetch-
ing good prices ; and to your great credit,
100,000 New Zealanders (for a nation can
only count on one-seventh of its whole
population as producers) have during the
year sent into the wide world nine millions
worth of exports. (Cheers.) You live
under the greatest amount of freedom ever
known, and you have at your back the
moral, the material, and the fighting
strength of England. (Cheers.) Gentle-
men, I offer you my warmest congratula-
tions on the day you celebrate, and my
warmest thanks for the compliments which
you have paid to New South Wales.
(Prolonged cheers.)
The Mayor then called for three cheers
for His Excellency the Governor, w'hich
were given with great enthusiasm.
Three cheers were also given for Lord
Carrington, for Sir J. B. Thurston (Gover-
nor of Fiji), for the Governor’s other guests
and for Lady Onslow and His Excellency’s
family.
ORANGE society’s ADDRESS.
Mr. R. Farrell (Grand Master of the
Orange Society), presented to His Excel-
lency the following address from the Orange
institution:
To His Excellency Right Hon. Karl of Onslow,
K.C.M.G.
May it please Your Excellency,—We, the members
of the Orange Institution in Auckland, and loyal
and devoted subjects of Her Most Gracious Ma-
esty, desire to welcome you, her representative, to
our city on this auspicious occasion, being not only
the Jubilee of the colony of New Zealand, but the
Jubilee of the Orange Institution in this colony.
We trust that the ties which bind us to the mother
country will never be severed, that peace and pros-
perity, concord and unity, will flourish amongst us ;
and that nothing will tend to mar the amity which
exists in this our adopted country. We feel assured
that your fidelity to the laws and constitution of
Great Britain and her colonies will add to the hap-
piness of those over whom you rule, and that trade
and commerce will take the place of that depression
which has reigned throughout our colony for the
last few years. We pray that Her Most Gracious
Majesty may long reign over a loyal and law-abiding
people, and that nothing shall ever arise which might
lead to even a semblance of disruption in the Em-
pire of which she is the esteemed and exalted mon-
arch. We right heartily welcome Your Excellency
to this city, and pray the Most High to watch over
yourself, your Countess, and family, and that the
righteousness which exalteth a nation may spread
over the length and breadth of this the land of our
adoption.—We are. Your Excellency’s faithful and
loyal servants. (Signed on behalf of the Orangemen
of Auckland.)
Robert Farrell, G.M.
James Jamieson, D.G.M.
James Carnachan, G. Secretary.
THE GOVERNOR’S REPLY.
His Excellency replied as follows :
Orangemen of Auckland, I rejoice to be
able to congratulate you simultaneously on
the attainment of the Jubilee of the colony
and of the fiftieth year of your existence as
an institution in this colony. (Cheers.)
You rightly assume that during my ad-
ministration of the Government of New
Zealand it will be my endeavour strictly to
adhere to those constitutional forms of
government which are so cherished by
Englis'hraen throughout the world ; but the
revival of trade and commerce, of which at
the present time w T e see such striking evi-
dences, is controlled by influences far
removed from the power of the Governor
of a colony. The tendency of modern
thought and statesmanship is rather tow'ards
federation and union of States for common
protection and for strength, than to disrup-
tionofempire, which you so justly deprecate.
(Cheers.) I shall convey to Her Majesty
the Queen, with every feeling of satisfac-
tion, the expressions of attachment to her
person which come so appropriately from
an institution bearing the title of a Loyal
Orange Lodge. (Prolonged cheers.)
Immediately after the presentation of and
reply to the Orange address, the President
of the Hibernian Society (Mr. W. Beehan)
and the Secretary (Mr. T. H. White), who
had been standing to the left of Grand
Master Farrell, shook hands with him, and
with Deputy-Grand Master James Jamieson,
and expressed their gratification at the unity
shown on the occasion. Grand Master Farrell
cordially reciprocated the sentiments ex-
pressed by these gentlemen. The incident
was one of the most pleasing which oc-
curred during the day, and gave great sat-
isfaction to those of the general public who
witnessed it.
THE ILLUMINATIONS.
Most of these were in Queen-street. The
Waverley Hotel had a star in each
window, on tinted paper, and lights
placed in the windows, which had a
pleasing effect. The Waiteraata and
Thames Hotels were tastefully deco-
rated with Chinese lanterns, and at the
latter hotel a carbonate light was displayed,
which illuminated the locality and attracted
a large crowd to witness it. In Custom-
street East, the Britomart Hotel was brilli-
antly lighted with Chinese lanterns in fanci-
ful designs. The New Zealand Insurance Co.
made a fine display in their offices known
as the Exchange Buildings. The whole of
the windows in the fagade, twenty-one in
number, were blocked with tinted paper
(red and blue) cut diagonal!} 7 and illumi-
nated with 800 candles. The outer bay
windows on the first floor were occupied by
two tasteful designs, as was the Queen-
street face of the Exchange clock. The
Victoria Arcade, also the company’s pro-
perty, had a row of Chinese lanterns along


iiiiii«yiiiiininHiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
the verandah of the block, extending from
Mr. Wildtnan’s shop in Shortland street
to the back of the block in Fort-street. At
the corner of Shortland and Queen streets
the South British Insurance Company’s pre-
mises were nicely decorated. The windows
were blocked with variegated paper, suitably
illuminated ; while at the corner was a
transparency, having a beehive represent-
ing industry ; a view of Auckland harbour,
with shipping and North Shore ; also the
legend, “Industry and Prosperity, 1890.”
Mr. J. B. Killian decorated the transpa-
rency, which was executed by Mr. Back-
house. On the opposite side of the
street the Bank of New Zealand made
an excellent display. There were three
transparencies, the one on the left being
a grouping of the flags of all na-
tions. A portion of the centre one repre-
sented the corner of a New Zealand bank
note—namely, Maori man and woman on
the margin of Lake Tarawera, with the
mountain in eruption. The other section
represented Britannia, one of the direct
steamers, and lighthouse. As representa-
tive of the agricultural and pastoral in-
dustries was a plough and bale of
wool. There were also telegraph and
railway signal posts, as indicating the
improved means of communication in the
country. The transparency on the right
was the horn of plenty, pouring out all
varieties of fruit. The architect seems to
have devised the windows to illustrate the
Jubilee, for the four centre windows of the
first floor each contained a numeral making
the date “ 1890,” while the seven windows
of the third storey each contained a letter
making the word “Jubilee.” The whole
fagade was well illuminated, and the general
effect was excellent in showing up the con-
trast of the foliage, bannerets, and toi grass,
The gas arrangements were carried out by
Messrs. McCarthny and Griffiths, of Albert-
street (late Branston and Foster). At the
Herald publishing office there was a de-
sign in gas jets containing the names of the
journals “ Herald and Weekly News,”
which was enclosed in a bordering of gas
jets, and brilliantly lit up Lower Queen-
street. In Shortland street the Evening
Star was tastefully illuminated, the design
illustrating the name of the journal. There
was also a transparency, with the dates
“1840-1890.” The Commercial Hotel was
decorated with Chinese lanterns, and
the Imperial Hotel was decorated at
its approaches with nikau. In Vulcan
Lane a string of Chinese lanterns was
placed across the street, and the Queen’s
Ferry Hotel was similarly decorated.
There was a fine transparency at Mr. T.
Harle Giles’ Educational Chambers and
Training College, Queen-street. It repre-
sented two pictures divided by a tree fern ;
one picture showed a New Zealand lake
landscape with a “ whare,” on the front of
which a sign, “ Private School ” is painted ;
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiu min
on the other side is seen Mr. Giles’ Educa-a-
tional Chambers and Training College,m,
Queen-street. A shield bearing a sugges->s-
tion for a flag for a federated colonies, sur-ir-
rounded by the rose, shamrock, and thistle,le,
on a marble pedestal, occupied the base of a a
really handsome picture. It bears thebe
legend, “ May Auckland Prosper.” In thebe
centre of the facade is the word “ Welcome”e”
in white on a red ground. The wholele
verandah was artistically and profuselyly
adorned with'native foliage. Mr. White,e,
tailor, adjacent, had a design paintechd
on a frame 12 by 9. The same idema
is carried out of the two epochs in the his-s-
-tory of the colony. A very handsomeie
framing surrounded the picture, which had a a
representation of the North Shore in thee
background. A Maori chief in ancient cos-s-
-tume occupied a pedestal on one side, andd
another chief in modern style occupied them
other. A cabbage tree, springing from a a
shield surrounded by flax plants bearingg
divers devices occupied the centre. Thee
legend was, “ Kia nui haere Akarana.”’
Messrs. Garrett Brothers had a large pic-
ture, which illustrated the progress of thee
tannery industry. One section of it showed!
their old tannery at Avondale in the earljy
days of the colony, and the other thee
present tannery. The contrast was aa
marked one. It bore the motto “ Coloniall
Labour for All ” in black and red, and wasis
decorated with ferns. At Messrs. J. HI.
Upton and Co.’s was a transparency witlh
the words “ Auckland Jubilee. Aucklancd
Advance, 1890.” In a shield were the ena-
blems of shipping and commerce, and thee
implements of agriculture and goldraining?.
The Union Bank had a transparency—bees-
hive, “ 1890” illustrative of industry ;
while on the right was a representation off
clasped hands (shaking hands across thee
sea), with Union Jack above. Over thee
transparency was “Auckland Jubilee,”’
with anchor underneath. The transparency
was very much admired, not only for its ex:-
cellency but the patriotic sentiment whicli
it embalmed. Mr. Killian decorated it,
and Mr. Backhouse executed the artistic
work. The Auckland W orking Men’s Club
had a very excellent transparency at their
premises at the corner of Darby-street. On
the left was Britannia with trident. In
the centre was a view of Auckland as
approached from the Queen-street Wharf,
showing view of blocks of buildings in
lower Queen - street; also, showing the
“old intake” with embankment, as illus-
trative of old Auckland before the present
harbour reclamations were built on. In
the next division was a portrait of Her
Majesty the Queen in a bordering of laurel,
as also the Royal coat of arms, sur-
rounded by laurel garlands, and bearing the
motto “United We Stand.” The Albert
Hotel was decorated with over 100 Chinese
lanterns in elegant designs, and the rows
of lanterns on its spacious fagade, thre©


lIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIiniIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIipiIIIIIIII^
storeys high, had an excellent effect and
were much admired. At the corner of Queen
and Wellesley-streets the United Service
Hotel was tastefully decorated with two
rows of Chinese lanterns on both fronts.
Hewin Brothers, grocers, had a crown
with “Y.R.” in gas jets, which, with a
star in gas jets, at Milne and Choyce’s,
brilliantly lit up the junction of the
streets. The Clarendon Hotel had also
a transparency. It was a representa-
tion of the sun rising out of the
sea. Underneath was a crown and the
Irish welcome, “Cead Mille Failthe.” The
fagade was also decorated with Chinese
lanterns. In Wakefield-street, Mr. Met-
calfe, fancy goods emporium, had an illu-
mination to exhibit the motto, “Peace and
Prosperity to New Zealand, 1890.” In
Grey-street, Mr. Tyndall, dentist, had a
transparency showing Auckland as it was
50 years ago, and as it is to-day. It was
festooned with Chinese lanterns, and was
arranged by Messrs. Killia i and Back-
house. At the Royal Mail Hotel,
Victoria-street, there was a transparency of
an unique character, also illustrative of 1840
and 1890. On the left was depicted a pa
crowning a hill, a company of soldiers
advancing on it, piled arms, and a field
gun with pile of cannon shot; on the right
was a settler’s home, with green crops, and
a reaping machine. Below, in the centre,
was shown an hour-glass with sand running
out, flanked by wings, to represent the
flight of time, also pen and crayon
pencil crossed. This transparency at-
tracted a great deal of attention, as bring-
ing back the old scenes of the Waikato
campaign. Mr. W. Parkinson, confec-
tioner, Albert and Victoria-streets, had a
capital transparency representing the Royal
Coat of Arms, and special by appointment
to Lord Onslow. There was a picture of
Doncaster Church by night, which is the
trademark of Mr. Parkinson’s Doncaster
Butterscotch. The legend was “ Our Ju-
bilee.” The transparency was decorated
with bannerettes, flags, and festooned
evergreens, in which were suspended
Chinese lanterns in various devices.
At the Shakespere Hotel, Wyndham-
street, there was a transparency by Mr. J.
Backhouse. 1840 is illustrated left of the
picture by depicting the Maoris in their
original condition, with paJca or store-
house, canoe on the lake with its crew of
paddlers, the background being filled up
with a range of mountains. On the right
is 1890, represented by a church and
village, railway train, the telegraph line,
and x’acehorse with jockey up. The two
historical epochs are divided by a nikau.
The legend on the transparency is “ God
Save Our Native Land.” This is the
motto of the proprietor of the hotel,
Mr. Thomas Foley, a young colonial.
A neat device was shown over the main
entrance to Mr. M. Dervan’s Freeman’s
Hotel, Freeman’s Bay, comprising the
letters “V.R.,” flanked by stars; and
when the jets were lighted the effect was
beautiful. The design was by McCarthny
and Griffiths.
Among the miscellaneous illuminations
F. Williams, fruiterer, on the wharf, had a
row of gas jets extended along his premises,
and Messrs. Foss and Co., butchers, Vic-
toria Luncheon Rooms, Young and Graham,
confectioners; W. E. Mears, bookseller ;
D. Movally, fruiterer ; and Messrs. Camp-
bell, fruiterers, had decorations with Chi-
nese lanterns.
Newmarket decorations on Jubilee night
were very neat and appropriate. The fire-
bell tower, with its four transparencies, was
a very noticeable feature, but the main
feature was the display of fireworks by the
Fire Brigade. Considerable attention had
been devoted to this feature by Mr. Wilson,
superintendent, and the members of the
Brigade, and frame works for see-saw fire-
works, and other displays of a striking
character were erected. A large crowd wit-
nessed the pyrotechnic display. The Parnell
Borough was certainly the most effectively
perfect in the way of ornamentation. The
arch across Manukau Road is a splendid
feature. The evergreens and the letter-
ing commemorative of the event are well
displayed, but a very prominent figure
in the centre of the arch is that of
a well-dressed Maori woman. Beneath the
arch a line of Chinese lanterns set off the
view to advantage. Mr. Davis’ toy shop and
Mr. Bagley’s fruit shop were also beautifully
decorated with evergreens, transparencies,
flags, and Chinese lanterns.
THE REPLY OF HIS EXCELLENCY
THE GOVERNOR.
His Excellency has sent us the following,
which is a copy of his reply to the cable
messages from Her Majesty and the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies
“ To the Right Honorable the
Colonial Secretary.
“Auckland, January 29, 1890.
“ I have received the telegrams from the
Queen and Her Majesty’s Government.
Ministers and people of New Zealand
return thanks for congratulations on Jubilee.
“(Signed) Onslow,
“ Governor of New Zealand.”
lllllllHllllllllllllllllUlllNnillllllllllllllllllllllllllll
lIIIIUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII


6o New Zealand’s Jubilee, 1840-1890.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
THE AUCKLAND REGATTA.
The fiftieth Auckland Anniversary Regatta, |
the first of the series of Jubilee celebrations, |
was held to-day, and was a pronounced |
success, though owing to the lightness of the |
wind the sailing contests were deprived to |
some extent of their interest. Owing to the |
attraction of the procession of friendly socie |
ties and other bodies in town the attendance |
was somewhat meagre during the earlier |
part of the forenoon, but about eleven o’clock |
the p.s. Enterprise was crowded every trip, |
and speedily filled up the two commodious |
flagships, the British ship Canterbury and |
Norwegian barque Orion, on board of which |
both Captains McMillan and Pettersen, as |
w'ell as the members of the Regatta Com- |
mittee, did all in their power to make |
everyone comfortable. By three o’clock both |
craft were lined alow and aloft with |
spectators of both sexes and all ages, the |
total number on board being estimated at |
fully 2000 people. Amongst the visitors in |
the early forenoon were Paul Tuhaere and |
his son Kawhiti, who rowed up from Orakei, |
and were received and welcomed by Captain |
McMillan and the members of the commit- |
tee. About midday great amusement was |
caused by the appearance of the launch of |
H.M.S. Orlando manned by about 100 jolly |
tars, who included in their number a drum |
and fife band, to whose music several fan- |
tastically arrayed individuals danced and |
performed a variety of ludicrous antics. The |
scene during the afternoon was a grand one, |
the harbour literally swarming with craft of |
all description, including the stately iron- |
clad and ocean-sailing packet, the greyhound- |
like whaleboat, unwieldy scow, shapely |
yacht, top-hampered ferry boat, and minia- |
ture cockleshells of dingies and skiffs, |
all of which were crowded with_ spec- |
tators or performers. It is pleasing to |
note that during all the hurrying to and |
fro, tacking backwards and forwards of |
such a multitude of vessels, that no_ accident |
of any kind has been reported, and in almost |
every case the races passed off without dis- |
pute. Amongst the many who worked so |
hard to bring the Regatta to such a success- |
ful conclusion, the names of Messrs. C. C. |
Dacre (secretary), H. Parker (signaller), J. |
F. Haultain and D. Ross (starters), J, B. |
Graham and J. M. Brigham (judges) are |
worthy of particular mention, while the |
officers and crew of the Canterbury and |
Orion were on the alert all the time to |
further the exertions of the committee. 5
The following are the office-bearers and
managing committee of the Jubilee Regatta :
PatronJ. H. Upton, Esq., Mayor of Auckland. =
Vice-patrons: A. E. Devore, Esq , President Jubi- 1
lee Celebration Sports ; M. Niccol, Esq., Chairman g
of the Auckland Harbour Board. President: John g
Marshall, Esq. Vice-president: The Manager Union s
Steamship Company. Committee Messrs. A. H. =
Nathan (chairman), P. Dignan, C. C. Dacre, J. J. =
Holland, D. F. Evans, J. Waymouth, J. F. Haul- =
tain, D. H. Ross, T. McEwin, C. Webb, R. S. |
Reynolds, A. Buchanan, F. W. Edwards, E. H. =
Montgomery, A. S. Reid, W. Skeen, J. B. Graham, g
J. Knox, R. v ßaxter, H. Parker, J. Hodgson, H. Rees a
George, Captains Nearing, A. Farqubar, and W.
Farquhar. Umpire sailing races : Mr. J. Waymouth.
Judge sailing races : Mr. J. B. Graham. Starter
sailing races ; Mr. James Haultain. Measurer : Mr.
George Goldie. Hon. treasurer : Mr. J. Waymouth.
Umpire rowing races : Mr. D. F. Evans. Judge
rowing races : Mr. J. M. Brigham. Starter rowing
races : Mr. D. H. Ross. Handicappers ; The Com-
mittee. Hon. Secretary : Mr. Charles C. Dacre.
The details of the day’s racing are ap-
pended
Ist Race. — Scows [bona fide baulk timber
scows, square bilges, handicap) : Ist prize,
£2O; 2nd, £10; 3rd, £2 10s. Course : From
flagship round mark boat off Lake Taka-
puna, thence round Drunken Bay buoy,
thence round hulk Clara Hargreaves,
thence round mark boat off Sugar Works,
finishing at flagship.
Irene (D. M. Darrah), 40 tons; Ida (G.
Darrah, 29 tons. The Dungarvon and Hau-
turu also competed. The Ida got away from
her moorings first, followed by the Dun-
garvon, Hauturu and Irene; but the Dun■
garvon got a good slant, and worked down
the harbour, while the others were dodging
about between the flagship and the biorth
Shore, the wind being both light and contrary
to making good progress, and it was some
considerable time before the vessels made
their appearance round the North Head.
After dark a southerly breeze sprang up,
and the Ida, getting a good slant, worked
well up, and finished first; the Irene, second,
a good way astern.
2nd Race.-— Coasting Gutters (Handicap), 12
tons and under 25, and which have not
been built for yachts : Ist prize, £5O, and
clock presented by Mr. Kelsey ; 2nd, £2O;
3rd, £7. Course : From flagship, thence
round black (Kate) buoy, Rangitoto Chan-
nel, thence round Drunken Bay buoy,
thence round hulk Clara Hargreaves, off
Judge’s Bay, thence round mark boat off
Sugar Works. Twice round.
Gannet (J. Spencer), 17 tons; Henry (J.
Hodgson), 14 tons; Margaret Casey (S.
Lecky), 18 tons. The Sarah and Teviot also
entered. This race was very disappointing,
owing to the unfavourable nature of the
wi n <-L At the start the Gannet and Henry
were quickly under way, and when off the
North Share the Gannet had the foremost
position. On the return up the harbour the
Henry had taken first place, and kept it till
the finish, winning well ahead of the Gannet,
the others being a good distance astern.
3rd Race.— Y achts (first-class); Yacht Club
Regulations (all marks to be kept on star-
board hand): Ist prize, £4O, and silver
cup presented by John Marshall, Presi-
dent Regatta Club, valued at £l5 15s; 2nd,
£2O Course; From flagship round mark
boat off Lake Takapuna, thence round
hulk Clara Hargreaves, off Judge’s Bay,
thence round mark boat off Sugar Works ;
Sassing east side of black (Kate) buoy,
.angitoto Channel, going and coming.
Twice round.


I UN
Matangi (John Wiseman), 14'50 tons ; We-
nona (H. Whittaker); Ngaira (H. Haines),
8‘47 tons; Maritana (W. Vereker Bindon),
14T9 tons. From a flying start the Maritana
got away with a slight lead, the Ngaira
second, the Matangi third, and the Wenona
last, i'he Maritana went about to the north
side of the flagship, but lost considerable
ground, and off the Lizard the Ngaira and
and Matangi were in front, fighting for
windward positions. Abreast of the Devon-
port wharf the Ngaira had the weather posi-
tion, the Matangi being next, and the Mari-
tana not far behind. All tacked across to
Hobson’s Bay, when the Matangi touched
the ground, and hung for some minutes,
having to lower the jib and work round, which
delayed tier considerably. Coming out of the
bay, the Maritana assumed the lead, with the
Ngaira close handy, but the latter weathered
her on the next tack, and rounded the North
Head first. On the return she still led, but
the Maritana was at her heels, and on the
run across to the Clara Hargreaves passed
her, the Matangi being a good third. This
order was maintained up the harbour, round
the Sugar Works buoy, and until the vessels
went into the Rangitoto Channel the second
time. It was near dusk when they came in-
side North Head again, the order still being
the same. With the wind almost a calm,
and a strong ebb tide, progress up the har-
bour was very slow, but the Maritana main-
tained her advantage, and finished first about
nine o’clock, the other pair giving up when
near the Argyle, about eight p.m., their
owners being under the impression that that
was the latest hour at which the race could
be finished.
4th Race.—Yachts (second-class); Yacht
Club regulations (all marks to be kept on
starboard hand); Ist prize, £2O and silver
cup presented by the Colonial Insurance
Company, valued at £l5 15s ; 2nd, £l5; 3rd
£3. Course: From flagship round black
(Kate) buoy, Rangitoto Channel, thence
round hulk Clara Hargreaves, thence round
mark boat off Sugar Works. Twice round.
Mapu (Waymouth and Son), 5 6-10 tons;
Awatea (Fredk. W. Mace), 4J tons; Spray
(A. J. S. Gibbs), 4'90 tons; Tawera (Carlaw
and Stone), 7T tons ; Juvarnia. The Awa-
tea was first to get away, followed by the
Mapu, Tawera, and Spray (with no topmast).
The Juvarnia at the time of starting was on
the north side of the flagship well over
towards the shore, and of course was out of
the running to all appearances. The Awatea,
getting under the lee of the flagship, had to go
about, and the Mapu shot ahead and went
about to weather the Opal, the Tawera
following. On the run across to Brick
Bay the Tawera was sailing closer to
the wind than the others. The Awatea was
the first to go about, but was a long way
astern, the Mapu well to windward, the
Tawera following, and the Spray a long way
behind. The Mapu got a good breeze out of
Brick Bay, and made good running along the
shore, being the first round N orth Head. On
reappearing she still had the lead, and
rounded the Clara Hargreaves fully a mile
ahead of the Juvarnia, who, though starting
so late, had made such progress as to fake
| the second place, owing to making a mistake
| in the course. The Spray followed, leading
| the Tawera by a few seconds. The race
| resulted in a win for the Mapu, the Spray
| being second, Tawera third.
sth Race. —Fishing Boats, over 4 tons ; Ist
prize, £3O; 2nd, £10; 3rd, £3. Course :
From flagship round black (Kate) buoy,
Rangitoto Channel, thence round hulk
Clara Hargreaves, thence round mark boat
off Sugar Works. Twice round.
Caprera (J. Petonie), 8 tons; Christina (F.
Williams), 8 tons; Laurina (F. Williams), 5
tons; May (D. Holland), 6J tons; Foam (J.
Quinn), 4 tons. Tile Caprera was first to get
away, followed closely by the Laurina, and
the others. The Caprera was the first to go
about, the rest following, the Christina being
astern a good distance. In the run across the
harbour, the same positions were maintained,
but on going about the Laurina took the lead-
ing place, with the Christina next, and the
May a good deal astern; but the Christina
was working well to windward. Off the
Dock, where the boats again went about, the
Christina took the foremost position, the
Caprera a long way astern, followed by
the Laurina. On the run up, the
May had improved her position con-
siderably, and was leading, the Laurina
second, Christina third, and Caprera last.
These positions were maintained up the har-
bour, and on the second time round, the race
resulting ; May, 1 ; Laurina, 2; Christina, 3;
Caprera, 4, the Foam being a long distance
astern.
6th Race. Yachts (Third-class); Yacht
Club Regulations (all marks to be kept on
starboard hand). Ist prize, £2O, and ane-
roid presented by Mr. Howden ; 2nd, £10;
3rd, £2. Course: From flagship round
black (Kate) buoy, Rangitoto Channel,
thence round hulk Clara Hargreaves,
thence round mark boat off Sugar Works.
Twice round.
Maia (W. and D. MaeCormick), 3 8-10 tons ;
Manola (W. Holder), 34 tons; Tangaroa
(Thos. Kilfoyle), 34 tons; Transit (H.
Wright), 2.28 tons ; Matea (Walter Jones),
3 9-10 tons ; Isca (Henry Wilson), 3 tons. All
formed into nice line, the Tangaroa being
the first to get away, followed by the Maia,
Transit, Isca, Matea, and Manola, the latter
working well up to windward. All went
about when off the Opal, the Manola taking
the lead, the Maia second, the Tangaroa
third, and the Transit fourth, but well to
windward, and the Matea close up next,
the Isca being last. When abreast of
the Orlando they all went about again,
heading into Brick Bay, the position being
much the same, though the Maia was
keeping close up to the wind, and the
Manola still leading. When about off
Calliope Dock the Maia had taken the lead,
Tangaroa second, and the Manola third. On
the return run the Manola was the first to
round the North Head, Maia second, and the
Isca third. On the second round the Manola
still maintained the lead, but the Isca had
worked up into second place, the Maia th ird,
and the race resulted in that order.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii 11111111111
7th Race.—Open Sailing Boats (first-class),
20 feet and above 16 feet; Ist prize, £2O;
2nd, £7; 3rd, £3. Course : From flagship
round red buoy off Sandspit, North Shore,
thence round hulk Clara Hargreaves, thence
round mark boat off Sugar Works. Twice
round.
Era (J. Logan), 20 feet; Surprise (J. Collins),
20 feet; Ira (C. Bailey, jun.), 20 feet; Alice
(Kingi), 20 feet. The Alice did not start.
The Era was the first to go about past the
flagship, followed by the Ira and Surprise.
Working across to Stanley Point the Era
still kept a good lead,the wind freshening,
and the Ira sailing closer to the wind than
the others, the Surprise following close up,
and got well to windward of the others, the
Ira working away to windward. Passing
Hevonport Wharf the Era began to close on
the Ira, and on the run up the Ira was first
and the Era second, but the latter improved
her position on the run down and took
first place, which position was maintained,
and the race resulted : Era, 1; Ira, 2; Sur-
prise, 3.
Bth Race. —Yachts (fourth-class), Yacht
Club regulations (all marks to be kept on
starboard hand) : Ist prize, £lO, and Cup
presented by Messrs. P. Hayman and Co.,
valued at £7 ; 2nd, £5 ; 3rd, £l. Course ;
From flagship round black (Kate) buoy,
Rangitoto channel, thence round hulk
Clara Hargreaves, thence round mark boat
off Sugar Works. Finishing at flagship.
Sybil (M. Fairs), P 52 tons; Doris (Geo. R.
Webb), 1 7-10th tons; Nikau (Harold W.
Hudson), 1-12 tons ; Maud (R. Gibbs), 1 ton;
Italy (G. P. Burton), 2 tons ; Malvina (J. T.
Munro). The Millie and Comet did not start.
The Maud was the first away, with the Nikau,
Malvina, Doris, Sybil, and Italy. On the
run across the harbour these positions were
maintained, but the Italy had much improved
her place. As they ran along towards the
dock, the Malvina crept ahead, the Maud
and Nikau being next, while the Italy was
well up to windward, these positions being
maintained as the boats rounded the North
Head. During the beat down Rangitoto
Channel, some misapprehension appears to
have occurred as to the proper buoy to be
rounded, and the Italy, which had gained
considerably, and the Doris, rounded the
black buoy off the reef. The Maud, Nikau,
and Sybil were the first to reappear round
the North Head and pass the flagship, but it
is thought that they have not gone the full
course, and the Italy and Doris, which shortly
after came up, are considered as first and
second boats.
9th Race.— Fishing Boats, four tons and
under: Ist prize, £2O; 2nd, £7 10s; 3rd,
£1 10s. Course: From flagship round
black (Kate) buoy, Rangitoto Channel,
thence round hulk Clara Hargreaves,
thence round mark boat off Sugar Works.
Finishing at flagship.
Venice (J. Lomey), 3J tons; Lita (Jas. Clare),
3g tons ; Mignonette (J. Gallagher), 3J tons ;
and May (F. Williams), 3| tons. The May
Queen also started. The May was the first
to get away, slightly ahead of the Venice,
the Mignonette, and the Lita, the May
Queen being last. On the lead across to Brick
iiiyiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Bay, the May took the first position, but in
the run down to the dock, the Mignonette dis-
placed the May, the Venice being some little
distance behind, and the May Queen away
in the rear, with but little alteration these
positions were maintained round the buoy in
Rangitoto Channel, and the second run
round, the race resulting—Venice, 1; May,
2; Mignonette, 3.
10th Race.—Open Sailing Boats (second;
class), 16 feet and under : Ist prize, £l5-
2nd, £10; 3rd, £2. Course: From flag-
ship round red buoy off Sandspit, North
Shore, thence round hulk Clara Har-
greaves, thence round mark boat off Sugar-
works. Twice round.
Lively (A. Smith), 16 feet; Hevonport (G.
Herrington), 16 feet; Sprite (J. Rogers), 16
feet); Clyde (D. McCallum), 16 feet; Coy
(J. Hammond), 16 feet: Era (W. Holmes), 16
feet; Star (J. Maxwell), 13 feet; Vic (J.
Mitchell), 16 feet; Phyllis (A. J. Carr), 16
feet; May (W. Lysaght), 16 feet. This was
a good race for the first half hour or so —all
being pretty close together as they went
down towards the North Head. As the
wind failed in the Channel they straggled
badly, and several gave up._ The Alice
came in first after dark, with the Era
second. A third boat finished, and her
owner expressed his intention of protesting,
but we were unable to ascertain her name.
11th Race.—Men-of-Wab, Pulling Race :
Ist prize, £10; 2nd, £5; 3rd, £2. Course :
From flagship round red buoy off Sandspit,
North Shore, thence round hulk Clara Har-
greaves, thence round mark boat off Sugar
Works. Twice round.
| Orlando (launch), 60 men; Orlando (gig), 8
| men; Orlando (galley), 8 men ; Opal (galley),
| 8 men; Opal (pinnace), 34 men; Opal (whaler),
| 6 men. This was a grand race. The Orlando’s
| galley, with eight men, took the lead, and
| maintained it for a considerable distance, but
j the gig from the same vessel, with a like
| crew, pressed them hard, and a desperate
| struggle ensued past the wharves for first
j place. The Opal's galley of eight men, and
| the Orlando’s launch containing over 60
| rowers, had a similar determined contest for
| third place. The tars, as they passed the
| ships and wharves, were repeatedly cheered,
| and responded by some grand spurting. The
| race finally resulted : —Orlando’s gig, 1; Or-
| lando’s galley, 2; Opal’s galley. 3; Orlando’s
| launch, 4; Opal’s whaler, 5; Opal’s pinnace,
I 6.
12th Race. —Men-op-wab Gigs : Ist prize,
£7 ; 2nd, £4 ; 3rd, £l. Course : From flag-
ship, thence round steamer Argyle, thence
round hulk Senator, finishing at flagship.
Orlando, first whaler; Orlando, second
wLaler; Orlando, despatch boat; Orlando,
marines’ whaler; Opal, whaler; Lizard,
gig. This was another exciting event, and
all the crews worked with great vigour
throughout the contest. The Lizard’s gig
w r as allowed 11 seconds start, but got no
nearer than fifth, the Opal winning rather
easily. The result was : —Opal’s whaler, 1;
Orlando’s Ist whaler, 2; Orlando’s despatch
boat 3; Orlando’s 2nd whaler, 4; Lizard’s
gig, 5; Orlando’s marines’ whaler, 6.


llllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllUIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlllllllllllllll!llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll||||ll||||||||||||i||||||||||||||i||||||||||||||||ip||||||j||||{|||||||||||||||||||||||||, |||||,||||^
13th Race. Men -oe - war Cutters : Ist
prize, £10; 2nd, £5. Course : From flag-
ship round mark buoys, thence round hulk
Senator, finishing at flagship.
Orlando (No. 1), Orlando (No. 2), Opal,
Lizard. Shortly after this event started the
Orlando’s two cutters had slightly the lead,
and on the return past the wharves were
neck-and-neck, pulling desperately. The
Lizard’s, however, were close behind going
well, and, rounding the Senator smartly, got
ahead, and won a very exciting race, the
positions being : —Lizard’s cutter, 1; Or-
lando’s 2nd cutter, 2; Orlando’s Ist cutter,
3 ; Opal’s cutter, 4.
14th Race.— Champion Whaleboats; Ist
prize, £100; 2nd, £35. Course : From start-
ing boat off Point Resolution, thence round
mark boats off St. Mary’s Point, finishing
at flagship.
Thames Rowing Club: W. Woodward, 1;
J. Johnstone, 2; H. Slade, 3; H. Gallagher,
4; J. Johnstone, stroke; T. Rolton, steer-
oar. Hauraki Rowing Club: S. Lowrie, R.
Lowrie, A. Fisher, G. Tetley, H. Brownlee,
and W. Rolton steer-oar. Waitemata Row-
ing Club :J. Collins, 1; T. B. O’Connor, 2;
G. Barrett, 3; R. Moore, 4; M. Keefe, stroke;
E. Moore, steer-oar. City Rowing Club : C.
W. Pennalligan, 1 : G. Rowles, 2; A. Harvey,
3; R. White, 4; W. Brophy, stroke ;L. Skin-
ner, steer-oar. West End Rowing Club :
F. W. Edwards, N. McLean, 0. Wells, J.
Whitticombe, J. Payne, stroke, A. Bailey
steer-oar. This race, which was considered
the event par excellence of the day, was post-
poned for the arrival of the Vice-Regal party
in the Nautilus, and was not started till about
half-past four p.m. Mr. Ros,s got the five
crews on very even terms, but the West End,
which had the inshore position, rowing at a
great pace, soon took the lead, the City men
being slightly ahead of the Waitemata, who
were third, the Hauraki being a length ahead
of the Thames. When a couple of hundred
yards had been traversed, the Waitemata
had caughc up to the City, but West End
were still ahead ; and off St. Barnabas Point
the positions were West End, Ist; Waite-
mata, 2nd; City and Hauraki level, 3rd;
Thames sth. Both West End and Waite-
mata were rowing strongly, and in good time,
.but the City were a bit jerky, and Haurakislow
in recovery. Off Mechanics’bay Waitemata
had gained somewhat on the West End, and
Hauraki had dispossessed City of third place,
and the Thames were now level with the
latter, all pulling hard against ibhe ebb tide,
and the coxswain of each boat backing up the
stroke. Off the Senator hulk, Waitemata
had got on terms with the leader, and set-
tling down to their work drew steadily away
and by the time the Railway wharf was
reached daylight was apparent between the
two boats. Between the Senator and the
wharves both the City and West End crews
were interfered with greatly by the ferry
steamer Britannia running too close, and
giving them her backwash. Passing the Queen-
street wharf, the Waitemata’s, who were the
favourites, were heartily cheered by the
crowds on the pier, and the West End going
strongly about two lengths behind, were also
applauded. From this point out the race
hardly needs description as the Waitemata
| and West End drew clear away fr< tr the
| other competitors, and rounded the buoys
| considerably in advance. The race r> suited
| in Waitemata being first about 12 ’engths
| ahead of West End ; behind these came Hau-
| raki about 7 lengths further astern. Thames
| were 5 lengths behind their confreres, and
| the City last distanced. The victors were re-
| ceived with lengthened applause as they
| passed the flagships and wharves.
| 15th Race. — Naval Volunteer and Per-
| manent Force Cutters (12-oared), which
| have been built for cutters : Ist prize, £80;
| 2nd, £l5. Course : From flagship, thence
| round steamer Argyle, thence round hulk
| Senator, finishing ait flagship,
j Chanticleer (Auckland Naval Artillery),
| Hinemoa (Auckland Naval Artillery), Jubilee
| (Thames Naval Artillery). Two crews from
| the Auckland Corps and one from the
| Thames competed. On the up journey they
| kept fairly even for a time, but on rounding
| the Argyle it was seen that the Hinemoa
| (the A.N.A.’s new boat) had the lead, and
| this was maintained to the finish, the Jubilee
| (Thames) being second, a couple of lengths
j behind, and the Chanticleer last.
16th Race.— Merchant Vessels’ Gigs (4
oared), to be rowed by hona fide crew :
Prize, £lO. Course : From flagship, thence
round steamer Argyle, thence round hulk
Senator, finishing at flagship.
Orion, Canterbury, Waimea. This was a
first-rate race between the Canterbury and
the Orion. The Canterbury was the first to
get away, closely followed by the Orion. On
the run up the Canterbury kept well ahead,
and rounded the Argyle first, about a minute
ahead of the Orion, the Waimea being a long
way astern. Passing the Queen-street wharf
the Canterbury had considerably increased
her lead, and the Senator was rounded in the
same order, and finished in the same order,
about equal distances apart.
17th Race. — Whaleboats, to be rowed by
junior amateur members of any recognised
rowing club, and whose weight does not
exceed 10 stone. Course: From Railway
Wharf round mark boats off St. Mary’s
Point, finishing at flagship.
West End Rowing Club : R. Dowden, C.
Farquhar, H. Stevenson, J. Williamson, J.
Clark, W. Scott, steer-oar. Ponsonby Row-
ing Club ;A. Cook, A. Mclndoe, A.'f inlay-
son, Wm. Scott, G. Mackenzie. City Row-
ing Club ; W. J. Evers, H. Barton, A. J.
Parker, C. Otto, H. McNaughton, L.
Skinner, steer-oar. Hauraki Rowing Club :
W. Webb, J. Bradshaw, A. Rae. A. Brown,
F. Brown, W. Rolton, steer-oar. North
Shore Rowing Club : R. Logan, G. Chester,
F. Chamberlain, H. Grattan, D. Harvey, A.
Logan, steer-oar. All were despatched to an
even start, but by the time the Queen-street
Wharf was reached St. George’s, which had
the inshore position, were ahead, North
Shore being second and Hauraki third. The
leading boat increased her distance on the
journey up the harbour, but owing to a pas-
sing cutter obscuring one of the buoys, mis-
took her proper mark. She, however, gained
no advantage by the error, and won by eight
or nine lengths, North Shore second, and
Hauraki third, The last-named has pro-


Mr. B. Thompson’s hr g Octopus (Carey)
Mr. J. Bass’ b g Badger (Neilly)
Mr. H. Cunningham’s b m Nosegay (Kat-
1
2
terns)
3
Mr. Robinson’s br g Vanguard, 9st
(Burns)
I
Messrs. Russell and Black’s ch g Takapau,
9st 51b (Johnson)
Mr. M. Hickey’s b g Larrikin, 9st (Mc-
Miniman)
2
3
UIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!IIIIIIIIIIIIIUI!nillllllllllllllllllllllllllIIIIUi:illllllll!llllllllllllllllll!llllllllllll!llllllllllllil!llllllll|lllllll
tested against the St. George’s win, because | .
of rounding the wrong buoy, but it is thought |
that both she and the North Shore made a |
similar mistake. I
18th Race. — Whaleboats, to be rowed by
amateur maiden oarsmen (Rowing Associa-
tion definition) of any recognised rowing
club : Ist prize, £l5; 2nd, £5. Course :
From Railway Wharf round mark boats
off St. Mary’s Point, finishing off flagship.
City Rowing Club : J. McDonnell, A. Eagle-
ton, J. Miller, W. Lawson, J. Halpin, L.
Skinner, steer-oar. Poverty Bay Rowing
Club : Walters (stroke), Marshall, Hansen,
Walters, Adeane. Waitemata Boating Club :
C. McDonald, R. Stewart, T. O’Neill, J.
Conway, M. McLeod, Moore, steer-oar-
St. George’s Rowing Club: F. Jervis, E.
iiiiiiniiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiii
llllIII[|[lllllll!lll!lllllIlllllllllllllllllllllllll!llllll!llillllllllllillllll|llllll1IIIIIIIIIIIIIi[lllllilllilll1EIII!l1llllllillllllilllllllllll!llll
Anderson, A. E. Whyte, W. E. Thomas, —
Burton, H. Sanders, steer-oar. North Shore
Rowing Club: B. Lambert, F. Brown, W.
Brown, C. Marshall, Otway, A. Logan,
steer-oar. Ponsonby Rowing Club :J. Cole,
E. Tate, P. W. Scott, D. Cole, S. Bowden.
Hauraki Rowing Club : R. Inglis, J. Simp-
son, W. Anderson, J. Anderson, W. Moor-
craft, W. Rolton, steer-oar. This, like the
other rowing events, was a well-contested
event, but the inshore craft had, owing to
the strong ebb-tide, a considerable advan-
tage. The Hauraki crew went away with
the lead shortly after the wharf had been
passed, and Ponsonby was second. Waite-
mata and St. George’s crew fought hard for
third place, and when the buoys had been
rounded had run into second place, and
this order was maintained to the finish, the
result being Hauraki, I; Waitemata, 2.
TAKAPUNA JOCKEY CLUB’S JUBILEE MEETING.
The Jubilee meeting of the Takapuna Jockey
Club was held to-day on the new race-
course. The attendance was the largest
that has ever assembled under the auspices
of the club, there being fully 6000 people
present. The weather was warm, but enjoy-
able.
During the afternoon His Excellency Lord
Onslow accompanied by Lord Carrington and
Lord Scott, Mr. Upton the Mayor, and Mr.
Devore, arrived on the ground. They were
received by the Hon. Mr. Mitchelson, presi-
dent of the club, and by the stewards, and
were entertained at a luncheon spread in a
marquee, and provided in the very best style
by Mr. Robson, of the Commercial Dining
Rooms. Amongst the guests at dinner be-
sides those enumerated were Colonel Hume,
Sir F. Whitaker, Mr. Meysey Thompson,
Messrs. J. Marshall, J. Coates, J. M. Phil-
son, Mr. P. A. Philips, town clerk, Captain
Saville, A.D.C., and others. The Hon. Mr.
Mitchelson, as president, occupied the chair,
and proposed the health of His Excellency
Lord Onslow. His Excellency suitably
replied, and proposed prosperity to the
'Takapuna Jockey Club. The health of Lord
Carrington and Admiral Scott were suitably
honoured. The distinguished guests were
only able to remain on the course for a short
time, and on driving off they were greeted
with warm and enthusiastic cheering.
The following are the results of the races ;
Handicap Maiden Plate of 30sovs. For all
horses that have not won an advertised
race exceeding 25sovs. One mile.
Mr. B. Thompson’s br m Torment, 7st 41b
(Priest) 1
Mr. J. Maitland’s br m Fairy Queen, 7st
(Lindsay) ... 2
Mr. J. Lowther’s ch g Rataplan, 7st 101 b
(Wills) 3
Possum (Bst 121 b), Hune (7st 101 b), Orakei
(7st 101 b), and Stamford (7st), also ran. Wini-
fred, Parnell, Te Kooti, Phantom, and Elena
were scratched. After several rather annoy-
ing breaks, Mr. Wattie despatched the field
to a good start, and Fairy Queen went off to
the front, followed by Rataplan and Hune.
Fairy Queen held command to the home
turn, where Torment came up with a great
rush, and Rataplan also put in a strong
claim, the result being a magnificent race up
the straight, Torment passing Fairy Queen at
the post, and winning by half-a-length;
Rataplan a close third. Time, Im. 495.
There were 418 investors on the totalisator,
of whom 126 were on the winner, and the
dividend was £2 19s. Rataplan was the fa-
vourite.
Novel Race of 20sovs. Winner to be sold
immediately after the race. Lowest weight,
Bst 71b. Five and a-half furlongs.
Mr. J. Davies’ b m Westmore also ran. A
number of horses entered were scratched.
Octopus started a warm favourite. The start
was a good one, but Octopus at once took
command of affairs, and when the back of the
course was reached he had a lead of three
lengths, his closest attendant then being
Badger ; but, maintaining his position to the
finish, he won by three lengths, about the
same distance separating second and third.
Westmere was outpaced from the start.
Time, Im. 15s. Totalisator investments,
£220; 125 on Octopus; dividend, £1 11s.
The winner was bought in by the owner for
£2O.
Handicap Hurdles of 75sovs ; second horse
to receive ssovs out of stakes; over eight
flights of hurdles. Two miles.
Recruit (lOst 91b), Messenger (lOst 41b),
Rossiter (lOst), Black Joe (9st 81b) Par-


Mr. J. Rae’s ch m Prudence, 6st 71b (S.
Cook)
1
Mr. R. Burke’s ch mDolosa, 6st 71b (Man-
ning)
2
Mr. W. Somerville’s blk h Teksum, 9st
41b (Taylor)
3
Messrs. Russell and Black’s ch g Takapau,
9st 101b (Johnson)
1
Mr. F. Bell’s ch g Rossiter, lOst 41b (Gr,
Laing)
2
Mr. J. McHugh’s blk g Messenger, list
21b (Collins)
3
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiii
nell (9st 51b), and Hero (9st) also started,
and the only horse scratched was Titokowaru,
weighted at 9st 51b. This was considered
a very open race. The Taranaki horse
Takapau, a half-brother to Silvio, the winner
of the Auckland Steeplechase, was considered
very good goods indeed by his supporters. Re-
cruit, Messenger, and Black Joe were also
well backed, and Rossiter had supporters, but
Vanguard and Hero were nearly friendless.
Takapau took the lead at the start, and cut out
the running, followed by Hero and Recruit.
Takapau held the lead during the second
round, and for the greater portion of the
third, when Vanguard put in a strong claim,
and rising with the favourite at the last hurdle
he gained every stride, and won by a clear
length. It was a very pretty race through-
out, and all the horses jumped cleverly, and
Larrikin’s performance was a very meri-
torious one. There was £863 on the totalisa-
tor, out of which only nine were on Vanguard,
and they received the very handsome divi-
dend of £B6 6s.
Zealandia Handicap, of 40sovs. Second
, horse to receive Ssovs out of stakes. Five
furlongs.
Tupake (9st), Raglan (9st), Capella (7st 81b),
Blarney (7st 41b), and Torment (6st), also ran.
Tamora and Badger were scratched. Tek-
sum, although top weight, was favourite on
the machine and in the betting. Mr. Wattie
sent his field away to a moderate s'tart. They
all swept round the track of the course in a
cluster, but then the leading division cut
out the pace so merrily that the others were
left behind, and one of the most magnifi-
cent struggles ensued in the straight which
has been seen here for many years. Pru-
dence secured a victory by half-a-head from
Dolosa, and Dolosa beat Teksum by half-a-
head for second place, so that only a head
separated the first from the third, and the
time was Im. 9s. There was £5BB on the
totalisator, of which only £25 was invested
on the winner, and the dividend was £2l
3s.
Takapuna Jubilee Cup Handicap of 150
sovs Second horse to receive 15sovs,
third horse Ssovs. Winner of any handi-
cap of 50sovs after the declaration of
weights to carry a penalty of 51bs extra;
of lOOsovs, 71bs extra. One mile and a-
half.
Mr. D. McKinnon’s blk c Loch Ness, 6st
121 b (G. Reid) 1
Mr. J. Kean’s br c Montrose, 6st 101 b
(Lindsay) 2
Mr. W. Bobbett’s blk h Patchwork, Bst
41b (A. Cook) 3
Leorina (Bst 21b) also ran, and was equal
favourite with Patchwork. Tamora, Capella,
and Torment were scratched. Loch Ness was
the first away when the flag fell, followed by
Patchwork and Montrose, but at the back of
the course Patchwork fell back, and Leorina
ran into third place, and maintained a handy
position for about half a mile, but when on
giiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
the final round the back of the course was
reached she gave up and Loch Ness Avent off
Avith a commanding lead, but Montrose and
Patchwork put in a strong claim at the fin-
ish and a most exciting struggle took place.
The judge awarded the victory to Loch Ness
by a head, Montrose beating Patchwork by
a neck. Time, 2m. 475. There was £B7B on
the totalisator, 130 on the winner, and the
dividend was £6 Is.
Handicap Pony Race of 25sovs. Second
horse to receive ssovs out of stakes. Six
furlongs and a-half.
Mr. A. Collins’ b m Lottery, 6st 71b
(owner) 1
Mr. J. Woods’b m Elena, 6st (Smith) ... 2
Mr. W. B. Lawson’s blk m Grace Darling,
9st 21b (McMiniman) 3
Fifteen others also started, and, as might be
expected, there was a great deal of difficulty
in getting such a large field away in order ;
but after several ineffectual attempts they
were let away in fair order, Little Hilda
going to the front, followed by Orphan and
Belvidere, Grace Darling, the favourite,
holding a good position. The little horses
held well together, and after a splendid con-
test in the straight Lottery just won by a
neck, Grace Darling being a close third.
Time, 1m 31s. There was £792 on the total-
isator, of Avhich only £26 was on the winner,
and the dividend was £27 Bs.
Handicap Steeplechase, of ISOsovs. Second
horse to receive 15sovs, third horse ssovs
out of stakes. About three and a-half
miles.
Recruit (lOst 71b), and Larrikin (9st 71b) also
ran. Orangeman, Parnell, and Hero were
scratched. Nearly every horse starting was
well backed, but Recruit had perhaps the
call in the betting, although Takapau had
again a strong support, and Messenger was
not left without backers. When the flag
dropped Recruit went to the front, and
led over the double hurdles, but here
Takapau shot out, and took the lead
round the flat, with Recruit second,
and Messenger, even at this early stage
showed a disposition to maintain a deter-
mined rear guard. Takapau led up the hill
followed by Recruit and Rossiter, but on
clearing the water jump, Recruit was first,
his rival Takapau being second. At the back
of the flat course Larrikin came into the
front, and led up the hill, followed by Taka-
pau and Recruit, and this order was main-
tained to the water jump, where Larrikin
fell and Recruit took the lead round the flat.
There was not very material alteration in the
next round, Recruit leading over the water,
with Takapau and Rossiter in close com-
panionship. The two leaders joined issue
in the home turn on the flat, and
then ensued one of the most peculiar
exhibitions of jockeyship that has been wit-
nessed for some time. It could be seen that
Johnson, on Tapakau, and Fergus, on Re-
cruit, were devoting their attention to each


llHllllill[IIIIIIIHIll[lillil!j|||||lillllIlillIlj||||||||||||lll|[|||[llllllllllllll|[l!|I||||i|||l|||l!||||||||||||[|||||J||||||j||!||||;|!||;|{||!||||[|]|||{[]
m Mr. W. Sommernlle’s blk li Teksum.
, 9st
S 21b, (Taylor) ‘
1
i Mr. B. Thompson’s ch in Leoriua, 8st 61b,
I , (Carey)
2
1 Mr. R. Burke’s ch m Dolosa, 6st
71b,
| (Manning)
3
iiiiiiii mu
other instead of to their horses ; in fact, it
appeared patent that they were lashing each
other, and suddenly Fergus dropped off Re-
cruit, and the horse also tumbled. Takapau
then came away and won by eight lengths.
Fergus was carried into the stewards’ room,
but he soon lecovered, and he made a bee-
line for the jockey-room, and went for John-
son so violently that the police were called
on to interfere. There were several talks
of protests, but none were entered, and
Takapau was declared the winner. There
was £B6O on the totalisator, of which 230 was
on the winner, and the dividend was £3 7s.
Selling Race of 30sovs. Five furlongs.
Mr. B. Thompson’s b m Capella, 6st 71b
(Priest) 1
Mr. J. Maitland’s br g Blarney, 6st 71b
(Lindsay) 2
Mr. B. Thompson’s br g Octopus, Bst lib,
and 41b over (Carey) 3
Fragrance (Bst 21b), Onslow (7st 41b), and
Lady Lonsdale (6st 71b) also ran. Capella
jumped away when the flag fell, and won
easily by two lengths. The winner was
bought by Mr. J B. Williamson for £4l. The
totalisator dividend was £l3.
Anniversary Handicap of 80sovs. Second
horse to receive lOsovs out of stakes. Win-
ner of the Zealandia Handicap or Taka-
puna Cup to carry a penalty of 51b extra,
or both, 7lbs extra. 6 furlongs.
iiiiiimiimiimiiiiiiiiii
\
Mr. Featiierston, owner of the fine steam
yacht Nautilus, kindly placed his vessel at
the disposal of the Entertainment Commit-
tee, and they resolved to employ it in taking
His Excellency and party to Devonport to
see the races there, then to visit the flagship,
and to follow the Whaleboat Race. At two
o’clock the steamer left the old ferry tee.
Amongst those on board were :—Hon. Sir F.
Whitaker, Hon. Mr. Mitchelson, Hon. Mr.
Hislop, His Worship the Mayor, Messrs.
Devore, Rees George, R. Cameron, J. Mar-
shall, A. S. Russell, J. Coates, and Cap-
tain Anderson. The Nautilus was steered
throughout the day by her owner; and
ticklish navigation it was sometimes, as the
harbour was simply alive with craft of all
kinds. She went alongside the Orlando,
where the Governor and party were,
and waited for a few minutes, as Lords
Onslow and Carrington were watching with
keen interest the race in which the boats of
the men-o’-war were engaged. After this
was concluded they embarked on the Nau-
tilus, and steamed rapidly to the Devonport
Wharf. Here His Worship the Mayor of
Devonport (Mr. M. Niccol) was in waiting,
with carriages to convey the party to the
race-ground. Lord Onslow was accompanied
by Captain Savile and Mr. Meysey-Thomp-
son, while with Admiral Lord Charles Scott
was Flag-lieu '-enant Fitzgerald. All the
party were, of course, in mufti. They were
conducted to seats on the grand stand by Mr.
Mitchelson, who is President of the Taka-
bridle of Takapau. ’ ”
iiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiimi
THE GOVERNOR’S PARTY.
Tamora (7st 81b), Rataplan (6st 121 b), Tor-
ment (6st), and Fairy Queen (6st), also ran.
Dolosa and Leorina were quickest away, and
the pair raced on terras till nearing the
home turn, here Teksum put in his claim,
and an inteiesting struggle down the straight
resulted in a win for Musket’s son. Divi-
dend, £3 2s.
AN OFFICIAL INQUIRY.
| Of course the fracas and complaints in re-
| gard to the riding of Fergus and Johnson in
| the Steeplechase could not be overlooked,
| and the stewards held an inquiry and took
| evidence, the outcome of which was that the
| following letter lias been forwarded to the
| Auckland Racing Club “In the Handicap
I Steeplechase a complaint was laid by Mr. J.
| J. Russell, the owner of Takapau, against
| S. Fergus, the rider of Recruit, for wilful
| interference with the horse; and after evi-
| dence was taken, the following decision was
| given ; —‘ That S. Fergus, the rider of Re-
| emit, be disqualified for three months,
| and one month for striking Johnson, the
| rider of Takapau ; and that Johnson, the rider
| of Takapau, be cautioned for striking Fergus
| with his whip in the race while he held the
puna Jockey Club, and Mr. Niccol, who is
the Vice-president, and shortly after their
arrival, Mr. E. VV. Alison, chairman of
the stewards, and Mr. W. H. Fenton
were introduced to their Excellencies and
Admiral Scott. They then saw the race
for the Takapuna Jubilee Cup, which
was a capital one. Shortly after the party
were invited to the Marquee, where an ex-
cellent luncheon was set out. Time, how-
ever, allowed of only a few toasts being
drunk. His Excellency the Governor asked
those present to drink the toast of “ Pros-
perity to the Takapuna Jockey Club.” The
Hon. Mr. Mitchelson then proposed the
health of His Excellency the Governor,
and Mr. M. Niccol then proposed the
health of Lord Carrington, and Major
George proposed the health of Admiral
Lord Charles Scott. The party were then
driven to the wharf, and" the Nautilus
steamed for the flagship. Arrived there,
they went into the cabin, when Mr. J. Mar-
shall, as president of the Regatta Club, pro-
posed the health of His Excellency the
Governor, Rear-Admiral Lord Charles Scott,
and of Lord Carrington. His Excellency
acknowledged the compliment, and proposed
“ Success to the Regatta Committee.” After
brief stay on board of the flagship the
Nautilus left, and followed the course of the
whaleboat race. When this was concluded,
Lords Onslow and Carrington and Admiral
Scott were landed at the Queen - street
Wharf.


A Jubilee Chick Show, under the auspices
of the Auckland Poultry, Pigeon, Canary,
and Dog Association, was opened on Jan. 29
at the Columbia Rink. The Show was
excellent in respect both to the number of
birds sh'own in all classes and to their
quality. Some fine specimens of poultry
were shown, and in pigeons and canaries
there were first-class exhibits. The officers
were:—-Poultry classes: Judge, Mr. F.
Rogan ('Vellington) ; steward, Mr. C. Phil-
lipps. Pigeons: Judges, Messrs. W. C.
Arthur and J. J. Craig ; steward, Mr. J. F.
Logan. Canaries : Judges, Messrs. G.
Cruickshank and J. E. White; steward,
Mr. E. Haywood. The following is the
prize list :
Poultry. —Black-breasted red game, under
twelve months —Cockerel: Craig and Duane,
Ist and 2nd prizes ; C. L. Wright, very highly
commended. Pullet: Craig and Duane, Ist
and 3rd prizes; F. Holmes, 2nd. Black-
breasted red game, under six months —
Cockerel : Craig and Duane, Ist and 2nd
prizes; J. L. Pattison, 3rd. Pullet: Craig
and Duane, Ist and 3rd prizes; J. L. Patti-
son, 2nd; C. A. Fawcett (two exhibits), very
highly commended. Pile, under twelve
months—Pullet: F. Holmes, Ist and 2nd
prizes. Pile game, under six months —
Cockerel: J Coleman, Ist prize. Pullet: J.
Coleman, Ist and 2nd prizes. Duckwing
game, under six months—Cockerel: Craig
and Duane, Ist prize; W. Rowe, 2nd.
PulletW. Rowe, Ist prize ; W. Hogg, 2nd.
Malay Game, under six months —Pullet;
Craig and Duane, Ist prize. White Dorkings,
under twelye months—Cockerel : T. and F.
8 tain ton, Ist prize. White Dorkings, under
six months —Cockerel and pullet; T. and F.
Stainton, Ist prize. Buff or cinnamon
Cochins, under twelve months—Cockerel;
Colonel Dawson, Ist and 2nd prizes; E. Hay-
wood, 3rd. Pullet: E. Haywood, Ist prize;
Reid Brothers, Motutapu, 2nd and 3rd. Buff
or cinnamon Cochin, under six months—
Cockerel and pullet: Reid Brothers, Ist, 2nd,
and 3rd prizes ; J. Hungerford, very highly
commended. Partridge Cochins, under twelve
months—Cockerel: W. F. Buckland, Ist,
2nd, and 3rd prizes. Pullet; W. I Buckland,
Ist, 2nd and 3rd prizes. Partridge Cochins,
under six months—Cockerel and Pullet : W.
F. Buckland, Ist and 2nd prizes; P. R.
Syers, 3rd prize, and another exhibit very
highly commended. Dark Brahmas, under
twelve months—Cockerel: W. F. Buckland,
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes ; G. Towler, very
highly commended. Pullet: W. F. Buck-
land, Ist and 3rd prizes; G. Towler, 2nd.
Dark Brahmas, under six months —Cockerel
and Pullet: Reid Brothers, Ist and 2nd
prizes;_G. Towler, 3rd; W. F. Buckland,
very highly commended. Light Brahmas,
under twelve months Cockerel; B. H.
lst and 2nd prizes. Pullet: B.
H. Clow, Ist prize. Light Brahmas,
under six months—Cockerel and Pullet :
B. H. Clow, Ist and 2nd prizes; Mrs. G.
JUBILEE CHICK SHOW.
iNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Cave, 3rd, and another exhibit very highly
commended. Black Langshans, under six
months Cockerel and pullet: J. Armi-
tage, Ist prize. Plymouth Rocks, under
twelve months—Cockerel; T. Gresham, Ist
prize. Pullet: Mrs. T. Hyde, Ist prize ; T.
Phillipps, Ist and 2nd prizes. Plymouth
Rocks, under six months—Cockerel and pul-
let : T. Phillipps, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes; E.
Haywood, two exhibits very highly com-
mended. Wyandottes, laced, under twelve
months—Cockerel ; Mrs. T. Hyde, Ist
prize. Pullet: Mrs. T. Hyde, Ist prize; Miss
Elsie Haszard, 2nd; Horace Haszard, 3rd.
Wyandottes, laced, under 12 months —Cock-
erel and Pullet; Audus Raynes, Ist and 2nd
prizes; J. C. Spinley, 3rd. Black Spanish,
under six months—Cockerel and Pullet: J.
Lowe, Ist and 3rd prizes, and another exhibit
very highly commended; P. J. L. Smith,
2nd. Andalusians, under 12 months —Cock-
erel : Dr. Parkinson, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes.
Pullet : W. Emery, Ist prize; Dr. Parkinson,
2nd and 3rd. Andalusians, under six months
—Cockerel and Pullet: Dr. Parkinson, Ist,
2nd, and 3rd prizes. Black Minorcas, under
12 months —cockf;rel : Dr. Parkinson, Ist,
2nd, and 3rd prizes. Pullet : Dr. Parkinson,
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes. Black Minor-
cas, under six months cockerel and
pullet—Dr. Parkinson, Ist prize. Golden-
pencilled Hamburgs, under six months—
Cockerel and Pullet; E. Haywood, Ist and
2nd prizes. Silver-spangled Harnburgs, under
twelve months—Cockerel: F. A. White, Ist
and 3rd prizes; R. Young, 2nd. Pullet: R.
Young, Ist prize; F. A. White, 2nd. Silver-
spangled Harnburgs, under six months —
Cockerel and Pullet: F. A. White, Ist
prize. Golden-spangled Polands, under
twelve months —Cockerels; F. A. White,
Ist prize. Pullet; F. A. White, Ist prize.
Golden-spangled Polands, under six months
■ —Cockerel and Pullet: F. A. White, Ist
prize. Silver-spangled Polands, under twelve
months—Cockerel: F. A. White, Ist prize.
Pullet: F. A. White, Ist and 2nd prize.
Silver-spangled Polands, under six months —
Cockerel and Pullet : F. A. White, Ist
prize. Houdans, under twelve months—Pul-
let: E. Mander, Ist prize; W. Waddel, 2nd.
Houdans, under six months —Cockerel and
Pullet ; G. Taylor, Ist prize ; W. Grey, 2nd ;
W. Coop, 3rd. White Leghorns, under
twelve months —Cockerel: J. Armijfcage, Ist
prize ; H. G. Garlick, 2nd ; A. E. Dewes,
3rd. Pullet: H. G. Garlick, Ist and 2nd
prizes. White Leghorns, under six mcnths
—Cockerel and Pullet ; Henry Wade, Ist
prize; Strong and Son, 2nd ; H. G. Garlick,
3rd; A. G. Baker, W. Grey, and J. Milden-
hall, very highly commended. Brown Leg
horns, under twelve months —Cockerel: W
F. Buckland, Ist prize ; A. E Dewes, 2nd
Pullet ; A. E. Dewes, Ist prize. Brown Leg
horn, under six months —Cockerel and Pul-
let : A. E. Dewes, Ist and 2nd prizes ; W.
F. Buckland, 3rd. Black Javas, under six
months—Cockerel and Pullet : A. E. Dewes,
Ist and 2nd prizes. Black or brown-
breasted red game bantams under twelve


iiiiininiiiiiiniiiiiiiniiinitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiinuHiriiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinuiuiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiip
months—Cockerel: W. Dowling, Ist prize. |
Pullet: C. A. Fawcett, Ist prize. Pile |
or duckwing game bantams, under twelve |
months Cockerel : G. Buchanan, Ist |
and 2nd prizes. Golden Sebright bantams, |
under six months —Cockerel and pullet: G. |
Towler, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes. Silver Se- |
bright bantams, under six months : Cockerel |
and Pullet: Waddel and Bartley, Ist, 2nd |
and 3rd prizes. Bantams, any other variety, |
except game, under twelve months—Cock- |
erel :W. F. Buckland, Ist prizes. Pullet |
W. F. Buckland, Ist and 2nd prizes. Bantams |
any other variety, except game, under six |
months—Cockerel and Pullet: W. F. Buck- |
land, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prize. Bantams, sell- |
ing class, any variety, under six months— |
Cockerel and pullet: B. H. Clow, Ist prize ; |
W F. Buckland, 2nd and 3rd ; P. R. Syers, |
very highly commended. Two pullets : Mrs. |
T. Hyde, Ist and 2nd prizes. W. F. Buck- |
a • jijuc, xou ci/iivi iZiCO. vt , jj . uuuh.* =
land, 3rd. Pekin Ducks, under five months, B
pair :A. Bluck, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes. Pe- |
kin ducks, crested, under six months, pair : |
W. Emery, Ist. Aylesbury ducks, under |
twelve months, pair : Reid Brothers, Ist and |
2nd prizes. Aylesbury ducks, under six |
months, pair : Reid Brothers, Ist. Rouen |
ducks, under six months, pair: Reid |
Brothers, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes. |
Ducks, selling class, any variety, pair : |
A. Bluck, Ist and 3rd prizes ; Reid |
Brothers, 2nd. Bronze turkeys, under six |
months gobbler ; Major Swindley, Ist. |
Pullet : Major Swindley, Ist. One dozen |
hen eggs : Mrs. G, Cave, light Brahma, Ist; |
E. Haywood, buff cochin, 2nd. Best table |
fowl fdead): Mrs. Kemble, Ist and 2nd prize. |
Pigeons, under six months. — Dragoons, |
any colour cock; G. Ford, Ist, and |
another exhibit highly commended. Hen : |
J. Walker, commended. Antwerps, short' |
faced, blue or silver cock; J. Walker, |
2nd; J. J. Knight, 3rd. Hen: J. Walker, |
Ist. Barbs, any colour cock: Wad- §
del and Bartley, Ist and 2nd prizes; E. J. |
Sexton, 2nd. Hen; Waddel and Bartley, |
Ist and 2nd prizes, G. H. Siddle, 3rd. Pou- |
ters, any colour —Cock : J. T. Knight, Ist |
g'ize; and another exhibit commended. |
en : J. T. Knight, Ist prize. Jacobins, red |
or yellow—Cock: G. Towler, Ist and 2nd |
prizes. Hen : J. Walker, Ist prize; and |
another exhibit commended. Nuns, and |
variety—Cock; H. Wilson, Ist prize; C. |
Newton, highly commended. Hen; H. |
Wilson, 2nd prize. Magpies, any variety— |
Cock ; E. Colson, Ist and 3rd prizes. Hen : |
J. Walker, Ist and 2nd prizes. Fan tails, |
English, white —Cock : A. H. Grainger, Ist |
and 2nd prizes. Hen; H. Parkinson, Ist |
prize; A. H. Grainger, commended. Fan- |
tails, Scotch, white —Cock : J. Walker, Ist |
and 2nd prizes. Hen : J. Walker, Ist and |
2nd prizes. Owl, any variety—Cock : T. |
Todd, Ist and 2nd prizes. Hen : T. Todd, Ist |
and 2nd prizes. Tumblers, short-faced, |
almond —Cock: J. Walker, Ist and 2nd =
liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii|iiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiii!iiiiiiiiuiniiiiiiiiiuii
prizes. Hen : H. Wilson, Ist prize. Fea-
ther-legged tumblers —Cock : J. Walker, Ist
prize. Hen ;J. Walker, Ist and 2nd prizes.
Ringdoves :H. A. French, 2nd prize. Sell-
ing class, any breed : G. Ford, Ist prize ; J.
Walker, 2nd and 3rd prizes.
Canaries, under six months.—Norwich,
clear yellow, cock or hen: W. Coe, Ist prize ;
J. Pithketley, 2nd; T. Shewring, 3rd, Nor-
wich yellow, marked or variegated, cock or
hen : T. Shewring, Ist prize ; C. A. Fawcett,
2nd. Norwich, yellow, ticked, cock or hen:
C. A. Fawcett, Ist prize; W. Rosser,2nd.
Norwich, clear buff, cock or hen : C. A. Faw-
cett, Ist prize; W. Rosser, 2nd. Norwich,
buff, cock or hen : C. A. Fawcett, Ist prize;
W. Forgie, 2nd ;W. Rosser, 3rd. Norwich,
buff, marked or variegated, cock or hen : W.
Rosser, Ist prize; T. Shewring, 2nd; C. A.
Fawcett, 3rd. Norwich, dark crested, yellow
or buff, cock or hen; C. A. Fawcett, Ist
prize. Cinnamon, yellow, cock or hen :
W. Sowden, Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes.
Cinnamon, buff, cock or hen : W. Sowden,
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes. Cinnamon, yellow
or buff: W. Forgie, Ist prize; C. A. Fawcett,
2nd. Green canaries, cock or hen: W.
Forgie, Ist prize; W. Sowden, 2nd and 3rd.
Any other variety : W. Forgie, Ist prize; J.
Pithkethley, 2nd. Selling class, any variety,
cock :C. A. Fawcett, Ist prize. Hen :C. A,
Fawcett, Ist prize.
Other Cage Birds. Goldfinch, mule,
cock or hen : G. Ford, Ist prize; W. Rosser,
2nd ; J. Harrison, 3rd, and another exhibit
highly commended. Any other variety of
finch, cock or hen ; W. Forgie, Ist and 2nd
prize; C. A. Fawcett, 3rd. Parrots, any
variety, large ; R. G. Cox, Ist prize.
Champion Prizes. —The following exhibi-
tors gained champion prizes with the birds
which won first prizes in their respective
sections : —Craig and Duane, black-breasted
red game cockerel, under twelve months,
champion in classes Ito 32; Colonel Dawson,
buff or cinnamon cockerel, under twelve
months, champion in classes 42 to 59 ; Mrs.
T. Hyde, laced Wyandotte pullet, under
twelve months, champion in classes 60 to 79,
and in classes 120 to 122 ; F. A. White, silver-
spangled cockerel, champion in classes 84 to
101; E. Mander, Houdan pullet, under
twelve months, champion in classes 102 to
113; Henry Wade, white cockerel, under six
months ; G. Towler, golden Sebright cockerel
and pullet, under six months, champion in
classes 129 to 143; Reid Brothers, pair of
Rouen ducks, under six months; Waddel
and Bartley, barb pigeon, hen, champion in
classes 164 to 176; J. Walker, Scotch fan-
tail, white, hen, champion in classes 177 to
210; W. Coe, Norwich canary, clear yellow;
W. Sowden, cinnamon canary, yellow.
A number of birds were also entered for
exhibition only.


!;iiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii]iiiiiiiiiiij|i[|jiiiijiiiiiiiiifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii]|iiiiii[||||[|||||||||||||||||||iii|i|i|||||||||nj||[|
THEIR ARRIVAL IN AUCKLAND.
The team of cricketers from New South
Wales, whose visit has been eagerly looked
forwmrd to for some time past, arrived from
Sydney on Wednesday forenoon, by the s.s.
Arawata. As soon as the vessel reached
the wharf a number of the leading crick-
eters, including Messrs McKinney, Beale,
Lusk, Cheeseman, Fowke, and others, pro-
ceeded on board and offered the “ Corn-
stalks” a hearty welcome to our shores.
Upon getting their luggage on shore, the
New South Welshmen, in company with a
number of local players, ■were taken to
their quarters at the Governor Browne
Hotel, Hobson-street. The visitors, with
the exception of their captain, Mr. J. Davis,
who suffered greatly from mal-de-mer, ap-
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
THE JUBILEE IN THE SOUTH
Christchurch, Wednesday.
The Government offices, banks, insurance
and lawyers’ offices, and most of the whole-
sale establishments and factories, were
closed to-day in celebration of the Jubilee.
There was no demonstration. The Wes-
leyan Conference to-day decided to send a
telegram to the Mayor of Auckland con-
gratulating the citizens of Auckland on the
Jubilee.
iiiii{iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiuiiiiiui l |i
THE NEW SOUTH WALES CRICKET TEAM
pear to have had a very pleasant passage,
and all speak in high terms of the treatment
they received from the officers on board.
They were greatly pleased with the beau-
tiful scenery of our harbour. The grand
display of bunting, and crowded wharves,
shipping, and ferry boats also appeared
to make an impression upon their minds.
After lunch the New South Wales players
were escorted to the Domain cricket
ground, via the Cemetery bridge, from
which they admired the beautiful scenery,
the large ferns especially taking their fancy.
About a couple of hours’ practice was in-
dulged in, and considering that our visitors
were fresh from a sea voyage, the form
displayed was first-rate.
Dunedin, Wednesday.
To-day was observed as a general holiday,
but. outside the Exhibition, which was
largely attended, there were no special
attractions. The harbour excursions were
largely patronised, and some thousands
visited the waterfalls in Leith Valley. The
weather -was splendid until late in the after-
noon, when it turned somewhat cold.


iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiii
SECOND DAY:
ENORMOUS ATTENDANCES.
The great interest which has been aroused in
regard to the celebration of the Jubilee of
the colony in Auckland was evidenced
in a most unmistakable manner by the
great crowds of holiday-makers which assem-
bled at the North Shore this afternoon
to witness the events of the second day’s
celebration, which consisted of a swimming
carnival at Calliope Dock, Maori canoe races
along the shore, and native war dances at
Takapuna. From long before noon the ferry
steamers were packed with living freight,
and it is estimated that there were over
20,000 spectators congregated along the fore-
shore of Devonport, during the afternoon. At
Takapuna, though Mr. Thomas Porter and
his contingent of Waikato natives were pre-
sent and eager to carry out their promised
dancing, its execution was sadly marred by
the senseless crushing of the crowd, and the
absence of a properly protected enclosure
was very apparent. It was intended that an
address from the Waikatos should be pre-
sented to the Governor by Major Te Wheoro
at Takapuna, but owing to the great crowd-
ing, this pleasing incident had to be omitted
altogether.
THE NATIVE CANOE RACE.
Owing to the great crowd of yachts, cut-
ters, and steamboats, which, during the
afternoon, congregated off' the foreshore in
the vicinity of the dock, it was found im-
practicable to run the Maori events as ori-
ginally intended, and by common consent
the natives themselves agreed to postpone
the war canoe race till next afternoon. Mr.
Thos. Porter had his men ready for the
races for a long time, and having no means
of clearing a course, at last despatched a
small canoe to the middle of the harbour as
a mark boat. Four whakatiwais, all manned
by full crew's of half-naked Maoris, all
decorated with feathered headgear, etc.,
then started on a race, and a stirring scene
was witnessed as the dusky paddlers,
gradually increasing their pace, swayed to
and fro in perfect unison, to the wild
chants of the excited fuglemen in the
centre of each craft. Through a mistake
natural enough under the circumstances, two
only went for the proper mark, but a splendid
race between them took place, and resulted
in the Momoni, manned by the Huntly hapu,
winning by about half a length from the
Pupirikana, whose crew also hailed from
Huntly. The Tarai Puruku, with a crew
of Rangiriri Maoris, and the Ruahori,
manned by Kaipara men, went along the
foreshore towards the dock, and had a good
race to themselves.
THE WAR DANCE.
The Maori w r ar dance was looked forward
to as a feature of the Jubilee celebrations.
At the hour fixed for the dance, four o’clock,
there was a large concourse of people
gathered on the racecourse. The small
JANUARY 30.
| grandstand was crowded with persons eager
| to witness the performance, and even the
| steps opthe stand from top to bottom were
| closely packed. When the Maoris arrived
| on the scene they were taken to the centre
|of the field, inside the racecourse. They
| were, however, soon surrounded by a crowd
I of people, and it was found impossible to
| keep the spectators back, in order that the
| dance might begin. There were only two or
| three policemen present, ana they were
I practically useless in the matter of keep-
| ing back the public. No provision, indeed,
| had been made to preserve a clear space for
| the Maoris. There was no portion of the
| ground fenced or roped off, as might easily,
I of course, have been done. The Maoris
I finding it impossible to dance in the field,
| moved forward to the racecourse proper in
| front of the grandstand. Here again the two
| or three police, aided by a few civilians and
| some of the Maoris, vainly attempted to keep
| back the crowd. The native women number-
II ing about 50, all attired in light flowing gar-
| ments, started one of their dances, and the
| performance was loudly applauded by the
| assembled multitude, but they were soon
| compelled to desist dancing, owing to
| the crowd crushing in upon them. The
| men then attempted to give a war dance,
| but were unable to do so in consequence of
| the people pressing in on them. The natives
| who were to have given the war dance mini-
| bered about 250, and these were all Waikatos.
| It appears that there was some disagreement
| between the Ngapuhis and the Waikatos,
| and the result was that the former did not
| put in an appearance. The dusky warriors
| were gradually forced along the racecourse to-
ll wards the road, until they at last became
| disgusted and left the ground, much to the
I disappointment and annoyance of the spec-
| tators. His Excellency the Governor arrived
| on the ground shortly after four o’clock. He
| was accompanied by his suite, and Admiral
| Lord Charles Scott, Sir John and Lady
| Thurston, and several members of the Recep-
| tion Committee. No special provision had
| been made for the Governor and his party,
| and they had to crush through the crowd on
| the steps of the grandstand in order to reach
| a place where they could get a view. After
| the Maoris gave up their attempt to dance,
| the Rarotongan natives performed one_ of
| their strange dances on a small space which
I they managed to secure just below the stand.
MAORI PROCESSION.
It was intended that as to-day was to
be especially a day for Maori events that a
procession of the natives now quartered at
the North Shore should take place at ten
o’clock, and the Artillery Band was in ’wait-
ing at that hour to march them off on their
arrival at the Queen-street Wharf. It was
not, however, until eleven that the natives
arrived, in charge of Mr. Porter. There were
150 of them, all Waikato natives, the North-
ern natives not taking any part in the pro-
ceedings. They were soon formed in line,


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
and a fine stalwart lot they looked as they
marched along, evidently proud of the dis-
play they made. In the matter of dress
there was no attempt at uniformity, for the
Maori mat-clothed natives marched with
those who were clad in European costumes,
and the colours were very varied indeed. The
procession followed the band in good order,
the greater number marching with shouldered
paddles as if they were armed with rifles. A
large crowd assembled to witness the pi’oces-
sion. The route was through Queen-street to
Grey-street and back to the wharf.
CONGRATULATIONS FROM CHRIST-
CHURCH.
His Worship the Mayor (Mr. J. H. Upton)
received the following telegram from Christ-
church on January 30 “ The Wesleyan
Conference congratulates the citizens of
Auckland on this auspicious day, and rejoices
with them in their celebration of the J übilee
of the colony.” The Mayor has sent the
following reply :—•“ To the Rev. William
Lee, Secretary Wesleyan Conference, Chris-
tchurch. On behalf of citizens of Auck-
land, I return you sincere thanks for your
kind message of congratulation. —J. H.
Upton, Mayor.”
BAND OF HOPE JUBILEE CONCERT.
A Jubilee gathering of the Band of Hope
Union was held on Thursday evening, at St.
James’s Hall. Mr. E. Withy, M.H.R., occu-
pied the chair, and there was a good attend-
ance. The Band of Hope Union children on
the stage made a fine display. A very plea-
sant programme, consisting of songs and re-
citations, was successfully rendered.
THE MAORIS AND THE JUBILEE.
The Minister for Native Affairs, the Hon. E.
Mitchelson, has received the following com-
munication from Major Kemp, which the
latter desired to present to His Excellency
the Governor at Wellington, but which he
has now forwarded to him and the Jubilee
Committee at Auckland :
Wanganui, January 27th, 1890. The Hon. Ed-
ward Mitchelson, Minister for Native Affairs : Sir, —
Salutations to you our Minister for Native Affairs.
This is a statement of ours to you, and do you make
it known to the Governor, Earl Onslow, and to the
committee of the Jubilee of New Zealand at Auck-
land. That is my word with respect to this
celebration. Fifty years are now elapsed since
Queen Victoria sent her mana and her favour to
these two islands, called New Zealand. The proof
of which is the Treaty of Waitangi. “In my
opinion this is a fitting time to confirm the unity of
New Zealand and England under the mana and
favour of Queen Victoria and her chieftainship for
ever and ever.” Sir, —Th s is an urgent word of
mine to you, or rather to you and the Governor :
Do you cablegraph these words above written, and
1 will pay for it, although it may cost ten or twenty
pounds—that is, for those words from the words
“ fitting time” to “ ever and ever,” as quoted.—From
your obedient servant, Meiha Kuepa Rangihi-
winui.
His Excellency has sent the following
reply
Sir,—l have received through my Minister for
Native Affairs your communication to Her Majesty
the Queen, expressing your desire that the union of
New Zealand to Britain, as at present existing, should
be confirmed for ever and ever. I have, at your desire,
conveyed that message to Her Majesty, and have
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiijiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
TONGANS.
also, as yon request, directed that your statement
be made known to the Jubilee Committee at Auck-
land. lam always ready and glad to receive your
communications and addresses at any time that you
intimate 10 me your wish to make them.— Onslow,
Governor.
THE GOVERNOR AND THE RARO-
The natives of Rarotonga, who are at pre-
sent in Auckland on a visit, waited on His
Excellency the Governor at Government
House to-day, at eleven o’clock. There
were present about twelve natives (six women
and six men). These w'cre headed by the
Premier of Rarotonga, Tepou o te Rangi.
His Excellency received the natives in the
drawing-room. Most of the natives sat on
the floor, as is their custom. There were
present with His Excellency Commander
Pelley (H.M.s. Lizard), and Captain Savile
(A.D.C.). The Premier of Rarotonga and
his son were introduced to the Governor by
Mr. H. J. Ellis.
Tepou o te Rangi then read an address
to the Governor, of which the following is a
translation :
To the Bight Hon. His Excellency Lord Onslow,
Governor of New Zealand and representative of
that great Queen Victoria of Great Britain.
Salutations ! I, Tepou o te Rangi, Premier of Raro-
tonga, and part of my people who have come
with me, wish to say a few words. We have merely
come to New Zealand on a visit; but upon our
arrival here we heard of the festivities fo be cele-
brated in honour of the jubilee of this great country
of New Zealand. We are all very much pleased to me. t
you on this festive occasion, as we ourselves are also
children of Great Britain, as that great Queen,
Victoria, has been pleased to grant us her protection
in the year 1888. I would also wish to add, O
Governor, that it will be a long period before we in
Rarotonga will be enabled to celebrate our j übilee.
It is even doubtful whether some of us will see that
time. Nevertheless it is my hope that the jubilee
of Rarotonga 49 years hence will show as much ad-
vance in prosperity and civilisation (in comparison)
as New Zealand has done. I can assure you, O
Governor, of our loyalty to your great Queen Vic-
toria, and our determination to live under her
shelter and protection. That is our wish. In con-
clusion, we wish long life and prosperity to our
great and good Queen Victoria, and also the same
good wishes to yourself, Lord Onslow, your lady
and family. Sufficient.
Mr. A. H. Brown interpreted the address.
The Earl of Onslow replied to the address
as follows: —The Premier and people of
Rarotonga,—Your address is an interesting
event in the celebration of our Jubilee festi-
vities, and your presence among us yesterday
gave additional lustre to the proceedings of
the day. New Zealand, and especially this
part of the colony, has always had a peculiar
interest for the islands of the Pacific, and
has watched with interest the spread of Bri-
tish influence among those Islands. I have
to offer my condolences with you on the sad
loss which your small company has suffered
since you have been here by the death of
young Ngataitautai, and I fervently hope
that the rest of your stay in New Zealand
may be marked only by pleasure and happi-
ness. Enjoying as you do the protection of
Her Majesty Queen Victoria, you must be
aware that you have the protection of one
of the most powerful sovereigns of the


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiniiiiiiiiiiHiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiii
world, and one who has deep sympathy for
all the varied races under her rule. 1 am
flad to learn that your earnest desire is that
Ler Majesty should continue to afford you
that protection.
His Excellency then handed a copy of his re-
ply to thePremierof Rarotonga. Attherequest
of the Premier of Rarotonga, the Governor
withdrew to an adjoining apartment in order
that the natives might make some presents to
him in true Rarotongan fashion. The natives
then brought in the presents, which consisted
of mats made from the breadfruit tree ; mats
made in the old heathen days; a pair of
shoes, etc. The Premier then led the way to
the Governor, the presents being carried by
the women and several of the men. These
gifts were laid at His Excellency’s feet. The
Governor heartily thanked the natives for
the valuable and interesting gifts.
THE SWIMMING CARNIVAL.
This portion of the second day’s Jubilee
events was a most pronounced success, and was
patronised by fully 6000 people. These were
conveyed across the harbour to the wharf at
the Calliope Hock by the ferry steamers, and
by the time the first race started, at noon,
the whole of the spacious enclosure was alive
with people, the caisson, sides, and all the
ledges of the basin to the water’s edge being
literally packed with spectators, who be-
trayed very keen interest in all the contests,
as they were, from the splendid opportunity
offered them by the conformation of the
dock, able to see and follow without trouble
all the events as they were run. All the
officers of the Auckland Swimming Club
worked very hard to have all the arrange-
ments perfected, and the proceedings passed
off without a hitch. Mr. J. E. Cooke acted
as starter with conspicuous success, while
the judges, Major Anderson and Mr. A. M.
Myers, who were ably assisted by the
patron of the club, Mr. John Marshall, gave
satisfaction in all their decisions. The exhi-
bition of swimming throughout was very
creditable, the boys especially showing great
improvement since the last gala. The Raro-
tongan events were very popular. In the
long dive the winner, W. Allen, made a
phenomenal record of 75 yards, but was
greatly exhausted at the finish, and would
have sunk had it not been for the plucky
conduct of Messrs. A. M. Myers and J.
Marshall, who jumped into the water and
hauled him ashore. The Jubilee Champion-
ship was a desperate fight, and was won by
a few feet by H. J. Bailey. It is worthy of
remark that Bailey, as well as last year’s
champion, W. Von Stunner, was trained by
Prof. Pannell, and in addition the following
of his pupils showed the benefit of his experi-
enced coaching by securing prizes during the
day : —P. J. Missen, N. White, A. McLean,
and H. N. Cossar. The races were as fol-
low :
Maiden Race, 100yds.— A large field of
about twenty started, and though they were
despatched in rather an uneven manner a
fast swum race took place, which resulted,
M. Scott. 1; A. 2; P. J. Missen,
3.
Boys Under 12, 50yds.—This race like all
the juvenile events w r as very exciting, and a
close struggle for victory ended, N. White,
1; J. Graham, 2; W. Kenny, 3.
Long Dive. —A good field of seven com-
peted in this event, but though some very
creditable diving was done, the winner, W. J.
Allen, was a good way ahead, his record be-
ing given as the wonderful one of 75yds. He
was much exhausted at the finish. Some of
the other competitors have, we understand,
protested against Allen on the ground of
wrongful entry.
Boys Under 14, Handicap. This race
was over a course of 60yds length, and was
very keenly contested. W. Kenny had a
good lead and looked like winning, but
stopped a few yards off the tap>e and the
others being close up did not gain a place,
the race resulting W. E. Cossar, 1; F. Mc-
Indoe, 2 ; J. Pollock, 3.
Jubilee Championship of New Zealand.
—This was the event of the day; but, al-
though theee was a good number of com-
petitors entered, the reported prowess of
three caused the balance to retire. The dis-
tance was 440yds, and the starters were H.
J. Bailey, A. M. Duthie, and P. Madigan,
and they were got away on even terms. For
a long time it was anyone’s race, all keeping
well together, but towards the finish Bailey
and Huthie drew ahead, and, after a des-
perate race, the former won by about a
couple of feet his time being 7m., 10s. H. J.
Bailey, 1; A. N. Duthie, 2; P. Madigan, 3.
Neat Header. —Eight competitors started,
and some pretty diving was exhibited.
Nicholson’s clean style w'as much admired ;
but McLean was even better, plunging into
the water without the least splash, in a very
graceful style. A. L. McLean, 1; H. Nichol-
son, 2.
Calliope Handicap, 150yds.—A grand
race took place for this event, a field of over
30 starting. The event was gamely con-
tested, and the winner only secured the
judge’s verdict by a couple of yards, while
the second and third men were even closer
together. The scratch division swam excel-
lently, but the limits were too long. The
result was: —F. Hedges, 305., 1; E. Jones,
605., 2; H. Brigham, 405., 3. Time, 2m. 535.
| Rarotongan Diving and Swimming.—
| For the dive five natives started, but
| their records did not, contrary to expecta-
| tion, exceed those of the average of the local
| amateurs. The winner, Tangaia, executed
| a good dive of about 55yds. In the race of
| 150yds five also competed, and the overhand
| style which they used w r as noted as differ-
| ing from the European side stroke. The
| race was w'on rather easily by Kautai, 1;
§ Pora, 2; Meau, 3.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin
Jubilee Handicap, 300yds. Thirteen
faced the starter, and went off well together.
Uuthie, the scratch man, swam in grand
style, but could not catch the leaders, and
after an exciting finish down the home turn
the race resulted : F. J. Taylor, 505., 1; A.
Gold water, 505., 2; H. Nicholson, 155., 3.
Naval Race, All-comers. Six blue-
jackets competed for this event, but the race
was not very exciting, as Murray won rather
easily, while Drake and Hayter, from the
same ship, were neck-and-neck for second.
The race concluded Murray (Orlando), 1;
Drake (Orlando), 2; Hayter (Orlando), 3.
Back Race, 50yds. —This was one of the
best races of the day, and was contested by a
big field. Many showed very pretty style,
and a well fought race was won, after a very
close finish, by L. M. Meyers. Major Ander-
son was sole judge in this event. L. M.
Myers, 55., 1; A. Smith, 10s., 2; J. W.
Gittos, Bs., 3.
Boys’ Race under 13.—This was a handi-
cap of 75yds, and brought out a large field.
The result was :—A. Upton, 10s., 1; H. N.
Cossar, 10s., 2; H. Black, Bs., 3.
Citizens’ Handicap, 200yds.—Fully thirty
competitors started in this race, and a keen
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii
JUBILEE BALL TO
The members of the Northern Club gave a
Jubilee ball in honor of His Excellency
the Governor. The assemblage was a large
and brilliant one. There were present
the Earl of Onslow and suite, Admiral Lord
Charles Scott, Lord Carrington, and the com-
manders and officers of the fleet at present in
Auckland harbour, besides a large number
of prominent citizens. Sir John and Lady
Thurston were also invited. The club was
beautifully decorated with festoons of flowers,
with ferns, foliage, and flags. The decora-
tions were chiefly done by a number of
sailors from the warships, and the thanks
of the members of the club are due to
the officers for the hearty assistance
given in this respect. An adjournment
was made for supper about eleven o’clock.
The tables were laden with all the delicacies
of the season, and were tastefully set off
with flowers, fenis, and pot plants. The
music supplied was excellent. The following
was the programme of dances and music :
Lancers, “Patience ;”Yalse, “ Love’s Golden
Dream valse, “La Murskapolka,
“Who’s That Calling;” valse, “Sweet
Vows;” valse, “Latona;” lancers, “May
Flower;” polka, “ Blush Rose ;” extras, three
valses ; lancers, “ Pepita ;” valse, “ Clarine ;”
Highland schottische, “ Prince Charlie ;”
valse, “Love’s Dreamland;” polka, “Le
Mandarin;” valse, “ Twilight Shadow.”
The ball was opened by the Earl of Onslow
and Mrs. James Russell in a double set, the
other partners in the set being as follows :
Lord Carrington and Mrs. Mitchclson ; Ad-
miral Lord Charles Scott and Mrs. Allan
Taylor; Captain Barlow and Lady Chute ;
Mr. James Russell and Mrs. Ware ; Mr. A.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
competition ensued. Duthie and Nicholson,
of the scratch division, went through their
men well, but could not quite get up, and tied
for third place. The winner Gittos swam
well; E. S. Gittos, 355., 1; A. Smith, 355.,
2; A. N. Duthie, 55., and H. Nicholson,
(10yds), equal, 3.
Naval Race, Officers.— A good race for
this event resulted in a victory for F. Pierce
(Opal); S. H. Skinner (Orlando) 2; J. Arm-
strong, 3.
Among the most interesting and popular
portions of the afternoon’s sports, was the
exhibition of fancy swimming by Professor
Pannell, who has been fittingly named the
“ Water Wizard.” He first indulged in a
long plunge, and then showed some pretty
swimming backwards, and then sculling feet
first, and floating in various positions. A
pretty revolving feat entitled “ The Sun-
flower,” was displayed, and then some rapid
styles of swimming, including the “ porpoise”
stroke. The whole concluded with the Pro-
fessor exhibiting a roll in the water, and then
after being tied hand and foot and cast into
the water, still keeping afloat and making
progress.
THE GOVERNOR.
K. Taylor and Mrs. Tolhurst; Mr. Dennis-
ton and M rs. Denniston ; Mr. Hanmer and
Mrs. Hanmer.
The following is a list of the invitations
which were issued :
LADIES.
Mesdames Armitage, F. Angus; Misses
Anderson.
Mesdames Bewes, S. Browning, Brigham,
Berry, Burton, Bailey, Baker, Blair, Bedling-
ton, Balrason, Butt, Brett. Misses M. Bruce,
Brett, Berry, Brigham, E. Banks, Banks,
Bedlington, Amy Brett, Brett, Brookfield (2),
B. Banks, Bailey, E. Barstow, A. Barstow,
Bruce, Birsill.
Mesdames Cotter, Churton, Cooper, Ching,
Clendon, Lady Chute, Clark, Coates, Cottle,
Rupert Clark. Misses Churton, Carr, Clen-
don, Sissie Coleman, Maggie Coleman, Coates,
Chew, Clayton, Chapman, Clark, Chambers,
Mesdames Dignan, Denniston, A. Devore,
Moss Davis, Misses Dickey, Durrieu, Da-
veney, Devore.
Mrs. W. Earl.
Mesdames Fraser, Ford, Misses Firth (2),
Fenton, A. Fenton.
Mesdames Goodhue, F. Nelson George,
Gover, Angus Gordon, S. Goldstein, Misses
E. Gorrie, M. Gorrie, Gruchy, Gordon,
Isabel Gordon, Gray, Goodall.
Mesdames Macgregor Hay, Hull, Holland,
Haines, Hanmer, Hoeder, Honeyman, Hay;
Misses J. Hay, Holland, A. Holland, Hay,
Houchen, M. Houchen, Ella Harris.
Misses Isaacs (2), Eva Isaacs.
Mrs. Jones; Misses Joseph, Jervis.
Misses Kissling (2), Gertrude Kempthorne,
Keesiug, Kilgour, Nelly Kilgour, Kemp-
thorne, Mabel Kissling.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiMjiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUU
Mrs. Lewis.
Misses E. Lockett, C. Lawford, F. Levin
Mesdames Mahoney, Mac Lean, Mackech-
nie, MacLaughlin, J. B. MacDonald, Mit-
chelson, Murray, S. Morrin, McPhellimy,
Lady Mainwaring, Misses Metcalfe, Ida Mc-
Donald, M. MacDonald, MacDonald, Mc-
Glashan, Murray, MacLaughlin, Moss (2),
MacDonald, Mulgan, J. Mowbray, Morse.
Mrs. N. A. Nathan.
Mrs. Ormond, Misses Isa Outhwaite, Owen,
Kitty Owen.
Mesdames J. Philson, Pierce, Page, Pea-
cock, W. Philson, Payton, Misses Puckey,
Purchas (2), Peacock, Mabel Philips.
Mesdames Rigg, J. Russell, Russell, J.
Reid, Ruck, Misses Roberton, Rees, B. Rees,
Russell, Rewes, Nina Russell, Rookes, N.
Ruck, M. Ruck.
Mesdames Saunders, Stubbs, T. Yiret
Shepherd, Bruce Suttor, F. Sharland, Misses
Sealy, Suttie, Stevenson, Stewart, Forbes
Shepherd, Shotton.
Mesdames A. H. Taylor, W. Thompson,
C. Chambers Taylor, Tennent, Trimnell, H.
Thompson, Thomas, G. Thompson, Tolhurst,
A. K. Taylor, Thomas, Tewsley, Misses M.
K. Taylor, Wright Thomson, Tolhurst, Kerr
Taylor, Katie Taylor, Louisa Taylor, Tilly.
Mrs. Upton, Miss Upton.
Mrs. Yerdin.
Mesdames Williamson, Worsp, Ware,
Reader Wood, Whyte, Webb, E. Waymouth,
Misses Worsp, I. Worsp, Whitaker, Worker,
Webb, Williamson, Wilkie, West.
GENTLEMEN.
Messrs. E. D. Benjamin and C. G. An-
drews, F. Angus, G. Aickin, L Abraham,
J. M. Alexander, Armitage, Anderson.
Messrs. H. Brett, Bewes, W. Bruce, H. L.
Brett, T. G. Brassey, Dr. Bewes, Colonel
Burton, Messrs. J. M. Butt, F. E. Baume,
R. Blair, P. 0. Bridgman, Dr. Bahnson, Mr.
Burton, Professor F. D. Brown, Messrs. W.
Berry, J. Bailey, j un., Baker.
Messrs. J. Logan Campbell, E. H. Clayton,
Clendou, Duncan Clerk, F. Crombie, H.
Campbell, T. Ching, Tewsley, A. Cancel,
M. A. Clark, J. Coates, T. Cotter, J. F.
Churton, A. E. Clarke, Cottle, Gumming,
A. Chamberlin, Cottrell, T. G. Charter,
Chambers.
Messrs Dasent, A. J. Denniston, Moss
Davis, E. T. Dnfaur, W. J. Dtifanr, P. L.
Dignan, Davy.
Messrs. L. Ehrenfried, C. I. Eller.
Dr. Forbes, Messrs. Fenton, R. Fenton.
Mr. A. Gordon, Rev. S. Goldstein, Major
F. N. George, Mr. H. Greenway, Sir G. Grey,
Mr. S. T. George, Mr. Goodhue.
Mr. C. J. Hutchinson, Dr. Honeyman, Mr.
John Hay, Mr. E. Harrow, Dr. Haines,
Messrs. E. W. Hanmer, A. G. Horton, J. F.
Hull, C. A. Harris, jun., J. H. Harrop, J C.
Hanna, Holland, Harrington.
Mr. R. E. Isaacs.
Hon. S. A. Joseph, Mr. Jones, Mr. T.
Jackson.
Messrs. W. H. Kettlewell, H. P. Kissling,
R. Keesing, W. A. Knight, G. King.
Dr. Lewis, Messrs. W. F. Lawry, E. Lewis,
J. W. Lusher, E. Langguth, Dr. Lewis, Mr.
R. Lusk, Mr. R. B. Lusk.
Messrs. F. S. McLean, C. C. McMillan, A.
L. McLean, J. Macfarlane, E. A. Mackech-
nie, John Murray, J. Marshall, E. Mitchel-
son, E. Mahoney, jun., F. A. Menzies, Sir P.
Mainwaring, Mr. W. H. Metcalf, Hon. E.
McLean, Messrs. McLaughlin, Minnett, W.
J. McKellar, T. A. Moresby.
Messrs. N. A. Nathan, S, J. Nathan, A.
H. Nathan, L. D. Nathan, D. B. Nolan, H.
P. Norton.
Messrs. Joseph Owen, E. D. O’Rorke, Dr.
Orpen, Mr. B. Owen.
Messrs. P. A. Philips, T. Peacock, J.
Philson, W. W. Philson, E. W. Payton.
Messrs. John Reid, R. Rose, J. Itussell, J.
B. Russell, L. Rees.
Lieut.-Colonel Shepherd, Dr. A. Scheidel,
Messrs. A. B. Sutter, C. Suttie, J. M. Steven-
son, M. Stubbings, W. Shera, F. Sharland.
Messrs. Thomas, G. A. Thompson, Taylor,
G. E. Tolhurst, A. K. Taylor, H. Thompson,
C. J. Taylor, E. C. M. Thompson, A. Thomp-
son, R. C. Tennent, H. Thompson, H.
Tanks.
Mr. J. H. Upton.
Mr. Von Stunner,
Messrs. W. Weston, T. S. Weston, T. C.
Williamson, Leslie Wilson, Captain Webb,
Captain Worsp, Messrs. J. R. White, R. G.
Wood, J. B. Whyte, W. Ware, H. E.
Whitaker, Sir F. Whitaker, Messrs. Wyn-
yard, Weldon
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiniiiiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiHjiiiiiiiiiin
AUCKLAND RACING CLUB’S JUBILEE MEETING.
The J übilee meeting of the Auckland Racing
Club was held to-day at Ellerslie. Excel-
lent weather prevailed, for though the sun
was hidden by clouds, the result was a
grateful shade and an agreeable tempering of
the heat. The course was in beautiful order ;
notwithstanding the recent dry weather, the
lawn was a picture of colour, the flower-beds
immediately in front of the stand and
bounding the wall being covered in rich
bloom, whilst outside the charming little
summer-house near the luncheon rooms, the
well-laid-out paths and masses of flowers,
completed a beautiful effect. Everywhere
the care of the authorities of the club was
manifest. In the avenue parallel with the
main luncheon room inside the stand, the
eye was pleased by knots of flowers and
foliage, boxes of trailing plants and ever-
greens, and a graceful arch which spanned
the passage.
Early in the afternoon, before the first
race, Lord Onslow, Rear-Admiral Lord Scott,
and Lord Carrington arrived on the course.
At about a quarter to one p.m., the vice-
regal “drag,” a four-in-hand, was seen ap-
proaching, Lord Onslow himself driving,
whilst there were also in the drag, Rear-
Admiral Scott, Lord Carrington, Captain
Savile, Captain Barlow (of the Orlando),
Hon. Mr. Hislop, Mr. E. C. Meysey-Thomp-
son, His Worship the Mayor of Auckland


1
67 — 99 Mr. J. Rae’s hr g Titokowaru, by
1
Dilke —Flora McDonald, aged,
i
9st (Ghent)... 1
|
31 — 49 Mr. J. Maitland’s ch g Parnell,
|
aged, 9st, (Morrigan) ... ... 2
i
31 — 41 Mr. D. Harford’s blk g Black
|
Joe, aged, 9st (McMinamin) ... 3
|
131 —170 Mr. A. Ellingham’s b g Chemist,
1
aged, 13st 41b (Hickey) -
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUJ
(Mr. J. H. Upton), and three other gentle-
men. Almost before the public were aware
of the presence of the vice-regal party, the
“drag” was on the course; and what pro-
mised to be an interesting reception was thus
to a certain extent spoilt. The carriage ap-
proached by way of the racing track until
opposite the grandstand, when the Hon. Mr.
Mitchelson, who is President of the Auck-
land Racing Club, received the party at the
entrance to the lawn, and conducted them to
the grandstand. Sir John Thurston, with
Lady and Miss Thurston, also drove out in
private carriage, and His Excellency was
present on the lawn when the other Gover-
nors arrived. The distinguished visitors,
during their stay, manifested the greatest in-
terest in the racing. After the Hurdle Race,
they proceeded to the stewards’ luncheon
room, where Mr. T. McEwin, aided by a
large staff of assistants, had laid in a most
complete manner an excellent luncheon,
whilst the table was tastefully decorated
with flowers, &c. At the conclusion of the
repast, the Hon. Mr. Mitchelson proposed
the health of “ The Queen,” and this toast
was followed by that of the health of “ Lord
Onslow and the other guests of the vice-
regal party.” His Excellency the Governor
of New Zealand replied, and thanked the
Racing Club for their courtesy. During their
stay, the visitors inspected the totalisator
in the saddling-paddock, and watched the
system of investing, paying out, _&c., and
the working of the machines, which were
explained to them by Mr. Blomfield, the
proprietor. At a quarter-past three p.m. the
vide-regal party, with the exception of Lord
Carrington, left the course, as they were to
proceed to the North Shore. After the
Juvenile Handicap the drag was brought on
to the course proper in front of the lawn, and
as Lord Onslow mounted thebox and drove off
there was a renewal of the enthusiastic cheer-
ing with which they had been received. Sir
John Thurston left with Lord Onslow.
During the journey out to the races and on
the return, the party were cheered all along
the route. In graceful compliment to their
guests, the Club had placed in front of the
Governor’s box at the grand stand the royal
arms flanked by the arms of the houses of
Onslow and Carrington; whilst from the
centre tower of the stand floated the Royal
Standard, and from each of the side towers
the Union Jack. Strings of flags were also
carried on top of the Derby stand.
In the afternoon the stewards held a
meeting, and endorsed the penalty of dis-
qualification for three months imposed upon
S. Fergus on Jan. 29 by the Taka puna
Jockey Club.
The following are the details of the racing,
the numbers before the names of the horses
showing the number of investors on the
totalisators :
Maiden Handicap, of 70sovs, second horse
to receive lOsovs out of stakes. For three-
year-olds and upwards. For all horses that
have not won 50sovs at time of starting.
One mile and a-quarter.
In. Out.
40 — 73 Mr. R. Burke’s ch m Dolosa, 3
yrs, 7st 111 b, by Leolinus—Lure
(Wells) 1
lil[lllllllllllilllllll[lllllllllllllllillllilllllll[llllllillllllllll
51 — 42 Mr. J. C. Booth’s b g Memoran-
dum, syrs, 7st 91b (Katterns)... 2
30— 50 Mr. H. French’s ch h Eruption,
syrs, 7st 101 b (Fletcher) ... 3
16 — 30 Mr. J. Carnegie’s hr m Cartridge,
3yrs, Bst 101 b (Skirving)
9 11 Mr. J. Maitland’s br m Fairy
Queen, 3yrs, 7st 71b (Lindsay)
9 13 Mr. Jas. Lowther’s ch g Rata-
plan, 4yrs, 7st 61b (Smith)
6 9 Mr. A. Joseph’s blk h Barber,
syrs, 7st 41b (Reid) -
12—• 17 Mr. J. Rae’s b m Fragrance,
4yrs, 6st 71b (Cook)
3 8 Mr. J. Hapa’s b g Mararoa, 6yrs,
6st 31b (Creamer)
18— 24 Mr. W. Walter’s b c Ingorina,
3yrs, 6st (Priest)
194—287
There was very little delay at the post,
and at the second attempt Mr. Cutts dipped
the flag to an excellent start. When they
settled into their strides, Dolosa was the first
to show in front, and as they passed the
stand she held half-a-length’s lead of Rata-
plan, Fairy Queen being next, with the
others close handy. As they swept round
the bottom Dolosa increased her advantage
to a length and a-half; but, as they ran up
the back, Rataplan again closed the gap,
and passing the three-quarter mile post,
Fragrance too joined issue, and the trio
raced almost abreast into the cutting, Ingo-
rina and Eruption being their nearest at-
tendants. As they raced across the top,
Dolosa began to draw away again, while Rata-
plan and Fragrance died away, and, sweeping
round the home turn, Eruption shot up into
second place, Memorandum also coming fast
on the outside. Dolosa, however, continued
to hold her advantage, and though Memo-
randum got past Eruption in the last fifty
yards, he could never get on terms with the
Leolinus mare, who won rather easily by a
length and a-half. Memorandum beating
Eruption by half-a-length for second place.
Time, 2m. 14s. Dividends : Inside, £4 7s ;
outside, £3 Bs.
Handicap Hurdle Race of SOsovs. Second
horse to receive Isov. out of stakes. Over
eight flights of hurdles. Two miles.
In. Out.
I 260 359
| When the flag fell, Chemist drew out in ad-
| vance, but they had scarcely gone fifty yards
| before Titokowaru was taken to the front,
| and by the time the cutting was reached he
J had at least a dozen lengths’ lead of Black
| Joe. Titokowaru’s jump at the next obstacle
| was very faulty, but he negotiated the next
j in grand style. From thence out the race
| was simply a procession, for going with a
| beautiful free stride, Titokowaru never gave


In. Out.
90— 74 Mr. N. Dickey’s ch g Recruit, by
Day Dawn —Stella, aged, lOst
91b (Laing)
61 — 81 Mr. J. McHugh’s blk g Messen-
1
ger, aged, lOst 61b (Collins) ...
256 —332 Mr. J. Rae’s b g Orangeman,
2
aged, 12s 41b (Rae) ... ...
85—157 Mr. A. Ellingham’s b g Chemist,
3
aged, 13st 41b (Hickey)
132 —199 Messrs. Russell and Black’s ch g
Takapau, aged, lOst 71b (John-
624 843
*
niiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
his opponents a chance, and he romped in an
easy winner by five lengths in front of Par-
nell, who was about the same distance ahead
of Black Joe, while Chemist, a long way in
the rear, whipped in the field. Time, 3in
595. Dividends : Inside, £3 9s 6d ; outside,
£3 ss.
Juvenile Handicap of 120sovs, second horse
to receive lOsovs, and third horse ssovs out
of the stakes. For two-year-olds. Six
furlongs.
In. Out.
168 —166 Mr. W. Somerville’s br f Mary,
by Nordenfeldt—Frailty, Bst
81b (Taylor) ... 1
61 — 70 Mr. J ohn Lynch’s ch c Leolantis,
by Leolinus —Atlantis, 6st 121 b
(Cook) ... 2
72 —105 Major F. N. George’s ch f Miss
Cole, by King Cole Tenam-
bra, 7st (Reid) 3
36 — 47 Mr. E. James’ brc The Dreamer,
by Somnus—Sweet Alice, 7st
81b (Priest) -
38 — 60 Mr. E. C. Meysey-Thompson’s b
f Souvenir, by Ingomar—Me-
mento, 7st 51b (Lindsay)
64 76 Mr. J. Lowther br c Cambria, by
Nordenfeldt Erycina, 7st
(Manning)
22 39 Mr. James Carnegie’s b c Master
Pat, by King Cole —Eileen Al-
annah, 6st 71b (Skirving)
461 563
After two breaks away, the flag fell to a
straggling start, of which Mary and Miss Cole
had the best, and Souvenir and Leolantis the
worst. Taylor immediately set to work to
make the pace a docker with the favourite,
and as they ran out of the cutting she held
nearly a length’s advantage of Miss Cole, Cam-
bria being close handy next, while the field was
closed in by Souvenir. Across the top
stretch Miss Cole was almost on terms with
Mary, but it was apparently only on suffer-
ance, as Taylor was sitting quite still on the
favourite. As they swept round the turn for
home Reid had to take out the whip to Miss
Cole to keep her in her place, while Leolantis
began to go up, and by the time the Derby
stand was reached he had Miss Cole beaten ;
but though he finished very gamely he could
not reach Mary, wdio won with something in
hand by half a length; Miss Cole was close
handy in third place, and then came Cam-
bria, The Dreamer, Souvenir, and Master
Pat in that order. Time, Irain 17sec. Divi-
dends ; Inside, £2 9s ; outside, £3 Is.
Jubilee Cup of 250sovs. Second horse to
receive 30sovs, and third horse lOsovs out
of the stakes. One mile and a-half.
In. Out.
129—138 Mr. H. Harrison’s br h Raglan, by
Cap-a-pie Tenambra 4yrs.,
7st 101 b (Katterns) 1
33 — 48 Mr. B. Thompson’s ch m Leo-
rina, by Leolinus—Yatteriua 6
yrs., 7st 121 b (Lindsay) ... 2
119—106 Mr. T. Page’s br m Antelope, by
Apremont—Miss Kate 6yrs.,
Bst (Murphy) 3
119—150 Mr. W. Somraerville’s br m
Hilda, by Musket —Ouida, 4
yrs., Bst 91b (Taylor)
lllllllllllllllilillllllillllilllllillllllllllllllllllllillllilllllllllllllllliillililllllllilllilllllllllllliHlllllllllillllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllll
99—114 Mr. W. Bobbett’s blk h Patch-
work, by Piscator—Patch, 4
yrs., 7st 101 b (Cook) ...
28— 42 Mr. C. Beresford’s ch c Fabu-
lous, by Leolinus —Atlantis, 3
yrs., 6st 101 b (Smith)
61— 47 Mr. J. Keau’s b c Montrose, by
Ingomar—Dundee’s Katie, 3
yrs., 6st 71b (Priest)
488 645
After two breaks away the flag fell to a
beautiful start. Hilda and Patchwork were
the first to show in front, but Antelope soon
joined them, and at the top turn there was
little to choose between the trio, while
Montrose was lying close handy. Coming
past the stand, Hilda held half a
length’s advantage of Montrose, Patch-
work, Antelope, Fabulous, Leorina, and
Raglan following in the order mentioned.
By the time the bottom turn was reached
Hilda had fallen back, and her place was
taken by Antelope, who was barely a neck
ahead of Montrose, Patchwork and Leorina
being next. Racing round the bottom turn
Montrose got his head in front, but wdien
they reached the far corner Antelope was
again on terms, and the two leaders began to
make the pace very fast. W hen the cutting
was gained Antelope was half a length in
front of Montrose ; and here Patchwork and
Raglan set out to tread their way to the
leading division. Antelope held her ad-
vantage across the top stretch, and she was
first to reach the turn for home, but at this
point Raglan came like a shot from a gun,
and dashing to the front with a run which
could not be denied, he had established a
two lengths’ lead in his favour before the
Derby stand was reached, where Leorina
passed Antelope, but though the daughter of
Leolinus struggled gamely on, she never had a
show with Raglan, who romped in a winner
by two lengths, Leorina beating Antelope
by a length and a-half for second place;
then followed Patchwork, Fabulous, and
Montrose. Time, 2m. 425. Dividends: In-
side, £4 2s ; outside, £4 4s.
Handicap Steeplechase, of 150sovs; se-
cond horse to receive 20sovs, and third
horse lOsovs out of the Stakes. About
three miles and a-half.
When the flag was lowered Takapau and
Recruit were first aw'ay, with Chemist next,
Orangeman fourth, and Messengerlast. In this
order they negotiated the gorse fence, which
Takapau jumped in a very slovenly manner.
As the horses came in sight again from behind
the trees the colours of Takapau were seen
in front, and he cleared the post and rail


llilllllllllllllillllllillllllIllllillllllll1llllllllllllllllillllillllHIIIII1lllllil4l1IIIIU11ll|llll!
fence two lengths in front of Recruit, Orange-
man being third, and Messenger fourth, ten
lengths away. Here Chemist baulked, and
took no further part in the race. As they
came down the hill Takapan was a length in
front of Recruit, with Orangeman eight
lengths behind, the same distance separating
him in his turn from Messenger. At the sod
wall Recruit drew out two lengths in front of
Takapau, Orangeman being still third, and
thus early in the apparently show-
ing signs of distress, w’hile Messenger, al-
though a long way in the rear, was going
kindly and well. There was no alteration in the
places as the horses crossed the water jump
and stone w T all, and when they came
in sight again from behind the trees
situate at the old water jump, Recruit,
running very strongly, had still a decided ad-
vantage of Takapau and Orangeman, and
racing up the back, he begun to draw still
further away. Approaching the hill the
horses maintained the places named, but
when they shot out from behind the planta-
tion Orangeman was seen to have improved
his position somewhat, and, coming down
the hill, he deprived Takapau of second
place, and, as they negotiated the stone wall,
he was scarcely three lengths behind the
leader. On the flat, however, Recruit again
began to draw away, and he held ten
lengths advantage of Orangeman when the
sod wall was reached, and the double
was crossed in the same order. As they
raced to the stone wall, Messenger ran into
third place, and making up his ground in
splendid style was on terms with Orangeman
when the three-quarter-mile post was reached.
Racing up the hill Recruit still held a long
lead of Messenger, Orangeman being next,
with Takapau fourth. The latter ran off at
the top of the hill, where Recruit, was ten
lengths in front of Messenger, and coming
down the hill, his name was on almost every-
one’s lips, and his victory was loudly pro-
claimed, but approaching the stone wall at
the top of the straight, Messenger had de-
creased the gap considerably, and scarcely
five lengths separated him from the leader.
By dint of vigorous riding on the part
of Collins, Messenger still further im-
proved his position, and when the
home turn was reached he was barely two
lengths to the bad. Here Laing surveyed
the position, and sitting down on Recruit he
began to ride in real earnest. At the last
hurdle scarcely a length separated the twain,
and the excitement grew intense as the horses
rose almost together to the obstacle. From
thence home a desperate struggle ensued for
supremacy. Messenger answered gallantly
at first to'the repeated calls of Collins, but
in the last few strides he ran a bit unkindly,
and swerving somewhat, Recruit dashed past
the post, all out, a winner by half a length.
Orangeman, although not placed by the
judge, was third. Time, Bm. 565. _ Divi-
dends : Inside, £6 4s 6d ; outside, £lO ss.
Flying Handicap of lOOsovs. Second horse
to receive lOsovs out of stakes. Six fur-
longs.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiinni
In. Out,
111 — 76 Mr. H. Harrison's br h Raglan,
4yrs, by Cap-a-pie—Tenambra,
Bst (Katterns) ... 1
78 — 56 Mr. T. Page’s br in Antelope,
6yrs, by Apremont Miss
Nate, Bst 121 b (Murphy) ... 2
24 31 Mr. D. McKinnon’s blk c Loch
Ness, 3yrs, by Ingomar—Alba-
-106—116 Mr. W. Somerville’s blk h Tek-
sum, 4yrs, by Musket —Alba-
tross 9st •
29 — 25 Mr. W. Bobbett’s br h Patch-
work, 3yrs, by Piscator —Patch,
Bst 61b -
28— 22 Mr. J. Carnegie’s br m Cartridge,
3yrs, by Musket —Rosalie, 7st
71b -
40— 44 Mr. Milieu’s b g Tupaki, aged,
by Anteros —Ratafia, 7st 71b ...
20— 14 Mr. R. Burke’s ch f Dolosa, 3yrs,
by Leolinus —Lure, 7st 41b ... -
436 384
Mr. Cutts slipped the field to a pretty fair
start, of which Tupaki had slightly the best.
Tupaki led into the cutting, followed by
Patchwork and Teksura, while Dolosa
whipped in the field. As they raced across
the top the field closed up into a compact
bunch, and Tupaki was the first into the
straight, when Raglan ran to the front, and
Tupaki fell away, his place being taken by
Antelope. The daughter of Apremont was
within a length of the leader as they came to
the lawn rails, but Raglan always held her
safe, and ran home a winner by a length.
Loch Ness being about the same distance be-
hind in third place, Patchwork was fourth.
Time, Im. 19s. Dividends: Inside, £3 15s
6d ; outside, £4 10s fid.
Selling Handicap of SOsovs. The winner
to be sold immediately after the race.
Seven furlongs.
| In. Out.
| 81—101 Mr. J. Rae’s ch m Prudence, by
; Danebury—Discretion, 4yrs, Bst
(Dixon) ... 1
| 79—H7 Mr. Maitland’s br g Blarney,
aged, 7st 101 b (Lindsay) ... 2
| 69 94 Mr. H. J. Coutts’ blk g Holly,
aged 7st 51b (Fletcher) ■
| 72 — 89 Mr. J. Wilson’s br g Premier,
aged, 6st (S. Cook) •
| 13— 33 Mr. Henry Whity’s b g The
Carter, aged, 6st (Johnson) ... -
| 50 — 72 Mr. N. Dickey’s g Try Fluke,
| aged, 6st (Manning) *
| 364 506
| A mistake happened in regard to this race.
| The horses lined up at the six furlongs post,
| and Mr. Cutts started them from that point,
| Blarney finishing first. The stewards had no
| alternative but to send the horses back, and
| the race was then run from the seven fur-
| longs post, Prudence winning by half a
| length. Dividends : Inside, £4 6s 6d; out-
| side, £4 10s. A number of persons who had
| supported Prudence threw away their total-
-11 isator tickets when Blarney ran in first, not
1 knowing


Illlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllliillll
INTERREDVINOIAL
A very fair attendance of the cricket-loving
public patronised the Domain to-day to
witness the commencement of the first
intercolonial match between teams from
Auckland and New South Wales. The
weather in the early part of the morning was
dull and gave promise of rain, but fortunately
for the visitors and the benefit of those who
-have looked forward with considerable in-
terest to the meeting of these teams the
threatened rain did not come, and the at-
mospheric surroundings were all that could
be desired, a nice light cool breeze tempering
the rays of old Sol. A first-class wicket was
provided for the occasion, and the members
of the visiting team had no cause for complaint
in this respect, but it did not wear so well as
anticipated, for after the Auckland had been
at the wickets for a few overs, it was easily
seen that the batsmen would be troubled
m ith a good many bumpy ones. The greatest
interest was taken in the proceedings by
those present, and every bit of work
with the bat or in the fielding, received good
recognition. Very attractive batting form
was shown by most of the ISI ew South Wales
eleven, the hitting of Youill, Cottam and
Robinson being a treat to see. McClinehy,
Davis and Cowper displayed cricket of the
skilful and patient order, and all gave the
bowlers a great deal of trouble. Although
a few chances were missed in the field,
the efforts of a majority of the Auck-
land were very brilliant, the wicket-keepin»
of Fowke being very expert and effective, and
as good as seen in any match throughout Au-
stralasia. Hawkins was the most successful
trundler tor the Auckland, but most credit
is due to Rees, who bowled all through, and
secured the most wickets, and had all the
chances that were given been taken, he would
have come out with an excellent average.
The visitors are of opinion that he is one of
the best bowlers they have met, and with a
little coaching would develop into an Au-
stralian eleven man. The Auckland men
started very inauspiciously, four of their best
batsmen being dismissed when only 24 had
been totalled.
THE PLAY.
Play commenced at half-past eleven. Mr.
Davis won the toss from Kissling, and elected
to bat. The Auckland team was placed as
follows Kissling, captain, third man, and
Tong-field; Rees, bowler and slip; Fowke,
wickets ; Lusk, slip and bowler ; Kelly, long-
off and long-leg; Neill, mid-on; Yates,
short-leg; Gardner, long-on and cover-point;
Lynch, cover-point and long-on ; Hawkins,
pointStemson, long-field ; MacCormick
and S. Davis, umpires. Robinson and Youill
appeared first for New South Wales. Between
two and three hundred were on the ground
at the start. As Robinson and Youill ap-
peared they were received with a round
of applause. Robinson took strike to Rees
from the Newmarket end. Off Rees’ third
Robinson hit to mid-on, and scored 2.
Lusk trundled from the Hospital end. Youill
hit his first to leg for one. Rees bowled a
maiden to Youill, a bye being scored off the
iiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii]iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
CRICKET MATCH.
last ball. Youill hit Lusk’s first to leg for 3,
while Robinson hit him to long on for 2, and
followed up by hitting the last for 3 to square
leg. Robinson drove Rees to long on for 1,
Neill mulling the ball. Youill scored 1 by
an uppish stroke of the last ball past
third man. Youill scored. Robinson got a
pretty forward cut off Lusk’s first for 2.
Youill cut Rees first for 1. Robinson placed
Reed hard to extra mid-off, and Youill not
responding to his call, he was badly run
out. Telegraph: 1 —lO —lB. McClinehy
filled the vacant crease. Youill drove Lusk
for 1 and followed up by cutting Rees for 3.
Youill lifted Lusk out of the ground for 3.
McClinehy stepped out to Lusk and broke
his duck by hitting him for 1; and scored Ito
leg off Rees. Youill by a forward, stroke for
3 off Rees brought 30 up. McClinehy then
gave Kelly an easy chance off Rees, which the
fielder refused. Stemson replaced Lusk at
the Hospital end. McClinehy drove Stem-
son's fourth along the carpet for 2, and
Youill lifted Rees to square-leg for 3. Stem-
son bowled two maidens in succession. Rees
gave McClinehy a full-pitcher, which he drove
for 3. Youill lifted Rees to deep field, where
Hawkins make an attempt to catch with his
left hand and mulled, the result 2 being scored.
McClinehy obtained 2 for a drive off Stemson.
McClinehy was applauded for a pretty cut for
2 off Stemson, Youill drove Rees for 1 and
scored 1 by a fluky hit to leg, and followed
up by driving Rees in the next over for 1.
Neill relieved Stemson, and Youill drove his
fourth ball for 2, bringing 50 up, and in the
next over repeated the dose by a pretty
drive, and then scored 2 by a square-leg hit.
A very high hit to square-leg brought 2 to
Youill, and his partner added 3 more to the
score for a nice hit to leg, bringing 60 in
sight. The next ball from N eill was lifted
high out to the long-field by Youill, and
Stemson was given a chance of bringing off
a well-judged catch. 60—2—33 was signalled
as Cottam appeared, and the newcomer safely
negotiated a very puzzling maiden over from
Rees. A single was obtained by each bats-
man in Neill’s next over. Cottam appeared
to be much troubled by the deliveries
of the left-hander. Yates was conspicuous
for good fielding at short-leg. Mainly through
the aggressive tactics of McClinehy the rats
of scoring increased, and 70 was soon hoisted.
Kelly now relieved Neill at the Hospital
end, and started with a no ball. Cottam
opened his shoulders, and lifted the new
bowler hard to long-field, obtaining 3 for
the stroke. Both batsmen were scoring pretty
rapidly, and 80 was brought to view. Cottam
had a very narrow escape of being run out,
but his exceptional pace just pulled him
through. Rees, who had been bowling since
the start, now secured his first wicket,
Cottam being the victim : 85 —3—ll. Clarke
was next, and his partner welcomed him by
driving Kelly for a single. Clarke opened
his account by lifting Rees high to mid-off,
and a single to McClinehy for a skilful on
stroke, brought 90 on the board. This bats-
man continued to do most of the scoring, and


Second Day s Celebrations. yg
IlllllllllllllllllllllllllillUllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllipilllllllllllllllllll^
at half-past one the usual adjournment was
made for luncheon, the score standing at 93,
for three wickets, McClinchy not out.
After lunch McClinchy and Clarke took up
their places at the wicket, Clarke taking
the bowling from Rees, and snicked the
third to leg for 1. Kelly resumed the bowl-
ing at the Hospital end, and Clarke brought
100 up by hitting him to leg for 4. The next
ball Kelly had his revenge, by getting Clarke
caught by Gardner at point. Telegraph;
100—4—8. Cowper filled the vacant crease,
and contented, himself by playing the re-
maining balls of the over. Off Rees’ second
ball McClinchy was smartly caught by
Fowke. Telegraph ; 100—5—34. Joe Davis,
the captain, took McClinchy’s place, and
was applauded as he appeared at the wicket.
Off Kelly’s first ball of the next over
Cowper scored by a pretty cut, and
then Davis scored 2 by a square-leg hit.
Davis hit Kelly nicely to leg for one, and
then Cowper cut the same bowler for a simi-
lar number. Rees bowled three maidens in
succession, and Kelly sent down his second,
and then Rees trundled his fourth and fifth
maidens. Davis broke the monotony by hit-
ting Kelly to leg for one, and Cowper helped
the score along by driving the same bowler to
the off for 2. Davis spoilt Rees’ maiden by
hitting him to leg for two. Davis lifted Kelly
to long-held for one, and Cowper scored two
off the same bowler by an off-drive. Davis
snicked Rees to leg for 2. Lusk relieved
Kelly at the Hospital end, and off his second
Cowper stole 1, and Davis lifted the fourth
to leg for 2. The 110 was quickly followed
by the 120. Davis got another three for
one of his characteristic leg hits, and his
partner added a single for a nice stroke to the
on side, and followed it up by cutting Rees
very prettily for a brace. When the total
was at 128 Davis got Lusk at short slip a
chance of securing a good catch off Rees,
but the Gordon man failed to hold it, and the
batsman showed his appreciation of the let
off by hitting the next ball to leg for three,
bringing 131 in sight. A neat back cut by
Cowper gained him a couple. Kelly at this
j uncture showed some smart bits of fielding at
mid-off. Davis made a couple of uppish strikes
to the off-side, but none of the fieldsmen were
in the proper position, and runs were scored,
140 having to be put up, and Hawkins re-
lieved Lusk, Davis hitting the second ball
for a triplet. The rate of scoring did not de-
crease, and soon got to 149, when Davis lifted
a soft one from Hawkins to square-leg where
Lynch was in waiting, and the genial skipper
had to retire for a well earned 32. 149—6
32 was the record as Newell filled the hiatus,
but a smart catch behind the wickets dis-
missed him before he could score, and the first
duck’s egg of the team had to be recorded.
Callaway appeared at the vacant crease, and
drove Rees to long-off for 3, and off Hawkins’
first obtained 3 by a pretty drive. Hawkins
mulled a drive from Cowper, and I resulted.
Cowper got 1 by a nice drive off Rees, Lynch
fielding well, and Callaway drove the left-
hander for 1, and afterwards got a like num-
ber by a leg hit off Hawkins. Off Hawkins’
next, Cowper was grandly caught at slip by
Rees with his left hand. Telegraph : 159—8
—lB. J. Shepherd took the Carlton player’s
place. Callaway obtained 2 by a pretty leg
hit off Rees. Shepherd broke his duck by a
nice leg hit for 1, and Callaway drove
Hawkins for 1, after which Shepherd was
nearly run out through the Moss vale man
refusing to respond to his partner’s call.
Off the first of Rees’ next Callaway got a
single by a pretty off drive, and repeated the
dose off Hawkins. He then opened his
shoulders to Rees, but was grandly caught in
the long field by Gardiner. Telegraph,
165 —9 —13 Josephs stepped into the vacant
wicket, and Shepherd scored two by a leg hit
off the Gordon man, and cut the same bowler
for a single. Josephs broke the ice by a llukey
hit to leg, getting a single for the stroke, and
then skied one from Hawkins to leg, where
Yates safely negotiated the catch, and the
New South Wales innings closed for 169.
After the wicket was rolled, New South
Wades took the field, and were soon followed
by Yates and Neill, the pioneers of the Auck-
land. Callaway started bowling from the
Brewery end to Neill, and sent down a
maiden. Newell took the ball at the Hospi-
tal end, and off his third Yates got 3 by a
nice cut, and off the last ball of the over
Neill was smartly caught by Davis at point.
Telegraph, 3—l—o. Lusk filled the vacancy,
and Callaway sent down a maiden to him.
Yates from an overthrow obtained 3, and
then Lusk was clean bowled by a beauty
from Newell. Telegraph, 72 —0. Lynch
appeared in place of Lusk, and was bowled
first ball by the Sydney Club man. Tele-
graph. 7 —3—o. Kissling filled the crease
left by the United player, and hit
hie well’s last ball for 3. Kissling cut
Callaway for a single, and Callaway
bowled a maiden to Yates, and hewed
followed suit to Kissling, and Calla-
way bowled another maiden to Yates,
while hewed sent down his second in suc-
cession to the Gordon man. The batsmen
were now playing very carefully, the bowling
appearing too good to score off, and the play
became rather monotonous until Kissling
broke the ice by scoring one by a leg-hit off
Newell. Kissling obtained a single by an
off drive from Callaway, Cottam fielding
rather loosely. Yates cut Callaway for 1,
while the Gordon skipper played the re-
mainder of the over carefully, and maidens
again became common. Kissling obtained I
in the slips off Callaway, and took another
maiden from Newell. Yates lifted Newell
to long-held for 1, Cowper fielding smartly
Kissling drove Newell to the off, and Cottam
mulling badly two resulted, and then Yates
drove Callaway in his next for a single.
Telegraph : 20. Yates opened his shoulders
to Newell, and got three by a nice off hit;
then the skipper obtained one by a leg stroke.
In Callaway’s next over Kissling was neatly
taken at slip by N ewell. Telegraph 24—4—10.
Kissling was cheered on returning to the
pavilion, having played well for his runs.
“ Our Johnny” took the vacant crease, and
negotiated the remainder of the over in
safety. In Newell’s next over Yates received
applause for a hne off drive for five. Yates
now appeared more confident, and brought
30 up by a drive off the Carlton bowler,
and Fowke obtained a couple by a
leg stroke. Yates next hit Newell for
two, and followed up by a drive for one.
Fowke earned applause for a pretty drive for


New South Wales.— First Innings.
H. Robinson, run out
10
G. Youill, c Stemson, b Neill
33
W. A. McClinchy, c Fowke, b Rees
34
J. Cottam, b Rees
11
A. Clark, c Gardiner, b Kelly
8
G. Cowper, c Rees, b Hawkins
18
J. Davis, c Lynch, b Hawkins
32
A. Newell, c Fowke, b Rees
0
S. Callaway, c Gardiner, b Rees
13
J. Shepherd, not out
2
J. Josephs, c Yates, b Hawkins
1
Extras
7
Total
169
illlllilllllllllllllll!llllll!lllllllllll!lllillllllllllllilIllEIIIIIIIIltl!lllllll!llllltllllillllllllllllIlllllllllll|j|lllllilllllllltlll]lllllll!lllll
three to the on, and then cut Callaway for a
brace. The wicket now appeared to cut up a
bit, Callaway’s bowling bumping a good deal,
one ball getting up a couple of feet over
Fowke’s bead. Yates got two by a clean
drive off Newell owing to Cowper’s slow
return. Owing to the light getting very bad
the umpires decided to draw the stumps at
a quarter to six, and appended are the
scores: —
iiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii{iiiiiiiiiiiimii!iiiiiiiiiiiii
llllllllllllllll|j||llllltlllllllllllllIlllllllllIlilj|||||||IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIjlII|llj||l|||||||!|]|||||[|||||||||[||||[||||||||]H||||l||||||]|
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Overs. M’dns. Runs. Wkts.
i Rees ... 45 15 72 4
| Lusk ... 11 1 28 0
I Stemson ... 6 3 7 0
| Neill 5 0 17 I
| Kelly ... 15 4 27 1
Hawkins ... 8 2 11 3
£ Kelly bowled 1 no ball.
Auckland. —First Innings.
I Yates, not out 25
I Neil, c Davis, b Neweil 0
I Lusk, bNewell 0
| Lyncb, b Newell 0
| Kissling, c and b Newell 10
| Fowke, not out 7
Total for 4 wickets 42
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Overs. M’dns. Runs. Wkts.
S. Callaway 18 9 12 1
Newell ... 17 7 30 3


Third Day s Celebrations . 8i
llllillllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllM
THIRD DAY:
JANUARY 31.
Notwithstanding the plethora of sports and
other festivities which have been provided
during the past couple of days, the appre-
ciation of the public on the third day showed
no signs of diminution, and the rowing
regatta, Maori canoe races, and war dance,
attracted fully 8000 people to Devonport
during the afternoon, while great numbers
also watched the grand yachting contest which
took place for the splendid trophies presented
by the Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralia. With the exception of the rowing
events, all* the day’s proceedings were
carried out without a hitch. The weather
was bright and cool, and the trip across
the water exceedingly pleasant.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiinNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiliuiiiiiiiuiiin
THE MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION’S TROPHIES.
The special boat race for the valuable
trophies presented by the Mutual Life
Assocation of Australasia, was held in
the Auckland harbour. The race was run
under the supervision of the Auckland Re-
gatta Committee, and in accordance with
the regatta rules. Mr. J. F. Haultain was
starter ; Mr. J. B. Graham, judge ; Mr. D.
H. Ross, timekeeper ; Messrs. J. B. Graham,
R. S. Reynolds, and F*. Hodgson, handi-
cappers. The master of the ship Canter-
bury, Captain McMillan, kindly permitted
the use of his vessel for signalling pur-
poses. The race, which was open to
all sailing vessels from three to fifteen
tons, attracted very great attention, and
the sight as the fleet started off Queen-
street Wharf and swept down the harbour
towards the North Head under full sail was
very pretty. Much interest was felt in the
result of the contest, and the boats in their
progress were watched by thousands of
spectators on shore, and were also accom-
panied for some distance by other craft, one
cutter, the Gannet, which was entered but
could not compete (owing to the fact that her
tonnage was beyond the limit), travelling
the whole of the course. However, by the
time the competing vessels had passed the
hulk Clara Hargreaves the Spray and
Matangi had a decided lead, and from this
out these two vessels alternately held the
E render position, the Matangi eventually
nishing first, though the Spray won the
race through handicap allowance
The details of the event are as follow :
Special Handicap Race, for the Jubilee |
trophies presented by the Mutual Life As- |
sociation of Australasia. Sailed for by |
vessels of three tons and up to but not ex- |
ceeding fifteen tons. First prize, trophy |
valued at £18; second prize, trophy valued |
at £l2, Course : From Queen-street Wharf |
round black and red striped buoy (first |
buoy round North Head), thence round |
hulk Clara Hargreaves, off Judge’s Bay ; |
thence round mark boat off Sugar Works, |
Chelsea. Twice round, finishing at Queen- |
street Wharf, I
Spray, yacht, 7 tons, Gibbs, 6h. 21m. 125.,
allowed 6|m. I
Matangi, yacht, 13 tons, Wilson and Wise-
man, 6h. 19m. 35., scratch 2
Henry, cutter, 14 tons, J. Hodgson, 6h.
32m. 515., allowed 5m 3
The other starters were : —lsca, 3 tons, W,
R. Wilson ; Maia, 3 4-sth tons, W. and D.
MacCormick ; Mapu, 5£ tons, Waymouth and
Son ; Tawera, 6| tons, Stone and Carlaw;
Sybil, 3J tons, Fairs and Wardell; Tangaroa,
34 tons, T. Kilfoyle; Doris, 3 tons, G. R.
Webb ; Italy, G. P. Burton; Maritana, 12
tons, W. Vereker-Bindon; Manola, 3 tons,
W. Holder ; Mignonette, J. Gallagher; May,
6J tons, D. Holland; Caprera, 8 tons, J.
Patoni; Malvina, 3J tons, J. T. Munro,
Marsden Point; Christina, 8 tons, F. Wil-
liams ; Laurina, 5 tons, F. Williams ; May, 4
tons, F. Williams; Venice,3tons, J. Lomey;
Malua, 6 tons, J. Carlaw; Juvarnia, 64 tons,
J. Keys, Whangarei; May Queen, Johnson,
and a few other small craft. The Transit,
Awatea, Ngaira, Matea, Victory, Koroa, and
Matiki, which were amongst those entered,
did not compete. At ten minutes to three,
Mr. Haultain sent the boats away to a good
start, there being at the time a fresh
S. W. breeze, and splendid weather for yacht-
ing. The Spray and Mapu, the cutter
Henry, and the fishing boat May were
amongst the first division as the vessels
passed the Railway Wharf in a cluster, the
Matangi being to leeward, and the Tawera
in the rear. At the North Head, the
Spray, which was carrying a balloon jib and
mainsail, but no topsail, was leading, and
she was first to round the Heads, the Mapu
being second, but the latter unfortunately
lost her jib halyards, and had to give up
much of her advantage of place, and subse-
quently her gaff-topsail halyards were carried
away. The Spray led past the lighthouse
after having come from the Channel, and
here the Matangi was second, with the
Tawera, Henry, Christina, and Mapu next in
that order, the others in single file, close
together, and still behind the North Head.
Off Orakei Point, the Spray and Matangi
tacked almost at the same moment, and


8 2 New Zealand's Jubilee, 1840-1890.
liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiipiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiniiii^
stood in towards the hulk Clara Hargreaves, |
and it was then seen that the Spray had |
slightly increased her lead. The hulk was |
passed in the following order |
H. m. s.
3 46 50 |
Spray 3 43 45
Matangi 3 46 50
Tawera 3 51 0
Then followed the Christina, Maritana, |
Mapu, and Henry, in the order in which |
they are mentioned. There was not much |
alteration in the places of the leading vessels |
as they ran up the harbour, except that the |
Maritana fell from fifth place, whilst the |
Spray gained a still further advantage of the |
Matangi, and when Captain Gibbs’ yacht |
passed tbe boat off the sugar works, she had |
added thirty seconds’ lead to that which she |
had held at the Clara Hargreaves. On the |
run down, however, the Matangi, under full |
sail, rapidly overhauled her opponent, and |
was alongside the Spray as the boats sailed |
past the Orlando. The Matangi was the first |
to reach the Victoria Wharf, where the |
approximate order was : 1
H. M. s. |
Matangi ... 4 44 30
... ... T T 1
Spray. ... ... ... 4 45 0 s
Tawera ... 4 52 0
Henry 4 53 0
Christina 4 53 50
The Mapu, Maritana, and Juvarnia fob |
lowed, each separated by about a minute’s |
distance. The lead gained by the Ma- 1
tangi was kept round the buoy in the Rangi- |
toto Channel, but coming up the harbour |
iiiHiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiii
the Spray once more improved her position,
and t)oth yachts, which were sailed with
great skill, were abreast off Orakei. Passing
the Clara Hargreaves, the Spray was ahead
of the Matangi by about seven seconds, the
next in order, some distance away, being the
Tawera, Henry, Christina, Mapu, Maritana,
Juvarnia, and'Laurina. It was now evident
that so far as actual positions were con-
cerned, the race would be decided by the
leading pair, and after a good race between
the Spray and Matangi, the latter was first
to finish, the race, however, as already
stated, being won by the Spray through the
time allowance. The following shows the
order of finishing of the vessels which com-
pleted the course, and shows also the handi-
caps :
h. m. s. Time allowance.
Matangi ... 619 3 scratch
Spray 6 21 12 6Jmin.
Henry ... 6 32 51 smin.
Tawera ... 6 33 42 s|min.
Christina ... 636 19 4min.
Mapu 6 39 30 s|min.
Maritana ... 643 18 Strain.
Juvarnia ... 644 43 Bmin.
Manola ... 657 5 7min.
Laurina ... 7 034 4min.
Venice ... 7 1 43 Bmin.
Doris 7 3 4 lOmin,
Maia 7 3 20 7rnin.
Tangaroa ... 7 5 0 7min.
Isca 7 5 13 7min.
Malua ... 7 12 14 Bmin.
Sybil 7 21 32 10m in,
Malvina ... 7 22 3 Bmin.
iiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiaiiiiiiiiiHiiininiiHiitiiiiiifUiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
ROWING
REGATTA
The races for the various clubs of the
Auckland Rowing Association, which were
held as part of the Jubilee celebrations,
did not prove as complete a success
as was anticipated, as the fresh S.E. wind
Which prevailed during the afternoon caused
a heavy roll on the northern side of the har-
bour, which proved too heavy for the light
string-test gigs, and after one or two had been
swamped, several of the races for this class
had to be abandoned. The courses were laid
from near the Calliope Dock to the Devon-
port Wharf. The starter was Mr. J. F.
Haultain, who, with the umpire (Mr. J. M.
Brigham), had the use of the Permanent
Force’s torpedo boat, while the judge (Mr. G.
S. Kissling) was stationed on one of the
wharves. The details of the racing were as
follow: —
I crew was ; —l. S. Bowden ; 2. E. Taite; 3.
| D. Cole ; 4. J. Cole; P. W. Scott, stroke ; J.
S Scott, steer-oar.
| Champion Gig Race. —This was considered
| to be the event of the programme, but owing
| to the rough state of the water, the Auckland
| and two West End crews declined to start.
| The field consisted of Waitemata, North
| Shore, Poverty Bay, and Ponsonby. The
| two latter swamped shortly after the start,
| and both North Shoreand Waitemata shipped
| a lot of water. The two latter kept afloat
| and finished, but Waitemata had the advan-
| tage throughout, and won easily by several
| lengths. The Waitemata four comprised :
| 1. R. Moore; 2. G. Barrett; 3. T. O’Connor ;
| M. Keefe, stroke; P. Bailey, (cox.)
| Dingy Race.— A. Bailey (Waitemata), H.
| Cooke (Ponsonby), R. Masefield (West End),
| started, but the race was a hollow affair, as
| Bailey speedily distanced his opponents, and
| won easily. Cooke did not finish.
Maiden Whaleboats. —Six crews—Wai-
teraata, Hauraki, St. George’s, Ponsonby,
North Shore, and City—competed, and were
despatched about three p.m. to an even start,
and a slashing race ensued. For half the
distance all were well together, but as the
wharf was neared, Ponsonby, Waitemata,
and Hauraki drew ahead of the rest, and
only half a length separated the three. A
determined struggle to the post ensued, and
resulted in favour of Ponsonby by about
half a length, Hauraki being second, and
Waitemata close up third. The winning
Maiden Gigs (under 10 stone). —Of the
seven crews entered all went out except the
West End, but all were swamped at the post
before they could be started. Waitemata
baled out and w'ent over the course, the
starter protesting, as he considered the state
of the water dangerous for gigs. The Waite-
mata crew was : —l, J. Philpot; 2, H. Bailey;
3, D. Dysart; E. Bailey, stroke; P. Bailey,
= cox.


iiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinwiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiw
At this stage the Association Committee
met and decided that, owing to the heavy
seas, no more gig events should be started,
and the junior maiden and senior bona fide
gig races and scullers’ race were abandoned
for the time, but to be rowed off on nnother
day.
NATIVE CANOE RACES.
The first of these events, which were run at
the North Shore, was a contest between Paul
Tuhaere’s grand war canoe, manned by about
80 rowers, and two whakatiwai, or plain
canoes, each having about 20 paddlers. The
course was from the Devonport Wharf round
a buoy off Calliope Dock and back. They
were despatched on very even terms, and
gradually increasing their pace as they pro-
gressed, a grand spectacle was presented to
the thousands who lined the foreshore of
about 150 stalwart Maoris, the majority of
whom were nude to the waist, swaying in a
graceful rythmic motion in time to the wild,
exhorting chant of the several fuglemen,
While the spray broke frequently over the
rapidly-progressing craft, and drenched the
lightly-clad paddlers. On the up journey
the smaller craft held gallantly to the big
whakataua, but at the buoy the latter forged
ahead, and, though the rowers redoubled their
efforts, she increased her lead, and won a
good race by a couple of lengths. The result
of the race was hailed witli cries and antics
of delight by the Maoris ashore, the wahines
particularly being vociferous in their expres-
sions of approval.
The whakatiwai race, over the same course,
brought out four canoes, which were named
the Momoni, Tarai Puruku, Ruahori, and
Pupirikana. Each craft contained about 20
paddlers, two being composed of Huntly
natives, one of Kaipara, and the other of
Rangiriri men. The course was the same as
in the previous race, and an exciting con-
test ensued. Near the finish the Momoni
and Tarai Puruku drew out, but the former,
whose men paddled with great vigour and in
splendid time, distanced their opponents, and
won. The Momoni was the canoe which won
the whakatiwai event on Thursday.
There was also an event for Rarotongan
canoes manned by single rowers. Four boats
started, and although one fellow upset his
frail craft at the start, and disported himself
for some time in the water, the other three
made a creditable race, propelling their
canoes with graceful dexterity, Tangaia being
first, Kainana second, and Kowtai third.
In the evening, when the tide had gone
down considerably, the canoe hurdle races
were started, and three craft, manned by a
couple of buxom wahines each competed. The
receding water had left the hurdle-booms too
high above the surface, however, and after
many determined and amusing efforts to
shoot them over the obstacle, the natives had
to abandon the attempt.
THE WAR DANCE.
The Maori war dance, whice was to have
taken place on Thursday, but which could
not be carried out owing to the spectators
crowding in on the natives, was given to-
day at what are known as the Bear Gardens,
at the North Shore. A portion of the ground
was fenced off, and there was a large force of
police present to keep the reserve clear. The
time fixed for the event to take place was
half-past four, and at that hour some 4000 or
5000 people were gathered in and around the
paddock. The hill at the north end of the
field was covered with onlookers. After a
delay of about half an hour the natives
arrived on the ground, headed by a band. The
dancing party consisted of about 50 women and
200 men, nearly all members of the Waikato
tribe. The women attired in white flowing
robes and were decked with some bright-
coloured ribbons. On entering the field the
women formed in line, and each woman
placing her hands on the shoulders of the one
in front of her, the whole party; marched
round in a circle, and then again formed
line and faced the people. The Maori
warriors in the meantime were crouch-
ing down behind the women. Most of the
men had only pieces of cloth round their
loins, the rest of the body being naked. They
carried canoe paddles in their hands in place
of guns, or, as was the custom in the old days,
taiahas, tewhatewhas, meres, &c. Some of
the men had decorated their heads with
feathers. Te Rawhiti, who formerly occu-
pied the position of secretary to Tawhiao,
had charge of the women, and led them in
their dance. The haka kotiro was then per-
formed, and at each interval in the dance the
spectators manifested their approval by ap-
plause. After a short interval the war-dance
was given. The contortions of the men were
hideous, and their chant and shouts had a
strange effect. The dances were finished
about quarter to six o’clock, when the natives
returned to their quarters at the Naval
Depot.
SHOOTING AND FISHING EXCURSION,
His Excellency the Governor proceeded
to Motutapu Island to-day on a shooting-
expedition. The Earl of Onslow was accom-
ganied by Admiral Lord Charles Scott, Lord
arrington, Hon. Mr. Mitchelson (Native
Minister), Hon. Mr. Hislop (Minister of Edu-
cation), Mr. J. H. Upton (Mayor of Auck-
land), Mr. M. Niccol (Mayor of Devonport),
Mr. E. W. Alison (Chairman of Directors of
the Devonport Steam Ferry Company), Mr,
Meysey - Thompson (A.D.C.), Flag - Lieu-
tenant Fitzgerald, Mr. L. D. Nathan,
and Major George. The party started for
Motutapu in the steamer Eagle at half-past
nine a.m. The course taken was round
Rangitoto Island. When outside the reef
the anchor was dropped, and an hour and
a-half was spent in fishing. There was ex-
cellent sport, for the party was kept busy
the whole time hauling in fish —principally
schnappers. About two hundred fish were
caught. The steamer was then headed
for Motutapu, and on arrival at that island
the distinguished visitors were most heartily
welcomed by Mr. John Reid. Horses were in
readiness for those who might wish to go
riding. Here the company were joined by
Captain Savile (A.D.C. to the Governor),
and Captain Trench (A.D.C. to Lord Car-
rington), who had sailed to Motutapu in Mr.
H. Whitaker’s yacht, Wenona. The Go-
vernor, Lord Charles Scott, Lord Carring-
ton, and several others went deer-shoot-
ing. Two deer and a number of rabbits


were shot. The Earl of Onlow had the good
fortune to “bring down” a fine stag with
magnificent antlers, and he expressed his in-
tention to have the head preserved. The
steamer left for Auckland at half-past five
p.m., and reached the wharf at about a quar-
ter past six o’clock. The day was beautifully
fine, and the Governor, Lord Charles Scott,
iiii{iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiniiiiiiiiiiiiii<tiiiiiiiiiiiuuiiiiiuniiiiiiiiiiiii
The Jubilee Horticultural Show was opened
at the Choral Hall, and it was in every
respect the most distinctive and best
display of the kind ever held since the foun-
dation of the colony, and it was carried out
to a most perfect success by the following
officers : —Judges : Messrs. J. C. Blackmore,
T. Bullen, J. Mayo, and E. Turner. Super-
intendent of Stewards and Staging ; Dr. C.
W. Sanders. Chairman of Horticultural
Committee ; Mr. A. E. Dewes. Committee:
Messrs. E. R. Atkin, F. Bennett, T. F.
Cheeseman. W. Goldie, D. A. Hay, C.
Hesketh, W. Mclndoe, C. S. Macdonald, J.
Pain, W. J. Palmer, C. W. Sanders, and
Thos. Steadman. There were many dis-
tinctive features, too many, indeed, to notice
specially, but the most prominent feature was
the artistic staging of the exhibits. The hall
itself was beautifully decorated with fern
fronds and nikau palms, and the pot plants
and shrubs were arranged with artistic
ability. The centre hall was of course the
areat" attraction, but the wings were also
filled with exhibits of great merit. The south
wing was mainly occupied by bouquets, fruit,
pot plants, etc, and the north wing with
vegetables and various exhibits of local in-
dustry. A central position in the main hall
was occupied by a fountain in full play, and in
tire basin Mr. Goldie, of the Auckland Do-
main, had placed about 60 well-grown carp
and gold fish, which by their lively move-
ments and varied hues in the sparkling water
excited a great amount of interest. At the
stage end there was a striking scene, an
illumination displaying a war canoe and a
full rigged ship on a thoroughly characteristic
new Zealand coast. On the other end, over
the main entrance, was the motto “ Jubilee”
in raised flowered letters.
The main feature of the show was the pot
plants, and nothing could excel the beauty
and variety of this display, amongst the
finest bein" several sent for exhibition only,
and not tor competition. Mrs. Boyd, of
Newton, who was a large exhibitor, had a
magnificent display of flowering begonias in
full foliage and flowers, many of which were of
her own hybridising. Mrs. W. S. Wilson ex-
hibited four fine fuchsia trees in pots. They
were healthy, vigorous shrubs, in full flower,
and were worthy to represent the climateand
its capabilities. The displays by Hay and
Son, Neal and Co., Mr. Forrest (gardener to
Mr. Murdoch), and others, were splendid, and
one gentleman who did not allow' his name
to transpire sent a fine collection of forty
JUBILEE HORTICULTURAL SHOW.
and Lord Carrington were very much pleased
with the sea trip, the fine scenery, and the
good sport they had.
In the evening His Excellency was present
at the performance of the Rarotongans at_
the City Hall. There were present with the
Governor Lord Carrington and Admiral
Lord Charles Scott.
I large pot plants full of rich variety, and these
I were distributed so as to fill in the vacancies
I between the various stands and groups, and
I greatly enhance the richness of the scene. Mr,
I Forrest had a fine show of 40 varieties, not
I for competition. The cut flowers were very
I good, considering the unfavourable season.
1 An exhibit of table and ornamental decora-
-1 tions by Mrs. E. Turner, of Karangahape
I Road, which were not for competition,
I formed a very attractive spectacle, and the
I bouquets were elegant and well grouped, the
| bouquets made up by children in the hall
| being very attractive indeed. Mr. Exler’s
| display of pottery was also a fine feature, and
| the manufacture was equal in finish to any
I ever imported to New Zealand. They were
I finished in Rockingham and yellow glaze,
| and took the form of baskets, rustics, stave
| flower pots, etc., and in the large vases were
| some fine pot plants which showed them off
| to advantage. Messrs. Carder Brothers had
| also a fine exhibit of pottery. Fruit was
I splendidly represented in apples, pears,
| oranges, lemons, peaches, grapes, etc. Mr.
| Crispe, of Mauku, exhibited some splen-
| did lemons. Mr. John Abbott, of Wai-
I komiti, had a fine show of luscious
| peaches, and Mr. J. Sharp, of Cam-
| bridge, made a good display of plums.
| Mr. R. Hobbs had a really grand display
| of apples, pears, plums, and peaches in varie-
| ties, and Mr. E. B. Houlton, amongst his
| other exhibits, had a peculiar rock melon
| named the banana, which in shape and appear-
| ance except as to colour resembles a cucum-
| ber. Vegetables were not largely placed as
| to quantity, but the quality was splendid,
| potatoes, cabbages, carrots, parsnips, etc.,
| being of the finest quality and grow'th. A very
| striking feature was the display made by the
| school children of the East Tamaki School, to
| whom a space was allotted in the north wing.
| It consisted of fruit, vegetables, pickles, etc.,
| the boys at the school being taught to grow,
| and the girls to preserve the fruits and veget-
| aides. There was also a display of carpentry
| and joinery work by the boys, whose ages
| range from 12 to 14 years of age, which would
| do credit to a carpenter and joiner; and
| another feature was a sample of boot-mending
| and saddlery. Another exhibit was hives of
| bees at work, and also samples of knots and
| splices, the work of the boys. A collection
| of oranges, grown on the Pah farm, also at-
| tracted attention; and a model farm, ex-
| hibited by Mr. Hamilton, was a fine piece of
I work. Altogether, the show was a splendid
I one, The following are the awards ;


ALL-COM ERS.—POT PLANTS.
Group of Pot Plants arranged in a space equal to
50 square feet. Quality and general effect to be the
leading features. First prize, £5 ; second, £2 : D.
Hay and Sou, Ist prize and certificate of merit;
W. J. Palmer, 2nd; Thomas Steadmm, highly
commended; Mrs Boyd, certificate of merit (be-
gonias).
Best Collection of Carpet Bedding Plants in 3
inch pots. First prize, given by the (fight Rev. J.
E. I .tick, 0.5.8., D.D., Bishop of Auckland, £1 Is;
second, 10s : The Right Rev. J. E. Luck, 0.5.8.,
D.D., Bishop of Auckland, Ist prize.
POT PLANTS IN FLOWER.
Group arranged in a space equal to 30 square feet.
Quality and general effect to be the leading fea-
tures. First prize, £2 10s ; second, £1: Thomas
Steadman, Ist prize ; D. Hay and Son.
Six Begonias, tuberous-rooted varieties. First
prize, 15s ; second, 5s ; Edward Neal, Ist prize;
Mrs. Boyd, 2nd ; Edward Neal, highly com-
mended ; Edward Neal.
Six Pelargoniums (zonals), double or single flow-
ered varieties. First prize, 15s ; second, 5s : Tlios.
Steadman, Ist prize.
Petunias, varieties. First prize, 15s ; second, 5s ;
Thomas Steadman, Ist prize ; D. Hay and Son, 2nd ;
Mrs. W. S. Wilson.
Four Fuchsias, varieties. First prize, 15s ; second,
5s : Mrs. W. S. Wilson, Ist prize.
FOLIAGE POT PLANTS.
Group arranged in a space equal to 30 square feet.
Quality and general effect to be the leading features.
First prize, £2 10s; second, £1: D. Hay and .Son,
Ist prize : George Warburton, 2nd.
12 Coleus, in three or more varieties. First
prize, £1 ; second, 10s: Thomas Steadman, Ist
prize; 2nd, the Right Rev. J. E. Luck, D.D.,
0.5.8. ; Miss Speight, J. H. Garner, Miss
Whitaker.
FERNS AND LYCOPODS.
Group arranged in a space equal to 40 square feet.
Quality and general effect to be the leading features.
First prize, £2 10t; second, £1: D. Hay and Son,
Ist and 2nd prizes.
HANGING BASKETS OR POTS.
I our specimens. First prize, £1; second, 5s : D.
Hay and Son, Ist prize ; Thomas Steadman, 2nd ;
George Warburton.
CUT FLOWERS.
Collection irown in Open Air, arranged in a space
equal to 15 square feet. First prize, £2 ; second, £1 :
Miss Whitaker, Ist prize.
Collection grown in Open Air, 24 distinct varieties.
First prize, £1; second, 10s : J. Stych, Ist prize ;
Mrs. (3. Alma Baker, 2nd ; Mrs. Boyd.
Collection grown in Open Air, 12 distinct varieties.
First prize, 10s ; 2nd, 5s ; C. S. McDonald, Ist prize ;
Mr. Stych, 2nd.
Collection Native Flowers. First prize, 10s;
Second, 5s : Robert Thompson, Ist prize.
Collection Annuals, 24 distinct varieties. First
prize, 15s ; 2nd, 5s : W. Goldie, for Auckland City
Council, Ist and 2nd prizes ; D. Hay and Son.
Collection Annuals, 12 distinct varieties. First
Erize, 7s (id; second, 2s 6d : W. Goldie, for Auck-
md City Council, Ist and 2nd prizes ; D. Hay and
Son.
Collection Everlastings, including ornamental
grasses, 12 distinct varieties. First prize, 10s;
second, ss; D. Hay and Son, Ist prize; Miss
Speight.
Phlox Drummondii, 12 distinct varieties, six
trusses of each. First prize, 7s 6d; 2nd, 2s 6d:
W. Goldie, for Auckland City Council, Ist prize ;
Mrs. C. Alma Baker, 2nd.
Zinnias, six distinct varieties. First prize, ss;
second, 2s 6d ; D. Hay and Son, Ist prize ; E. Hay-
ivood, 2nd ; Mrs. C. Alma Baker, W. Goldie, for
Auckland City Council, E. Haywood, Thomas
Steadman.
Delphiniums, six distinct varieties, not more than
three spikes of each. First prize, 7s 6d ; second, 2s
6d : C. S. McDonald, Ist prize.
Dahlias, double, 12 distinct varieties. First prize,
10s ; second, 5s : Miss Speight, Ist prize ; G. Alder-
ton, 2nd ; G. Alderton, C. S. McDonald.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiujiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiini iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinniiiriniiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
Dahlias, single, nine distinct varieties. First prize,
10s; second, ss: A. E. Dewes, Ist prize; F. T.
Ward.
Dahlias, Cactus, six distinct varieties. First
prize, 10s ; second, 5s : D. Hay and Son, Ist prize ;
C. S. McDonald, 2nd; Miss Speight.
Tea Roses, six varieties. First prize, 7s 6d;
second, 2s 6d: W. Mclndoe, Ist and 2nd prizes ; D.
Hay and Son, E. Lippiatt and Sons, W. J. Palme ■.
Gladiolus, 12 varieties, one spike of each. First
prize, 10s; second, ss; Thomas Steadman, Ist
prize.
Gladiolus, six varieties, one spike each. First
prize, 7s 6d ; second, 2s 6d : Thomas Steadman, Ist
prize ; IS. Lippiatt and Sons.
BOUQUETS.
One Hand Bouquet. First prize, 15s ; second, 5s :
Mrs. Robertson, Ist priz ; C. S. McDonald, 2nd ;
Mrs. Speight, highly commended ; Mrs. C. Alma
Baker, Miss Cobb, Miss Eva Hughes, Miss Mabel
Maclndoe.
One Bridal Bouquet First prize, £1 ; second, 10s :
C. S. McDonald, Ist prize ; Miss Speight, 2nd ; Miss
Eva Hughes, Mrs. Robertson, Miss Whitaker.
One Table Bouquet. First prize, 15s ; second, 5s :
C. S. McDonald, Ist prize ; Miss Cobb, 2nd; Miss
Eva Hughes.
FRUIT.
Collection arranged in a space equal to 30 square
feet. First prize, £3 ; second, £1: E. Lippiatt and
Sons, 2nd prize.
Collection grown in open air, arranged in a space
equal to 30 square feet. First prize, £3 ; second,
cl: E Lippiatt and Sons, Ist prize, John Collins,
2nd ; W. L. Beloe.
Collection of Stone Fruit, arranged in a space
equal to 20 square feet. First prize, £llos ; second,
15s ; E. Lippiatt and Sons, Ist prize ; John Collins,
2nd.
Collection of Grapes, 12 bunches. First prize,
£2 ; second, £1; E. Jones.
Grapes, Black, two bunches. First prize, 15s;
second, 7s 6d : E. Jones, Ist prize ; James Trayes,
2nd.
Grapes, White, two bunches. First prize, 15s ;
second, 7s 6d; E. Jones, Ist prize; James Trayes,
2nd.
VEGETABLES.
Collection, best. First prize, £4 ; second, £2 ; E
B. Houlton, Ist prize.
Collection Potatoes. First prize, £1 ; second, 10s
W. Harris, Ist prize and highly commended ; F. B
Houlton, C. S. McDonald.
12 Potatoes, Round. First prize, 7s 6d ; second,
2s 6d : E. B. Houlton, Ist prize ; W. J. Palmer, 2nd;
A. T. Good, W. Harris.
12 Potatoes, Kidney. First prize, 7s 6d ; second
prize, 2s (id : H. Lipscombe, Ist prize ; E. B. Houl-
ton, 2nd ; Michael Burke, H. Edmonds, W. Harris,
W. J, Palmer.
12 Onions. First prize, 7s 6d ; second prize, 2s 6d ;
W. J. Palmer, Ist prize; Michael Burke, 2nd ; H.
Bridgman, Michael Burke (three entries), Richard
Nicholls.
Collection S lads. First prize, 7s 6d; second
prize, 2s 6d : W. J. Palmer, Ist prize.
Collection Tomatoes. First prize, £1; second
prize, 10s : Archibald Wilson, Ist prize ; Archibald
Wilson, 2nd.
12 Tomatoes. First prize, 7s 6d; second prize :
2s 6d : E. Lippiatt and Sons, Ist prize ; Archibald
Wilson, 2nd : Michael Burke, James Trayes, Miss
Whitaker.
Collection Peas, fifty pods of each variety. First
prize, 15s; second prize, 5s :W. Harris, Ist prize;
Archibald Wilson.
AMATEUR CLASS—POT PLANTS.
Collection. First prize, £1; second, 10s, J.
Stych, Ist prize.
POT PLANTS IN FLOWER.
Three Begonias, tuberous-rooted varieties. First
prize, 10s ; second prize, ss. Mrs Boyd, Ist prize ;
J. Stych, 2nd, Tom C. P. Whiteley,
Three Specimens. J. Stych.
FOLIAGE POT PLANTS.
Three Begonias, varieties. First prize, 10s; second,
5s : Mrs. Boyd, Ist prize ; J. Stych, 2nd.


iiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiNn:iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiii!jiiiiiiiniiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii | ii | iiiiiii | iiiiii | iiiiiMi | iiiiiiiiiiiii | iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii | i | iiii | iiii | iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiii
Three Coleus, varieties. First prize, 10s ; second,
5s : J. Stych, Ist prize ; Tom C. P. Whiteley, 2nd.
Three Specimens. First prize, 10s ; second, 5s :
J. Stych, Ist prize.
FERNS AND LYCOPODS-POT PLANTS.
Collection or group. First prize, £1; second, 10s ;
. Stych, Ist prize; Tom C. P. Whiteley, 2nd.
Three specimens : J. Stych, Ist prize.
CUT FLOWERS.
Collection grown in open air, 12 distinct varieties.
First prize, 10s : second, 5s ;J. Stych, Ist; W. Cruick-
shank, 2nd; Mrs. Boyd, W. Harris, S. B. Hughes
(two exhibits), Tom C. P. Whiteley.
Collection grown in open air, six distinct varie-
ties. First prize, 7s 6d : second, 2s 6d : J. Stych, Ist
prize ; E. Hayward, 2nd; W. Harris, highly com-
mended ; S. E. Hughes, A. O. Lipscombe, C. W.
Sanders, F. T. Ward, Tom C. P. Whiteley.
Collection Annuals, six distinct varieties. First
prize, 5s ; second, 2s 6d : W. Harris, Ist prize ; W.
Cruickshank, 2nd; A. C. Lipscombe, J. Stych.
Collection Everlastings, including ornamental
grasses, six distinct varieties : J. Stych, Ist prize.
Phlox Drummondii, six varieties. First prize 5s ;
second, 2s 6d : Tom C. P. Whiteley, Ist prize ; E.
Haywood, 2nd ; W. Cruickshank, W. Harris.
Zinnias, six varieties. First prize, 5s ; second, 2s
6d : E. Haywood, Ist prize; W. Cruickshank, 2nd ;
E. Haywood, J. Stych.
Tea Roses, not less than three varieties. First
prize, 5s ; second, 2s 6d : Tom C. P. Whiteley, Ist
prize ; W. Harris, J. Stych.
Dahlias, double, six varieties. First prize, 7s 6d ;
second, 5s ; G. Alderton, Ist prize ; G. Alder-
ton, 2nd : J. Stych.
Dahlias, single, six varieties. First prize, 5s ; se-
cond, 2s 6d : A. E. Dewes, Ist prize ; F. T. Ward.
SPECIAL CLASSES.
Collection Sauces and Pickles, preserved, dried,
or made in New Zealand. First prize, £1 ; second,
10s ; H. Lipscombe, Ist prize.
Collection Garden Seeds, Tools and Requisites.
First prize, £1 ; second, 10s : Arthur Yates and
Co., Ist prize.
CHILDREN’S BOUQUETS.
For Boys or Girls under the age of 14 years.
One Bouquet, all the materials to be brought to,
and the bouquet made up in, the exhibition room
under supervision. First prize, 10s ; second, 7s 6d;
third, 5s : Miss Kate Speight, Ist prize ; Miss Mary
Garnaut, 2nd; Miss Mary Combes, 3rd; Cecil
Hughes, Percy Hughes, Miss Sarah Mclndoe, Miss
M. Richards.
The following exhibits were not for compe-
tition, but added largely to the success of the
exhibition: —
J. Jones, Remuera, six vegetable marrows ; J. M.
Horsbrough (age six), one sunflower ; John Stanley,
Birkenhead, three heads celery; H. lipscombe,
Hepburn-street, two plates plums; Ed. Neal, Ep-
som, seedling begonias ; grown on Pah estate, One-
hunga, oranges (specially commended); W. Nicoll,
Remuera, three cabbages ; M. Burke, Mount Eden,
six carrots, six parsnips, 12 potatoes; IV. McFet-
ridge, Takapuna, six sticks rhubarb ; East Tamaki
district school, miscellaneous (special prize, £1 Is) ;
Miss Speight, Parnell, pompon dahlias; W. Mc-
Fetridge, Takapuna, 12 onions, six sticks rhubarb ;
H. E. Sharp, Waikomiti, 20 varieties apples, eicht
varieties Russian apples; four plates ornamental
crabs, one plate plums ; E. B. Houlton, Epsom, two
banana melons ; E. Withy, Remuera, miscellaneous
(highly commended); H. Green, Symonds-street,
blackberries and raspberries ; A." E. Dewes, Par-
nell, seedling cactus dahlia; R. Hobbs, M.H.R.,
Pokeno, collection of fruit ; W. J. Palmer,
Carlton Gore Road, vegetable marrows and
rhubarb; J. Mayo, Drury, Cloth of Gold roses;
E. Haywood, Ponsonby, box cut flowers ; J. Abbott,
Waikomiti, six plates fruit, one plate potatoes;
J. Trayes, North Shore, two cucumbers : T. Stead-
man, Auckland, variety ferns and cockscombs
(highly commended); W. J. Palmer, Carlton Gore
Road, collection salads; F. Forrest, Epsom, cut
flowers ; A. Lipscombe, Hepburn-street, cut flower’s ;
D. Hay and Son, Remuera, roses; E. Haywood,
Ponsonbv, plate blackberries ; W. J. Palmer, Carl-
ton Gore Road, cut flowers, tuberous-rooted bego-
nias (C.M.); W. Go! die, Auckland, one liliura aura-
turn ; D. Hay and Son, Remuera, group plants ; Mr.
Martin, Mahurangi Heads, lemons ; Mr. Martin, Ma-
lm angi Heads, maize ; R. Brewin, Kaukapakapa,
native seeds (Wildman’s prize, sp cial); C. A. Bru-
ford, Onehunga, thirty-six varieties dianthus; H.
Crispe, Maukau, Lisbon lemon ; John Sharpe, Cam-
bridge, colleciion fruit; Exler and Son, Avondale
pottery, pottery works; Mrs. Speight, Parnell,
hats made by native girls; Mrs. Edward Turner,
Karangahape Road, floral decorations (specially
commended); Mrs. Malcolm, Helensville, hanging-
baskets, epergnes, etc. ; Carder Brothers, pottery
ware; Mr. Hamilton, model garden ; a horticultural
friend, collection of poi-plants ; the Right Rev.
Dr. Luck, 12 coleus ; Thomas Steadman, four hang-
ing baskets ; John Sharp, Cambridge, apple “ Crim-
son Peach,” a sport from Irish Peach.
Special prizes were given by the following
gentlemen
The Right Rev. J. E. Luck, 0.5.8., D.D., Bishop
of Auckland, donation of £1 Is ; Mr. F. T. Ward,
Parnell, donation of £1 Is; Messrs. Hammond and
Co., Newmarket, half-ton Taupiri coal; Mr. W.
Wildman, stationer, Victoria Arcade, New Zealand,
illustrated by Mr. Edward Wakefield.
The show was opened without any formality
shortly after three o’clock, when Mr. Eady s
band played a number of selections. There
was a large rush of visitors at the outset,
a great number having been waiting at the
doors until the judging was completed.
There were special exhibits of a peculiarly
interesting character. One of these was a
magnificent display of Indian weaving work,
exhibited by Mrs. Hyer, who is at present
staying at Wyward House. The work, which
is all hand woven, is very beautiful, the fabric
being rich and fine. There were table cloths
and covers, and dress fronts for skirts and
bodices, the interweaving being rich and
artistic. There was another very notice-
able feature in the way of native in-
dustry, and this was an exhibit, in the
name of Miss Speight, of ladies’ hats,
built and trimmed by native women of
Hokianga out of the native poplar tree.
The texture is elegant and beautifully soft
in appearance, and the hats were greatly
admired by lady visitors last night.
THE EVENING’S EXHIBITION.
The attendance in the afternoon was good,
and cheered the hearts of the promoters of
the show, but they were quite unprepared
for the rush of visitors in the evening. It is
true that everything was in shipshape and in
exhibition order, and the attendance was all
the more gratifying. The flower show was an
attraction, but there was another powerful
draw in the shape of a tableau and concert.
The tableau was thoroughly in keeping with
the event. It was a living similitude of the
founding of the colony, and the hoisting of the
British flag in New’ Zealand. _ Admiral Lord
Charles Scott gave permission to some of
the crew of the Orlando to take part in thi
feature of the display. Master-at-Arms
Grant, of the Orlando, had control of the
display, and the whole programme of reading
the proclamation, hoisting the flag, and firing
the royal salute, was realistically performed.
The' following programme was then per-
formed, Mr. Phillpot officiating as conductor :
—Jubilee Ode to “ Zealandia” (written by Hi
May, Esq.), composed for this occasion by J.


iiiiiinn!iiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii]iii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
H. Phillpot, Esq. ; solo (bass), Mr. R. Eagle-
ton ; solo (tenor), Mr. J. P. Fell; quartette,
Mesdames Beaumont and Collings, Messrs.
Eagleton and Bell; chorus, Union; solo
(bass), “ Hands All Round” (especially ar-
ranged for this occasion by J. H. Phillpot,
Esq.), Mr. R. A. Holloway; solo (soprano),
“On the Threshold,” Miss Warren ; grand
chorus, “ The Emigrant Ship,” Union;
Part 11. : Jubilee Festival March (specially
composed for Jubilee celebration by Mr. J.
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIiIIIIIIIIIIIIIIiHIII
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitniiiiii
INTERCOLONIAL
This match was resumed at half-past
eleven a.m. to-day. The weather was all
that could be desired for cricket, the sky
being clear, while a slight southerly breeze
pleasantly tempered the sun’s rays. The
wicket played far better than on the first
day, and in consequence there was a good
display of batting on both sides. For the
home eleven Yates showed fine form, and
appeared to master the Cornstalks’ bowling,
while Kissling played pretty cricket for his
score of 39, not out. His hitting all round
was very fair, and it he could only infuse
more force into his strokes his play would
be first-class. Fowke played steadily, and
obtained his runs by sound cricket, while
Stemson and Gardiner hit well and freely
for their scores. In the New South
Wales second innings Robinson gave a fine
exhibition of batting, hitting everything very
cleanly, and Youill again demonstrated that
he is a sterling batsman. Joe Davis, the
skipper, played a remarkably free innings, not-
withstanding the fact that he was indisposed.
His leg hitting was favourably commented
on, and Auckland cricketers should profit by
it. J. Cottam batted in taking style, while
McClinchy and the genial Sid Callaway,
although they did not obtain double figures,
shaped nicely. In bowling Cowper and
Newell were the most successful for the
visitors, while McClinchy and Callaway were
at times very difficult to play. J. Shepherd,
although not so showy a wicket-keeper as
Fowke, was very smart and safe. H. B.
Lusk was by far the most successful
with the ball for Auckland, and also
made a fine right-handed catch off his
own trundling, for which he was de-
servedly applauded. The Auckland first
innings closed for a total of 113. The Corn-
stalks lost 7 wickets for 116, and then Davis
declared the innings closed in hope of putting
the local men out in the second innings for a
small total, and thereby winning the match,
however, in this he was unsuccessful, and at
the call of time the Auckland men had lost
4 wickets for 70, having 6 wickets to fall, and
being 102 behind the visitors. Had time per-
mitted the game to be concluded, there is not
the least doubt the match would have been
very exciting.
THE PLAY.
As New South Wales’ eleven took the field
they were greeted with a cheer. Yates and
Fowke, the not outs of the previous evening,
H. Phillpot), Union orchestra; grand chorus,
“ Wake the Song of Jubilee,” Union; solo
(bass), “Old England forever shall Weather
the Storm,” Mr. R. Eagleton ; solo (contralto),
“Excelsior,” Mrs. Edmonds; solo (tenor),
“Britain’s Greetings” (especially composed
for the occasion by Mr. J. H, Phillpot), Mr.
Ferriday; National Anthem (solo), Miss
Warren; quartette, Miss Warren, Mrs.
Edmonds, Messrs. Ferriday and Flolloway).
CRICKET MATCH.
| resumed their positions at the wickets,
j Yates took the strike from Callaway, who
i changed to the Hospital end. Off the third
| ball the United veteran scored two by a
| pretty cut, and followed up by putting the
| next past point for 2. Newell’s first over
| from the Brewery end was a maiden,
| while Callaway followed suit, and Newell
| did ditto. In Callaway’s next over Yates
| got a fluky 2 off the first ball, and
| drove the last for 1. Yates brought 50 up
| by diiving Newell for 1, and Fowke got 1 off
| the same bowler by an off drive. Yates hit
| out at Callaway, but was beautifully caught
| by Clarke at forward cover. Telegraph :
| 54 —5 —35. Stemson was the incomer, and
i scored 1 off the first ball by a snick
| off Callaway. Fowke hit Newell to leg
| for 5 and brought 60 up. In Calla-
| way’s next Fowke got 3 by a fluky cut,
| Newell nearly bringing off a catch, the ball
j going a few inches too high Stemson drove
| Newell hard to long-off, and Cottam missing
| it, he obtained 4. A hit for Iby Fowke off
| Callaway brought 70 up, and then Stemson
j drove the Carlton man for 5. The United
| man hit Newell to long-field for 2, and fol-
| lowed suit off the next, bringing 80 up. Cow-
| per relieved Callaway, and off his first Stem-
i son scored 2by a leg hit. McClinchy bowled in
| place of IN ewell, and sent down a maiden.
| Cowper bowled a maiden, and in the first
| ball of McClinchy’s Stemson’s timbers were
| scattered. Telegraph: 83 —6 —lB. Gardiner
| filled the breach, and scored one to square
i leg off the last bail of the over. Fowke skied
| a ball of Cowper’s, which fell between the
| bowler and Clarke. Fowke hit McClinchy
| to long leg for 4, bringing 90 up, and saving
| the follow on. After a couple of maidens,
| Fowke found one of Cowper’s too good and
| had to retire. Telegraph : 91—7 —24. Rees
| appeared in place of the wicket - keeper,
| ana. broke the ice by a short run off the
| Newcastle man. Gardiner skied one to short
| leg, but Cottam and Callaway both rush-
| ing for the catch the Carlton bowler lost it.
| In Cowper’s next over Rees was clean bowled,
| Telegraph : 97 —B—3.8 —3. Hawkins filled the
| gap, and after a couple of leg-byes were run,
| Cowper caught and bowled him. Telegraph
| 99—9—0. Kelly stepped into the vacancy,
| and a leg-bye brought IUO up amidst ap-
| plause. Gardiner skied one from McClinchy to
| loug-on, but Robinson dropped an easy catch*
| Gardiner cut the Newcastle man hard for 4,
= and then hit the same bowler hard to square


lllltlllllllillllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllildlillllllllllljllilllllllllllillllillllillllllilllllllllllillHlllllllllilillllll
for 4, but in attempting the fifth Kelly was
run out, through smart fielding on the part
of Robinson and Cottam, Telegraph:
113 —10—0. Gardiner (not out) 18, and the
innings closed. Play was then stopped for
an hour. After lunch McClinchy and Cottam
appeared at the wickets for New South
Wales. Mills fielded substitute for Lynch,
who was absent, while Walker took the
place of Yates, who, for some unexplained
reason, did not field, although he was
on the ground watching the match, and
batted in the Auckland second innings.
The Newcastle player took the strike from
Rees, who trundled from the brewery end.
Off the third ball McClinchy scored 1.
Lusk started the bowling at the other end,
and McClinchy scored 2 off the first ball by
a forward square-leg hit. Cottam scored his
first by a hard hit to mid-off from the left-
hander. Cottam got a single, and McClinchy
drove Lusk for 2, and followed up by a
single. The Newcastle man got 1 by a
pretty hit to leg, and then Cottam drove
Rees along the carpet for 5. The Sydney
Club player drove Lusk out of bounds for 3,
and then McClinchy jumped out at the
same bowler, but, getting under the ball,
was well taken by Gardiner. Telegraph:
17—1—7. Robinson filled the breach. Cot-
tam stepped out to Lusk, and was stumped
by Powke. Telegraph : 17 —2—lo. Youill
joined Robinson, and the latter broke Ins
duck by a pretty leg stroke for 2, and brought
2) up by a single. Robinson placed Lusk
nicely to forward square leg for 2, and off
the Ist ball of Rees’ next Youill broke the
ice by a single, and in Lusk’s next over
Robinson got 2 for a pretty on drive. Youill
fot 1 for a pretty drive off Rees, and in
iUsk’s next got another single to square-leg.
Youill drove the left-hander along the carpet
for 3, bringing 30 up, and then got a magnifi-
cent drive off Lusk for 4, and afterwards
gave Mills a difficult chance at square leg,
result being a single. The Carlton man
drove Rees for 3, and brought 40 up by a
snick for2offLusk; andnext ballgaveWalker
in the long field a hard chance, the result being
2. Kelly relieved Rees at the Newmarket end,
and Robinson scored a single off the third
ball, and Youill scored another off the fourth.
Runs came apace owing to Robinson’s agency,
and 50 went up. At 54, Youill lifted Lusk to
long-on, and Walker running brought off a
well-judged catch. Telegraph : 54 —3 —21.
Cowper took his club mate’s place, and
started the ball rolling by a single off Kelly,
and Robinson got a pretty cut for 3. Several
strokes to each batsman, and 60 appeared on
the board. Robinson cut Kelly prettily for
2, and Cowper placed Lusk neatly to the on
for a single. Neill relieved Kelly, and Robin-
son scored a single off the first, but the second
proved too much for Cowper, and he retired.
Telegraph : 68 —4 —5. Joe Davis, the skipper,
took theCarltonite’s place, and was applauded
as he walked the wicket. He put the first ball
neatly to long-leg for 4, bringing 70 up.
Robinson hit Lusk out of the ground to square-
leg for 2, and then drove 1 back very hard
to the same bowler, who brought down the
fillery by a brilliant right-hand catch,
elegraph : 74 —5 —24. The Moss Vale man,
the genial Sid. Callaway, filled the vacancy ;
and after Davis had scored a single the
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiinmiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiun
Carlton player broke the egg by a single off
Neill, and followed up by a drive for 2. A
single to the captain, and 80 appeared. He
then hit Neill hard to leg for 4, and followed
up by a drive to the on for 2, the ball being
well returned by Mills. In the next over
from Neill the skipper scored 3 to leg,
and Callaway got 2 by an on-drive, bring-
ing 90 up. He followed by an uppish
stroke to the off, 3 being run. Rees resumed
the bowling with the score at 94, and Davis
drove the third ball nicely for 3. Callaway
was too late for one from Rees, and lost his
wicket. Telegraph : 99—6—8. The Mans-
field man, Clarke, took the wicket. Davis
got 2 by a pretty cut, and brought 100 up.
Clarke started his score by a nice drive for 1,
and Davis got a pretty leg hit for 1 off the
left-hander, Clarke obtained a single by a
neat hit to the on, and Davis hit Rees to
the long-on for 3. With the score at 109,
Clarke played one back to Lusk, and retired.
Telegraph: 109—7 —2. Newell went in, but had
scored nothing, when at 116 the New South
Wales skipper declared the innings closed, and
Auckland went in for their second innings.
At half-past four the New South Wales team
took the field, and Yates and Kissling started
the batting for Auckland. Yates took
the strike from Callaway, who trundled
from the garden end, and started with
a maiden. Newell bowled to Kissling
from the Newmarket end. Yates broke the
ice by a cut for two off Callaway. Davis re-
ceived applause for smart fielding at point.
The play became monotonous, four maidens
being sent down in succession, and then Kiss-
ling obtained 4 for a hit to square-leg off
Newell. Kissling cut the same bowler for 3,
and 10 appeared on the board. McClinchy
relieved Newell. Kissling obtained 2,
through bad fielding on the part of
Josephs. Cowper replaced Callaway, and
a leg-bye was run off the first ball. Yates
hit the Newcastle bowler for 4, Robinson’s
shoe comin" off in chasing the ball. After
several maidens Yates got a drive to long-off
for 5, and 20 appeared on the board. Yates
scored 4 from a square-leg hit off the Carlton
bowler, Clarke being applauded for the
return. Kissling snicked Cowper to leg for
2 and brought 30 up, and Yates drove Mc-
Clinchy’s first for 3. Kissling hit Cowper to
leg for 2, and Callaway went on again in
glace of the Newcastle man. Kissling drove
iallaway hard to long-off, and in attempt-
ing to run a third Yates was run out,
owing to fine fielding on the part of
Clarke. Telegraph ; 40—1 —21. The Parnell
player filled the vacancy, and played the
remaining balls of the Moss Vale man’s
over. Kissling cut Cowper for 2. Davis
was again cheered for brilliant fielding at
point. The Gordon skipper hit Callaway
to leg for 3, and after several singles 50
went up. Newell relieved Cowper, and
Gardiner cut the first for 3, and Kissling in-
creased his score by a leg hit for two off the
same bowler. More singles, and 60 appeared on
the board. Walker took Cottam’s place in the
field, as the latter player had injured his leg.
Gardiner lifted Newell to Youill in the deep
long field, and the Carlton man brought off a
pretty catch. Telegraph : 61 —2—6. Fowke
appeared next, and Kissling gave a difficult
chance to Shepherd at the wickets. Newell


H. B. Lusk, b Newell
... 0
D. Lynch, b Newell
... 0
H. P. Kissling, c Newell, b Callaway
J. Fowke, b Cowper
W. Stemson, b McClinchy
... 10
... 24
... 18
W. Gardiner, not out
... 18
A. Rees, b Cowper
... 3
W. Hawkins, c and b Cowper
.. 0
F. V. Kelly, run out
... 0
Extras
... 5
iiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiimiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiHiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiHiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiij
appealed for Fowke Ibw, and the Auckland
wicket-keeper retired without scoring. 64 —3
—O. Stemson came next, and Kissling cut
Callaway for 3. Stemson opened his score by
2 to leg, a few singles to Kissling and 70 went
up, when Newell bowled Stemson with a
yorker. Telegraph : 70—4—0.
Auckland —First Innings,
R. J. Yates, c Clarke, b Callaway ... 35
R. Neill, c Davis, b Newell 0
Balls. Mdns. Runs. VYkts.
Total 113
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Callaway ... 125 10 30 2
Newell ... 120 10 49 3
McClinchy 44 3 22 1
Cow r per ... 45 4 7 3
New South Wales. —Second Innings.
W. A. McClinchy, c Gardiner, b Lusk ... 7
J. Cottam, stpd Fowke, b Lusk 10
H. Robinson, c and b Lusk 24
G. Youill, c Walker (sub), b Lusk ... 21
G. Cowper, b Neill 5
J. Davis, not out 34
Sid. Callaway, b Rees 8
A. Clarke, c and b Lusk 3
A. Newell, not out 0
Extras 4
Total 116
To bat : J. Shepherd and J. Josephs.
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Balls. Mdns. Runs. Wkts.
A. Rees ... 85 4 37 1
H. B. Lusk 125 8 36 5
F. V. Kelly 75 0 17 0
R. Neill ... 20 0 23 1
1 no ball.
Auckland. —Second Innings.
R. J. Yates, run out 21
H. P. Kissling, not out 39
W. Gardiner, c Youill, b Newell ... 6
J. Fowke, Ibw, Newell ... 0
W. Stemson, b Newell 2
Extras 2
Total 70
To bat: H. B. Lusk, R. Neill, W. Haw-
kins, A. Rees, F. V. Kelly, and D. Lynch.
BOWLING ANALYSIS.
Balls. Mdns. Runs. Wkts.
Callaway ... 70 6 20 0
Newell ... 39 4 19 3
McClinchy ... 30 1 17 0
Cowper ... 45 4 12
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiKiiiiiniiiniiii
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiuiiiiiiiHiinini iiiniiimi iiiiiiiiiiiiiiihiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
In the evening the team were the guests of
i the Auckland Cricket Association at a smoke
i concert given at the Imperial Hotel, Fort-
I street. There was a very large attendance of
; cricketers and lovers of the game, and a most
i enjoyable evening was spent. Mr. W. L. Rees
; was in the chair. The toasts honoured w'ere as
I follow: —“The Queen,” proposed by the Chair-
I man ; “ Our Guests,” coupled with the name
I of Mr. J. Davis, captain of the New South
I Wales players, by Mr. A. E. Whitaker, who
| made a most appropriate speech, stating
| that he had enjoyed the match greatly, and
1 only regretted that the attendance was not
| larger; however, he hoped the New South
I Welshmen would play a return match, and
I that they would be better patronised. Mr.
I Davis, in a few words, returned thanks.
I The game had been a very pleasant one,
I while he was sure all his team were enjoying
| their stay in Auckland. “The Auckland
I Team,” coupled with the name of the captain,
| Mr. H. P. Kissling, was proposed by Mr.
| Shepherd, who said that the most princely
| hospitality had been extended to the New
| South Wales cricketers since their arrival
| in Auckland. With regard to the form
| shown by the local team, he ventured
| the opinion that there was very little to
| choose between the two teams, and if the
| same merit is possessed by the cricketers in
| the South, a New Zealand eleven would make
| a remarkably good show against the picks of
| New South Wales. Mr. Yates, in the un-
| avoidable absence of Mr. Kissling, replied
| very briefly on behalf of the Auckland team.
| “The Scorers and Umpires,” was proposed
| by Mr. H. Rees George, and responded to by
I Messrs. McCormick and Kenderdine. Mr.
C. Davis, manager of the New South Wales
team, in a short speech, proposed the health
of Mr. F. C. Cheeseman, and the latter re-
plied, saying that he hoped this visit
of our cousins from across the sea,
would prove the forerunner of many others.
The toast of the “ New South Wales
Cricket Union ” and “ the Southern As-
sociations of New Zealand ” was allotted
to Mr. McKinney, who stated that it
gave him great pleasure to meet the
New South Wales players, and he was
sure that their visit through this colony
would be an enjoyable one. Mr. Shepherd
in a happy speech replied for the New South
Wales Cricket Union, while Mr. Holle re-
turned thanks on behalf of the Southern
Unions. “ Cricket,” coupled with the name
of His Worship the Mayor (Mr. Upton), was
proposed by the Chairman, and replied to by
Mr. J. H.' Upton. Mr. H. Robinson gave
the toast of the “ Auckland Cricket Associa-
tion” coupled with the name of Mr. Mc-
Kinney, who replied in a very happy manner.
During the evening comic and sentimental
songs were contributed by Messrs. J. Knox, S.
Callaway, J. Cottam, R. J, Yates, E. Davis,
G. Reid, Holle, and T. S. Sandes. Three
cheers were given for the respective teams,
and after singing “ Auld Lang Svne” and
“ God Save the Queen” the concert broke up.
iiiiiiiiiiiimniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii


go New Zealand's Jubilee, 1840-1890.
tllllllllllllllllilllllltllllllllllliilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllilllllllllllllilllllllllinilM
FOURTH DAY: FEBRUARY 1.
IlllilllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllllUlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllillllilllllllllilll
ATHLETIC SPORTS.
The Jubilee festivities were concluded to-
day, when the athletic sports for the
officers and men of the squadron, the mem-
bers of Friendly Societies, and local ama-
teurs, were held in the Domain Cricket
Ground. Beautifully fine weather prevailed.
The demonstration was in every respect a
success beyond the highest expectations of its
promoters. There was present the greatest
concourse of people ever seen in the Auckland
Domain, and it is estimated that the atten-
dance exceeded in numbers that at any fete
previously held in New Zealand. Looked at
from a point on the low ground opposite the
pavilion, the spectacle was a very impres-
sive one. The centre of the picture was
the beautiful green carpet of well - kept
grass, at the outside of which was the racing
track completely bounded by thousands of
the populace. On the slope at the southern
end of the ground there overlooked the field
an immense throng, so deep that those in the
rear were lost to view against the high trees
growing in a long line on the side of the hill,
and forming a most appropriate background
to the animated scene ; and in the immediate
centre of this serried mass was the pavilion,
its front almost hidden by the numbers of
people crowded on the verandah and stair-
way. The cool and pleasant shade given by
the belt of pines was gratefully claimed by
many other thousands, whilst the high hill at
the north-eastern corner of the field had also
fringes of humanity, as well as knots of
people dotted here and there, and on the flat
there were great numbers, many of them
standing under a canopy formed by innumer-
abla umbrellas used as sunshades. The scene
was one which in itself fitly celebrated the
Jubilee. It is estimated that about 20,000
people were present, and the good order
which they observed was a striking feature.
At about 3.15 p.m. His Excellency the Go-
vernor of New Zealand and party arrived at
the Domain gates. There were with Lord
Onslow, Rear-Admiral Lord Charles Scott,
Lord Carrington, Sir John and Lady Thurs-
ton, Miss Thurston, Captain Savile, Captain
Trench, Hon. D’Arcy and Mrs. Lambton,
Captain Barlow (H.M.s. Orlando), Messrs.
Meysey-Thompson, Fitzgerald, and Pullen.
The party were received at the entrance to
the ground by His Worship the Mayor (Mr.
J. H. Upton), Mr. Devore (President of the
Jubilee Committee), and the members of the
Entertainment Committee, and were escorted
to the pavilion. Here they were met by Mrs.
Upton (the Mayoress), Mrs. A. Devore, and
Mr. J Coates (president of the Auckland
Amateur Athletic Club). Seats had been
reserved on the pavilion for the visitors, who
were presented with programmes of the
sports, beautifully printed on satin. A choice
luncheon was provided for the party by Mr.
M. Gallagher, imperial Hotel. Lord Onslow
expressed himself charmed with the beauty
of the Domain and the surroundings, and
agreeably surprised at witnessing the many
thousands of well dressed and orderly
people. His Excellency and party, with
the exception of Lord Carrington, left
the ground about five o’clock, not waiting
for the Maori war dance, as they had seen it
that day at Orakei. Lord Carrington, how-
ever, remained until the close of the sports,
and watched the dance with much interest;
and at its close he asked Mr. Porter to .con-
vey to the Maoris a message from him to the
effect that he was much impressed with their
noble bearing and good behaviour, and that
he thanked them for their performance.
The meeting was under the management of
the Auckland Amateur Athletic Club, and
the arrangements were of the most com-
plete character. The racing ground was
marked off with a post and 'wire fence,
in order to prevent encroachment by
the public, and all the races were
started punctually to time. Special praise
must be given to Messrs. J. Halyday, A. H.
Cotter, T. F. Upfill, H. H. Davy, and F.
Edwards, and the judges, Messrs. R. Garrett,
J. F. Logan, and Coupland. The starting
by Mr. Edwards was excellent, and Mr.
J. E. Cooke, who was time-keeper, was
indefatigable in the duties of his office.
The committee, in conducting the sports in
which the men of the squadron took part,
were assisted by a committee comprising
Captain Barlow, Lieutenants Lambton, Tyr-
whitt, and Risk, and Paymaster Campion.
The gentlemen named, and all the other
authorities of the meeting, worked well, and
deserve every credit. The Friendly Societies
sports were conducted by the following Com-
mittee Messrs. J. Jamieson, Pigott, Cole,
Hughes, Garratt, Carr, Massey, Beehan, Le-
Roy, Duthie, and Niblock.
The amount of money taken at the gates
was £509, but this does not represent the
total number of people present, as many
entered the ground without paying. This
sum, with the £42 realised by the tender for
the progaammes, makes £551, or £350 more
than the estimate given by the Amateur
Athletic Club to the Jubilee Committee.
There were two bands on the ground—that,
of H.M.s. Orlando, twenty members, under
Bandmaster G. Bird ; and the Artillery,
under Bandmaster A. R. Hunter. The per-
formances of both were exceedingly good.
The Orlando band contributed the following
programme; “Bohemian Girl,” Balfe ;
waltz, “ Daddy,” Bncallosi ; fantasia, “Folk
Songs of Italy,” E. Rampezzoti; quadrille,
“ Merrie England,” Williams ; grand selec-
tion, “ Attila,” Verdi; galop, “Tourists.’
A fine programme was also submitted by Mr.
Hunter’s band, a notable item being the
“ Mari tana” fantasia.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin
A staff of police, under Inspector Broham
and _ Sergeant-Major Pratt, rendered good
service during the day.
The sports throughout were well contested,
and some of the races for the members of the
Amateur Athletic Club, especially the 150
yards handicap, were very exciting. The
officers and men of the squadron entered
heartily into the spirit of the gathering, and
showed the greatest interest in the events
which they decided. Besides Captain Bar-
low, Captain Pelly and a large number of
other officers of tiie squadron were present.
One of the most novel features of the pro-
ceedings was the Mongolian Race, the com-
petitors being 25 Chinamen. They appeared
in newrunning costume, purchasedfor theocca-
sion atatotal costof £7 4s. Whenthey trooped
on to the ground they were received with
great applause. The details of the race were
arranged by Messrs. Ah Kew and Ah Chee,
who presented a large consignment of Chinese
crackers (costing £7 10s), and these were
placed in the centre of the field and fired at
the moment of starting the race. The sound
of the exploding crackers was almost deafen-
ing, and as packet after packet was thrown
on to the heap, a great volume of smoke
arose, accompanied with a noise like the
discharge of artillery, which continued whilst
the Chinamen were running, and for some
time afterwards.
The day’s proceedings began at half-past
ten o’clock with the sports for men of the
Friendly Societies; and after the adjourn-
ment, at half-past twelve, the squadron
sports began. The details are as follow:
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
100 Yards Handicap. —The starters were :
—Purdy, scratch ; Parsons, scratch; Mc-
Donnell, 2 yards ; O’Hare, 3 yards ; Duffiu
and McPhail, 4 yards; Jones, 5 yards;
Bain and Harvey, 6 yards; Markes and
Wilson, 7 yards; Miles, 8 yards. This was
a very good race, the three placed men finish-
ing almost abreast. Harvey, 1; Jones, 2;
McDonnell, 3.
Quarter-mile Handicap.— ln this event
the starters were Purdy, scratch; Mc-
Laughlin, 10 yards; McPhail, 15 yards ;
Bailey, 15 yards; and Harvey 16 yards.
Bailey took the lead from the start, and was
never headed, winning easily. Bailey, 1;
Harvey, 2; McLaughlin, 3. Time, 58s.
Half-mile Handicap.— McLaughlin, 20
yards; Bailey, 21 yards; and Wilson, 22
yards, were the starters. Bailey came to
the front at the back of the course the second
time, and won easily. Bailey, 1; McLaugh-
lin, 2. Time, 2m. 21£s.
One Mile Handicap.— There were post
entries for this event, as follows :—Bailey,
scratch ; McCormick, 35 yards; Beachem,
25 yards; and Wilson, 40 yards. Won
rather easily. McCormick, 1; Bailey, 2;
Wilson, 3.
150 Yards Handicap. —The starters were :
Purdy and Parsons, scratch; McDonnell, 3|
yards; Duffin, 6 yards ; Jones, 7 yards ; Har-
vey, 8 yards; Marks, 9 yards ; and Wilson,
10 yards. After a good race Harvey won.
Parsons being second, and Duffin and Jones
running a dead heat for third place. Time,
16s.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
100 Yards Handicap (for men over 40).
The entries were received on the ground, as
follows : —E. O’Hare, scratch; Andrews, 18
yards; C. Eater, 20 yards; and Miles, 25
yards. Won by a few yards, O’Hare run-
ning well. Eater, 1; O’Hare, 2; Miles, 3.
150 Yards Hurdles. —The starters were :
—O’Hare, scratch ; Parsons, 3 yards ; Jones,
4 yards ; and McLaughlin 8 yards. Parsons
won easily. O’Hare stopped at the first
hurdle. Time, 225.
Wheelbarrow Race, 100 yards.— J. Mc-
Donnell, 1; Shaw, 2; Cole, 3. These were
the only starters.
FIRE BRIGADES.
100 Yards Handicap.— This was one of two
races promoted on the ground for members
of fire brigades. The starters were : Parsons,
scratch; Jones, 4 yards; Jenkins, 12 yards.
Won easily. Parsons, 1; Jones, 2 ; Jenkins,
3.
150 Yards Handicap. —The starters were
the same as in the last event, the handicaps
being: Parsons, scratch; Jones, 8 yards;
Jenkins, 30 yards. Won by about a yard.
Jones, 1; Jenkins, 2 ; Parsons, 3.
SQUADRON AND AMATEUR SPORTS.
100 Yards Race. —J. Lydon (Orlando), 1 ;
F. Stimpson (Orlando), 2; W. Keleher and
O. Raynor, dead heat for third place. Seven
started. Time, ll|s.
150 Yards Handicap.— This race, for the
members of the A.A.A.C. Club, was run in
two heats and a final. A good field of seven
started in the first, and after a good race it
resulted : A. Smith, 11 yards, 1 ; J. Hill, 13
yards, 2; R. Jeffreys, 17 yards, 3. Time,
ls|s. The second heat was also a good con-
test. The limit man, Barton, led for most of
the way, but Hutchison came at the finish
and won with something in hand : J. P. Hut-
chison, 5 yards, 1 ; N. Barton, 14 yards, 2 ;
M. H. Laird, 2J yards, 3. Time, 15|s. In
the final all six placed men started, and a
fierce struggle for victory resulted. When
100 yards had been traversed Smith had a
good lead, but Hutchison came at the finish
in a most determined manner and just beat
him on the tape by a couple of inches, Laird
being half a yard away third, and the field
■well up: J. P. Hutchison, 5 yards, 1 ; A.
Smith, 11 yards, 2 ; M. H. Laird, 2 h yards, 3.
Time, 15s.
Quarter Mile. —Eight men from the
squadron started for this event all from
scratch. They went away at a very merry
pace, and J. Lydon got a good lead, which
he held till the back of the course, when O.
Raynor displaced him, and running strongly
won rather easily by about eight yards : 0.
Raynor (Opal), 1 ; Ji Lydon Orlando), 2; W.
Keleher (Opal), 3.
One Mile Bicycle.— This was a first-class
race. Eleven started. Rollo fell when he
had gone 10 yards. The limit man, Hoffman,
led the first round, but the scratch division
were closing up rapidly. Selby displaced
Taylor, and at the back of the course in the
second round Lecky came up, and getting on
terms with the leader passed him in the
straight. Howard then spurted strongly,
and was leading in the last lap, Buchanan
and Short both passed Lecky, and the former!
drew up to Howard’s hind wheel, but the


Q 2 New Zealand' s Jubilee , 1840-1890.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiin!iiiiiiiiiiiiiininiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiH!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii)iiiiiiiiii|iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiii
latter held his own, and won rather easily by
a couple of lengths : A. Howard, scratch, 1;
A. G. Buchanan, 20 yards, 2; H. Short, 100
yards, 3. Time, 3m. 20s.
220 Yards Veterans’ Race. This was
for all-comers from the squadron, and a good
field started. A spirited contest ensued, but
on turning into the straight A. Gunn took
the lead, and leaving his field rapidly won by
10 yards : A. Gunn (Orlando), 1; Stauzon
(Lizard), 2; W. Warburton, 3.
120 Yards Hurdles. A most amusing
event took place for this contest. Nine
started, and at the first hurdle several fell,
and nearly every one of the ten flights was
tumbled over before the race finished. F.
Stimpson, who jumped well throughout, won
after a good finish. F. Stimpson (Orlando),
1; W. Martin (Orlando), 2; W. Payne
(Orlando), 3.
Wheelbarrow Race (100 Yards).—This
event, for bluejackets, caused great laughter.
The competitors, eleven in number, were
blindfolded, and each drove a wheelbarrow
in which was seated another sailor who
guided his mate as to the direction he was to
take by his voice. The start had barely
been effected when several collisions took
place, causing much diversion, and the
erratic courses described by those who were
fortunate enough to escape upset was equally
amusing. The winner turned up in Loch
and Torr, who managed to keep a fairly
straight course, and a close fight for second
place ensued between two other pairs, the
result being ; Loch and Torr (Orlando), 1 ;
J. Bissett and mate (Orlando), 2; Leach and
Sherman, 3.
Professor Carrollo’s Display.—The ex-
hibition of dumbbell practice and formations
to music, by about 80 of Professor Carrollo’s
pupils, was one of the most pleasing items on
the programme. All the party filed out in
neat black and white costumes, and taking
up their positions in squad opposite the
grand stand, under the direction of the Pro-
fessor a variety of graceful movements were
gone through in splendid style and with great
precision, the whole concluding with a mazy
march at the double. At the conclusion of
the display the performers were accorded
hearty and lengthened applause.
Quarter-Mile Handicap.—This event
was for local amateurs, and produced a splen-
did contest. A fine field of 17 were des-
patched to an even start, and Clarkson,
Goldwater, and Atkinson were the first to
show in front, but at the back of the course
all had drawn up into a bunch. Turning
into the straight Taylor was ahead, but Kil-
foyle, coming on full of running, quickly dis-
placed him, and though Hutchison came on
the outside in grand style he could not get on
terms with the leader, and only beat Taylor
for second place. The result was : A. Kil-
foyle, 16 yards, 1; J. R. Hutchison, scratch,
2 : T. W. Taylor, 30 yards, 3. Time, 545.
Three-legged Race.—A great field of blue
jackets contested in this event, and though
many fell a keen struggle for victory took
glace. The result was : W. Smith and \V.
herman (Opal), 1 ; F. Wilson and W.
Stevens (Orlando), 2; A. McKinlay and J.
Lydou (Orlando), 3.
B
Obstacle Race (officers only).—This was
a race which caused great amusement. The
obstacles which had to be surmounted in a
course of about 500 yards were : —First, a
triple hurdle; next, a boom, erected hori-
zontally about 15 feet from the ground, had
to be climbed over by means of dangling ropes
attached, then a large sail pinned securely to
the ground had to be crept under, a greased
inclined plank had to be scrambled up, and
last, but not least, the competitors had to
crawl through suspended barrels. Eight
started and all got safely over the hurdles,
but at the boom Baird got a good lead and
running well, scrambled under or over all
the succeeding impediments, and won with a
bit in hand. The result was, Baird (Opal),
1; Armstrong (Opal), 2; Corbett (Opal), 3.
Half-mile Mongolian Handicap.—This
was quite a novelty to the spectators, and
the sight of 25 well-built, wiry-looking
Celestials filing on the ground in orthodox
athletic costume was one that has perhaps
never before been witnessed in any athletic
meeting in Australasia. All started from
scratch, and the field began to straggle
rapidly. At the end of the first round Ling
Chung had a good lead, and running in good
style, won by about 20 yards. The result
was : Ling Chung, 1 ; Ah Hing, 2; Ah Yuk, 3.
The following were the competitors : —Ling
Chung, Ah Hing, Ah Yuk, Yuh Fung, Ah
Wong, Sing Him, Ah Mung, Yuk Lee, Ah
Hee, Li Yung, Kong Ting, Ah Won, Sun
Foo, Ah Quong, Ah Chow, Ah Kwoang, Ku
Hiu?, Ah Ling, Ah Gang, Ah Wing, Kow
Kee, and four others.
Tugs-of-War.—There were five teams en-
tered for this contest. The first heat was be-
tween 12 stokers (Orlando) and 12 bluejackets
(Opal). After a brief struggle the former
hauled some of their opponents over the line,
but then desisted, and the Opals taking ad-
vantage of the halt took them by surprise
and reversed the verdict. Orlando’s marines
and Opal’s bluejackets, No. 2, next measured
their strength, and a good tussle resulted in
favour of the former. The next heat was be-
tween Orlando’s bluejackets and Lizard’s
bluejackets. A tough pull ensued, but the
former wore their opponents down and won.
After an interval the Orlando’s bluejackets
and Opal’s bluejackets met, and a desperate
struggle ensued. The former had the worst
of the first portion of the tug, but clinging to
their work with great tenacity at last out-
stayed their opponents and won the contest
amidst great cheering. The effect of their
great exertions was apparent, however, when
they met the team of marines from the Or-
lando. The soldiers were a stalwart lot of
fellows, and pulling with a will, carried off
the prize. They were heartily applauded by
the spectators.
Three Mile Bicycle Race,—This was one
of the most interesting events of the day.
Ten started, but Ashton fell in the first lap.
Selby led for the first half-mile, but Boord,
after running second time, displaced him, and
Taylor drew up, while the field closed on the
leaders, Howard and Buchanan going very
strongly, and cutting down their opponents.
Boord shortly after ran to the front and led
the field at a _ merry pace, and Buchanan,
with Howard in close attendance, spurted


strongly, and when two miles had been gone I
1 were given with tremendous energy, and
was second. The pair of scratch men then I
1 elicited great cheering from the spectators.
settled down in pursuit of Boord, gaining I
I But the feature of the programme was the
steadily, and in the last lap but one were 1
I Kokiri, or charge, when the Maoris getting
within five yards of him. Howard then put 1
I into formation, gave a tremenduous war
on a magnificent burst of speed and went § whoop, and brandishing their paddles chara-ed
ahead, and led Buchanan on the back stretch. 1
1 right down on the immense assemblage in
On turning into the straight he had the mis- I
I front of the grand stand. The effect" was
fortune to lose his pedal and Buchanan 1
1 electric, hundreds of the spectators believed
passed him and won by a couple of lengths : 1
1 they were going to burst in on the packed
hi. G. Buchanan, scratch, 1 ; A. Howard, 20 | assemblage, like an avalanche, but with great
yards, 2; F. Boord, 250 yards, 3. Time, 10m g agility and dexterity, the leading files pulled
29s. g up at the very feet of the spectators, and
| tnen charged round the cricket ground, so as
the winner, leaving his field early in the 1
I to enable the spectators on all sides of the
second round, and finishing well in advance i
1 amphitheatre to see the Kokiri, or rush, or
of his opponents. H. N. Goldwater, 45 1
1 Maori charge. This spectacle completed the
yards, 1 ; R. Jeffries, 10 yards, 2 ; E. Clarke, i
1 delight and satisfaction of the spectators, and
i was an excellent ending to the day’s amuse-
1 ment. Lord Carrington directed Mr. Porter
Sack Race. —Eleven men started, and many 1
I to thank the natives for their performance of
tumbles ensued, the race eventually being I
1 the dances, with which he had been greatly
won by a seaman from the Orlando.
I pleased.
Obstacle Race, Allcomers.—For this I
I The days of a genuine war dance are past.
event over a dozen started, and all went well |
I The Maoris now do not practice it in earnest,
until the greasy inclined planks were encoun- |
| and so it tends to degenerate into a some-
tered, at which many of the competitors came f
1 what spiritless performance. Those who
to grief, and Raynor, who was leading, was 1
I saw a war dance thirty or forty years ago,
displaced by W. Payne, who got over at his I
I when the Maoris meant it, and when per-
first attempt, and securing a long lead, won |
1 haps 1000 warriors took part, could not lielp
easily. |
| making comparisons. But what we saw is
I probably the best we can expect to see in
| Auckland.
THE WAR DANCE.
I We may quote from Dr. Thomson his de-
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiaiiiiiiiiiii|iiimiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiin^
We may quote from Dr. Thomson his de-
scription of a war dance as it should be :
“The whole army, after running about 20
yards, arranged itself in lines, five, ten,
twenty, or even forty deep, and then all
squatted down in a sitting posture. Suddenly,
at a signal given by the leader, all started to
their feet, having weapons in their right
hands. With the regularity of a regiment at
drill, each man elevated the right leg and
right side of the body, then the left leg and
left side ; and then, like a flash of lightning,
jumped two feet from the ground, brandish-
ing and_ cleaving the air with his weapon,
and yelling a loud chorus, which terminated
with a long, deep, expressive sigh, and was
accompanied with gaping mouths, inflated
nostrils, distorted faces, in which nothing
was seen but the dark pupil surrounded with
white. Every muscle quivered. Again and
again these movements were enacted, and
time was marked by striking their thighs
with their open left hands so as to produce
one sound, and by old naked women daubed
over with red ochre acting as fuglers in front
of the dancers.”
Owing to the fiasco which occurred at the
Devonport Racecourse, in the failure of the
public to see the war-dance, Mr. Devore and
the members of the Jubilee Committee de-
termined that no stone should be left
unturned to have the dance repeated
in the Auckland Domain, where the
natural amphitheatre surrounding the
Cricket Ground would enable 20,000 people
to see it performed with ease and
comfort. They, accordingly, arranged with
the natives to give it immediately after the
sports of the day on Saturday. The result
was a magnificent success, and the Auckland
public have seen the Maori war-dance, as
performed by a large body of natives,
for, perhaps, the last time they will have the
opportunity of witnessing it. At the close of
the day’s sports the natives, who had been
marched up late in the afternoon, and were
kept in reserve in the bush near the Govern-
ment gardens, came up in regular formation,
preceded by Mr. Porter and Mr. E. T. Dufaur,
and were greeted by the immense assemblage
with enthusiastic cheers. The Maoris were
all stripped to the waist, and armed with
paddles. Two or three of the chiefs had
taiahas, or meres, and led the dances, which
were given with great vigour and precision.
The first dance, the Ngeri was one of the
hakas which is performed when a tribe has
had a meeting and decided to fight, believing
their quarrel to be just. The performance
of the dance was greeted with great applause.
Then followed the dance when they had con-
quered the enemy’s pa and were victors.
This was a haka or dance of delight.
The third dance was when the victors
went out of the pa and were eating
the bodies of their enemies. These dances
Here is the translation of a war chant
which obtained considerable celebrity at one
time, having been sent down by Rewi to
Taranaki when the war first broke out there •
It was sung by Wetine Taiporutu (who was
afterwards killed at Mahoetahi) and those
who went with him from Waikato to assist
the Taranakis:—
Bed plume, red plume,
Plume of the kaka ;
Rehearse it at Kawhia,
Cartridge, one, three, four, O Matamata
Lay hold and bring
The strong eight-stranded cord
That cannot be unfastened,
Grasp firm your weapons I Strike 1 hire !


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiumiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiyuiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiuiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiui
We give four other chants of different
kinds ;
One voice ; My children, here’s strength,
Chorus ; Ha ! ha !
One voice : My children, here’s firmness.
Chorus : Ha ! ha !
One voice : Behold a proof of unflinching strength,
The head of Te Kawai-ta-taki,
Which I grasp in my hand.
Chorus : Ha ! ha !
No. 11.
Ah, see ye not there are signs in the heavens?
And know ye not there are thoughts in the heart ?
Hew them in pieces ! hew them in pieces !
Pounce, pounce upon them,
Pounce upon them now !
No. 111.
Son of the potent ? Son of the brave !
Mighty in battle on land and the wave.
Great is the soul where true valour reigns,
Noble the blood that swells in your veins ;
| Crest of the Kawau yield to your foe,
| Chiefs of the warriors ! ye are laid low.
No. IV.
| Kumara, one, two, three ;
| Kumara, two, three, four ;
| Now carry out your plan.
| Pounce; pounce upon them.
| Rehearse your incantations,
| ISo ye may be strengthened in the strife ;
i ()h, let your plots
| Ripen into action.
| Say, are we not the descendants
| Of Puhikuku and Puhikaka ?
| Pounce upon them ; pounce upon them.
When will your valour begin to rage?
| When will your valour be strong ?
i Ah ! when the tide murmurs.
| Ah ! when the tide roars.
| Bid farewell to your children,
| For what else can you do ?
You see how the brave,
| Like the lofty exulting peaks of the mountains,
i Are coming on.
i They yield ! they yield ! O fame !
iiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiininiiiiiiimtiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiimiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
REGATTA
EVENTS.
In the forenoon the events of the Ju-
bilee Regatta which had to be contested
again in consequence of the numerous pro-
tests that had been lodged, were decided.
There was a light breeze for the sailing races,
and in the majority of cases nearly all the
competitors w ho had taken part in the x’aces
on Wednesday again faced the starter. In
consequence of the alteration in the course,
however, the exact amount of the time allow-
ances could not be properly calculated, and
the residts of the races below are therefore
given as the craft finished, but probably
several of those who came in first will not be
the ultimate winners of the prizes when the
apportionment of allowances is taken into
consideration. Mr. J. F. Haultain proved an
efficient starter, and Mr. J. B. Graham, as
usual, was a painstaking and impartial judge.
The details of the races are appended :
Second Class Yachts. —This was the race
for craft between 4 and 7 tons. Only three
vessels started, the Mapu, which came in
first on Regatta Day, had carried away her
gaff the day previous, and came to the post
too late to have any chance. The Spray was
ahead for the most of the first round, but
was eventually passed by the Tawera, which
came in an easy winner, the positions at the
finish being as follows; —Tawera, 2h. 56m.
305., 1 ; Spray, 3h. 6m. 285., 2; Juvarnia, 3h.
11m. 305., 3. The Tawera therefore wins
the valuable cup presented by the Colonial
Insurance Company, as well as the announced
prize money.
First-class Fishing Boats. All those
who had contested on Regatta Day again
came to the start, which was an excellent
one, all being sent off on very even terms.
The Foam with her small sails was out of the
race. The May was the first to round the
North Head, but as she had not a great
spread of canvas, her owner evidently calcu-
lating on a stiff breeze, she was afterwards
passed by both the Christina and the Caprera
which were better prepared for the light
wind. The Foam gave up early in the race
being distanced. The order in which the
boats finished was; —Christina, 2h. 54m., 1;
Caprera, 2h. 58m. 455.,2; May,|2h. 59m. 305.,
3 ; Laurina, 3h. sm. 305., 4.
Third Class Yachts. —Six craft answered
the starter’s signal, and were sent away on
even terms. The Manola soon asserted her
superiority, and repeated her performance of
the 29th, but the other craft made repeated
changes in their positions, the yachts which
had any chance with the Manola being the
Matea and Tangaroa. The Isca was late in
starting, and was considerably handicapped
thereby. The result was : Manola, 3h. 33m.
205., 1 ; Matea, 3h. 34m. 215.,2; Tangaroa,3h.
34m. 555., 3; Isca, 3h. 40m. 305., 4 ; Maia, 3h.
42m., 5.
Small Fishing Boats.. — N early all the
competitors of Regatta Day again came for-
ward, and though the breeze was very light,
a fair race ensued. Owing to an alteration
being made in the time of starting, the May
Queen was about six minutes late in starting,
and at the finish was well up with the
leaders, the order being; Venice, lb. 39m.,
1; Mignonette, lb. 45m., 2 ; Lita, lb. 48m.,
3; May Queen, Ih. 51m. 455., 4; Mary,
Ih. 52m., 5.
Fourth Class Yachts. -This was a very
good race, but would have been more ex-
citing had there been a stronger wind, The
result was ; Italy, 2h. 39m., 1; Maud, 2h.
41m., 2; Doris, 2h. 48m., 3; Malvina, 2h.
53ra., 4.
Junior Whaleboats. —This race was one
of those which had to be re-contested. St.
George’s, which won so easily on Regatta
Day, did not compete, the starters being
North Shore, Hauraki, and City. A good
contest ensued for half the distance, when


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiipiiiu^^
the North Shore, who were second on Re-
gatta Day, won easily, Hauraki being second,
and City third.
Gic Race.— A match between two four-
oared gig crews from the Poverty Bay and
Auckland Rowing Clubs took place. A very
fair contest ensued for a mile, when the
visitors drew away, and won at the finish
somewhat easily by a couple of lengths.
As showing the masses of people which
have been handled during the Jubilee week,
and transported to and fro without a single
hitch or accident, we give the returns of the
Devonport Steam Ferry Company and the
Auckland Tramway Company. The ferry
steamers carried 51,332, and the Tramway
Company about 50,000. The ’buses and
cabs must also have carried about 20,000,
and the railways must have carried some
20,000, making over 140,000 persons in all,
or the population of Auckland and suburbs
shifted more than twice over.
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
THE GOVERNOR
AND THE MAORIS.
In the morning His Excellency Lord
Onslow, by invitation of the Waikato na-
tives, proceeded to Devonport to receive an
address of welcome. His Lordship was
accompanied by Admiral Lord Charles
Scott, Sir John and Lady Thurston, Miss
Thurston, Captain Savile, A.D.C. to Lord
Onslow, Hon. Messrs. Mitchelson and His-
lop, Mr. Clendon (R.M.), Mr. Lewis (Under-
secretary for Native Affairs), Mr. Upton
(Mayor of Auckland), Mr. Devore (President
of the Jubilee Committee), Mr. M. Niccol
(Mayor of Devonport), and a number of
officers from the warships in harbour. The
party were met and welcomed by fifty
young Maori girls, led by Te Rawhiti, and
they accompanied them to the Naval Depot,
where the main body of the natives met
them with great cheering. Lord Onslow
was introduced to Major Te Wheoro, who
presented him with an address from the
Waikato natives, which was read by Te
Rawhiti, as follows :
Pepuere Ist, 1890.
Kia koe e Anaro, te Kawana o Nui Tireni. Tena
koe, —Ko matou ko uga Rangitira me te Iwi o Wai-
kato, he tangata Maori no Nui Tireni, e powhiri
manuhiri atu ana kia koe, i runga i tenei Hupirii
Rarangatia ai te Kawana, me te pakeha e o matou
tupuna Matua, kia noho ki tenei whenua, ki Waite-
mata ite tau 1840.” A tae noa mai ki tenei tau 50
kote Hupiri. A, tenei matou kei te koa ki to haere-
nga mai me te taenga mai hold o nga Kawana me
nga rangatira nunui o nga Koroni me te Rangalira
o te Moana e tauria nei e te maua kuini e tiaki nei i
te moana o tatou Koroni. Tenei hold matou kei te
whakapai atu kite urunga mai o te minita o tou
Kawanatanga kite Whakahaere i touhaerenga mai
ki a kite koe me on hoa i a matau i konei i tenei, ra.
Haere mai! haere mai ! ki Waitemata i runga ite
aroha me te atawhai o nga Rangatira Maori me nga
Kawana i whakatakotoria ai i te Timatanga. Haere
mai hoki i runga i te kotahitanga o nga Iwi e rua
kite karanga a te Hupiri o te Koroni, me te mahara
ano kei te whakanui to tatou Koroni me te mahara
ano kei te Whakanui to tatou Koroni i tenei Hupiri.
Me puta i konei ki tou aro aro he whakapai atu ma
matou ki nga rangatira me nga kai Whakahaere o
tenei Hupiri me te Iwi o Akarana i Karangatia ai
matou ki konei kite mahi i nga Ahuareka mo to
tatou Hupiri me to ratou atawhai hoki ia matou.
A e tumanako ana matou ki a u tonu tenei painega
ki runga i nga Iwi e rua Pakeha-Maori ka tumanako
matou ki a ora koe me tou Reiri me tou Whanau.
Na Wi Te Wheoro.
The address was interpreted to Lord
Onslow by Mr. Clendon, R. M. The follow-
ing is the translation :
February 1, 1890. To you, Onslow, Governor of
New Zealand. Greetings to you,—We, the chiefs of
the people of the Waikato tribe, Maoris of New
Zealand, salute you as a stranger at this time of
Jubilee that has been instituted by the Governor,
and the Europeans, and our former ancestors, that
it should remain in this land, in this district of the
Waitemata, in the year 1840 until now this 50th
year of the Jubilee. Now, we are glad of your
coming here, and also of the arrival of the other
Governors, and of the chiefs and important people
of these colonies, and of the Admiral of the
seas, who is administering the authority of
the Queen, and protecting the seas of our
colonies. We are also glad of the coming
amongst us of the Ministers of your Govern-
ment, to prepare for your arrival, that you and your
friends might see us here on this day. Welcome,
welcome to Waitemata, in the love and affection of
the Maori chiefs, of the Governors who were ap-
pointed from the commencement. Welcome also on
account of the union of the two peoples—the Euro-
peans and the Maoris—by the naming of the Jubilee
of the colony, and on account of the thought of the
aggrandisement of our colony by this Jubilee. Let
us, therefore, pronounce in your presence our ap-
preciation to the chiefs and Committee of this
Jubilee, and also to the people of Auckland who
have requested ns to come here to carry on the
sports for our Jubilee, and also for their kindness
to us. We desire that this good feeling should
always remain between the two peoples, Europeans
and Maoris, and wo also desire the health and wel-
fare of yourself, and your lady, and your family.—
from Wi Te Wheoro.
His Excellency the Governor replied
as follows, Mr. Clendon again interpreting :
—“ To Te Wheoro and people of Waikato, —
To be the first Governor who has received
an address of loyalty to the Queen of Eng-
land from the natives of the Waikato is a
great pleasure to me. Englishmen believe
their institutions and their forms of Go-
vernment to be the best in the world ; at
any rate, it has enabled them, where other
nations of Europe, with different forms of
Government have failed, to people every
part of the globe, and to bring Christianity
and civilisation to countless native tribes.
In bidding you share with us on equal
terms in these forms of government, and by
opening to you our law Courts and our Par-
liament Houses, we believe we are doing


g 6 New Zealand's Jubilee, 1840-1890.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinin
our best to show you that there is to be no
difference in the future between our races ;
that the strife which lasted so long between
us is over for ever, and that any good thing
which centuries of civilisation has taught
us is now the property of the Maori. The
Queen, whom we all reverence for her
blameless life, and her affection for her
people, shall know the part which you have
taken in celebrating the fiftieth year of her
dominion over New Zealand.”
After His Excellency’s reply, TeWhkoeo
uttered some words of welcome, and a war
dance was given by the natives. The
Whakataua, or principal war canoe, was
then prepared; and Lord Onslow, Admiral
Scott, Sir John and Lady Thurston, Miss
Thurston, and the rest of the party em-
barked in it to proceed to Paul Tuhaere’s
settlement at Orakei. The large canoe was
followed by the second canoe, the Whakati-
wai, in which the Hon. Mr. Mitchelson was
seated. On arrival at Orakei it was found
that the principal canoe could not approach
the shore so near as to allow the party to
land from it, and the Governor and the other
gentlemen who were with him were taken
ashore on the backs of stalwart Maoris,
whilst the ladies were carried by natives
whose arms were extended in a chair fashion.
The Maoris at Paul’s settlement welcomed
their distinguished visitors, and the Maoris
who had accompanied them from Devon-
port, and all of the natives, then assembled
together and gave the war dance with
great spirit and enthusiasm. Another ad-
dress was shortly afterwards presented to
Lord Onslow on behalf of the Hauraki natives
by the Chief Paul, Mr. Clendon interpret-
ing. His Excellency having replied, the
visitors were shown through the settlement
by Paul. A number of Maori maidens then
danced the “ poi” dance, and the vice-regal
party returned to the city shortly after
twelve o’clock.
lIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIUIIIIIIIIItIIIIIIIIIIII
THE KEY. W. COLENSO AND THE JUBILEE.
Mr. W. Wildman having telegraphed to
Mr. W. Colenso, of Hawke’s Bay, inviting
him to come to Auckland at the time of
the Jubilee, received in reply the following
interesting letter ;
Napier, January 24, 1890.
Dear Mr. Wildman, —I can scarcely tell you
in a few words how very greatly your kind
telegram of yesterday affected me on receipt
thereof. It was so unexpected and so very
generous on your part. As I don’t benefit by
the town delivery of letters I did not receive
it until late this day, and then by chance;
but I replied by wire (briefly) as you wished.
The chief causes of my not accepting your
invitation are ; my chronic rheumatism (often
severe), my age (nearly 80) preventing my
undertaking the long and rough overland
journey, and my being always such a great
sufferer at sea from mal-de-mer ; at the same
time my general health is fair if I keep quietly
within my old gearings.
For many reasons 1 should like to be there
with you at Auckland on this occasion (1)
From my having both witnessed and assisted
at the creation of the colony in the Bay of
Islands (Auckland province) in 1840 ; and (2)
from my wish to add my testimony (that of a
living witness) to that fact against the vain-
glorious and intolerable assumption of Wel-
lington,—which to me, from my intimate
actual knowledge of the past, and of the
hundreds of whites located at the North, in
and about the Bay of Islands, with our re-
spectable merchants, stores, hotels, bank,
churches, shipping, and extensive trade, is
worse than preposterous. I could say a good
deal on this head, but I forbear.
The Government undertook to publish my
authentic account of “ the signing of the
treaty of Waitangi” (written entirely at the
time, and also corroborated by Mr. Busby,
then the late British Resident), and as I read
the proofs (revise) a fortnight ago I hope you
may have some copies with you by the J übilee
day.
I venture to think that not a few Auck-
landers (by this term I mean of the whole
province) will find it interesting, as well as
historical and correct.
I much regret, however, the Government
declining to publish with it my two appen-
dices pertaining to the formation of the
colony (on the score of not wishing to enlarge
the little book). The first of those two was
of public matters prior to 1840; the second
of matters closely following the same—viz.,
in that year, until the seat of Government
was removed to Auckland. These, however,
may yet be published by me.
Heartily wishing you every possible suc-
cess —without a flaw ! —and trusting that
much future good (though it may be for the
present hidden from view) may follow this
Jubilee year and commemoration to Auck-
land and to her whole province, and to the
colony at large.—l am, &c.,
Wm. Colenso.
P.S. —Be very sure to send me an Auck-
land paper containing a full account of your
doings.
iiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
lIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII


niiittJiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiniii
IINIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIfII
THE LATEST, BEST, AND MOST DURABLE!!!
THE
BEALE PATENT
lEEE I <GS- ZE3C-.A. HMC
SEWING MACHINES.
Including
BUTTON-HOLE ATTACHMENTS. Kept
for Three Yesjrs FREE OF CHARGE. *
in Repair
HAPSBUBG PIANOS,
HAYDN ORGANS, HAYDN HARMONIUMS.
BEALE KNIFE CLEANERS.
—■
Gash or fimt Payjaents e -4.
m CATALOGUES AND FULL PARTICULARS ON APPLICATION.
QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND.
Victoria Avenue, WANGANUI. Emerson Street, NAPIER.


THE UNION
FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE CO.
OF NEW ZEALAND, LIMITED.
CAPITAL - - £2,000,000
Paid-up Capital and Reserve Fund - - £165,000
DIRECTORS;
HON. J. T. PEACOCK, M.L.C., Chairman.
G. G. STEAD, Esq., Deputy Chairman
JOSEPH PALMER, Esq.
HON. W. REEVES, M.L.C.
R. H. WEBB, Esq.
J. ANDERSON, Esq.
P. CUNNINGHAM, Esq,
BANKERS
UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA, LIMITED.
FIRE & MARINE INSURANCES OF EVERY DESCRIP
TION ACCEPTED AT THE LOWEST RATES.
LOSSES RECEIVE PROMPT SETTLEMENT.
BRANCHES AND AGENCIES THROUGHOUT THE COLONY
SECURITY OF ASSURED UNDOUBTED.
BARTHOLOMEW KENT,
Manager Auckland Branch.


GOLD MEDAL, PARIS, 1889. Of
'W~
J %e*ies ©j?
ILLUSTRATING THE
■h JUBILEE * OF * THE * COLONY,-f-
Including Yieivs of the Procession, Regatta, Maori Canoe
Race , Dances, Groups of Natives, and
PORTRAITS OP DISTINGUISHED CHIEFS,
<S -^ JS S ft a)
JOSIAH MARTIN,
portrait and csandAcape JVrtiAf,
202, QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND.
' — —*
Includes Views of all the principal Towns in the Colony, the
most picturesque places of popular resort, and illustrations
of Wonderful Natural Phenomena.
THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE COLONY.
Maori Life and Antiquities, Buildings, Carvings, Weapons, etc.,
fully illustrated by Photography.
THE SOUTH PACIFIC AMS ITS PEOPLE :
A New Series of Characteristic Portraits, Groups, and Scenes in
the Coral Islands.
PRIZE MEDALS—LONDON, MELBOURNE, PARIS.


IlllllllllllllllllUIlllllltlllllllllllllllllllillllllllilililllllllllilllllllllllilllllllllilllllllllllllllllllll)
KING, WALKER & GO.
QUEEN ST., AUCKLAND.
ROBERTSON’S WHISKY,
DENIS MOUNIE’S BRANDY,
SURD’S SUN MR PS
AND
MELBOURNE TIMBER AGENCY.
4 AGENTS.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiiiiiiiiii(iiiiiiiiiiii]iiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiin
IHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
LONDON AND BERLIN PIANO COMPANY.
DIRECT CASH IMPORTERS.-?-
Opposite Post Office, SHORTLAND STREET, AUCKLAND.
NEW MODELS
£35 IRON-FRAMED PIANOS £35
£4O IRON COTTAGE GRAND PIANOS £4O
£45 HIGH-CLASS IRON COTTAGE GRAND PIANOS £45
£5O HIGH-CLASS IRON UPRIGHT GRANDS £5O
PIANOS CAN BE PURCHASED ON THE HIRE SYSTEM FROM 20s. A MONTH.
Illustrated and Descriptive Catalogue Gratis.
w. IIL VIBBI a « lMag©s.
PERSONAL.—MR. WEBBE continues Professional Teaching—Piano, Singing,
Organ, Theory,
AT HIS RESIDENCE, KARANGAHAPE ROAD
LESSONS-Morning before 9; Evening after 6.


Illlllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllll
lllillllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllillllllllllllHlllliliillllllllllilllllillllllllllllllilllllllllllllllillllllllllilllllllll
pvapcx' cm 6 (STotliier,
252 AND 254,
QUEEN ST., ATJ CKLAND.
PATTEKMS + AKB + PlilCE + HSTS
POST FREE ON APPLICATION.
Country Orders well Packed,
and Delivered* to BOAT or ST All ON
FREE OF CHARGE.


illllllllllltllllllli
ffiTHN wm.
-AND-
HABIT MAKER.
($• JJo
SlilflAll iflllf,
Auckland.


Illlilllllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Jl 'r' TE V A '
AUCTIONEER
AUCTION ROOMS:
POULTRY, FRUIT,
DAIRY AND OTHER PRODUCE
(Special Accommodation for Staging the above for Sale
to the best advantage).
SALES ARE HELD—
TUESDAY AND FRIDAY EACH WEEK,
When Goods from 300 to 500 Vendors are disposed of.
EVERY CARE TAKEN OF CONSIGNMENTS, AND
ACCOUNT SALES PROMPTLY RENDERED.
<A ALEXANDER AITKEN,
AUCTPIttNIEBK,
JUNCTION of QUEEN and GREY STREETS,
AUCKLAND.


lillllllllllllll!llllllillllllilllllllll|[l!lfililllll[|llllllllllilillilillIllNil)!lllllllllill!lllllllllllllllllllllill!|]lllllllllll!ll!IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!llllllllllllll!ll!IIIIIIIlllIII!lllll[||||llllli!lllllllll|||l||i||||||||||jl|||||||||jl|][|||j
UNSURPASSED FOR
ELEGANCE, DURABILITY,
AND
EXCELLENCE OF WORK.
Cheapest House in Town for Fancy Goods, Toys, Etc.!


TO BOOK COLLECTORS AND ALL INTERESTED IN
LOCAL PUBLICATIONS.
Makes a specialty of dealing in Books
relating to tkis Colony artd fke JPacific
Islands, and kas fast issaed a list of
tke most interesting and saleable Books
on tke sabjeet, wkiek will be sent on
application.
W.W. holds the sole remaining copies of
Gudgeon’s History of the War - - 12/6
Dr. Campbell’s Poenamo -
Well’s History of Taranaki - 4 6
Dr. Maunsell’s Maori Grammar - - 3/6
Keaton’s History of the Waikato War 2/6
Thomson’s Story of New Zealand (very
scarce), new copies - 25/-
Purchasers are advised to hurry up before the Stock
is exhausted.
Sole Agent for this Province for the very Handsome Jubilee
Book just issued by the noted Chromo-Lithographer, Mr.
Willis, of Wanganui. Contains 18 large coloured pictures of
the principal towns and scenery of the colony, with graphic
descriptive letterpress by Edwd. Wakefield, Esq. Price, 21s.
Posted in the Colony, is. yd.; out, 3s. gd.
Auckland Office of Te Korimako, the only newspaper in Maori
now published. 4s. per annum.
ALL colonists should have a copy of Vink's Forest Flora of New
Zealand. , 12s. 6d.; postage, is. /od.
In preparation a Beautiful Book on New Zealand Ferns , fully
illustrated.
W. WILDMAN,
VICTORIA ARCADE, AUCKLAND.


THOS.M. JACKSON & GO.
HOUSE.LAND & ESTATE AGENTS.
MORTGAGES on FREEHOLD SECURITY NEGOTIATED.
STOCK and FURNITURE SALES undertaken
in Town or Country at 5 per cent,
VALUATIONS MADE at 2i per cent.
i&GOTW skhM TSB WhMWiSG MI
Wan stilus ®a £Sj*JDsßlk
SFisaiS ta mmm iaiaaii® StDa? Huai©®
>***••«««*****«*«**
FURNITURE SALES HELD AT MART
TUESDAYS AND FRIDAYS.
THOS. M. JACKSON & GO.,
QUEEN STREET, AXJGKLAITD,


]Mexc§ants,
Established 1840,-f- N.Z.
IMPORTERS OF
Teas, Sugars, Tobacco, Cigars,
OILMEN’S STORES, EASTERN PRODUCE,
GROGERIEp, * DRIED * pßlflTg, * CA]T]TED ♦ QOODg.
>SAL T,-*-
WOODEN WARE, WIRE NAILS, CORN SACKS, Etc.
Country Stores Supplied with every Trade Requisite.
Gum, Flax, Tow, Dairy Produce, Fungus, Wool, etc.
received for sale on clients’ account.
Bfßflf QESQRimotf Q.f MnRQHMJS% QQSmSSSSQSt, MB SHIP
MBMm BUSItfBSS traßsmtbd, iHbeHts BXSQIITBD*
Advances made on Consignments to our London House, 6, Hamsell
Street, or to our Agents in New York.
Correspondence in all Australian Cities, and in the Chief Producing
and Manufacturing Centres in Europe, Asia, and United States.
43TSEE NEXT PAGE FOR LIST OF AGENCIES.


iiniiiiiiiniiiitiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiii
L. D. NATHAN & CO.,
A.XJOK:L-A.KrD 3
We are Agents for the following:—
SHIPPING.
THE SHAW, SAVILL, AND ALBION SHIPPING COMPANY, LONDON.
Steamers leaving every Month.
INSURANCE.
THE BRITISH AND FOREIGN MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY, Limited.
MERCHANDIZE.
MESSRS. READ BROS’. Celebrated Dog’s Head Bottled Ale and Stout, from Bass and
Guinness’ Brews.
THE DISTILLERS COMPANY OF EDINBURGH, Scotch and Irish Whiskies.
BISQUIT DUBOUCHE & GO., Bulk and Bottled Brandies.
UDOLPHO WOLFE’S Aromatic Schnapps.
JOHN HOPKINS <& SON’S, Due de Montebello Champagne and Spey side Whisky.
R. BELL & CO.’S Wax Vestas ( Agents for New Zealand).
TAIKOO SUGAR REFINERY COMPANY’S Sugars, Hongkong.
EDINGTON ESTATES Sugars, Fiji.
T. C. WILLIAMS & GO., of Richmond, Virginia, Tobaccos.
DAVID DUNLOP, Petersburg, Virginia, Columbia Brand Tobaccos.
KINNEY & CO., American Cigarettes.
SIR ROBERT BURNETT & CO.’S Bulk and Bottled Vinegar.
F. HUEMANN <& CO., of Antwerp, Starch.
ALGOCK ds CO., Melbourne, Billiard Tables and Requisites.
PERRY DAVIS & SONS, Providence Rhode Island, Pain Killer.
ALLEN’S Lung Balsam.
THOMAS LOUNDES <& CO., Key Rum.
BLANKENHEIM & NOLET, Rotterdam, Key Geneva.
MELLOR’S Celebrated Sauce.
U.S.A. Hop Bitters.
BRISTOL’S Sarsaparilla.
UNION BAG AND PAPER COMPANY, Chicago.
NINETEEN AUCKLAND PROVINCIAL FLAX MILLS.


m
W "W
'i|i|iiii|H«
Qf 1 . S2$*. &
i
W. H. FENTON & 00.,
1
KEEP THE
BEST AND CHOICEST VARIETY
OF
I
HATS, CAPS, HOSIERY, MERCERY, PORTMAN-
1{
at ami i
1
|a*|afadam$
I
TEAUX, UMBRELLAS, OVERCOATS,
SHIRTS, GLOVES, SCARVES,
AND
8
ETC., ETC., IN THE COLONY.
GENTLEMEN’S
MERCERS,
|:|
WE ARE ALSO THE
If
CHEAPEST MOUSE IN TOWN.
f5. «
uesn
Mipoei
i
INSPECTION INVITED. -4-
(OPPOSITE “HERALD
” OFFICE),
h
N.B. — FENTON’S PATENT “FLEXIBLE”
and “ DUPLEX” HATS, always in Stock
©^AUCKLAND.
and made to Order.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiii
miiiiiiiiiniiiiiii


iiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiHiiiiiiiiniiiiii
(Late of EARLE & MONTGOMERY),
268, QUEEN STREET,
KARANGAHAPE ROAD, N>
Olroccr § prouisioit lijcrcliaut.
FAMILIES WAITED UPON FOR ORDERS.
All COUNTRY FAVOURS PERSONALLY Attended to.
ramMLMI ®»®®g at
§8 WHOLESALE T PRICES.®!
Postal Address
Wmiil EARLE,
GROCER
1
Auckland.


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiim
JAff
fJ6U o
f | 3?Od
i i
M. MURCHIE,
TAILOR.
IMPORTER of ENGLISH AND SCOTCH TWEEDS,
EJgcinch, and Eesniaa
COATINGS AND FANCY TROUSERINGS.
38, SHORTLAND ST., AUCKLAND.


F. G. EWINGTON. [C. C. BAKER.
EWIHGTOH I BASER
(Established 24 Years),
House. Land , & Commission Agents.
Agents for Queen Insurance Company.
Capital £2,000,000.
Alt. Roslcill Agents for New■ Zealand In-
surance Company. Gapitcd £1,000,000.
Interest, Rents, and Dividends collected in
Toivn and Country.
Confidential Agencies undertaken.
Estates surveyed and subdivided for sale.
Valuations of Reed and Personal Estate made.
Money invested free of charge to lenders.
Arbitrations undertaken.
Exchanges effected of Country Land for City
Property.
FOR SOME YEARS WE
OoUeeliag laterest @iA
AND GENERALLY
Building Society Shares bought.
Money to Lend.
Loans negotiated in large or small sums.
Mortgages bought.
Estates managed for Absentees, and remit-
tances sent monthly or quarterly.
Agents for Trustees and Executors.
All descriptions of Freehold and Leasehold
Properties for sale.
Trustee and Executorships undertaken.
Partnerships arranged.
Tenants found for Shops, Houses, Cottages,
Farms, and Offices.
MADE A SPECIALTY' OP
Beats, Lettlag Premises,
LOOKING AFTER THEM#
TO LANDLORDS, MORTGAGEES, AND OTHERS.
MR. EWINGTON having resided in Auckland over 27 years, during which time he has
been 24 years in the Estate Agency Business, his firm are able to render valuable assistance
to persons wishing to buy, sell, let, or take property; or to borrow or lend money.
EWINGTON & BAKER have for sale at low prices, all descriptions of real estate.
They have Properties to let at cheap rentals; and Money to lend at current rates. They relieve
landlords and mortgagees of much trouble and anxiety for a small commission on actual
receipts, and charge nothing for paying out of funds in hand insurances and rates to order.
Any business entrusted to Ewington & Baker receives prompt, personal, and careful
attention.
Property Owners, not already have agents, entrusting their business to EWINGTON and
BAKER, will find it faithfully attended to.
EWINGTON & BAKER accord to their principals all the advantages advertised by
other agents.
MONEY TO LEND AT 0 PER CENT. PER ANNUM, AND VERY CHEAP PROPERTIES FOR SALE.
F. G. EWINGTON & C. C. BAKER,
COOMB ES’ ARCADE, QUEEN ST., AUCKLAND.




FAC-SIMILES OF PROCLAMATIONS BY GOVERNOR HOBSON.
«^#se, fiijtJJcl
tf&us
Stfijy? y%W^/& £ &4>
/£ /#&/ xdL *y&y&&£
aS <xxS
* x sg*y£t~y y? • yz<r/ a^y^yZy
4«> y*y~f v^a>^
t y^ ryy <£y64z**cs a& yjb>


II I , 11' i•}II , 11 I*
1 11 *l l 4Mv II ij-
II h | Hm H r
Ii 1 1 yJ K 1 IN I f
II i5l i ||h|h
|| |t-. j I r u
,IIJ f I I J|T H M If
h 1 O 1H i I 1
114 I i !j1 I %
Ii i i J. :L
I f 1 | Th h I si *vi
hit hi if ji ii
vy I -h J i I i *
IJ I jn|| j
Soli] d/s&VtW
■puereaz msm ‘pireppnv ‘jmx>s iUßqpuXjW 'ex V uv 01 P«* ‘»»w»S U3an o ‘ iEl 'WaimpijqßiSH
uresis TEJJU3O xisqj Ju ‘(.’IO.I.HOH V SNOSIIAV J u »l*Js »H> J3 P“ n l NOX«OH HDJIOHO (IHUJ'iy pus
‘NoST I AV NOXSn Hdssof ‘nosiim XXOOS nvrniM. ‘sxojaudoxj sq» *q paqsiiqnj pire psqdTuSomnojoqj
|
j
i |
&
I
\s
I*
