

Jf\tp
NEW CONSTITUTION
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
OF THE
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
ADOPTED AT THE GENERAL ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
SOCIETY, HELD ON 17th JUNE, 1886.
cSubncjj:
w. E. SMITH, PRINTER, 28 & 30 BRIDGE STREEET & 229 GEORGE STREET.
D(SSUO




NEW CONSTITUTION
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
OF THE
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
ADOPTED AT THE GENERAL ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
SOCIETY, HELD ON I7th JUNE, 1886. 1


Members of Council and Officers
OF THE
('ifaflrajjljtnii of Sustnilasia,
PROVINCE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Oirf-Jlmitott:
Sir EDWARD STRICKLAND, K. 0.8., F.R.G.S.
Ijrr. Srcrsimr:
EjRANCIS GERARD.
Um :
T. H. MYRING.
J. T. CAHILL.
Ipm&m of Cmmnl:
HARRIE WOOD, J.P.
C. S. WILKINSON, F.R.G.S.
HENRY W. HAMMOND.
Captain E. E. BRETT.
JOHN ARTHUR, J.P.
d. McDonald, c.e.
HERBERT POWER.
G. RANKEN.
W. M. WALLIS.


THE
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
TITLE.
1. “The New South Wales Branch of the Geographical Society
of Australasia.”
OBJECTS.
2. The objects of the Society are —
I. Scientific—The advancement of geographical science,
the study of physical geography, and the exploration
of Australasia, with the islands and seas adjacent
thereto, and the antarctic region, to obtain inform-
ation upon their physical features, fauna, flora,
and geological formation, &c.
ii. Commercial —The study of commercial geography, the
natural and artificial products, and the manufactures
of various countries to promote commerce,
in. Educational —The dissemination of knowledge of
physical, commercial, and political geography among
all classes, by means of illustrated public lectures,
and publications,
iv. Historical—The collection and publication of historical
records of geographical interest, and of memoirs
of notable men of Australasia.
v. The compilation from reliable data of the geography
of Australasia.


CONSTITUTION.
(Articles 3,4, 5, and 6 of Constitution.)
3. The Society shall consist of Ordinary, Corresponding, and
Honorary Members.
i. Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary
Member, subject to election.
ii. Persons of distinguished scientific attainments, who
have promoted the objects of the Society, may be
elected Corresponding Members.
in. Honorary Members shall be elected from among such
persons as have rendered valuable service in the cause
of geographical science.
ELECTION AND PRIVILEGES OF ORDINARY MEMBERS.
4. Every person desirous of admission as a Member of this
Society shall be nominated by two Ordinary Members ; the
nomination (to be in Eorm I. of the Appendix) to be delivered to
the Honorary Secretaries in writing, and submitted to the
Members at the next monthly meeting, when a ballot shall be
taken; the assent of more than half the Members voting shall
be requisite before the admission of a Member.
5. Every person so elected shall, upon payment of his sub-
cription, become a Member of this Society; and shall be presented
by the Secretary with a Member’s ticket, a copy of the rules, and
an annual list of Members.
6. The Ordinary Members of the Society have the right to be
present and vote at all meetings of the Society; to introduce two
visitors at the General or Ordinary Meetings upon entering their
names in the visitor’s book; but no visitor shall speak unless
specially invited to do so by the Chairman. Each Member to be
entitled to receive a copy of the Society’s official publications,
and to have access to the library and other public rooms of the
Society.
7. Any Member is eligible to be an officer, or Member of the
Council of the Society.
8. The names of Members elected shall be announced to the
Society by the Yice-President when the result of the ballot is
ascertained.
ELECTION OF CORRESPONDING AND HONORARY MEMBERS.
9. The Corresponding and Honorary Members shall be elected
under the same conditions as laid down in rule 4 for Ordinary
Members, and such election shall be announced to the Society.
They shall be exempted from the payment of fees, and may
exercise the privileges of Ordinary Members, except that they
shall not vote or hold office or seat on the Council.


GOVERNMENT BY COUNCIL.
10. The government of the Society shall be vested in a Council
consisting of a Vice-President, Honorary Treasurer, two Honorary
Secretaries, and nine Ordinary Members of the Society, to be
elected as hereinafter directed.
11. The Council shall have the management of the affairs and
property of the Society.
PROPERTY.
12. The whole of the property and effects of the Society of
what kind soever shall he vested in three Trustees for its use,
who shall be chosen at a General Meeting of the Society.
ELECTION OF VICE-PRESIDENT.
13. The Vice-President shall be elected by ballot at the
General Annual Meeting of the Society, and shall hold office for
one year, and shall be eligible for re-election. He shall preside
at all meetings of the Council at which he may be present.
ELECTION OF HONORARY TREASURER AND HONORARY
SECRETARIES.
14. The Honorary Treasurer and the two Honorary Secretaries
shall be elected separately by ballot at a General Annual Meeting
of the Society, and shall hold office for one year, and be eligible
or re-election.
15. In the event of any vacancy occuring, the Council shall ap-
point a Member of the Society to fill such vacancy temporarily.
THE ELECTION OF ORDINARY MEMBERS TO THE COUNCIL.
16. The election of Ordinary Members of Council shall be by
ballot at a General Annual Meeting of the Society, having been
previously nominated, and two at least shall then retire from
office each year. The two Members who have attended the least
number of meetings of the Council shall so retire, and shall not be
eligible for re-election until the following General Annual Meeting.
17. The Vice-President or Members of the Councils of Victoria,
South Australia, Queensland or other associated province, shall,
when present in Sydney, be admitted to the meetings of Council
as Honorary Members.
DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.
18. The Council shall meet once in every month for the trans-
action of business, at such time and place as may be appointed.
Special meetings may be convened at any other time on the
authority of the Vice-President, or of three Members of the
Council. Due notice of all Council meetings to be sent to each
Member.
19. The Council shall prepare an annual balance-sheet, a return
of the attendances of Members, and a report on the operations of
the Society for the preceding year, for presentation at the General
Annual Meeting.


20. No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the
Council unless three Members of the Council are present; in
■case of equality of votes, the Chairman shall have an additional
or casting vote.
21. It shall be the duty of the Council to decide on the papers
to be read at the monthly meetings, and to determine as to their
publication, in whole or in part.
22. Any Member of Council personally interested in a question
before the Council, shall, if requested to do so by the Chairman,
withdraw during its consideration.
23. Any Member of Council absenting himself from three
sonsecutive Ordinary Meetings of Council, without satisfactory
explanation, shall be considered to have vacated office.
24. If, in the interval between two Annual Meetings, any
vacancy in the Council occur, as in the last preceding clause, or
from any other reason, the Council may appoint some Member of
the Society to temporarily fill such vacancy until it is filled by
election at the General Annual Meeting.
25. It shall be the duty of the Council to prepare ballot papers,
for the election of officers, containing the names of the present
and the proposed officers, with a space for fresh nominations by
dissentients. '
DUTIES OF THE HONORARY TREASURER.
26. The Treasurer shall have special charge of all moneys and
accounts, and shall see to the collecting of all moneys due to the
Society, and shall submit, quarterly, to the Council a list of the
names of such Members as shall be in arrears with their subscrip-
tions. He shall pay all moneys received into a bank account to
the credit of the -‘New South Wales Branch of the Geographical
Society of Australasia.”
27. All accounts due by the Society shall be approved by the
Council before being paid, and all payments shall be by cheque
signed by the Treasurer, and countersigned by one of the
Honorary Secretaries.
28. The Treasurer shall prepare an annual statement of receipts
and disbursements; to be audited by Auditors appointed at the
preceding General Annual Meeting.
29. This statement shall be submitted to the Council at its
meeting prior to the General Annual Meeting.
DUTIES OF THE HONORARY SECRETARIES.
30. An Honorary Secretary shall attend and take minutes of
the proceedings of the Society and of the Council respectively,
and see that all such minutes are entered in the several minute
books. The Honorary Secretaries shall keep a complete list of
the Members of the Society, with the name and address of each
accurately set forth; they shall conduct all correspondence and
transact all the routine business; and shall have charge of all
the property, books, maps, papers, &c., and shall see that the
same are properly recorded and catalogued.


31. Ordinary Members shall subscribe £1 Is. per annum,
payable in advance, to the Honorary Treasurer, on or before the
first day of the session.
32. A Member may at any time compound for future annual
contributions, by the payment of the sum of £lO 10s.
33. Members elected during the second half of the session
(excepting the first session) shall pay half the usual fee for that
year. No Member shall be responsible for any expenditure
beyond his annual subscription.
34. Any annual subscriber who has not paid the year’s contri-
bution during the currency of the year, shall be liable to have
his name removed by the Council from the list of Members of the
Society: Provided always that written application for the same
shall first have been made by or on behalf of the Treasurer: And
provided, also, that the Council shall have power to restore the
defaulter’s name at his request, after payment of arrears, and
satisfactory explanation.
SESSION.
(Article 13 of Constitution)
35. Session shall commence in the month of May, and last six
calendar months.
MEETINGS.
36. The Meetings of the Society shall be—
i. General Annual Meeting.
ii. Ordinary Monthly Meeting,
in. Special General Meeting
37. The General Annual Meeting shall be held at the com-
mencement of every annual session in the month of May, on a
day to be fixed by the Council, to receive the Yice-President’s
address and the report of the Council on the state of the Society,
and to discuss such subjects as may be brought forward relative
to the affairs of the Society; and to make the elections for the
ensuing year. If, after the lapse of fifteen minutes, less than ten
Members are present, it shall not be lawful for the meeting to
proceed to business, except for the purpose of adjournment, and
the meeting shall stand adjourned until a day and time then
resolved upon.
38. The Ordinary Monthly Meetings of the Society shall be
held in each month of the session on such days as the Council
may appoint. The business shall be conducted in the following
order, unless otherwise decided.
i. The reading and confirming the minutes of last meeting.
ii. The Secretary shall announce any donations made to
the Society since their last meeting, and read any
special communications.


in. The Chairman’s reports or statements from the Council.
iy. Ballot for the election of new Members.
v. Motions to he considered and notices of motion for the
next meeting to be read.
vi. The consideration of any special subject which Members
may desire to bring forward, provided it be approved
by the Chairman.
vii. Any paper or subject notified in the circular shall then
be read.
39. Every paper read before the Society shall be the property
thereof, and immediately after it has been read, shall be delivered
to one of the Secretaries for publication or otherwise as may be
deemed desirable by the Council.
40. A Special General Meeting shall be called by the Council
when considered by them necessary, or when required by the
requisition in writing of any ten Members to do so; the requisi-
tion to specify (in the form of a resolution) the purpose for
which the meeting is required to be called ; and at the meeting
the discussion shall be confined to the subjects mentioned in
the notice convening such meeting. Ten Members to form a
quorum.
41. All meetings of the Society shall be convened by notice,
written or printed, sent by the Secretaries to every Member
resident in the colony, at least seven days before date fixed for
meeting The circular shall state generally the subjects to be
brought before the meeting.
42. The Vice-President shall take the chair at all meetings of
the Society; or, in the event of his absence, Members present
shall elect a Chairman, being a Member of Council, if such be
present.
43. The Council may, at a duly constituted meeting, invite any
distinguished gentleman, whether a Member or not, to occupy
the chair on any special occasion.
INTERCOLONIAL MEETINGS.
44. The Council may appoint a Member, or Members, to attend
Intercolonial General Meetings when deemed necessary.
RETIREMENT OF MEMBERS.
45. Any Member may, on payment of all arrears of his annual
contribution, withdraw from the Society, by signifying his wish to
do so by letter under his own hand, addressed to one of the Hono-
rary Secretaries. Such Member shall, however, be liable to the con-
tribution of the year in which he signifies his wish to withdraw,
and shall also continue liable for the annual contribution until he
shall have returned all books, or other property, borrowed by
him of the Society; or shall have made full compensation for the
same, if lost or not forthcoming. Should there appear cause, in


the opinion of the Council, to require the retirement from the
Society of any Member, a Special General Meeting shall be called
by the Council for that purpose; and if three-fourths of those
voting agree by ballot that such Member shall retire, the Chair-
man shall declare the same accordingly ; whereupon the name of
such person shall be erased from the list Members.
ARCHIVES.
46. The archives of this Society shall be kept in Sydney.
ANNUAL REPORT.
47 An annual report of this Society shall be published, and
transmitted to each Member of the Society.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
48. Any alterations of the rules of this Society shall not be
considered, unless a written notice of the motion, signed by not
less than five Members, be given at a General Annual Meeting of
the Society, and thereupon such motion may be brought forward
at the next General Annual Meeting; or, if thought desirable, a
Special Meeting may be convened before such General Annual
Meeting to consider the resolution ; and any resolution passed at
such Special Meeting altering or repairing the rules shall be in
force until the General Annual Meeting next following, and, if
not then confirmed, shall thereafter be held void and of no effect.
BY-LAWS.
49. The Council shall have power to make By-laws for the
conduct of its business and the business of the Society generally ;
Provided no such By-law shall be repugnant to the objects of the
Society, or to any rules made by the Society at any of its General
Meetings.


BY-LAWS RELATING TO COMMUNICATIONS TO THE SOCIETY.
1. Every paper which it is proposed to communicate to the
Society shall he forwarded to one of the Honorary Secretaries
for the approval of the Council.
2. The Council may permit a paper written by a non-member
to be read, if communicated through a Member.
3. In the absence or at the wish of the authors, papers may
be read by any Member of the Society appointed by the Chair-
man or nominated by the author.
4. No paper or communication read before the Society shall be
published in the proceedings of the Society, without the consent
of the Council.
5. The Council shall decide, not later than at its meeting next
following the reading of a paper, whether it shall be printed in
the proceedings; and if not, such paper shall be returned, if
desired, to the author.
6. All communications intended for publication by the Society
shall be clearly and legibly written on one side of the paper
only, with proper references, and in all respects in fit condition
for being at once placed in the printer’s hands.
7. In order to ensure a correct report, the Council request
that the paper shall be accompanied by a short abstract for
newspaper publication.
8. The author of any paper which the Council has decided to
publish, will be presented with twenty copies; and he shall be
permitted to have extra copies printed, on making application to
the Honorary Secretary, and on paying the cost of such copies.
9. A proof, corrected by the MS., shall be submitted to the
author for revision.


Appendix.
FORM No. 1.
THE GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTEALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
CERTIFICATE OF A CANDIDATE FOR ELECTION.
Name...
Qualification or Occupation
Address
Being desirous of admission into the New South Wales Branch
of the Geographical Society of Australasia, we, the under-
signed members of the Society, propose and recommend him
as a proper person to become a member thereof.
Dated this day of 188








/frf.
Biographical |odctg of
New South Wales Branch,
Sydney
yt'/eadetie ■/&
\ //*/
CC
cc
5D
./e t/ec/st/ a /e> -g&ete/y.


