

NEW SETTLEMENT AT WESTERN PORT IN AUSTRALIA.
Amongst the places on the coast of New Holland, which have been recom-
mended as eligible spots for new settlements, is Western Port, situated in
about 38 degrees of south latitude, and in about 145° 45' of east longitude,
distant somewhat less than 500 miles south-west, in a direct line by land, from
Sydney. From the flattering description of the country in this part given
by Mr. Hovell, one of the persons by whom part of the coast of this vast
island has been surveyed, and from its obvious advantages in respect to Bass’s
Straits, it was chosen as the spot for the formation of a new settlement, and
an expedition was accordingly fitted out from Sydney in November last for
that purpose: it consisted of his Majesty’s ship Fly, Capt. Wetherall, with
two other vessels containing a number of convicts, and a party of military,
with stores, &c. We are furnished with several reports, from the Sydney
newspapers, of the proceedings of the expedition, which arrived at its destina-
tion in sixteen days from the time of leaving Port Jackson, notwithstanding
some strong gales and heavy weather.
In standing in for the entrance of Port Western, they passed on the right
several rocky and singularly formed islets, lying off the S.W. point of Philip
Island, which receives on its southernmost side the rolling waters of Bass’s
Straits, and forms an extensive natural barrier, crossing the mouth of the
harbour. One of the smaller islets is of rather a singular pyramidal form,
but considerably flattened at top ,* its barren sides raise themselves abruptly
from the waves which are continually roaring around, and lashing them with
their heavy spray. On another islet several sealers appeared in anxious pursuit of
their amphibious prey. As the vessels ranged along Philip Island, the face of
the country became pleasingly varied; patches of open land, irregularly dis-
persed, and cheating the eye with the semblance of having been cleared by the
united hands of art and nature, here and there usurped the places of barren
brush and apparently close impenetrable forest land, which occupied a
principal portion of the country extending along a flanking range of hills, and
as far as the eye could discern. Some men (Europeans) dressed in seal skins,
and accompanied by a number of dogs, appeared along the shores ; and shortly
after were observed several conical, rudely constructed huts, half hid amongst
the prolific honeysuckle, mimosa , and gaudy acacia pendula, which had sprung
up there and flourished, unassisted and unregarded. These people, it after-
wards appeared, were a party of sealers ; they had come over from Port Dal-
rymple, and mustered seven in number. One or two spoke of having con-
tinued on the island for several preceding years. Some black native women,
whom they had managed to carry off* from the main land, lived with them.
They seemed extremely fond of each other’s society !
Capt. Wetherall’s first care being to obtain an accurate acquaintance with
the harbour and places offering the best inducements for fixing a settlement
upon, boats were despatched on survey in different directions, and a party
commenced clearing away a commanding portion of the island, situate nearly
opposite to the anchorage. Near this point the country towards the interior is
thinly timbered, and partially covered with a long tough species of natural grass,
on which the stock appeared to thrive. A hut had been already constructed
there, and a well dug by some sealers, who in their excursions up the harbour
frequently refreshed in this port. At high tide the water of the well became
brackish, and indeed was at no time remarkably limpid. This sandy beach
forms


forms the only good landing along the northern extent of Philip Island ; a low
mud flat making its appearance all along to the eastward at half ebb. A great
portion of the overhanging wood which crowned the sides of the hill being
cleared, and a sort of glacis formed, so as to command the landing place, this
battery was named Fort Dumaresq.
It was round a point of the main land, distant about nine miles N. and E.
from the south-east extreme of I’lsle des Frangais, and N. 2°, or nearly so,
from Fort Dumaresq, on Philip Island, where the land appeared to be of
the most luxuriant description, and from whence the eye might wander un-
disturbed and delighted over some of the most wild and fantastical, rich and
unstudied scenes of natural loveliness, to be found in any country, that the
new settlement was determined to be formed. The shore at half flood is ac-
cessible to boats, and a small stream of fresh water runs at no great distance.
The soil around the settlement for some miles is rich and productive. The
timber, which is indeed in every part of the circumjacent country as yet explored
not of the most majestic kind, appears diversely scattered about in clumps,
and extends in this manner, it is imagined, with little variation towards Bass’s
River, which discharges itself among the flats to the southward of the settle-
ment, but continues salt for six miles up from its entrance on the eastern shore
of Western Port. On this part of the harbour, the military party, prisoners,
government stock, and provisions were landed, under the directions of Capt.
Wright, of the Buffs, who acts as commandant.
Roads have already been cut (one of which, running in a direction S.W.
towards the sea, has already been carried the length of three miles), huts built,
gardens planted, and wells sunk. The want of water seems the great evil at
present; none of a good quality has yet been obtained; after'digging to fifteen
and sixteen feet the water still retains a brackish taste. The sealers hold out
some hopes of a stream of water being hid behind a range of hills which
look out on the sea. A stratum of coal has also been mentioned as existing
on the island. The soil on many parts is of a rich arable nature; and, to
judge from the products of a small garden formed by the sealers near their
huts, on which no great labour had been expended, promises most favourably.
The island is nearly overrun with timber of a stunted growth, and low scrub,
or thick, but yielding underwood. The tea-tree, honeysuckle, beef-wood, and
several kinds of mimosa, generally prevail; but here, as well as on the main
land, neither remarkable for majestic beauty or utility. The interior bears in
many instances marks of an extensive conflagration; the sealers attribute it to
some runaways from Van Diemen’s Land, or elsewhere. The number of flower-
ing shrubs and plants is considerable. Samphire roots itself in abundance among
the rocks, and a wild vegetable which flourishes luxuriantly, and when boiled
is not a bad substitute for French beans, is equally abundant. In the woods,
the garrulous notes of the mocking bird, of iris-coloured loories, and parro-
quets, the harsh screams of the black cockatoo, and plaintive cooings of
numberless woodquests, resound incessantly; whilst quail and partridge start
from under the feet of every new explorer, and again plunge in amongst the
thickest underwood. Wallowbies were said to frequent the bush land, but
none could be captured or even seen by any of the officers, who frequently went
in pursuit of them : guanoes and lizards were not so scarce. Black swans
cruize about the mud flats round the harbour in considerable numbers; they
afford great diversion. Cranes and pelicans are found in considerable numbers
along the shores and flats which nourish the spreading mangroves, and which
latter obtain principally on the N.E. shore of Philip Island. Mutton birds
have


have been taken from their nests, formed of holes in the rocks. Wild ducks,
teal, and widgeon, have been shot, but do not appear numerous. The yellow-
hooded spurwing is not unfrequently met with ; his wings are armed at the
tips with a short, ossified, sharp-pointed kind of spear. On the sandy beach
to the westward of a lagoon not quite a mile from Fort Dumaresq, the seine
has been hauled almost daily, and frequently with some success; but few or
none of the finny captives are so good or abundant as the snapper, king fish,
whiting, and others of Port Jackson. The snapper is not totally wanting either ;
a fine one, but one only, having been taken. Sting ray of a very large size, dog
fish, mullet, sword fish, toad, trumpet, elephant, dog, pig, horse, porcupine
(diodon hislrix ), and even cat fish, have been encircled at one cast of the seine,
and hauled upon the beach together. A singularly beautiful fish, probably the
sea-leopard, measuring nearly six feet in length, and of a proportionate
breadth, was one day netted. Capt. W. caused it to be skinned and preserved,
which has been done, but not in so perfect a manner as might be wished; it is
well calculated to fix the eye of curiosity. Along the back from the head,
which has some resemblance to its fierce namesake, down to the tail, it is
elegantly variegated with mottled spots of a palish blue, on a sea-green ground,
bordered by the same colour, but of a still deeper hue. One of the two central
testes has unluckily been alone naturally preserved. Sharks are numerous:
one, conjectured to be from fifteen to twenty feet in length, was hooked twice,
a musket ball was lodged in his head ,• he made a desperate plunge and darted
of£ leaving the hook straight as a pump bolt, and a track of blood dyeing the
stream behind him. Several brown snakes, between four and five feet long, are
every day taken and destroyed. Near the settlement one of them bit a soldier;
the man had sufficient presence of mind to make an excision of the part; his
comrade was spirited and charitable enough to suck the wound, and the
operation of cauterizing being gone through, the man, though at times
oppressed by a creeping lethargy, has quite recovered. An ill-fated pig did
not escape so luckily; being bitten, he saved the butcher the labour of using
his knife by dying, though not in the way his owners could have wished.
It seems to be generally supposed, and indeed admitted, that Mr. Hovell
was never at Western Port, and that the place he visited, and the description
of which he gave for that of Western Port, was Port Philip, to the westward
of the former. Mr. Hovell accompanied the present expedition, and proposes
to penetrate across a distant range of lofty hills, stretching beyond the land
to the northward of ITsle des Frangais (now called Darling Island), into the
district of Argyleshire.
Longer experience of the capabilities of Western Port has discovered that,
although it is in many respects admirably situated, it labours under some natural
disadvantages which will probably prevent its fulfilling the expectations
formed of it. The extensive mud flats (winding more or less across its coasts
from Cape Schanck on the west, passing N. and E. beyond the northern shores
of Isle until they pass the settlement on the east side, and cross-
ing the entrance to Bass’s River, and are lost before arriving at the east
passage, which separates Philip Island from the main,) form a great and natural
impediment to communication from the harbour, and must infinitely retard
the march of discovery and improvement towards the interior. As the land,
from the internal ranges of upland and lowland country which bound the view
of the observer to the northward, descends, it is observed to degenerate from
an apparently alternate open and fruitful champaign and hilly country, present-
ing deep forests and opening vistas, varied with irregularly disposed clumps
of


of branching trees, to an extensive swamp; which either gives being to, or
swallows up, the few inconsiderable streams of water that have been detected
by those who coasted round those northern flats at the top of flood, from
westward to the settlement, attempting by their efflux to increase the waters
of Western Port, and which continues until joined by the circumambient mud
banks; the latter perhaps here and there interrupted by a range of mangrove
trees. Nor is the anchorage in all parts of the harbour unexceptionable.
North-east from Fort Dumaresq, where the Fly during her stay remained at
anchor up towards the settlement, the channel continues nearly of the same
depth, six, seven, and eight fathoms, possesses good, firm, holding ground, and
is powerfully protected on all sides from winds by the surrounding lands. On
the south-west side of Darling Island twelve fathoms water are met with, but
the situation is exposed to winds from the sea. Elizabeth Cove, to the west-
ward of Fort Dumaresq, also affords good anchorage. The country for some
miles off where the settlement has been formed, and those parts of the main to
the westward immediately opposite, present a flattering picture, as well in
foreground as in the perspective. Looking down along the superior slope of
the glacis of Fort Dmaresq, from its elevation of sixty feet above the sea,
the eye is directed over the scarce ruffled surface of the spacious basin of
Port Western, whose blue waters sparkle in the sun, or seem to sleep tran-
quilly in the moonbeams, until interrupted by the opposite woody shores of
Darling Island ; on pursuing the sinuous outline of which, to the eastward, the
harbour seems gradually to narrow until entirely shut up from the eye by the
projecting point of main land, round which the settlement extends itself, and
a distant woody offscape. The back ground is lost in woods on woods ; and
the still farther mainland across the western channel, in the distance, its
elevated summit still marking a bold outline between the superior clouds and
inferior waters, and continuing so until entirely obscured by the intercepting
wood-crowned summits of I’lsle des Frangais.
The climate of this part of New Holland does not appear subject to those
sudden vicissitudes from heat to coolness so common at Sydney. The range
of the thermometer was found 61° to 83° on board the ships, and reached
somewhat higher on shore, in those places shut out from the influence of the
prevailing south-westerly winds, which at times blow violently; and, on more
than one occasion, to a day rendered lowering and oppressive from the in-
fluence of a parching northerly wind, has succeeded a night of intense dark-
ness, illuminated by the most vivid flashes of lightning.
The latest accounts from Sydney state the return of the Fly from Western
Port; the newspapers give some intimations that the settlement has proved to
be unhealthy. The following information is, however, encouraging:—
Some days before the Fly sailed from Western Port, a lagoon, or rather
morass, containing several deep gullies, dispersed here and there, and over-
flowing with good fresh water, was fallen in with. It lies concealed behind a
portion of hilly land, which runs for a short distance parallel with, and scarcely
100 yards from, a sandy sea shore, and which latter intervenes with the salt
water on the north side of Philip Island, from the western extreme of which
the morass is scarcely a mile distant. Necessity, as much as chance, contri-
buted towards the discovery of this valuable object. Some sailors belonging
to a party employed in getting up a flag-staff on the pyramidal, and apparently
insulated rock, lying off Point Grant, on the west side of Philip Island,
having exhausted their supply of water from the ship, ventured farther inland,
and fell in with the morass.
