

riSi.
NEW SOUTH WALES
LAND LAWS.
THE CENTRAL DIVISION.
LAND LEGISLATION AND THE LEASES,
By REGINALD BLACK.
Published by
“ THE HUSTRHLHSIfIN PJLSTORRUSTS’ REVIEW,”
63 Pitt Street, Sydney.
47S Collins St., Melbourne. IS6 Elizabeth St., Brisbane.
31 Fleet Street, London.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.


FOR CROSSBRED SHEEP
Wm. Bain & Co.’s
‘ Lochrin” Patent Fencing
IS CONSIDERED THE BEST & CHEAPEST.
What Our Constituents write: —
Mr. IVON C. FRAZER, Mary Vale, Nyngan.—l consider the “Lochrin”
Dropper Fence to be the cheapest and most suitable of all fences for subdivisions.
It has a longer life, and is more nearly sheep-proof than any other description.
I keep LEICESTERS in paddocks formed with six-wire droppers, and none of
them get through it.
Mr. NORMAN L. SUTTOR, Eurona, Bathurst. —The best example I can
give you of the efficiency of the “ Lochrin ” fencing is this : I weaned a lot of
BORDER LEICESTER RAMS in this paddock, and not one got out; hitherto
the great trouble has been to keep weaned lambs in their paddocks.
Mr. W. T. EDWARDS, Bibbenluke, Cooma. —The cost is less to us “on
the plains ” than any sheep-proof fencing we ever erected; it is so effectual that
CROSSBREDS which get through our other fences are completely puzzled when
they try it; it makes, in my opinion, an admirable fence for any class of stock.
“ JUMBUCK,” writing to Australasian Pastoralists’ Review of 15th July—
For CROSSBRED SHEEP the Dropper Pence is better than the rigid, as the
sheep trying to get under, or through the wires, has the strain of the whole of
them above to lift against, instead of only one wire, as in ordinary fencing. An
excellent elastic fence can be made with posts thirty feet apart and three
Droppers between, or with posts forty feet to forty-two feet apart and five
Droppers between. Either of these styles of fencing, if erected with a top
barbed wire, will disappoint no one who give them a trial.
Some other references Messrs. J. & W. H. Moore, Juandah, Q’land;
D. McCaughey, Coree; J. H. Davies, Burburgate; Wm. Kilpatrick, Cornalla ;
S. B. Leishman, Lome, Q’land.; G. N. McGill, Boorah ; H. B. Patterson & Co.,
Boorara, Q’land.; Dickson & Leslie Bros., Lerida, Q’land.; H. C. White,
Havilah; Jas.Lee, LarrasLake; G. H. Hebden, Erambie ; A. Lucian Faithful,
Springfield; W. R. Hepburn, Coolamatong; J. D. & W. Sellar, Bobundara ;
Mills, Neilson & Smith, Uardry; R. M. P. Eckford, Glenroy; D. Hannah,
Cowabee; John Bring, Crowther; W. Foster Rutledge, Gidleigh ; John
Crisp, Ironmongie ; John Cameron & Co., Kensington Downs, Q’land.; William
Crombie & Co., Greenhills, Q’land.; W. J. Curle, Gumble ; J. A. Hamilton,
Tambo, Q’laud.; Fowler, Carstairs & Mandevillb, Currawinya, Q’land.
ALEX. T. HAEYEY,
63 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


-1 -5
CONTENTS.
Introduction by “ The Australasian Pastoralists’ Review ” .. 9
Preface by R. J. Black .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
The Memorable Act of 1861 .. .. ~ .. .. 12
The Selector and the Squatter .. .. ~ .. .. 14
The Fine Art of Selecting and Blackmailing .. .. .. 15
The Acts of 1884 and 1889 .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
The Central Division .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
The Cream of the Pastoral Land .. .. .. .. ~ 18
Why the Leases should not be Cancelled.. .. .. .. 19
Wanted Grazing Farms .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Alienation by Conditional Purchase .. .. .. .. 21
Conditional Leases .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 22
Additional Conditional Purchases .. .. .. .. .. 24
Position of Public Lands in 1892 ~ .. .. .. .. 24
Area available for Settlement .. ~ ~ ~ .. 25
The Genuine Selector—a New Bill .. ~ ~ .. 27
Revenue from Land Sales .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
The Financial Aspect .. .. ~ ~ .. .. 28
Conclusions .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 30


WOOL.
WOOL. WOOL.
Australasian Njortgage & Agency Go.
LIMITED,
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE & EDINBURGH.
Capital “ £1,300,000. llcscrvc Fund - £300,000.
SYDNEY BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
JOHN de V. LAMB, Esq., Chairman. The Hon. F. B. SUTTOE, M.L.A.
The Hon. S. A. STEPHEN, M.L.C. W. C. WATT, Esq.
Sydney Office: THE EXCHANGE CORNER, 59 PITT STREET.
Wool Stores: CENTRAL WHARF.
Liberal Advances made upon Wool either for Sale in this Market or for Shipment to London.
H. N. CUNINGHAM, Manager.


INTRODUCTION
“The Australasian Pastoralists' Review.”
FOR over two years now the conductors of this
Review have labored to draw attention to the
vital importance of a reform in the central principles of
the land laws of New South Wales. Month after month
we have published articles pointing out where and to
what extent the existing laws have failed and suggesting
the lines upon which new legislation should proceed.
We had intended republishing these articles in pamphlet
form with a view to arousing public opinion effectually
before the elections were held. But, meanwhile, a
gentleman, who has approached the subject from an
entirely independent standpoint, has read the following
paper before the Economic Association of New South
Wales, arriving at exactly the same conclusions as we
had presented and for much the same reasons. It has
appeared to us that for popular purposes a review of
the main features of the subject such as Mr. Black
has so ably presented would be more effective than our
series of articles, necessarily somewhat lengthy and
going more into detail. We have, therefore, set ourselves
to give the widest possible publicity to a statement of
the case, which, whilst thoroughly sound throughout,
is admirably adapted to go home to “ the business and
bosoms of men,” who think that because they are not


themselves squatters or selectors they need not trouble
their heads about the land laws. It is this public
indifference, rather than any evil intent on the part of
the squatter or selector, which is responsible for the
scandalous land monopoly and land speculations which
have worked so much evil to New South Wales in the
past. If the electors will but think over for themselves
the facts, figures and arguments in this pamphlet
we have no doubt that they will recognise that justice
to the pastoral lessee is not incompatible with the
fullest encouragement to the bond fide small settler.
The broad lands of New South Wales afford ample
space for both to work to the fullest advantage without
interfering with each other. And the electors who read
this pamphlet will also be bound to recognise that
outside the actual occupiers of the land, the future of
the whole community for many years hence depends
upon the nature of the Land Act which will result
from the approaching elections; and no part of the
community is more interested than those who are
lacking employment.
T. P. & Co.
In discussing this subject my aim has been, not so
much to suggest improvements in, as to direct public
attention to, the serious defects of our present Land Laws.
To point out that on our large territory there is plenty of
room for the Pastoralist, the small Grazier and the
Agriculturist to carry on their work without in any way
interfering with each other, to the general good of the
community.
R. J. Black.


OUR LAND LAWS.
THE CENTRAL DIVISION.
LAND LEGISLATION AND THE LEASES.
By REGINALD J. BLACK.
The subject I am about to discuss is not one of my own choosing,
but was selected for me by the committee of our Association. I was
asked to write a paper on the leases in the central division, as it was
thought the question was one of national importance at the present
time, and, in dealing with the subject, I have, in order to discuss
the whole matter with that fulness which it deserves, touched upon
our land laws as they exist, and have entitled the paper, “ Land
Legislation, and the Leases in the Central Division.” I wish also
to make it clearly understood, that, in whatever I may say, I am
not advocating the interests of the pastoralist or the selector. I do
not possess any pastoral or conditionally-purchased land, I am not a
shareholder in any bank or financial institution, and am, therefore,
not advocating the interests of any section or class, but I am ad-
dressing you from the standpoint of one of the public as a taxpayer,
whose only object is to direct public attention to a system which, I
am sure, is sapping the life-blood out of the community; and, unless
a drastic change is made without delay, the general prosperity of the
colony will be seriously prejudiced, and heavy losses will overtake a
large number of people. I shall deal with facts taken from statistics
of the colony, published by the Government. Some years ago, as
an inspector of the largest financial institution in this country, I had
special opportunities to study the working of our land laws in a
practical way. Between the years 1875 to 1880, when alienation of


our Crown lands by auction sales reached their highest point, I was
specially interested in watching the different modes by which these
lands were being acquired. Since I have been engaged in private
business I have still continued to watch the operations of our land
laws, and I do not hesitate to say that no country in the world could
have a worse system. Up to the year 1861, the public land of the
colony had been alienated under various systems, according to the re-
quirements of the colony’s gradual progress and development. Large
tracts had been alienated by grants and orders, and the Governor
had the sole power in the early days of disposing of the Crown lands.
In the year 1831 sales by auction were introduced, the minimum price
being fixed at five shillings per acre; the minimum was shortly after
raised to twelve shillings per acre, and subsequently to twenty
shillings per acre. The occupation of the waste lands of the colony
was at first allowed under a system of yearly licenses, and the amount
paid was at the rate of £lO per annum for a section of twenty-five
square miles, and £2 10s. was charged for every additional five miles.
After this, the squatter was given a fixity of tenure of his run, cal-
culated on its stock-carrying capacity, instead of on its area.
THE MEMORABLE ACT OF 1861.
Owing to the difficulty that existed in obtaining land, an
agitation sprang up, and it culminated in the passing of Sir John
Robertson’s memorable Act in 1861. The object of the Act was to
settle an agricultural population on the soil, side by side with the
pastoral tenants, and a totally new principle was introduced with
respect to the alienation of Crown lands, viz., free selection before
survey, coupled with conditions of residence and improvements,
and the whole of the pastoral leases of the colony were thrown open
to the operation of this new principle ; and if the measure had been
safeguarded in only two points—viz., first, by having the lands
classified, and, second, in making survey precede selection—it
would have served its purpose in almost every respect. But what
took place ? An area as large as the French Republic was thrown
open for indiscriminate selection at a time when the whole population
of the colony, including men, women and children, did not number
350,000. What did the Act really mean ? Simply that any man of
a certain age could settle down and take possession of a certain area
of land, which was practically in the occupation of another person.
Is it to be wondered at that war to the knife took place between
these two sets of men ? The runholders looked upon the selector as
a base intruder, and the selector regarded the runholder as his


mortal enemy. Had the lands suitable for agricultural settlement
been classified and withdrawn from pastoral occupation, and
surveyed well in advance of requirements, no trouble would have
existed, and, what is of greater importance, the public estate would
not have been sacrificed. I have no desire to detract in any way
from the large amount of good that was done during the first few
years after this Act came into force. It must be borne in mind that
up to 1861 all the lands were practically locked up in the hands of a
few people, and a bold measure was necessary in order to obtain a
change in the order of things. Sir John Robertson was honest and
patriotic, and his name will be ever green in the memories of many
settlers and their descendants, who were able to obtain homes under
his Act; but the blame for not reversing the principle of selection
before survey to after survey, and also for not having a proper
classification made of the lands suitable to agricultural and grazing
settlement, must be charged to the apathy of the people and their
representatives. In the coast districts, where the earliest settlers
took up land we find them a thriving class, and also along the
railway lines, near our large inland towns, and large numbers of
these selections are still in the hands of the original people who took
them up, whilst in the interior we know that millions of acres have
been selected and then transferred at the earliest possible moment to
swell the large estates, whilst the transferrors have gone off to
repeat the operation. This Act practically, as I have said just now,
allowed one set of men to enter into possession of land already
occupied by another set of men. In a very few years a class of men
arose in the country who found that they could make more money by
blackmailing the runholder than by taking up land for bond fide
settlement. The pastoral interest had become the great producing
factor of the colony, and in some way or another almost every man’s
business was affected by its prosperity or otherwise, as it is in fact at
the present moment. All the lands under occupation in the interior
were being used to the best advantage, and what was known as a
station was one of the best marketable forms of property that any
man could possess.
Well, those men who had laid out all their capital in pushing out
into the interior, many of whom had risked their lives in the work,
who had spent large sums of money in fencing, in erecting home-
steads, in clearing timber, making dams, and who naturally thought
they had some right to their holdings, were confronted with two
conditions—either to sell out altogether or protect their holdings by
baying land, which they were allowed to do under the Act.


THE SELECTOR AND THE SQUATTER.
I am now about to state facts that I know from personal
experience, and there are hundreds of similar cases. In the year
1876 I had occasion to interview a runholder with respect to his
account, who had some of the best squatting properties in the
northern district, which were quite free from encumbrance, and he
had about £7OOO to his credit on fixed deposit. Just at this time
the wave of free selection had begun to approach his district, and he
became alarmed. He argued with me thus; —“ I can sell out
altogether for a good sum, but if I do so what am I to do with
myself and my sons, who have no knowledge of any business except
rearing stock, &c. ? I think it will be better for me to take
advantage of the Act, which will allow me to purchase land, and I
can buy up the frontages to all the watercourses, and secure land in
such a way as will make the rest of the Crown land of so little value
that no selector or even blackmailer will be able to do me much
harm. Now, mark two points I wish to make clear. In the first
place, this man had no natural desire to obtain the freehold of an
acre of land. He knew quite well that the soil would not grow any
more grass when he held the fee simple of the land than it did
when he held it under lease. In the next place, this man set to
work to deliberately destroy a large portion of the public estate, and
he did it in this way. He sent for a surveyor and instructed him
to go over the stations and give him an estimate of how much land
it would be necessary to purchase so as to make himself safe from
encroachment. This estimate came to about £lB,OOO. The fixed
deposit was soon spent, and an overdraft established. Selectors
and blackmailers still came and he went on buying out, and
purchasing land from the Crown, until in time the overdraft had
increased to £50,000, for buying out selectors was a costly proceeding,
some of them receiving as much as £2 10s. per acre. The last I
heard of this man was that he was insolvent. The debt had reached
£BO,OOO, and droughts, low prices and interest on the debt had all
combined to bring him to ruin. Now, this case I watched for some
years, and it is stated to show you that he was compelled to buy
the Crown land and buy out the selectors, and thereby incur debt
and ultimate ruin, through the operation of the Land Act, for he
made these purchases unwillingly, but the law permitted men to go
upon and take possession of certain land, which the Crown had
already rented to another man.
As a rule, men of the present day have no conception of the
experiences runholders had from the blackmailers twenty years ago,


before fencing was compulsory. In the earlier days of free selection
the moment a man paid down his five shillings per acre he could take
possession of the land ; and although he had put up no fence, or
anything to mark his holding, he could set to work and impound
every hoof that came on to his selection. I once had to take pos-
session of a cattle station on which selection was rampant. The
plan was to free-select a cattle camp, and in due course, as the
cattle came and strayed on to their camp—some of them pure bred
bulls—they were taken off by the selector to the pound, and in a
week I once paid £157 to release bulls from the pound.
THE FINE AET OF SELECTING AND BLACKMAILING.
I will just relate another case, and this is mentioned in the
admirable and most valuable report by Messrs. Morris and Eankin
on the state of the public lands in 1882. A gentleman, in giving
his evidence before the commission, stated :—“A friend of mine was
in the midst of shearing. Some of the shearers were shearing badly,
and leaving a good deal of wool on the sheep. My friend remonstrated,
and told the men that if they did not shear better they would have
to leave the shed. They took very little notice of this, and continued
to shear badly, and he had to pay three of them off and discharge
them. These three men went the next day and each selected forty
acres in the paddock next the shearing shed, and gave notice to the
overseer to keep his sheep off their grazing rights and selections, or the
sheep would be impounded. The result was that my friend had to
build huts and yards, and actually shepherd his sheep in his own
paddock, and subsequently had to abandon the paddock altogether.’
Selecting and blackmailing became almost a fine art, and we
have men in our midst at the present moment, holding important
positions, who have acquired lan independence by exercising their
knowledge in this respect. The bulk of the large estates have been
put together by buying land at auction—by purchasing land at the
upset price after lapsed sales by auction, and by buying out selectors
and conditional leaseholders, to say nothing of dummying. The
pastoral lessee has also, in many instances, used every stratagem
possible to acquire land in order to preserve his original holding.
THE ACTS OF 1884 AND 1889.
The Land Acts of 1884 and 1889 were passed to remedy the
supposed defects which existed in the original Act, but the fatal
principle of selection before survey, which was the curse of the
original measure, was not altered. Under the original Act, the whole


Crown lands of the colony were thrown open to indiscriminate se-
lection, and the lands under pastoral lease were not exempted from
the operation of the law. The aim of the Acts of 1884 and 1889
was to give some fixity of tenure to the pastoral lessees and,
at the same time, obtain a larger rental from the public lands,
whilst the sales'of lands unconditionally were to be restricted. The
holders of the pastoral leases under the old Acts were to surrender
one-half of their leases, which were resumed by the Crown for sub-
sequent alienation, lease or reserve, the other half remaining in the
leasehold occupation of the pastoralist under fixity of tenure for a
term of years.
Mr. Coghlan states :
It was computed on December 81,1884, when this'division was made, tha
there were within the colony 4313 leased runs, yielding an annual rental of
£268,500, and forming about 1600 stations, estimated to contain the bulk of the
unalienated public estate, after allowing for reserves, &c. That the increased
revenue from pastoral occupation, which was one of the principal alterations
introduced in the land legislation by the Act of 1884, has been realised, may be
gathered from the fact that in 1892 the total rental received from the occupation
of Crown land, &c., amounted to £892,214. The Act of 1884 became law on
January 1,1885, and that of 1889 came into operation on December 1 of that
year.
An important innovation was made under the Act of 1889, and
that was the Land Court. By its constitution and powers it was
intended to free the administration of the law from political inter-
ference, and this institution has given general satisfaction throughout
the colony. Under the Act of 1884 the whole colony is divided into
three divisions, which are called the eastern, central and western.
THE CENTRAL DIVISION.
The Central Division, of which I am now about to specially
direct your attention, embraces an area of about fifty-five-and-a-half
million acres, and, rightly speaking, extends from the Darling and
the Mclntyre in the north to the Murray in the south. The major
portion of it is pastoral country, but containing throughout large
areas capable of being improved to carry three times the number of
stock now depasturing on them. In the south, about the Murrum-
bidgee, on the Lachlan, the lower Namoi, and Western Plains,
there are large tracts of fine agricultural land, while, on the other
hand, there are some millions of acres of bad and scrub lands, which
are almost worthless for any purpose. In the southern portion of
this division, large areas, which have been put under the plough,
show that, with favorable seasons, the soil will give wheat to the


best advantage. In this division any person above the age of
sixteen may, upon any part of the resumed area not specially
exempted from purchase, select an area from forty acres to 2560
acres. The price demanded by the Crown is a uniform one of £1
per acre ; two shillings being deposited on making the applica-
tion, and the rest paid by instalments of one shilling per year,
together with interest of four per cent, on the unpaid balance. I
want you to clearly understand that under the Act of 1884 the runs
were divided into two parts—one to be called the leasehold area, the
other the resumed area. A tenure of ten years was given to the
leasehold area, in consideration of which a higher rent was charged
by the Crown. It is exempt from the operation of the conditional
purchaser. The resumed area was occupied by a pastoral lessee, but
it was open for free selection, and consequently the rent paid for
this half was very much lower than the other half, but the main
thing to note is, that a fixed tenure of ten years was given for a
certain area of Crown land. These leases fall due from July to
October, 1895. Now, under the Act of 1884 the pastoralists
considered they had a right to a further extension of five years.
Under the Act of 1889, however, he can only obtain extension in
consideration of improvements, and the extension may be for five
years or anything under; but mark this—in the event of any ex-
tension being given all the improvements made by the lessee become
the property of the Crown.
It will be seen at once how hard it is for the lessee to seek
extension on this basis. It would suit him better at the worst to
have his run thrown open and be paid for his improvements by
selectors taking the land. Very large sums have been expended in
the central division in making water to guard against the droughts
and improve the runs. At the present moment there are about 26
million of sheep depasturing in the central division, and some
millions sterling have been advanced by the English and Australian
pastoral and finance institutions on the various holdings embraced
within this area. Owing to the uncertainty which has existed
during the last few years with respect to the renewals of the leases,
hardly any improvements have been carried out in this division.
The result is that some thousands of men who were formerly
employed in dam-sinking, ring-barking, rabbit-fencing, and sub-
dividing, have been thrown out of employment, and have in some
measure helped to swell the ranks of the unemployed in the city.
All over the country men are walking about asking for work, and
if a fixed tenure for ten or fifteen years were given for only a half of


the present holdings, I have no hesitation in saying that 10,000
or 12,000 men would in a short time be employed in the work of
carrying out permanent improvements in this part of the country.
The pastoral industry in this country overshadows all other
industries combined, and indirectly the prosperity or otherwise of
every person in the community is affected by its fluctuations. Take,
for instance, our inland country towns, such as Bourke, Wilcannia,
Moree, Dubbo, Wagga, Hay, &e. The prosperity of these places is
almost entirely dependent on the pastoral industry, and if business
in these places is depressed its effects are immediately felt in the
metropolis. Besides the pastoralist, we have the small grazier, the
genuine selector who grazes on his conditional leases. He, like his
big brother the squatter, is also in debt, for he is addicted to earth
hunger, and is always endeavoring to extend his possessions. If he
is not indebted to a financial institution he is in debt to the country
storekeeper, and if any dislocation of our public finances should take
place, and capital should be withdrawn from the colony, this class
would suffer severely by the restriction of credit.
THE CREAM OF THE PASTORAL LAND.
Now, it is in the central division where the large landed estates
have been aggregated, and it is in this division in which is situated
the cream of the pastoral land in New South Wales. As previously
stated, the leases of the runholders in this division will fall due in
1895. Not only do the leases fall due, but with them all the im-
provements, which have cost some millions of money, become the
property of the Crown. The question then is : What action should
be taken with respect to these leases ? On these Crown lands and
freehold areas are depasturing about 26,000,000 of sheep. Can it be
possible that any Parliament could take such action as would tend to
destroy properties which, in a large measure, constitute the backbone
of the country ? It is proposed by Mr. Copeland that renewals for
ten years shall be given for half the leasehold areas in the central
division, and if a new departure could be made, so that, instead of
throwing open for indiscriminate selection the area withdrawn from
lease, large portions of them, such as are suitable for agricultural
and pastoral settlement, could be classified, and when completed
offered for selection. It would be a wise step. Instead of the eyes
being picked out of the country by men, who would merely select to
sell out again at a profit to the large landowner, the blocks might be
surveyed, maps prepared and exhibited throughout the colony, so


that everyone who desires to obtain land could see how and where
it could be got. That is the system in vogue |in the United States
and Canada, and if in those countries they can survey ahead of
settlement, surely here, with our handful of people, we can do the
same. What a boon it would be to the legitimate selector to have
such a system here.
It is said in some quarters that these leases should be
thrown open, but when I say that there is now more land open for
selection than there is any demand for—and under Mr. Copeland’s
bill about six million more acres will be available—it must be
apparent to everybody that the land available for settlement would
suffice for a population ten times our number. And our legislators,
as trustees of the public estate, must take care that if land is
alienated, the State shall get full value for it; that it is alienated
to such people as will turn it to the best advantage ; and instead of
sacrificing all the cream of the public estate, a certain amount
should be retained for those who will come after us. It has been
proposed in other quarters that instead of giving an extension of
half the leases in the central division, extension should only be
given for those north of the Murrumbidgee. Now, between the
Murrumbidgee and the Murray, there are now available for selection
in the resumed area 1,130,000 acres, and if all the leases in this
district were thrown open, there would be an additional area there
for settlement of 1,898,000 acres, making a total of 3,028,000 acres
between the Murrumbidgee and the Murray.
WHY THE LEASES SHOULD NOT BE CANCELLED.
The reasons why the whole of the central division leasehold
areas should not be cancelled are to my mind :
1. There is still a large area of unalienated lands in the eastern and
central divisions, within fair distance of rail and water communication. Some
of this, though inferior to the best country in the area, is, by reason of the
above advantages, quite as suitable for small settlement as any part of the
central division which it is proposed to cancel.
2. Admitting that the unalienated Crown lands south of the Murrumbidgee
are required for settlement, there is a considerable portion of it to the west,
and comprised in the Balranald and Hay districts, which is not suited for
anything but grazing.
3. Between the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee, and between the Lachlan and
Bogan, there is a large area of country abandoned, and for which the Crown
receives no rental. Most of this country is pine scrub and mallee, and there
are only isolated instances of its being used for grain growing, and that only
within a reasonable distance of the railway.


4. The resumed areas in the timbered country are in many instances not
ring-barked and scrubbed, though they have water and other improvements.
Selectors prefer taking land that has been improved by ringing, &c., as they
have no green timber to contend with. Pastoralists in past years have made
these improvements, and when their leases are cancelled, if they are, the
small men will step in and reap the benefit without adequately paying for it.
5. Country in the north-west, in the Walgett district, is not suited for
small settlers—a family requires fully 5000 acres to keep them, and the lands
and climate will not admit of profitable cultivation in large areas. Should
land of this description be resumed it should not be sold, but leased in blocks
of from 5000 acres to 10,000 acres for a term of, say, twenty-one years, with
compensation for improvements to outgoing tenants. In all cases the lands
should be surveyed before purchase or lease.
If all the leases are thrown open there will be an enormous loss
of revenue to the State, and the greatest industry in the country will
suffer a severe check.
WANTED GRAZING FARMS.
Settlement in a country like this must, in the first instance,
depend upon the grass for grazing stock, and in time, as there is a
demand for agricultural produce, it will be forthcoming, and,
therefore, what we should encourage besides the small farmer is a
class who will occupy grazing farms of about 5000 acres. A smaller
area than this would not support a family by grazing. Leases of
these areas could be granted for twenty-one years with tenant rights.
Improvements would be largely carried out under this system, and
the carrying capacity of the land would be greatly increased.
Grazing farms where wool-growing and farming are carried on
together are the most successful holdings in the country at the
present time, and we have many examples of them in such places as
New England and about Tamworth, Mudgee, Young, and other places
in the southern districts. It is greatly to the interest of the bond
fide settler that this plan should be adopted. Although I have been
attempting to master the intricacy of our land laws for twenty-five years,
and have had special opportunities of obtaining a knowledge of them, I
confess frankly that if I wanted to select a block of land, or wished
to put one of my boys on a selection, I would not know where I could
get the land. I should have to pay a surveyor, or some selector
who knew the district in which I intended to take up a selection, to
find some land for me. After I had succeeded in doing this, I should
have to lodge an application, with the description of the land I
wanted, with the local land agent. Then after waiting for months,
perhaps for nearly a year, a surveyor would be sent to measure the
land. It is possible he would discover that there was not the


quantity of land available that I had applied for, and I should then
have to take what I could get in whatever form the surveyor said he
could measure it, or go off and try somewhere else. Can any sane
man understand how such a ridiculous state of things has been
allowed to exist for all these years ?
ALIENATION BY CONDITIONAL PUECHASE.
The most critical observer of our land system must admit, that
notwithstanding the unfortunate results which have emanated from
Sir John Eobertson’s Act, for the first few years a great deal of
bond fide settlement took place, to the advantage of the settlers and
the country generally. At first the evils of the system were not
apparent, but they gradually began to appear, when it became
manifest that a great deal more money could be made out of the
traffic of land under the new system than by legitimate selection.
In 1862, the first year of the Act, 2449 selections were taken up ; in
1863, 1730; in 1864, 1166 ; in 1865, 1050. By this time people had
learnt that traffic could be carried on at a good profit, and the num-
ber of selections increased yearly until, in 1873, the number reached
4761, and this average was maintained up to 1884. In the first few
years after the passing of the Act, when large numbers were waiting
for an opportunity to settle down, the average was only about 1500,
and the number of selectors should have decreased instead of
increased ; but we see that the average went up to nearly 5000. It
was quite clear that the Act was being taken advantage of for some
purpose other than legitimate occupation. Now, according to the
report of Messrs. Morris and Eankin, the bond Jide settlers did not
average 1000 a year from 1861 to 1882, and up to the end of the
latter year they did not amount to 18,000 altogether, although the
applications amounted to over 70,000. From the records of the
Statistical Department it is shown that through sales by auction,
and sales on account of improvements, 15,000,000 acres have been
alienated, and mark this, during the past ten or eleven years over
95.000 transfers of conditional purchases have been lodged, aggregating
an area of over 21,000,000 acres, which have gone to swell the large
landed estates. During the year 1892 applications for ]2134 con-
ditional purchases representing 425,456 acres were received, but
during the same year no less than 14,017 selections representing an
area of 2,060,000 acres were transferred. So you see that nearly
12.000 more selections were transferred than taken up in one year.
But what is the position of the State with respect to these whole-
sale transfers of land ? Whilst these selections nominally represent


£1 per acre to the Crown, they do not realise much more than ten
shillings per acre, owing to the system in existence for deferred pay-
ment, and the cost of administration of the department. The amount
which the transferrors have received on their sales at the lowest
estimate has realised a profit not less than from ten to fifteen shillings
per acre, and thus we see that while the Crown is parting with the
large areas for a sum much below their real value, the land-jobber
and trafficker has pocketed about £10,000,000 sterling. Are we going
to perpetuate such a system as this, by which the land-jobber in ten
years can pocket £10,000,000 which should have gone into the coffers
of the State, whilst the very object for which the Act was passed is
being defeated ?
Another point I desire you to specially note is this—During
thirty years we have succeeded in placing about 16,000 actual settlers
on the land, at an enormous cost, and in our efforts to achieve this
result we have, under the system in vogue, alienated the cream of
the public estate, and caused large landed estates to come into ex-
istence, whereas the avowed object of the Act was to alienate the
land in such a way as should settle bona fide settlers on the soil side
by side with the pastoral lessees. If in thirty years we have only
succeeded in settling 16,000 bond fide settlers, where can there be any
legitimate demand that the whole leasehold area of the central
division, which is now being occupied by the pastoral tenants with
26,000,000 sheep, should be thrown open for indiscriminate selection ?
At the present moment the whole of the eastern division and the
whole of the resumed area of the central division are open for se-
lection. There are now about six millions of acres available for
selection in the central division alone, in addition to the millions of
acres representing the whole of the eastern division, and if half of
the present leases are thrown open, as Mr. Copeland proposes, it
would mean that another six millions of acres would be available
for selection.
CONDITIONAL LEASES.
Having shown how large tracts of land have been alienated by
the transfers of conditional purchases, I now desire to point out two
other systems by which very large areas are being alienated, to the
detriment of the public estate, and large profits are being realised by
the men who are trafficking in this class of holding. I allude to the
conditional lease and the additional conditional purchase. A
conditional lease is taken in virtue of a conditional purchase. A
man with a selection of 640 acres can take up 1920 acres in addition


as a conditional lease. Now, mark the conditions;—For this he
pays a rent of about twopence to twopence-halfpenny per annum.
The lease runs for fifteen years, and during its currency he has a
preferent right of purchase at £1 per acre on the terms of a conditional
purchase, which practically gives him thirty-two years to pay up on his
holding. So that this man has, from the time he took up his original
conditional purchase, forty-seven years to complete his holding. In
the meantime, the Crown has to keep all the accounts in connection
with these transactions, and keep a large staff of officers all over the
country, at a large expense, to see that all the conditions are carried
out. It is complained that the Crown should not give an extension
of lease to the pastoralist for even a few years, but in the case of
the conditional leaseholder we see millions of acres are being dealt
with in a way that gives them a tenure of forty-seven years. This
is a much greater evil than the indiscriminate conditional purchaser,
because we depart from all the recognised rules of leasing, and we
give the holder of land, after he has completed his conditions,
which means five years, a valuable asset in his “right ’’ to the land
and his “right,” in most cases, can be sold for a large sum of
money, and the records of the Lands Department show that he is
not slow to avail himself of what the State has so generously
endowed him with. We know that, as the enormous sales of Crown
lands which had been going on for some years were threatening to
endanger the true interests of the country, this form of alienation
was stopped in 1883, and sales were restricted, in any one year, to
two hundred thousand acres.
Yet the statistical records show the remarkable fact that from
1885 to 1892, seven years only, 14,370,803 acres have been alienated
by additional leases—a larger area than had been alienated
by auction sales and direct means in thirty years, from 1862 to
1892.
And in many cases large profits arising from transactions in
connection with these conditional leases have gone into the pockets
of individuals.
It would surprise you if you knew what a large number of men
are placed upon the land by the country storekeepers in certain
districts, and kept going for five years until the conditions are
completed, when the land is transferred to the storekeeper, who
sells it at a profit in most cases to the pastoral lessee. This is not
considered dummying, because it is only the squatter who gets credit
for dummying; yet we know thousands of cases have occurred, and
it is a curious fact that the records of the law courts show that only


sales prior to 1862
7,146,579
Area unconditionally sold 1862 — 1892 inclusive
(30 years)
14,198,910
Area conditionally sold for which deeds have been issued
2,246,094
Area granted under Volunteer regulations
167.395
Area granted for public purposes..
178,414
Total area covered by deeds
23,937,392
one man has been sent to gaol for dummying, and he would never
have got there had he not confessed.
I have nothing but praise for the genuine conditional lease
holder, but the system can be abused, and we know it is being done
all over the country. The large landed estates are also being added
to by another system perhaps worse than the one just described.
This is called the additional conditional purchase.
ADDITIONAL CONDITIONAL PURCHASES.
This was intended to give the honest man, who had selected as
much land as he could afford at the time, the chance of getting a
larger slice when he had the means to pay for it. But this
privilege is being used for quite another purpose. For instance, a
man may hold twenty conditional purchases of the minimum area of
forty acres, and if the residence has been done on these conditional
purchases, he can make each of these forty acres into 2560 acres with-
out residence. Consequently, we find every day large estates being
made up out of selections bought up and increased to their maximum
area to the advantage of the jobber, and direct palpable loss to the
State.
POSITION OF PUBLIC LANDS IN 1892.
In Mr. Coghlan’s work on the “Wealth and Progress of New
South Wales for 1893,” the position with respect to the public lands
is as under :
Land granted and sold by private tender and auction
Area in process of alienation under system of deferred
payments standing good on December 31, 1892 .. 20,115,467
Total alienation, or in process of alienation.. 44,052,859


The area leased to pastoral tenants and others comprised
130,309,466 acres, which includes leases to miners under the Mining
Act, subdivided as follows :
Acres.
Area held under pastoral lease at close of 1892 .. 58,054,824
Occupation licenses at close of 1892 43,061,807
Conditional leases, 1885 to 1892 (7 years) .. .. 14,370,803
Homestead leases .. .. .. .. 9,743 023
Annual leases .. .. .. .. ~ > > 4 539 729
Other leases.. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 334 330
Leases under Mining Act .. .. .. .. .. 154,450
Total 130,309,466
Add total alienated, or in process of alienation .. 44,052,859
Total 174,362,325
So that out of the total available area of the colony—viz., 195,882,150
acres—there were either leased or sold 174,362,325 acres, leaving a
balance of only 21,519,825 acres representing the area of country
neither alienated nor leased, including roads reserves for public
purposes, and land unsuitable for settlement.
AREA AVAILABLE FOR SETTLEMENT.
Thus we see that at the close of 1892 there were 23,937,392
acres absolutely alienated, for which deeds have been issued;
20,115,467 acres conditionally sold, the condition of purchase not
being complete; and 14,370,803 acres leased, with the right of
purchase; or, in all, 58,423,622 acres which have been placed
entirely beyond the power of future legislation. There are, more-
over, 49,425,413 acres under long contracts of lease, with the right
of renewal, which no future legislation can affect until at least the
expiration of the first fixed period of their tenure, such as homestead
leases, scrub leases, leases of inferior lands, pastoral leases in the
western division and mining leases.
The entire area, therefore, affected by existing contracts amounts
to 107,849,075 acres. The balance available now only covers
88,033,075 acres, but from that area 21,519,825 acres of reserves and
of waste lands, useless for any immediate practical purposes, should
be deducted, reducing to 66,513,250 acres the area which the State
has to offer to intending settlers. But this area may still further be
reduced if the pastoral leases, covering 18,604,696 acres, in the


central division, which fall due during the year 1895, are renewed,
and in that event the balance open to the influence of fresh legis-
lation would be limited to about 48,000,000 acres. These facts show
the manner and the rate in which the Crown lands are being alienated,
and how necessary it is that proper legislation should be introduced
to deal with it; otherwise, in a few years there will be very little
Crown land left of any value for.legitimate settlement, and what is
left will be of an inferior class, and for the most part remnants.
Mr. Coghlan says“ The 'principal element in the aggregation of
great landed estates was that of auction sales of country lands which
were resumed in vast areas upon the application of the runholder,
who bought them at the upset price,"at first at £1 per acre, and sub-
sequently at £1 ss. per acre. The great struggle between the squatter
and selector began in earnest in 1873, when the effect of the Act
began to be felt in its most acute form. In the year 1877 auction
sales of 1,829,613 acres took place, and in this year the maximum
revenue was reached, the gross amount being £3,236,277. During
the ten years from 1873 to 1882 the area alienated, principally with
the object of consolidating pastoral properties and securing them
against the operations of the conditional purchasers, amounted to
11,189,082 acres. Besides the auction sales, the transfer of enormous
areas of conditional purchases tended to further aggregate the
holdings of the runholders, and, while the original free selectors are
rapidly selling out to the large estate owners, the area which is being
selected does not exhibit a tendency to increase at anything like the
same ratio. Since 1882 there have been 23,157,453 acres of con-
ditional purchasers actually transferred, against 13,986,848 acres
applied for, a difference of over nine million acres, which have gone to
increase the large estates, to the detriment of the legitimate
settlement.”
It must be remembered, however, that a proportion of these
transfers was made by way of mortgage, and therefore it is not pos-
sible to ascertain the area absolutely transferred by the original
selectors. But if to the area parted with by its owners since 1882 be
added, to the extent of country transferred during the previous twenty
years (1862 —1882), the fact that 22,567,753 acres out of the total
area alienated are now held by 672 persons, giving to each one an
average domain of 33,583 acres, becomes easily accounted for. But
the burden of heavy interest, the prices ruling for pastoral produce,
and other economic reasons will gradually cause these properties to
disintegrate, and we already see this taking place in several portions
of the central division.


THE GENUINE SELECTOE—A NEW BILL.
After reading many of the speeches made by people who
advocate throwing open the whole of the central division, I am
convinced, from what I know of some of the speakers, that it is only
a want of knowledge of the question that makes them speak as they
do. If they will look down to the bed-rock of the question, and
once realise that it is in the interest of the legitimate selector that
the whole of the central division should not be thrown open, we
shall find that they have sufficient patriotism to make them do what
is right. My contention is that only such land should be thrown
open for agricultural settlement as can be utilised by legitimate
selectors, and that in future such large areas as 2560 acres should
not be available for that purpose. If these large blocks can be
taken up it will provide opportunities for the speculator to secure
extensive areas for the purpose of selling again at a profit, to the
detriment of those people who by-and-bye will require land. What
we want is concentration of settlement—within a radius of market.
In case it should be imagined that I am trying to magnify the
importance of the pastoralist to the detriment of the free selector, I
wish to make it clear that I have no desire to do so. In fact, I have
the greatest admiration for the bond fide selector on our coast
districts and up-country districts, where large numbers are doing
well as farmers and graziers. They are the very men I wish to see
encouraged. A very large portion of our wool clip is grown by this
class. Their selections form splendid securities for our financial
institutions. Their properties are economically managed, and the
holdings are in most instances being steadily improved. On our
great territory we have room for thousands of these men. The man
I denounce is the bogus selector, who wants to make money by
taking advantage of our land system to the detriment of the genuine
man. My argument is, why should we displace the pastoralist,
and depreciate his asset, until the land he is occupying is really
wanted for the smaller man ? There is room enough for both to
carry on their work. Nature has intended the bulk of the interior
for grazing, and what we should aim at is to so manage our land
system so that a pastoralist shall have a fixed tenure of his run,
without fear of molestation, while the bond fide farmer and the
grazing selector shall have every opportunity to obtain suitable land
to carry on their occupations on the fairest terms.
If there is any special necessity for Crown lands to be withdrawn
from pastoral occupation in order to settle an agricultural community


on land suitable for such purpose, by reason of its physical conditions
and proximity to a market, there is no earthly reason why an Act
should not be so framed as would provide for such cases without
destroying or seriously interfering with any existing interests. It
seems to me that it would facilitate the passing of a new measure if
the Minister, whoever he might be, would take into his confidence
five or six experienced practical men with a special knowledge of the
question, to assist him in framing a bill, so that when it came before
Parliament members would have the assurance that it had been
well considered, and it would not then stand a chance to be made
unworkable by stupid amendments, and in all cases survey should
precede selection.
EEYENUE FROM LAND SALES.
In this colony we treat the whole of the receipts from the sale
and occupation of Crown lands as revenue. The rents derived from
the occupation of Crown lands might very properly be treated as
revenue, but when we sell land we part with what is really our
capital, and I hold that the proceeds of sales should be either
applied to a sinking fund for the redemption of the public debt or
for the construction of public works. Prior to the year 1855 the
revenue from land was placed to a separate fund, called territorial
revenue, which was dealt with apart from the general revenue of
the colony; but in the year named the present practice was adopted
on the suggestion of the then Governor, Sir William Denison. For
some years up to this period the revenue from land had been applied
to immigration purposes.
THE FINANCIAL ASPECT.
Our position is a remarkable one, especially now when it is
essential that we should do our best to restore confidence in those
who have by their many tens of millions sterling enabled us to
make our pastoral industry what it is. To give you a few figures :
I am of opinion that quite £45,000,000 has been lent, mainly on
mortgage upon these properties, and that but for such wholesale
lending the land sales of the New South Wales Government and the
land revenue would not have reached above one-fourth of what we
find them to be. What is true of New South Wales is true of all
these colonies. In round numbers the Australasian banks hold
funds to the extent of £166,000,000, divided into £120,000,000 from
Australian resources, and £46,000,000 from British investors, of
which fully one-half is in one form or another secured upon mortgage


or other liens upon pastoral land and live stock. In New South
Wales alone we may consider that fully £20,000,000 of this bank
money has been so secured. But there are the land, mortgage,
agency and pastoral companies, which have drawn even larger
resources from the mother country than the banks have drawn. I
find upon going through the figures of a great number of companies
with their head offices in Great Britain that certainly over
£50,000,000 has been raised on that side, of which quite two-thirds
has been in the form of debentures and debenture stock, and this
money is in the main employed here in the development of the
pastoral industry. Even this is -not all, for our own disastrous
ventures in the shape of land mortgage and land credit concerns
have also raised large amounts, including quite another £10,000,000
in the mother country, and doubtless as large a sum here. And
from the land and loan companies it is estimated that fully
£20,000,000 has been loaned out on New South Wales pastoral
securities. These sources make up the 45 millions to which I have
referred. Now, this loss of value, in by far the most important
contribution to our national wealth, i should be the aim of our
legislation to recover as speedily as possible. Nothing so adds to
and protracts depression in these colonies as the evidence of this
depreciation in our pastoral wealth. But it is evident that the
termination of all the leases in the central division next year would
further greatly depreciate this asset, and it would at the same time
depreciate the value of the runs in the western division, which may
be dealt with in a similar way in a few years’ time. No policy
could, therefore, be more hurtful to the interests of the colony. And
it is clear that if credit is restricted and large withdrawals of capital
should take place, the labor classes would be most seriously affected
in the end, for it means the power to provide employment for
thousands of men would be destroyed.
We have all rejoiced to see that our colonial securities have
shown a marked increase in value on the London Stock Exchange
during the past few months. In the colony itself there has been a
gradual, if slow, revival of that confidence which constitutes the
life-blood of trade and commercial life, and if we show a confidence
in ourselves our creditors on the other side will not be slow to
observe it. Hence it is important that at this juncture, as we are
emerging from a great crisis—the greatest the world has ever seen in
proportion to our population—we should do nothing to cause the
British creditor to doubt the stability of his security. Apart from
the misfortune it would be to the State to have all the central


years ended in 1891, amounted to
.. 370,418
Of this number the increase in the
country only
amounted to
66,928
While in the towns it was..
303.490
370,418
division placed at the disposal of the land-jot ..r, who at this
moment is waiting his opportunity to commence operations, I have
no hesitation in saying that any action on the part of the Legislature
that would tend to suddenly cause a large depreciation in these
securities would constitute a grave danger to the financial stability
of the colony.
CONCLUSIONS.
The general conclusion to be drawn from the foregoing state-
ments are that for thirty-three years we have been parting with our
land under a false system, for we see that instead of placing an
agricultural population on the soil side by side with the pastoral
tenants, the actual bond fide settlement has been so small that we
have only succeeded in obtaining 16,000 legitimate settlers in
occupation of their holdings, whilst we have done what the Act
intended should not be done, viz., built up enormous freehold
estates.
In the next place we find that, instead of population increasing
in the country, the increase has been comparatively small, whilst the
increase of population in the towns has been very great.
According to the figures of the last census we see that
the increase of population of the colony in the ten
And, owing to the systems by which land can be alienated by
conditional and additional conditional purchases, and by conditional
leases, transfers are being made so fast, unless some drastic change
is made, there will be, notwithstanding our enormous territory, very
little good land left for those who will come after us.
And then, looking at our agricultural position, we see that
our progress has been very slow.
In fact, our agricultural produce realised less in 1890 than it did
in 1881, when the total was £4,194,345, against £4,136,887 in the
former year. And even now the colony cannot supply itself with
such products as wheat, hay, chaff, oats and potatoes. Large
quantities of these products come to us from Victoria and New
Zealand.


The present system of alienating land is destroying the value
of the land that regains in the hands of the Crown, because the eyes
are being picked out of it. The remarkable fact that in seven years
we alienated by conditional lease 14,370,803 acres, a larger area than
has been alienated by direct auction sales in thirty years, speaks for
itself, and that in ten years over 95,000 transfers of conditional
purchases were lodged, representing an area of about twenty-one
millions of acres, the major portion of which went to further build
up the freehold estates, speaks more eloquently against our present
system than any other argument that could be brought forward; and
when we bear in mind that the men who transferred these holdings
could not have made less than from ten shillings to fifteen shillings
per acre out of the transaction, or ten millions sterling, we have no
difficulty in arriving at the reason why transfers of selections are
being made in such numbers.
We have alienated the very cream of the land in New South
Wales ; have built up vast freehold estates—in most cases actually
against the wish of the owners, who were compelled to buy in self-
defence. We have shown jobbers that it is more to their advantage to
buy land on credit and sell again at a big profit than remain on the
land. We have set class against class, induced thousands of men to
scheme, lie and commit perjury, have made every person who has
been connected with our land laws dissatisfied and discontented, and
the only thing to be done is to sweep away the old Acts and bring in
a new bill, in which the principles of classification and survey before
selection shall be incorporated.
The most valuable service that any man can render to the State
would be to bring home to the minds of the people of the country
districts, especially those who intend to become selectors, how
essential it is in their own interests that these principles should be
adopted—to show them that if survey were to precede selection, how
much easier it would be for them to obtain reliable information about
the land they proposed to take up, and how much easier it would be
to obtain possession of it without the vexatious delays that attend
the present system. That in the new bill finality of selection and a
longer period of residence on the part of the selector, or his trans-
ferree, should be leading principles.
Also, that by adopting a system by which grazing farms could
be leased on long terms, the land would be preserved for their
children and for those people who in years to come will require land
for settlement.


1 do not believe that our financial position will be placed upon a
sound basis until we get our land laws adjusted in such a way that
those people who have leases from the Crown, on which their flocks
and herds are depasturing, shall have a tenure of their holdings in
such a form as will prevent a sudden depreciation in the value of
these properties, against which large sums of money have been ad-
vanced by British and Australasian investors; until we so amend
our system, that all proceeds arising from the alienation of land
shall go into the coffers of the Crown and not to the speculator;
until we afford such facilities for [people to acquire land, they will
settle down in the towns and not in the country; and until we offer
generally such inducements for settlement that people of the right
class will be attracted to our shores, and so help on the great work of
developing the producing industries of the country.
A Minister with determination and a thorough knowledge of
the difficulties he has to face will be required to successfully carry
out this policy. Mr. Copeland is the first man who has had the
courage to propose any scheme for dealing with the iniquitous
system of selection before survey, and I hope he will have the
satisfaction and the country will have the advantage of seeing his
policy carried out.
The subject I have dealt with in this paper is above the range
of party politics. It is a national question, in which the welfare of
every man, woman and child in the country is involved; and every
person who takes a pride in this country should never rest until the
work is accomplished.
I desire to acknowledge the great assistance I have received in
the preparation of this paper from Mr. Coghlan’s valuable work,
“ The Wealth and Progress of New South Wales for 1893,” several
passages from which I have quoted verbatim; also from Messrs.
Morris and Rankin’s report of inquiry into the state of the public
lands; and from the valuable articles on the central division
which have appeared from time to time in the Australasian
Pastoralists ’ Review.
[ADYT.]
DU FAUR & GERARD,
PASTORALISTS’ AGENTS.
ADDRESS: BOX 690 G.P.0., SYDNEY.
MeCarron, Stewart & Co., Printers, 44 Pitt St., Sydney.
32
