

'■■ ■ ■ ™ W--


M BB


MAGAZINE EXECUTIVE.
President
Editor - - - C.S.M. HARVEY
c . C- \ SGT. UREN.
bub-Editors - , „ _
( CPL. ROWE.
Printer - - - L/CPL. McCARTIE
Business Manager - SGT. GoUDIE.
LIEUT. HENDERSON.
Cartoonist - CPL. BUCHAN
1 CPL. MELODY
Reporters
' PTE. FRYER.
Typist - - - PTE. BAGLEY.
Secretary and Treasurer 2ND LIEU . HARTMAN
FOREWORD
\V/HATEVER its merits or demerits may be, this
Magazine is published without apologies. Its
object is to serve as a memento, and as such will find
its place. As far as our knowledge lies, everything
published is original and the contribution of some
member of the Reinforcement aboard ; we leave it at that.


?.• ' ' *
SHIP'S OFFICERS.
T.S.S. " TGFUA," H.M.N.Z.T. No. 109.
Commander
CAPT. J. R. STRINGER.
MR. N. MACLEAN
Chief Officer.
Second Officer.
MR. E. J. MCCLELLAN
MR. H. R. YOUNG
Third Officer.
MR. W. REID
Ext. Third Officer.
Transport Officer.
I
i
)
MR. J. H. SHAW
MR. O. JONES -
Wireless Operator.
MR. C. C. MCILVEEN -
MR. G. H. MCDONALD
MR. J. C. SHARPE
Chief Steward.
Second Steward.
MR. H. BURT
MR. R. GRAHAM
MR. P. PAYNE
MR. P. T. MiDDLEDITCH
MR. G. CUNNINGHAME
MR. H. RASMUSSEN
MR. H. H. MOUNTFORT
MR. R. R. KNEWSTUBB
Chief Engineer.
Second Engineer.
Third Engineer.
Fourth Engineer.
Fifth Engineer.
Sixth Engineer.
Seventh Engineer.
Electrician.
)
)
)
*


The Chronicles of the Forty
Tooths according to the
Pay Books of the Profits
to the Members thereof.
1. And a great stir arose in the
land, for the word of Bil the Mas-
seyite had gone forth saying : Bring
unto me all men who have less than
one child that I may raise me a
mighty host wherewith to deliver my
people from the bondage of my un-
clean neighbour, Bil the Hun.
2. And Jimalan, hearing these
things, said unto Bil the Masseyite :
Where have I defaulted? Have I
not supplied you with a great army ?
Where are men more valiant that the
young men I have given you, and
where men who can whitewash like
the men of CI? Have not my trusted
servants, Gib, the son of Agun, and
Bumper, which means righteous, work-
ed mightily that the ways of Bil the
Hun may be confounded ? Have I not
sent many Redfeds unto Jugg; yea,
even to plant trees.
3. But Bil the Masseyite waxed ex-
ceeding sorrowful and answered say-
ing : Many of the young men_you have
given me are slain and many wounded,
and even those who remain are weary
and cry out for their kindred to come
and assist them; therefore it is meet
that we send forth word unto the
forty tooths that the tribe may fore-
gather and smack the wily Hun to leg,
yea, even unto 150 not out.
4. And it came to pass that the men
of the forty tooths journeyed unto
Trent Ham," a place of forbidding
appearance, where dwelt the tribe of
the Bigpots. And in the multitude
which assembled were men from the
wet places who were exceeding joyful
and also men from the dry places who
carried corkscrews.
5. And the men of the forty tooths
seeing the city of Trent Ham, said
among themselves : There shall we
make ourselves a home until Bil the
Masseyite requires us. But the tribe
of the Bigpots spake unto them say-
ing : Behold . you are unclean; you
have measles and meginiss among you
and may bring a plague upon the city.
Go you forth unto Mairy Tango unto
the tents which we have erected for
you. So the men of the forty tooths
went and took up their abode in the
tents.
6. And it came to pass in the days
which followed the tribe suffered great
trials and tribulations, for the heavens
opened and the rain descended upon
the earth until no dry spot remained
in the tents, yea, even were the insti-
tutes of the padres blown down until
the murmurings of the men and the
language of the padres reached unto
the ears of the Bigpots.
7. And there came to Hairy Tango
a man called Potter who was chief
of the Bigpots, and he spake unto
the tribe saying, Go as many as can
unto the huts and them that remain
shall double-bank their tents with
those which you have left. And the
tribe arose and did this, saying, Bles-
sed be the name of Potter for he uses
his nut.
8. And it came to pass that the
tribe visited the Gumdiggers, which
means Toothcarpenters, who ill-treated
them after the manner of their kind
and lacerated their mouths until they
cared not to eat the stew of Bil the
Masseyite and were compelled to sub-
sist on much sloppy stuff which the
cooks in their wrath supplied. And
the names of the Gumdiggers and the
cooks became sour in the mouths of
men, for it is said they brought much
affliction upon us.
9. And certain of the High Priests
of Trent Ham, who were called
quacks, fell upon them and forced
sticks into the throats of the forty
tooths that they may discover those
who were possessed of devils. And
behold many were possessed of devils
and were cast into Iso Layshun which
is nigh unto Hairy Tango, and the
Chronicles of the forty tooths knew
them no more.
10. And it came to pass that a man
of Trent Ham, who was called Taila,
spake unto the forty tooths exhorting
them to be steadfast in their resolve
to put the kibosch on Bil the Hun
and to live honourably among them-
selves. And the tribe arose and said,
This man is one of us for he is a
Hardoah.
11. And behold another who was
called J. M., which means Jeremiah,
lamented unto them, saying, Take heed
that ye touch not the electric light
globes for verily you may be burned.
But the tribe were not moved by his
lamentations, and said among them-
selves, This is all piffle and Bulls-
wool.
12. And it came to pass in the days
which followed that the tribe jour-
neyed afar even unto Ahellufa Place,
which, was also called Tarrynee Kow,
wherein dwelt one of the tribe of
Bigpots who was named Major, which
means Jonwilly.
13. And Jonwilly seeing the forty
tooths from, afar off near unto the
Tinhut, rode to meet them, _ saying,
Know you there is by one Discipline
and Jonwilly is his profit. Wish ye
that consternation be struck into the
heart of Bil the Hun, then take heed
of my commandments.
14. I am the boss dog and King
pin, and have brought thee out of the
land of Trent Ham, out of the land
of sandflies and lightning.
15. Thou shalt have no other bosses
before me.
15. Thou shalt not make before thy
tents images the likeness of anything
on the earth or in the waters under
the earth.
17. Thou shalt not bow down thy-
self before the Medical Officers and
swing the lead, for I the boss dog will
visit such iniquity with many days
C.8., even unto 28 days.
18. Thou shalt not take my name in
vain nor the name of any of the
officers in vain.
19. Remember the Sabbath Day to
keep it holy. Six days shalt thou
labour and do all thy work, but on
the seventh day thou shalt wash thy
clothes and .have thy kit inspected,
and also shalt thou have many inspec-
tion parades, and whitewash stones as '
far as the eye can reach.
20. Honour me seven days a week
and at smoko. Jump when I say
jump, and when I say " In fours about
turn," about turn like soldiers, so thy
drilling may be short and thy fatigues
shorter.
21. Thou shalt kill all Huns, and
those you cannot kill they shall ye
maim.
22. Thou shalt not adulterate thy
section's rum.
23. Neither shalt thou steal out of
camp or break bounds, for if thou be
caught ye shall surely die or some less
penalty as in this act mentioned.
24. Thou shalt not mislead the C.O.
at orderly room, for if ye do and be
caught then your appeals to me shall
be in vain, and more so, for I can but
increase the penalty, and woe shall be
thy portion day and night.
25. Thou shalt not covet thy com-
rade's palliasse. Remember each straw
thereof is numbered. Neither shalt
thou pinch his boots or clean his rifle,
for both are double dealing, and in
adversity shall ye return his boots and
clean your own rifle. Remember ye
cannot covet his ox or his ass, since
he does the work of' both and so is
akin.
25. And it came to pass after many
days that the tribe became fed-up, so
that even the Bigpots said among
themselves, It is meet that we send
the tribe back unto the place from
which they came, that they may again
see the wives and damsels of their
hearts, for verily it is written the
quacks of Tarrynee Kow are of no
avail.
27. And the forty tooths journeyed
back unto Trent Ham and took up
their abode in the huts.
28. And the tribe of the Bigpots
spake unto them saying, Behold we
give you leave, which means final
even unto ten days.
29. But the forty tooths waxed ex-
ceedingly angry, saying among them-
selves, How d, timean are the tribe
of the Bigpots. Let us arise before
them and make riotous demonstration


2
that they be manifested as the dizzy
limit.
30. And a great multitude assembled
before the house of Luekam, crying
aloud, Give us the leave which is 14
days that thy days may be long in
the job which Jimalan has given
thee.
31. And Luekam hearing these
things was sore afraid, and answered
unto the multitude saying, Behold I
the dispenser of the squaredeal will
give you leave of 14 days.
32. And the multitude were exceed-
ingly joyful, but certain of the forty
tooths who were soldiers said among
themselves, This is a ragtime outfit,
which means uptoputt.
33. Then the forty tooths journeyed
back unto their own lands, and after
fourteen days many returned to Trent
Ham.
34. But behold there were some who
swung the lead and many who missed
the 'bus:
35. And after many days when all
were again at Trent Ham the word
of Bil the Masseyite came unto them
saying, The time has arrived for you
to go and smite mine enemies. So
the tribe of the forty tooths journeyed
unto a far land, and the place of
their fathers knew them, no more.'
La Vie Militaire
(In five spasms.)
lor a soldier I 'listed, to grow great
in fame
And be shot at for sixpence a day.
—Dibdin.
Spasm 1. (Civilian days) :
Vacillation, inspiration, attestation
Trepidation, examination, consola
tion.
Spasm 11. (Trentham days) :
Mobilization, expectation, perspira-
tion ;
Recreation, embrocation, titivation
Exasperation, inoculation, realiza-
tion.
Spasm 111. (L'envoi) :
Osculation, embarkation, despera
tion;
Intoxication, insubordination, vac-
cination.
Spasm IV. (Sling) :
Destination, revelation elimination.
Spasm V. (France) :
Annihilation, performation (or) per-
ambulation, (perhaps) decora-
tion.
Jack's Letter Home.
Just a line or two, dear mother, to
tell you where I've been,
And what I've done to help the cause,
and what I've heard and seen.
I stood upon the upper deck, as we
came into port
And I espied, upon the tide, a vessel
of a sort.
A rising sun, upon a flag, was stick-
ing out behind,
Whilst all along, in double file, some
Japanese were lined.
Then as we passed beside their ship,
I gave a sudden bound
And like a stag, from crag to crag,
I landed safe and sound.
Ihe Japanese commander shook me
warmly by the hand,
And as I raised my hat, he made me
clearly understand
That whilst my visit lasted, I was
fully placed in charge,
And second place himself would
grace, whilst I walked round at
large.
I showed him how to lay and fire his
guns both fore and aft,
As I stood with arms akimbo upon
that foreign craft.
" New Zealand men," he said to me,
are up to every trick,"
So I explained that we obtained re-
sults by being slick.
At luncheon time we had a spread
that went extremely well;
We'd marmalade, and mutton chops,
and oysters on the shell,
Then chicken broth, and ham and
eggs, and whisky punch galore;
We'd beer and roast and drank each
toast, and loudly called for more.
Just then it struck me, fair and
square, to show them something
new,
So I ordered the ingredients to make
Bill Massey's stew.
I stirred it round and round, and
then I gave each man his whack;
With scarce a smell, like fiends of
hell, they rushed me in a pack.
1 just had time to reach the deck and
jump into the sea,
\\ hen every man upon that boat was
sick as sick could be,
And with great anguish in their
tones, I heard them curse and
yell—
So fast I float towards my boat and
get there fit and well.
And now you'll know, my mother
dear, the dangers of the sea.
And how great risks are taken by the
likes of such as me.
The honour of New Zealand I'll up-
hold until I'm back.
Your soldier boy, your only joy, your
truthful, loving Jack.
O.C. TROOPS.


A Day Afloat.
T3. t-a-a ta t-3.-U-a * Ta t-a-3 ta
t-a-a-a!
To the accompaniment of a slight
swell interspersed with a gentle and
warm breeze, life aboard H.M.N.Z.T.
No. 109 is awakened once more by the
somewhat groggy notes of the " Re-
veille " played by the one and only
bugler, Hooker. In spite of the extra
half-hour, or so allowed by reason of
our going west (geographically speak-
ing) this summons is NOT accepted
everywhere with the spirit and forti-
tude which have been instilled into us.
Fore and aft where the men " doss"
" Reveille " has but little meaning, as,
owing to the awful stuffiness and—■"
er—smelliness of their respective dor-
mitories, they are up on deck long
before the awakening notes are
sounded.
A hurried wash is only just accom-
plished when the bugle sounds the
"Warning for parade," and ten min-
utes after that "Fall in" for roll-
call goes. While the platoon ser-
geants are bawling "Smith, Jones,
Robinson," etc., the mess orderlies—
who are exempt from all drill parades
—are away aft securing their respec-
tive companies' breakfasts.
The cooking, serving, and general
routine of the ship's cookhouse is a
work of art and a masterpiece of or-
ganisation on the part of the hard-
looking cooks and their willing assist-
ants, who smile and swelter simulta-
neously in their torrid caboose. Why
is it, may be rightly asked, that at
Trentham, with fresh meat, vegetables
direct from the garden, excellent
water, up to date ovens and cook-
houses, etc., at the disposal of the
cooks, the men were forced to put up
with such ill-cooked and badly served
food, while on a ship such as this,
with no conveniences at all to speak
of, the food is better cooked, served
more punctually and in a much more
appetising condition ? Echo answers
why ?
Breakfast of either chops,- steak,
or stew being over, shaving and a gen-
eral titivation for the 9 o'clock parade
is the next thing to consider. Neg-
lecting to shave for this parade is al-
most on a par with the crime of em-
bezzlement in civil life, and woe be-
tide the unfortunate private who neg-
lects this daily prune.
First his Sergeant will look upon his
dial in a most disconcerting manner,
making remarks the while to the
effect that if he has no razor "to
push 'em in and bite 'em off inside,"
" Wonder the rifle does not get
tangled up with them," and various
other acidic suggestions. Then the
Sergeant-Major appears, followed by
the 0.C., who "hits the roof" and
lectures on and on until the culprit
is convinced that suicide is the only
thing left for him to do.
Deck space being somewhat limited fashion, which is termed " doing a
aboard, drill has necessarily to be semaphore stunt."
adapted accordingly. To keep the men Games aboard ship are various and
employed and amused is the aim of always humorous. In one corner
the powers that be, and the Officers may be seen two perspiring privates
and N.C.O.'s are kept busy in de- endeavouring indelibly to mark each
vising ways and means to this end. other's countenance per medium of the
Work, interspersed with fun, is the gloves, each hampered in his object,
order of the day until smoko at 10.15 however, by the eccentric motions of
a.m. One platoon takes the rifles the ship and the fact that their feet
THE SKIPPER.
and, under thy able guidance of its and legs are encased in common or
Sergeant, indulges in a mixture of garden potato sacks. " Whip to the
"Standing load," "On guard," " Se- gap" is in full swing elsewhere; the
cure arms" and the shattering of unsuspecting soldier being awakened
imaginary periscopes with more or less by a sounding smack on his nether
success. Mean-vthile the balance of regions which tells him in a most
the Company is either being shaken touching manner, and as if spoken in
out of its coma by the physical ser- so many words, that more will follow
geant or each individual man is wav- unless he skips round the ring in
ing his arms about in a most weird double time. It is to be wondered


what "wifie" would think if she saw
her sluggish "hubby" playing ye
goode olde Sunday school bun rush
games with a equalled only by
his antipathy to chopping the wood
in pre-war days
Dinner of good roast beef and
plenty is followed by an hour's rest,
"Fall in" not sounding until 2 p.m.
The same routine as in the morning
follows, with the exception of, per-
haps, more amusement in the shape
of potato, sack, wheelbarrow, and re-
lav races until eight bells (four
o'clock), when work ceases for the
dav. At this hour, however, the fire-
bell usually rings, followed immedi-
ately by the "Alarm." This is a
signal for donning lifebelts and stand-
ing bv on the respective parade decks
to await orders.
The good effect of these " false "
alarms can readily be seen by the
celerity with which everyone aboard,
from the Master downwards, arrives
at his particular post.
Tea is followed by a regular go-as-
you-please feeling. The weather being
good, everyone congregates on the
boat-deck and indulges in such sport
and pastime as his fancy dictates.
Boxing, ring and deck quoits, reading,
rough and tumble, punch-ball and
skipping supervene until night-fall,
when music (sic) in all its branches
holds sway. Accordeons, Gazoos, Sally
Brown bands and choruses serve to
sooth (or otherwise) the savage breasts
above decks, while below a first-class
orchestra and some fine vocalists while
away many a pleasant hour.
Gambling (in toto) being forbidden,
the Knights of the " Crown and An-
chor," " Spiel-board," etc., are con-
spicuous by their absence. This edict
does not interfere with card-playing,
and many are the exciting finishes ex-
perienced by the devotees of the vari-
ous games.
"Lights-out" blows at 9-45 p.m.,
but at this time almost everyone is
well asleep, the soldier turning into his
hammock fairly early and echoing to
himself as he loses consciousness in
sleep, " Another day nearer the bally
war and to our eventual return to
' God's Own Country.' "
A day afloat is too mixed up with
different happenings ever to verge on
the Monotonous. Kit inspections, chest
and other medical inspections, bath
parades, C.B. parades, dental appoint-
ments,. etc., etc., all serve to keep a
man employed and healthy. This,
combined with the splendid spirit dis-
played by the officers, N.C.O.'s and
men towards each other and the
general good fellowship pervading
everything and everybody, serves to
make one half wonder if life on a
transport is as dull and irksome as it
is usually paif tef b
The Hero of the Transport.
A SORDID TALE
'Twas the year of our Lord nineteen
eighteen,
The last of July was the day
When the glory of Maoriland's man-
hood
Left Trentham to join in the fray.
We embarked on the transport Tofua
To the strains of a march from the
band,
And the shouts of the men on the
transport
Were mingled with cheers from the
land.
Soon came the call of the hungry
As the time for the dinner drew
nigh,
And three men were told off for duty
To arrange for the drawing of
" Kai."
Then all went quite right for a time,
boys,
The army was keeping up well,
When quickly the scene started chang-
ing,
For the transport encountered a
swell.
The men were all laughing and jok-
ing
And immensely enjoying the
change;
But shortly their mood became differ-
ent,
And they quickly began to feel
strange.
First one, then another, stopped
laughing
And hurried away to the rails,
With but one thought in mind at the
moment—
To relieve their poor harried en
trails.
Down below decks it was awful;
For minvled with heavings and
Was something that tackled the
nostrils
In the shape of some hellish strange
smells.
That was what settled the stomachs
Of many that slept in that den;
And soon below decks was a Hades
With the sick and the vomiting
Alone at his table next morning
A mess orderly stood in disgust;
Amid all the dead and the dying
Alone, he was true to his trust.
He was the only survivor
Of twelve gallant heroes so true,
Who yesterday sat at the table,
And glad y Partook of the stew.
And though all around him were
lying
His comrades in direst distress,
Faltered he never a moment
To draw the full rations for mess.
The sick men, they only despised him
As blithely he doled out the stew,
And lay in their blankets and ham-
Their faces a strange-coloured hue.
The smell and the mess it was awful,
And no one would try to put right.
To fumigate, cleanse, and to wash
The signs of that terrible night.
Up on the deck was an officer
Shedding his coat with a yell;
From him came the call for some
workers
To help him in cleansing that Hell.
Up sprang that gallant mess orderly
(And never a moment he swerved),
With a loud shout, "I'm one every
time, Sir "
He surely a medal deserved.
The scene below deck soon was
altered
As the sick men were hoisted above.
And the men with their buckets and
brushes
Just bent to their labour of love.
The ship was again in good order ;
But oh ! at what cost to that band 1
For hardly a man of the party
But suffered the pangs of the
damned.
Now in this war we've had many
heroes,
And great deeds are frequently
done;
But to my mind that gallant mess
orderly
Is a hero who's second to none.
"The Ballad of Bibulous
Bill."
When I dwelt in far New Zealand,
I leant my elbows brown
On many a bar-room counter,
And poured the good wine down.
Ah, those were palmv days for me,
Life full of ups and downs,
With " ups " in a minority—-
Just mostly "downs" and
" downs."
But, woe is me! The scene has
changed;
My action's quite reversed.
Since I've been on the ocean wave.
I've lost my scorching thirst.
My elbows on the steamer's rail
Rest easy as of yore;
But now life holds more ups than
downs—
Just " "Ps " and " ups " galore.


'C^PORTini
uwejAtn
pA A^
* THE.
HEADS
THE OPTICUS T


n
THE MAJOR.
A Weak on Bord. make anyone go crook aint it the other
. ... day we ad a horful exposion on bord
Say 1 ave ad a rotting time ivebeene ther cheef steward cumout in is per-
in orspetle with measlies the rashun jumpers an the ships orficers apeared
was orl oyer me body when i got in in negligent attire we never sore ther
a horderlike cum along and put a sisters but i erd they wore a worried
thermater in me fice to take me tem- look we orl ad our lites blown out
perence i didnt stay their lorng i but ther ellectian soon fixed it up an
couldernt stand ther milk diate i ate we can sea wonce more ther other day
it but i ated it i cum out jist in toime iad a soar frote an got a scare i thort
for hinosculation and waxination iad spinle virginis but it turned out
which urt orrible ave yer ever bin ter be hinfluner so ime tres beens
waxinated a majer scratches orl ther again i heard one of our interned
skin e can find on yer arm and then orficers say that the other day i dont
a capting rubs some stuf inter ther no what it means its funny ow ther
scratches thats orl rite its arfter words see air makes our watches go like
yer no orl about it yer arm orl comes biases we ave to put em back arf an
out investures when i was worst i went hour every day i jist erd ther bungler
to a concert _an ther doctor sang a blow ther c b corl that means con-
song corled infectus thats ernuf ter fided to boat so ile ave ter go so lorng.
Mainly About Us,
Outbound soldiers who are given
to reflection—and how many are not
—have no doubt received the impres-
sion that the voyage "over there"
marks a distinct phase in the military
career of the overseas recruit. What-
ever his further adventures may be,
this, the first long-distance voyage for
the majority is sure to retain a per-
manent niche in their memories. In
recapitulative mood, we hark back to
that " parting on the shore" in far-
off Wellington. Ever the picture and
pathos are vivid unto reality. On
ship, the crowded points of vantage;
on shore the silent throng of mothers,
fathers, sisters, sweethearts, and, yes,
wives and babies, for the nation is
growing old in war. So far has " the
moving finger writ" ; what more ? 'Tis
well that events succeed each other
quickly in the programme, diverting
the mind to the business of the mo-
ment. Well, to our hammocks all of
us; to our quarters which were to be
our habitat for the succeeding two
months. Human nature is versatile,
and the humorous faculty is a trusty
friend in all gravities. So with the
introduction to our new surroundings
came a new interest, and the irrepres-
sible were soon in full play, every
strange object and trifling incident be-
coming sport for raucous wags. A
final glimpse of the myriad lights of
Wellington, next the broad expanse
of the "boundless blue" and our re-
sume comes to the real commencement
of the voyage. Alas for human
frailty; the mercury falls again ! A
lively sea is encountered, and an un-
canny sensation in our vitals gradu-
ally overcomes the placid interest
which we had in the scenic outlook.
One by one, in twos and threes, in
batches, the victims go down in the
grip of the never-to-be-forgotten
malady, and for days they lie on deck
and below plunged in abject misery,
knowing not and caring less for what
passes around them, With this ordeal,
the homage to old Neptune, our sol-
diers enter upon their long sojourn
upon the high seas. But soon ail be-
come accustomed to their new experi-
ences. The cook-house staffs, quarter-
master's, and in general the human
machinery of the ship's establishment,
are speeded up to top capacity to cope
with the collective appetite, for
all are, now consuming food
with the avidity of schoolboys. Neg-
lected musical instruments are
brought to light, the mess-tables are
organised, services appointed, parades,
inspections, sports and pastimes in-
augurated and indelible friendships
formed throughout the community. A
stage of the voyage was marked by
visits to our first ports of call. In the
first instance the stay was exceedingly
brief and the eagerly-expected shore
leave did. not eventuate. There was,
however, no small measure of grati-


I I
I
fication in the ship's entry to this
port—a not unpicturesque inlet—and
hope was renewed by the promise of
leave at a more attractive port the
following day. Accordingly, as land-
marks came within view, all were alive
with curiosity and eager contempla-
tion. Leave ashore ! An eternity
seemed to have passed since we had set
foot upon the good hard earth. The
outlook was propitious. The warm
glow of the sun, cheery salutes from
many voices and from sundry sirens
and steam whistles from ashore,
promised well for the visit and de-
monstrated the hospitable character
for which the folk ashore are noted.
Of the jaunt ashore, the ineffable en-
joyment of dining and shopping and
seeing as much of the city as time per-
mitted or inclination prompted, there
is insufficient space here to write.
In the interval that has ensued the
good ship has travelled a big stretch
of the long trail, ana each day has
brought forth something new and in-
teresting in the process of making
soldiers and safeguarding their health.
Other contributions will enlighten the
reader upon the nature of our mul-
titudinous but not strenuous duties,
our plenteous recreation and the social
life aboard. Reference to one inci-
dent, however, should come within
the scope of this article. This was an
accident during the sleeping hours to
the electrical , lines, causing an out-
break of fire and an ominous " bang."
It is not suggested that a scare ensued
among those in the locality, but had
the ship's alarm sounded, it is certain
that many would have beaten the
pistol in the matter of donning life-
belts. In other quarters the affair was
kept comparatively quiet, although the
flitting of sundry apparitions up the
dark stairways, accompanied by
sounds surprisingly like the flapping
of lifebelts, showed that a few light
sleepers in the distant dormitories
had an idea that " something was
doing" amidships. Fortunately, the
outbreak was effectively dealt with in
incipient stage, and the affair re--
solved into an absorbing subject of
mess gossip and became a welcome
accession of copy for the home mail,
which, conveniently, was at that time
in preparation. Mention of the ship's
mail suggests our next port of call.
Again the quidnuncs are tipping in-
formation " from reliable sources "
about the things we ask enlightenment
upon, and the C.B. Brigade appears
to be diminishing in numbers. The
most critical stage of our voyage is
yet to come, and, unavoidably, will
be preceded by this publication. How-
ever, it should be safe to record that
" The Black Watch " views the future
with an equanimity worthy of the
traditions of their kin who have pre-
ceded them in the world's greatest
crusade.
LLEUT. MABEE.


n 0 NOU)^^^
£> H v n
WARRIE \. XV
nGVf\V| \
V 5uB-e-D.
l
C [^
THE. H ARTISTS
Tragedy at Sea.
Have you heard of the startling ex-
plosion ?
It happened on Saturday morn;
Just about 3 a.m. I've a notion,
It was then that our slumbers were
By an ear-splitting crash and a roar-
ing)
Enough to wake Job from his bed;
But the Medical Major's loud snor-
ing
Kept on as he slumbered like lead.
The Mate heard the sound, dread and
dire —
'Twas a minej hurling all to their
doom;
But the real cause, I'm told, was a
wire
That fused in the Chief Steward's
room.
It is said that he narrowly missed a
Sad death from the flames that broke
out,
But I've had the news straight from
a sister
As to how the bust-up came about.
It 'was caused by the Chief Electri-
cian,
For the Steward refused him a
spot;
So he turned all the " juice " on a
mission
To blow up the whole bloomin' lot.
But the wily old Chief isn't beaten;
Of his pranks Mr. Sparks he has
cured;
For his trump card is truly a neat
'un—
He's got the whole outfit insured.


Thp Sharlv Sidf respondent, ever on the look out for Nurse M. A. Stodard (second day
Ine snaay Siae. intercepted the following out, sorely tempted by succulent lamo
" . , , ,„ 7 . and green peas)
On the occasion of the departure of Private Addison (at the wnarl, Wei- « When sorrow sleepeth, wake it not,
the Forty-seconds- for overseas a high lin S ton ) But let it slumber on."
. , , " Once more farewell!
, -if dice mure laiewen:
pressure ethergram was received from Jf e , er we meet hereafter) we shall Private P. B. Shelley (stony-broke
Elysium, in the planet Mars, announc- meet
ing that the shades of some of our ha PP ier ,? limes > and on a safer
R shore.
THE CHIEF ENGINEER.
Private J. Logan (in the stream)
illustrious departed poets would ac- << j take a last> long li nger ing view;
company us on the voyage. Garbed Adieu! my native land, adieu! "
in the uniforms of their respective Private G . Barrington (drawn in
ranks, they patrolled the ship from first ballot, and landed at last) :
stem to stern, and in the course of "True patriots we; for be it under-
, , ~ • stood,
their peregrinations gave vent to their We left our country f or our country's
feelings in true poetic style. Our cor- good."
upon finumg himself in close proximity
to Private riush, after latter s return
from canteen) :
heels "JX pard-like spirit beautiful
and swift."
Lieut. 0. W. Holmes (oft bitten,
quite shy —on the eve of the. Rein-
forcement sports) :
'* JLt cannot be—it is—it is—
A hat is going round."
Ibid (Memories of a port of call)
" 'hue old, old story —lair and young,
And fond —and not too wise."
Sergt-Major W. Shakespeare (to
Private Aiwayseasick, twentieth day
out) :
The devil damn thee black, thou
cream-faced loon!
Where gott'st thou that goose look? "
Private Lowell (first pay-day
afloat) : " Ninepence a day fer Klliin'
folks comes kind o' low tor murder."
Sgt. Tom Hood (Reveille, the morn-
ing after the first leave ashore) :
"Oh, bed! oh, bed! delicious bed!
That heaven upon earth to the weary
head."
Private Robert Burns (ten minutes
late on wharf at A.) :
'1 wasna fou, but just had plenty."
Q.M.S. Tennyson (eulogizing mess-
orderly pioneers, second day out) :
" When can their glory fade."
Corporai Chaucer (c/o Y.M.C.A.,
on reading in routine orders that
taverns were out of bounds at X.) :
" Porbede us things and that desyren
we."
Private Bret Harte (suffering from
acute mal-de-mer, in over-close proxi-
mity to seasoned sea salt, member of
ship s staff) : " His language is pain-
lul and free."
Our Contributors.
The articles that appear in the
Magazine are the work of the follow-
ing : Cpl. Melody, Lieut. Henderson,
Pvte. Buckland, Lieut. Hartman,
Pvte. Whiting, Sergt. Uren, Cpl.
Rowe, C.S.M. Harvey, C.S.M. Fin-
layson, Rev. C. H. Olds, Pvte. Ben-
nett, Pvte. Fryer, Sergt. Ching and
L/Cpl. Beavis.


War News.
Special from our Correspondent, Mr.
MALCOLM ALBERT-ROSS.
The Italians have captured 35,000
prisoners.
Sir Joseph Massey and Mr. Wil-
liam Ward visited the trenches yes-
terday and inspected the Army Ray
Corps. Later, tne freedom of the city
of Tiers was conferred on them.
There is great submarine activity
along the Alaskan Coast.
Rome, later:
The prisoners captured by the Ital-
ians total 3,500.
Trentham
Motor bicycle No. 2L having been
issued to Capt. Cheater is taken on
the strength of this camp.
Pitcairn Island.:
Rumours are afloat that a war is in
progress. The rumour is uncon-
firmed.
The Italians have captured 350
prisoners.
Tauherenikau:
Major J. W. Brunt has been ap-
pointed road engineer to the Welling-
ton City Council.
Featherston:
A Board of Enquiry consisting of
Col. Adams, Col. McDonald and
Major Talbot has been convened to
ascertain how Private J. Smith be-
came deficient in his kit to the extent
of one knife, one oil-bottle and one
toothbrush.
Wellington:
Mr. J. W. Brunt has resigned from
the position of road engineer owing
to a disagreement with the Council
on a proposal to paint all kerbstones
white.
Stockholm :
Berlin Official. —During the past
week we- brought down 1,376 enemy
aeroplanes.
London:
During the week we carried out
successful bombing operations on
enemy towns and dumps. Our recon-
naissance patrols were also busy. All
our machines returned safely.
Sling:
Of the first draft of Ci. men passed
through, 50 per cent, are ready to
proceed for service abroad. Unfor-
tunately the other man is in hospital
with measles.
_ Programme of Concert
To be held in the Inhalation Room.
D.V. and W.P.
OVERTURE—" The Merry Monk,"
Medical Orchestra.
SONG—" Ring down the curtain, I
can't sing, to-night," Q.M.S.
Atkinson.
RECITATION—" The Ancient Mariner,"
Our Civilian Passenger.
CLASSICAL READING (from Shakes-
peare) —" The quality of mercy
is not strained," The C.O.
CHORUS (Sacred) —" Work for the
night is coming," The Bos'un,
accompanied by the famous C.B.
Band.
SONG —" Could I but tell you," The
Wireless Operator.
RECITATION—" The Brook," Captain
Welch.
HUMOROUS SONG—" In the little shirt
my mother made for me," The
Chief Steward.
SONG —" It's nice to get up in the
morning," Lieutenant Mabee.
DUET—" When the swallows come
again," Chaplain Olds and Lieut.
Innes Jones.
RECITATION—" You are old, Father
William," Pvt. W. J. Armstrong.
SONG —" Always in the way," Lieut.
Bacon.
DUET—" Where are my wandering
boys, to-night?" O.C.'s A and C
Companies.
SONG —" I wish I were a tiny bird,"
Major Monk.
DUET—" The skipper," Sister McNab
and Lieut. Henderson.
GRAND CHORUS—" Out on the rocks,"
Members of the Reinforcement.
A MAL DE MERMAID.
T-tr one unt ri> LC T.
f *~flu
Dawn.
Out of the silent eastern sea,
Herald of Dawn,
Arise, and Night's dark tapestry
Unroll to the morn.
.Ope with thine hands the gates of
light
That banish from Earth the shadows
of night
When day is born.
Touch with thy wand all eyes dream-
kissed,
In slumber deep.
Dispel thou gently the charmed mist
That bounds sweet sleep.
And in the sun's gold orient ray,
Unfold the glories of opening day,
Whose joys we reap.
Bear long-sought light to the watch-
ers' eyes
O'er the sick bed bent.
Chase from the heart the dread that
With the darkness blent.
O Dawn, thou sweetest anodyne
To sleepless Cares that our lives en
twine,
From Heaven thou'rt sent.
Sonnet.
Methought I gazed upon an anguished
plain
Where thronged two angry hosts for
war arrayed,
And far and wide unto the Heavens
displayed
The passions dark the human soul
that stain.
" Wherefore hath not from Earth
God's blessed reign
Dispelled," I cried, " the clouds that
strife hath laid
So dank through ages o'er the world ?
Why wade
Men still in the blood of brothers
guiltless slain?"
But from the void in answer to my
plaint
A voice spake softly to my questing
heart.
" Learn thou that naught of good
endures all Time,
But what is bought by blood and
pain. Who faint
Beneath their burdens, naught to
Time impart
Of good; through Sacrifice to Truth
men climb."
Scene: French railway station.
Tommy to New Zealander as his
party marches through the station :
"'Ow far is it, chum?"
N. Zealander : "Where to?"
Tommy : " I dunno !"


fl Scldie-f Jo ck*K t** '
?eaviTx<> 7,oT\ir> S ie?o~ To bo c^coM
Joseph, or The Spud- • Instantly every pair of eyes shot to
«IrinnAr'c Revonop * ts owners P late , and there com-
SKinner S iveveilge. menced a rummaging and scratching
among the unscraped carrots, half-
sprouted onions, pieces of potato
A No. 8 Tragedy. peelings, and paperhanger's paste that
. adorned each plate.
The stew man had arr i ve d an d Other members of Uren's urchins
after a short interval the duff and then discovered that Warren was not
dixie man agitated his carcass into the only victi as stra nge white
the landscape and dinner commenced. things with black heads were pushed
The usual- banter and complimentary to the sides of full a dozen * plates _
remarks flew from table to table until A wild rusb for the stairs ensued, the
every man had his whack before him, men bolti ag if their liyes depended
then all that could be heard was the on reaching the top in recort f t ime.
rattle of the knives and forks and gome tri Qn th £ t gt and de _
the du l murmurings of men trying li ver ed their bundle where they landed
to speak with their mouths full. after the bounce . The ten seconds
The familiar sound was broken by men reached the rail, hung there in
one of Warren's wails. It was a sound an all-too-familiar attitude for a
that was full of the concentrated es- while, and returned slowly down the
sence of disgust, horror, and a ter- stairs just as Lieut. Warren, officer of
rible loathing, terminating in : " I've the day, shoved his forelock round
got a pine grub in my stew." the flat. His namesake, plate in hand,
shot like a. Jack-in-the-box to attention,
paused for a few seconds, and swung
dim a beauty that was a credit to
his sergeant's teaching. " Sir," he
said, " look what I've landed for
lunch." The officer looked the lad in
the face, smiled benignly, and shifted
his gaze to the fearsome-looking ob-
ject that had caused all the turmoil.
The " Sadie Simmons " smile de-
parted, a shadow swept o'er his hand-
some face from chin to brow, his blue
eyes bulged like beads on a golly-
wog. " iviy God," he gasped, " what
did Noah call that when he let it in
the door? "
A disciple of Isaac Walton chirped
up and said he had never used bigger
bait even when fishing for quinnat in
the Waitaki; while another reckoned
they should catch its mother, harness
her, and give her to the bo'sun to
carry holystones round the deck on.
The officer swore vengeance on the
cook and all his satellites and de-
parted hastily.
Just then Joe, the boy who muti-
lates the murpnies, appeared at the
top of the companion way. "That.,
learn ya," he grinned, " not to stick
matches and cigarette butts down my
back when I'm workin' near your
hatch; still I thought ya'd know
asparagus when ya saw it."
A close dispassionate scrutiny then
disclosed that the great unknowns
were merely the fine shoots olf pota-
toes. Joe's triumph was complete.
The Y.M.C.A.—A Tribute.
We cannot speak too highly of the
activity of this organization through-
out the voyage.
During those early days of painful
memory, when hundreds of us were
enforced absentees from the mess-
tables, the indefatigable Secretary,
Mr. W. R. Taylor, armed with a copi-
ous supply of lemons, Mothersill's
capsules, and ships' biscuits, patrol-
led the ship from stem to stern, even
venturing into the nauseous infernos
fore and aft, administering to the
comforts of the men. With the able
assistance of Privates Burt and Dud-
ley, he has kept the men of the four
Companies well supplied with books,
magazines, games and stationery,
while those who still find the uncer-
tain going troublesome, are always
sure of beef-tea and biscuits at any
odd time.
Mr. Taylor has taken such a whole-
hearted interest in all matters per-
taining to our welfare, that we feel
we cannot let slip this opportunity of
recording our unstinted appreciation
of his labour of love.


Remarks by the Padre.
The Ship's Magazine .would scarcely
be complete without some reference to
the religious work on board, and I
suppose it is natural that the Padre
should be expected to furnish this.
He himself, alas! has not been able
to settle down to the tossing of the
mighty deep as serenely as did Jonah
of ancient writ, but he is hopeful
that the issue of the voyage will be
more satisfactory in his case than it
was for Jonah.
J think we may say with confidence
that our Church Parades on Sunday
mornings are on the whole very satis-
factory. We could do with twice the
deck space, it is true; but the hearty
singing of well-known hymns and the
reverent attentiveness of the men
throughout, together with the excellent
weather conditions with which we have
usually been favoured, have made the
services most enjoyable—at least from
the Padre's standpoint.
["What about the collection?"
Cheer up, old man ; you shall not be
disappointed. We know how accus-
tomed you have been to have the
plate passed in front of you and shall
see that you have an opportunity be-
fore our destination is reached of con-
tributing something towards the Ship-
wrecked Mariners' Fund.]
About 50 men avail themselves of
the Brotherhood meetings held on Sun-
day afternoons in the Sergeants' Mess,
and from the keen interest shown, evi-
dently find them profitable.
Our Sing Song Services on Sunday
and Thursday evenings were rather a
failure on deck owing to the restric-
tions with regard to lights, but give
promise of good times in No. 2 Upper
Dormitory, The men know how to
throw themselves into the singing of
grand old hymns and swinging
choruses. We are indebted to Pri-
vates Prouse and Burns for supplying
with their cornets the lack of a piano,
and would welcome the assistance of
other instrumentalists to lead the Sing
Song. Corporal Bowe and Private
McCaldon render willing service at
the piano on other occasions.
Evening prayers, conducted in No.
5 Upper Dormitory at 8 o'clock, com-
plete the round of definite religious
activities.
It has been a pleasure to deal out
beef tea, cake, fruit, etc., kindly
placed at my disposal by the Welling-
ton Citizens' Christmas Gift Com-
mittee, the Bed Cross Association, and
my own Church Committee. In this
connection I have much appreciated
the kind help of Mr. Taylor, the
Y.M.C.A. Secretary, and his assist-
ants, who doled out beef tea and fruit
to fellows in distress when I was
stretched upon my back scarcely car-
ing whether the ship weathered the
gale or went to the bottom ! Enough !
This will be growing into a sermon if
I don't look out, so I'll cry off.
Y.M. Bloque.
"Yorky."
A War Story.
I am telling this in the first person,
but I was not there. The first part
of my story is my own, but the war
part is not. The story is a tale of
the apparent and the real, of a man
who had nerves and a man who had
none. My first introduction to the
narrator was up North in New Zea-
land. I was spending an afternoon
at a friend's house and had wandered
round the back to rob his orchard.
Coming along the side of the house,
I had got as far as the corner near
the porch, when I was deafened by
the roar of a gun and a stream of
number five shot passed a foot in front
of my face. I was very white—partly
with rage and partly at my narrow
escape, and the firer was almost
equally white. We had a real man's
talk, and then he explained he was
rat shooting from the porch. He'd
got the rat all right. My next meet-
ing was when i joined a yachting
cruise. He formed one of our party,
and going round North Head in "a
heavy breeze, the skipper said to my
rat-shooting friend, "Let the sheet
go." le gods, he did. Tne main
sneet went through the blocks like
greased lightning, and four of us dived
ror the end of it, and just managed
to get it. Our craft was nearly
dim Ding Mount Victoria by this time,
out we managed to pay her off, and
then the rat-snooter had a careful
explanation from our careful old
skipper that "letting the sheet go"
meant easing it till he was told to stop,
and that the mainsheet was never let
go altogether. We were cruising some
weeks, and my literal friend and my-
self became very friendly. War broke
out soon after, and in 1917 he came
back wounded, a first lieutenant, and
was discharged unfit. He was men-
tioned m despatches for the rescue at
Uallipoli.
" iou know, Jim," he told me on
his return, " I was a platoon ser-
geant when we embarked. 1 had a
man in the platoon called Yorky. He
came from somewhere up North, Man-
gonui or Bussell way. A big brawny
untidy chap, six feet high, about 2b,
bent over at the knees and wide open
lips. He was my despair, dirty on
parade, with a vacant expression on
his face. I'd roar "Yorky" and
he'd slowly turn his head like a
darned camel. His redeeming fea-
ture was his great strength, though
the blighter never used it. Our
Major was a very strict disciplinarian.
A very hard man with a square-jawed
face and gleaming eyes. We all wor-
shipped the Major, and you know
everybody has a little hero-worship
in him. Well, I used to look at our
grim Major and say in my heart, " I'd
follow you to hell if necessary," and
I'd have, gone. I'd have followed
him anywhere."
" In course of time we got to Cairo,
and stopped there for training. Yorky
was still my despair, but he was a bit
better. He kept his rifle clean, and
that's about all. I'd get to him and
he'd say, ' Bight, sergeant,' and for
a day he'd improve. I saw he had
formed habits and it would mean a
long job to make a smart soldier of
him. Several other drafts had ar-
rived, and when the Gailipoii stunt
was on there was a big rush to go. I
tried to leave Yorky behind and had
thought he was fixed, but on our
first deck parade he loomed as large
as ever. He'd cleaned himself a bit,
and his rifle all right, but he was
the same darned yahoo who'd wor-
ried me in all the training of the
platoon.
" Well, Jim, you know what Gaili-
poii was. We got plain Hades from
start to finish and tore into it like
footballers. Our crowd had been
under fire for 20 hours, officers down,
men dying, and hellish confusion
everywhere. The Turkish shells were
bursting amongst us and around us,
and the rifle fire was very solid. I
got my acting commission at 3 a.m. I


reported to the Major, to my ideal
of a soldier. God ! Jim, he'd broken
down. His nerves had gone. Tears
were pouring down his cheeks. He
leant on me. He knew his position.
He called me by name and said, "1
can't bear the shelling, I can't bear
the shelling !
" Well, we advanced over a part
of the daisy patch. Xne daisy patch
was no meadow covered with daisies,
but a big stretch of open country, anu
the Turns gave us particular hell.
Our Major was.killed in the very start,
and it was best so. We'd crossed
the open, and lay watching the Can-
terbury's crossing. They caught it
worse than we aid, and you'll under-
stand, old man, when I saw one of
their captains down and severely
wounded, 1 called for a volunteer anu
started oh to bring him m. 1 was
lifting his shoulders and had got him
sitting when a huge pair of hands
gripped mine underneath him and we
whipped our wounded Canterbury up
and went eyes out for cover. It was
Yorky who had followed. Big, dirty,
unstoppable ¥orky.
" Things gradually settled, and life
assumed a routine after a time and
then we went, our platoon, 40 strong,
on another stunt. We went into
another trench, of which we held the
extreme end, then there was a blank,
and then the Turks had a stretch of
it. We had a tough time. Our
ammunition supply was running short
and reinforcements failed to get to
us. The Turks were getting us down,
but we made it very hot for them
while our bombs lasted. It was dusk
one night. Our crowd were reduced
to eight. I'd got our wounded away
and was hurrying up the trench, mak-
ing final arrangements for a bombing
go, when I bumped a man cursing
most horribly.
" I snapped, ' What's your trouble? '
Yoi'ky's Cockney drawl came :
' Johnny Turk just got me with a
rifle-bail in the elbow-joint, sir.' ' Well,
Yorjty,' I said, 'get back if you can.
It's going to be one little hell of our
own for a few minutes and then our
quietus. I don't want any wounded
men. Every man must shift for him-
self.' 'ls it as bad as that, sir? '
he asked. I nodded. ' Well, thank
God, it's me left arm. They'll have
to b well carry me back.' We
made our last bid and were whaling
in with bombs for all we were worth
and got a bad time in return. I got a
bad smack and things were rotten
when our supports came tearing over
on top of the Turks with the bayonet
and cleaned up more of the trench
than we could hold.
" Yorky and 1 went out together, but
Yorky insisted, in his darned camel-
like style, that 1 went first."
Sports and Entertainments. Ver .v earl y in the ™y a ge an im-
promptu orchestra was formed, con-
Naturally one would expect that on sisting of Corporal Rowe, pianist;
such a prolonged voyage as this, some Sergt. Lester, 'cello; and Mr. P.
attention would be given to the social Payne, ship's Engineer (one of the
side of ship life. Owing to the best), violin. This orchestra, with the
limited space at our disposal for drill addition of Pte. Anderson, of C
and recreation purposes, we have had Cov., and his cornet, has rendered
to carry on in the best manner pos- many splendid selections of music, the
sible, each platoon working separate- while assisting concert parties in the
ly and varying the hours of instruc- Sergeants' Mess and on deck. Those
tion with physical exercises—some of above-mentioned have given much of
them more cruel than kind. Boxing, their .time for this work, and are to be
Maori wrestling, pulling the lazy stick, congratulated upon the quality of the
tossing the sandbag, whipping the gap, programmes rendered. Pte. Mudford,
and many other amusing stunts have too, with his fine singing, has helped
had their part. in a great measure to while away the


~ FIRST FIVeTNHNU TE.S C~B — FTER HALF ANHOUR 1>A
UICEI^EP
'
hours. _ Company concerts are now mention of Lieutenants Warren and ments of every description have been
being givfcn, A Coy. having led the Hartman, who have not spared them- held 'tween decks of an evening under
way with a rather creditable pro- selves to make these concerts a success company management—chess, draughts,
gramme. B, C and D Cos. are just and who, with the addition of Lieu- cards, quoits, etc. This has helped
waiting a favourable opportunity to tenants Henderson and Blackie, have in a great measure to while way the
bring forward their " Carusos" and rendered signal service for the welfare hours, besides fostering much good
"Lauders." It would be unfair to omit of the boys at all times. Tourna- fellowship.
HOLYSTONING BY HOLY JOHN."
F/RST PORT OF CALL


" GET THAT GADGETT, JOE."
In Graver - Mood. spoken in a fond farewell. " Far off The time had come for me to_ prove
I see something undiscovered await- myself, to bring out the Man in me,
happiness of being old." and, although the fact that going
HER'S —THE HARDER PART. They had come from her lips seem- forth to fight for King and Country
ingly as a message to spur me on in was a worthy cause, there was one
There are times during the life of the. greatest mission I had yet under- far greater—to fight for all that I held
every soldier, but more especially when taken. Was it worth fighting for — most dear. That last evening had
that soldier has just left his native that future happiness? To me it was its happy moments —and its sad.
shores wherein are Home and its com- worth everything. Neither of us realised how hard the
forts, when his thoughts wander back ~ , , . , , ■ , ■ parting would be until those final few
to days gone by; and many a happy . were suddenly d.s- inute e g t ther on the whar£ the
scene is vividly pictured by his mind's turbed b 7 th f following day. The tears that over-
eye. So it was that, on I clear, cool so "§ c ,° min S S f & dowed from her sad e y es told of her
evening, far out on the ocean, I sel- near feelingly a tenor VOlce struggle to be brave, and the heart
ected a comfortable corner on the sn § • within me ached as it had never done
deck of the transport hurrying west- << j on iy ] la( j a R ose to give to you before. Following a bold effort on
ward with her freight of soldiers, in An Emblem of mv Love so fond and m y P art to c^eer h er > we fondly em-
her progress disturbing a sea, calm true." braced each other—and were parted;
and restful, and bathed in silvery And 1 was carried back to Home, eac * l to P* a y our P arfc * n g reatr
moonlight. The twinkling stars tak- war, but her's, the harder. For, to
ing up their positions overhead at- to the happy circumstances under live through those months of anxiety
tracted my gaze, and I wandered off which I had last heard that song— for her soldier boy, those months of
into Dreamland. I dipped into the only a few weeks previously. Her longing for his homecoming, is indeed
future, attempting to unfold its mys- rendering had thrilled me. It was my the harder part.
teries; thought of the coming dangers last night's leave, and had been spent And as each day carries us farther
to be faced, the tasks to be overcome; at Home —the Home which I had and farther away from our Home-
but, above all, I found myself trying strived for years to set up, but which land, away to the unknown future,
to realise the full meaning of those now, after my task had been but a my hopes seem to rest on her belief
words which had ever been ringing little while accomplished, was about that " something undiscovered awaited
in my ears since the evening they were to be broken. Such was war. Us —the happiness of being old.'


lisSSiibv £***£
j£f v« k *i' * *
j&
Sports. the judges, and they had no easy
tasks in picking some of the winners,
For the past fortnight each com- as * he f J n jf hes were T/ clo ? e indee f'
pany has been trying out its talent, The_follow.ng are the winners to
in me sporting sense, preparing to '
contest honours for the athletic Sack Race : Pte. Nixey, C Coy.,
championships of the ship. Much Ist; Pte. Ford, A Coy., 2nd.
could be written of the many splen- Potato Race : Lance-Corpl. Beavis,
did tussles for the various events each C Coy., Ist; Pte. Price, A Coy., 2nd.
company has held, and the wrestle for Victoria Cross Race : Pte. Newton,
final honours caused no little excite- B Coy.. Ist; Pte. Castles, B Cov., 2nd.
FAMILY CREST
BARON WARREN DE FULLDOOK.
Ufori a field gules —Two pokers rampant. Crossed by tin-opener, horizontal. |
Above and below —Two Hands proper (and very nice, too).
Camouflage-^ Gauche. Sign of Changes —Droit. Motto —Bon Chance.
ment and- enthusiasm. Wednesday Potato and Spoon Race: Lance-
afternoon, the 28th August, proved an Corpl. Gardiner, A Coy., Ist; Pte.
ideal afternoon for holding sports, Haycock, D Coy., 2nd.
and five of the championships were Lazy Stick Pull : Pte. Castles, B
got off. There was a record gather- Coy., Ist; Pte. Forbes, C Coy., 2nd.
ing, all who could, being present. Both Several other events, including tug-
sides of the boat deck were in use of-war, alarm race, boxing and blind-
in trying off the heats, the finals fold boxing. The boxing stunts have
being held on the port side only. Our been mos u amusing to date, soaring
patron, Captain Stringer (master of from the ridiculous to the sublime in
the ship) and President, Captain this fine art. We have _ heaps of
Urquhart, M.C., O.C. troops, were talent and the chamoionships in this
line will be sure to draw a full house,
and entries will no doubt be very
heavy.
Tne following Committee were
elected to supervise the Sports and
Entertainments Department:—
Chairman : Lieut. R. W. Warren.
Hon. Secretary : Mr. W. R. Taylor,
Y.M.C.A.
Representing A Coy. : Privates
Burns and lies.
Representing B Coy., Sergt. Jack
and Lance-Corpl. Cheeseman.
Representing C Coy., Corpl. Bat-
chelor and Pte. Waters.
Representing D Coy., Q.M.S.
Gollan and Pte. Robertson.
Corporal Melody, of C Coy., also
rendered able assistance.
Musical Sub-Committee : Mr. P.
Payne (Third Engineer), Sergt.
Lester, and Corpl. Rowe.
It is hoped that now we have got
right into our stride, the next stage
of our journey will be a merry one.
Answers to Correspondents
"Clutch." —We cannot agree with
you. Your argument that Sir Douglas
Haig threw away the fruits of the
Somme offensive,' by not taking your
advice, is not backed up bv the other
Cook's tourists abroad and, anyway,
how could Haig be expected to know
as much about it as you, who were
there 1
"H. B. J."—You are wrong. 11
was Mr. Blackie.
"C. B."—Cannot publish. Your
remarks on the Bos'un are libellous in
any case.
"Roebuck."—Would strongly advise
you to continue your musical studies.
In the meantime we will endeavour to
get the Bugler to play the Last Post
so that it can* be distinguished from
the Reveille.
"Chopin."—Sorry you find B Com-
pany's band music too "high class."
The fault is with yourself.
"Ship's S.M." —Your contribution
is utterly devoid of humour, either
as prose, verse or line-drawing.
" Sgt. Goudie."—Regret to hear that
one man refused to subscribe. Un-
derstand he has since committed
suicide.
" Poet Laureate."—We pass no com-
ment. One verse will suffice —the best
of twenty three :
He stood on the deck at midnight,
His cobbers laying sick all around,
He thought he'd write his dear tart a
poem,
So he skinned down the hold with
a bound.
" Private."—All your remarks on
the Rt. Hon. W. F. Massey have been
written before. The Main Body said
all that need be said on the subject.
" Promotion."—Dishonesty does not
necessarily debar vou from promotion
to Q.M.S.


Notes on Returned Officers
CAPTAIN M. URQUHART, M.C.—Left
New Zealand with the Main Body,
11th Regiment, as Second Lieutenant.
Saw service with Wellington Regi-
ment on Gallipoli and in France.
Was awarded Montenegrin Decoration
Order Danilo sth Class, December,
1916. Mentioned in dispatches Janu-
ary, 1917. Awarded Military Cross
for action, 31st- July, 1917, at La
Basse Yille. Promoted Lieutenant,
May 29th, 1915; Captain, Ist March,
1916. Seconded for duty to New Zea-
land, arriving 6th March, 1918. Re-
turns to service. " 0. C. troops 42nd
Reinforcement. Also saw service in
South Africa.
CAPTAIN E. J. J. WELCH. —Enlisted
August 10th, 1915, as Ship's Quarter-
master, " Tofua." Was Lieutenant.
Promoted May Ist, 1917. 6th, Bth,
10th, 13th, lBth, 25th, 29th, 34th
Mounteds, 35th and 42nd Infantry.
Saw service at Gallipoli.
MAJOR MONK. —Sailed for Samoa,
March. 1915,; returned October, 1915.
Seconded for duty in New Zealand.
Returned to duty, Public Health De-
partment, December, 1917. Sails with
42nd Infantry Reinforcements as
P.M.O.
LIEUT. H. HENDERSON. —Went into
camp October, 1915, with 11th
N.C.O.'s. Gained commission at
Trentham, March, 1916. Left New
Zealand with 17th Reinforcement,
September, 1916. Posted 2nd C.1.R.,
December, 1916, at Laventie. France.
Wounded, June, 1917. Promoted
Lieutenant, September, 1917; invalided
to New Zealand, January, 1918.
Boarded and passed for service, June,
1918. Returns to service as O.C A
Company, 42nd Reinforcement
LIEUT. R. W. WARREN. —Went into
camp, 13th October, 1915, with 10th
N.C.O.'s. Gained commission at
Trentham, 23rd March, 1916. Posted
on service to Ist Battalion, A.1.R.,
December. 1916. Seconded for duty
to Machine-gun School, Grantham,
England, April, 1917. Returned to
France, June, 1917, and posted to 3rd
N.Z.M.G. Coy. Wounded, Aug. 6th,
1917. Seconded for duty to New
Zealand; arrived, May, 1918. Re-
turns to service as O.C. B Coy., 42nd
Reinforcement.
SEC. LIEUT. B. HARTMAN. —Left New
Zealand with Main Body F.A.
Stretcher B. Saw service Suez Canal,
Gallipoli landing, Cape Helles, and
the Evacuation. Awarded Military
Medal, Walker's Ridge; promoted to
Lance-Corporal October, 1915; full
Corporal, December, 1915; Temporary
Sergeant, March, 1916; confirmed Ser-
geant April, 1915. Went to France
with N.Z. Expeditionary Force, April,
1916. Gained commission at Trinity
College, Cambridge, December, 1917.
Seconded for duty to N.Z.. February,
1918. Returns for service with A
Coy., 42nd Reinforcement.
SEC. LIEUT. W. S. DAWSON. —Left
N.Z. with 7th Mounted Rifles. Saw
service in Egypt. Transferred 2nd
Otago Battalion April, 1916. Pro-
moted Sergeant, October, 1916;
C.S.M., March, 1917. Gained com-
mission at Pembroke College, Cam-
bridge, December, 1917. Seconded
for duty to N.Z., February, 1918. Re-
turns to service with B Company, 42nd
Reinforcement.
SEC. LIEUT. W. A. STEAD. —Left
N.Z. with Ist Battalion N.Z.R.8.,
rank of Sergeant. Saw service with
same unit at Mersa Matruh, Egyptian
Western front, and in France. Gained
commission at Trinity College, Cam-
bridge, December, 1917. Seconded for
duty to N.Z., February, 1918. Re-
turns to service with B Company,
42nd Reinforcement.
SEC. LIEUT. INNES JONES. —Left
N.Z. with Main Body,- Auckland
Mounted Regiment, 4th Waikato
Squadron, as' trooper. Saw service
in Egypt and Gallipoli. Wounded
at Sari Bair, August, 1915. Returned
to N.Z. for discharge June, 1916.
Was under treatment in N.Z. until
re-enlisted November, 1916. Promoted
to Sec. Lieut., May Ist. 1918. Re-
turns to service with C Coy., 42nd
Reinforcement.
SEC. LIEUT. BLACKIE. —Left N.Z.
Advance Guard, Samoa. Returned to
N.Z. from Samoa, November, 1914.
Left N.Z. again with 4th Reinforce-
ment, A.M.R. Saw service on Gal-
lipoli till evacuation. In action Sinai
Desert and Palestine. Wounded at
Rafa, January 9th, 1917. Returned
to N.Z. for discharge, May, 1917. Re-
enlisted November, 1917; promoted
Sec. Lieut. May 23rd, 1918.
Wattles.
Wattle blossoms wave on high,
Wattle scent is in the air,
And the breezes rustling by
Scatter fragrance everywhere;
Yellow dust is showered down
As the gentle zephyrs blow;
There's a glory all its own
Where the wattle blossoms grow.
Birdlife dwells in wattle bloom,
Flitting through the golden leaves
From the sunshine to the gloom
Which the clustered yellow weaves.
While upon the earth below
Whence the virgin wattle rose
Slanting beams their shadows throw
As the wattle blossom blows.
There's the road I know so well
In the shade the wattles cast,
To the home where loved ones dwell,
Waiting till I'm home at last.
And I care not how I fare
In life's pleasures, in life's woes,
All my interests centre there
Where the wattle blossom blows.
Nautical Terms Explained.
Master, known also as The Old Man
or the Skipper.—Seen usually at 11
a.m. looking for microbes with the
aid of an electric torch. His main use
is an advertisement for sardines.
Ist Mate. —Great cobber of Old Man.
Keeps one eye on the bos'un and the
other on the deck. Boxes the com-
pass, but the compass usually wins on
points.
2nd Mate.— So called to distinguish
him from Ist Mate. Although some-
times referred to by his friends as an
unclean bow-wow, has never been
known to growl on the dog watch.
3rd Mate. —Assists 2nd Mate. The
rumour that he is the grandson of the
Old Man is incorrect.
Extra Zrd Mate. —Holds a position
equivalent to that of lance-corporal in
the army, but draws extra pay.
Bos'un. —A holystone terror. En-
tirely responsible for the cleanliness,
discipline and moral tone of the ship.
Suffers from insomnia in consequence.
Assists Ship's Orderly Corporal in the
discharge of his duties.
Bos'un's Mate or Bos'un's Batman.—
His duties are to shine the bos'un's
gum boots, clean his buttons and dress
him for dinner.
Carpenter. —Known as Chips. Chops
cooks' morning wood. Can replace
anything from a bathplug to a spare
beam.
Chief Engineer. —Known as the civi-
lised engineer. Dines with the com-
batant officers. Very Scotch. Makes
his screw go a long way.
2nd Engineer. —Of revolutionary
tendencies.
Zrd Engineer. —The trimmers' de-
light. Enlivens their dreary existence
by telling funny yarns intermingled
with classical selections on the violin.
4th Engineer. —Responsible for oil-
ing the works.
Greaser. —The man who oils the
works.
Fireman.— A Futurist. A man who
calls a spade a shovel; also a poker
expert.
Purser. —Not carried, as nothing
valuable on board.
A.B. —Stands for Ask the Bos'un,
Abaft the Binnacle.
O.S. —Orderly Seaman. Does any
little jobs overlooked by the fatigue
parties.
Chief Steward. —Responsible for the
manufacture of the stew.
Stewards. —Convey the stew to the
officers.
Porthole. —Has position but no
magnitude; originally designed for
ventilation; now only used when not
required.
Dormitory.—A place designed to
prevent sleep.
Saloon.— Where the police sleep.


Kia Pono Tonu.
Through days of bitter want the gal-
lant band
Had stayed the onslaught of our
armed might,
Nor hope remained that they could
long withstand
Our engines fraught with life's
swift-winged night.
Enclosed within our army's grim
array,
A savage race, to yield they ne'er
had dreamed
Though naught was left keen hunger's
pangs to stay,
And from brave hearts the scarlet
life-blood streamed.
A truce proclaimed, an envoy hailed
our foes
And offered life and pardon who
forebore
To wage a hopeless cause. Then stern
uprose
An aged chieftain tried in black-
est war.
In accents grand, he bade the envoy
bear
The message of his dauntless race;
that life
In bondage they desired not, nor
there
Till death them claimed, would
cease their righteous strife.
And well they proved the vow the
chieftain spake
For e'en unto the soul's expiring
breath
They steadfast kept the faith no pain
could break,
And showed their hearts aye faith-
ful unto death.
Competitions.
In order to create an incentive to
contribute among members of the rein-
forcement, prizes were offered by the
Committee for matter suitable for
publication. The following have been
adjudged winners under the various
headings
Cover Design: Corpl. Buchan, Ist;
Lce.-Cpl. Byatt and Pte. Brown,
equal, second.
Short Story : No entry.
Descriptive Article : Sergt. Ching.
Humorous Article : C.S.M. Harvey
(redonated).
Poem : Lieut. Henderson (redo-
nated).
Joke : Lieut. Hartman (redonated).
Humorous Drawing : Lieut. Hart-
man (redonated).
. After receiving contributions the
Committee decided to include prizes
for the best humorous poem, sketch
and cartoon. The awards under these
headings are :■ —
Humorous poem : Pte. Buckland
Sketch : Q.M.S. Hornblow.
Cartoon : Corporal Buchan.
At the request of Lieut. Henderson
the prize for best poem is awarded to
Pte. Bennett. The reference to a
famous fighting regiment on the cover
will be apparent to most of our
readers.
To Our Folks at Home.
A Quotation.
Quit not the pledge, frail sufferer
then,
Although a distant date be given,
Despair is treason towards man,
And blasphemy to Heaven.
Advertisements.
HAIR-CUTTING DE LUXE
M. STEWART, PROPRIETOR
Neck shaved American
and Norwegian Styles.
De tray bit touch a speciality.
Onions or cold meat taken as payment.
SPECIAL TRIM FOR PICKLES.
MOSES, STEAD & CO.
TOBACCONISTS.
Special Line of Cigars—
FLOR ,DE MANURIO
Straight from Manufacturers, the
Zoo, Wellington.
Most Economical : Guaranteed to last
out the consumer.
Price one penny or an empty bottle
C.O. ADJUTANT & CO.,
DEALERS IN JUSTICE.
Best prices given for old tanks, lead,
etc. Highest awards of any firm in
similar line.
Business Manager :
Ship's Sergt.-Major.
Telegraphic address: " Hoppy."
TAYLOR & COMPANY,
Music EMPORIUM.
Special Sale Line of Red Triangles.
MUCK LEAN & BO SUN,
GREENGROCERS.
Large assortment of potatoes and
onions always on deck.
Spare earth delivered f.o.b. &• d.a.m
ROWE, PERCY, HARTMAN
AND ANDERSON,
LESTER SQUARE,
Italian Orchestra and Raconteurs.
All classes of entertainment under
taken.
Hair Raising Tales a Speciality.
A CARD.
ROEBUCK,
Piano Tuner and Bricklayer
SCHOOL
OF PHYSICAL CULTURE,
BOAT DECK.
Take my Course of Training : Pre-
vents hair from turning grey, spots
before the eyes, overweight, pigeon
toes and feeling of fullness after eat-
ing.
Testimonials from Ship's Officers,
Military Officers and Nurses
Staff of Instructors include :
Wrestling—
Professors Warren and Dodgshun
Boxing—
Professors McNab and Everitt
Skipping—
Professor Stringer


Reinforcement Headquarters.
Capt. URQUHART, M. (M.C.), O.C.
Troops.
Act./R.S.M. HOPKINS, R. S. P.,
Ship's Sergt.-Major.
Ship's Permanent Staff.
Capt. WELCH, E. J. J., Adjutant and
Quartermaster.
R.Q.M.S. HORNBLOW. R. R., Ship's
Q.M.S.
S./Sergt. NUGENT, R. H., Army
Pay Corps.
Sergt. YOUNG, G. A., Records Clerk.
Sergt. MASON, R. 8., Medical Staff.
Cpl. BUCHAN, C., Medical Staff.
Pte. DALGLEISH, J. Medical Staff.
Pte. NORTH, J. J., Medical Staff.
Divisional Signallers.
Sgt. Hall, A. E.; Cpl. Perkins, E.
R. Sappers: Elwin, F. W.; Gowdy,
W.; Gruar, F. H.; Moore, E. S.
A Coy., 42nd Reinforcement.
Lieut. Henderson, H. (0.C.); 2nd
Lieut. Hartman, B.
C.S.M. tfinlayson, J. H. M.;
Atkinson, H. R. ; Sergeants: Coles, F.
J.; Fordham, W. E.; Railton, J. ;
Spring, W. J. L.-Sergeants: Loren-
zen, H. C.; Smith, W. W. Corporals:
Jones, R. H.; Begbie, C. R.; Pull-
man, W. W. G.; Edwards, N. B.;
Croft, R. H.; Graves, J. B.; Holland,
W.; Lyon, R. J. L.-Corporals: Con-
way, H. H.; Fleming, E. P.; Gardner,
E. W.; Gobbe, W. R.; Signal, C. H.;
Wilson, E. A. Privates: H.;
Armstrong, D. A.; Armstrong, W. J. ;
Aston, G. E.; Baird, J. L.; Ballard,
R. H.; Bargh, J.- H.; Barrell, A. I.
M.; Bodger, F. J. ; Brady, J.; Brown,
E.; Bruorton, J. S.; Burgess, W. T.;
Burns, G. F.; Calvert, P. J. ;
Chalmers, J. ; Ching, G. P.; Christie,
J.; Clarkson, J. A.; Coffey, T. P.;
Corbett, P.; Cordner, J. C.; Dalley,
D. S.; Daniel, E. H.; Day, J. E.;
Dennes, H. L.; Donnelly, W.; Dunlop,
G. A.; Elvy, S. H.; Faro, J. W.;
Fleming, R. W.; Foley, R. J.; Ford,
R. J.; Forrest, J. W.; Foster, P. H.;
Fraser, W. G.; Fryer, L. H.; Gal-
lagher, M. D.; Gal way, R. J. B.;
Garstang, C.; Gibb, G. E.; Gill, E. E.;
Goppertn, W. J.j Griff en, C.; Gunn,
•v. C.: Haalow, Yv. V.; Harbison, W.
T.; Harris, H.; Hartigan, M. : Hay,
M.; Hayes, H. H.; Her rick, G. M.;
Hobbs, W.; Holmes, G. H.; Hooper,
W. H. ; Horwell, W. J.; Hoskin, E.
D.; Humm. H. E.; lies, W. : Irving,
W. F. ; Kirker, R. W.; Langford, PL ;
Langnsh, G. W.; Lanyon, E. F. ; Lcd-
sharn, W. D. ; Le Gros, E. G.; Mac-
phail, H. A.; Macphail, R. A.; Mala-
quin, F. C. : Marks, C. D. ; Mason,
O. A. J.: Metcalf, J. A.; Miller, R. ;
Millard, J. P.; Moore, J. E.; Morrow,
G. J.; Mowat, C. ;Mudgway, S. C.;
SHIP'S
ROLL.
Murdock, G. B.; Murphy, R.; Mc-
Bride, J. ; McClintock, J. A. ; Mc-
Cormick, F. J.; McGeorge, S. H.; Mc-
Guire, J.; Mcllroy, E. J. ; Mcliwrick,
R. E.; McKay, A.; McKay, C. S. :
McLachlan, A. H.; McLeod, J. R.;
Nelson, I. ; Nicholls, C. T. ; Ormandy,
H, J.; Orsborn, J.; Page, H. J. :
Parnham, T. R.; Passclls, H. A. ;
Pearce, F.; Peattie, A.; Phillips, A.
E.; Porter, C.; Price, C. H.; Prince,
B. G.; Prowse, R. ; Rattray, A. B. ;
Reade, P. W.; Reyland, W. E. ; Round,
W. E.; Savage, F. ; Seed, W. H. M.;
Simpson, P. J.; Sligo, J.; Smith, A.
H. ; Smith, J. H. ; Smith, L. A. ;
Stockden, C. J. ; Stowell, W. H. ;
Street, L. E.; Sutton, R. A.; Tough,
J. ; Trembath, J.; Tucker, F. E. ;
Tyler, G. T.; Wallis, J. T.; Waters, J. :
Watson, J. C. F.; Whitford, D. G. L. ;
Williams, A. C. : Williams, H. : Wool-
ford, J. F. H. ; Wright, J.
Coy., 42nd Reinforcement.
Lieut. Warren, R. W. (0.C.); 2nd
Lieut. Dawson, W. S. ; 2nd Lieut. Stead,
W. A.
C.S.M. Harvey, J.; Q.M.S. Barrow -
clough, M. E.; Sgts.: Jack, H. E.;
Chappell, A.; Uren, G.; Bawden, J. P. ;
Swanson, A. E. : Act.-Sgt. Wylie, A. P. ;
L.-Sgt. McDonald, C. N.; Cpls. Swif-
fen, W. ; O'Sullivan, S. J. ; Gardner
W. C.; Brooker, L. N. : Pullman, A.
W. : Boaler, J. ; Green, F. E. ; Hath-
away, F. D.; Oliver, J. A. L.; Robert-
son, R. K.; L.-Cpls. Clapp, C. O. ;
Dallas, T. W.; Paul, J. C.; Cheeseme-
man, E. T. ; Colthorpe, W. H. W. ;
Finnerty, T. M.; Hay, W. F. ; Kennel
ly, M.; Miller, A ; McDonald, PA G. ;
Newton, E. J. ; Watson, C. M.; Privates
Adams, W. T.; Agnew, S. ; Alexander,
H. ; Alexander, N. PI. ; Allan, A. G. ;
Angland, M. P. ; Anderson, J.; Atkin-
son, J.; Barr, A. S. ; Begg, J. S.; Ben-
fell, G. H.; Bennet, A. C.; Bennet, H. ;
Ben net, H. F.; Black, P. ; Bradbrook,
R. A. ; Bremner, F. A. ; Brookes, H.
W.; Brown, R, W.; Bucldand, A. C. ;
Burns, E. A.; Burrell, I. E.; Cain, J.
G.; Caird, L. ; Calder, G. A.; Campion,
T. ; Castles, W. McN. ; Crecketts, J. ;
Cheyne, F. A. ; Clark, D. ; Clark, H.
A.; Clark, I.; Clark, J.; Clark, P.;
Clarke, W. J.; Cole, L.; Condon, T.;
Cook, W. G.; Coombes, A. R.; Cra-
mond, J. T. ; Critchfield, H. C.; Cur-
sey, J. D. , Day, J. F.; Downie, W. C.
PI.; Drake, II.; Dudley, C. W.; Duff,
J. 0. ; Duncan, G. A. ; Dunning, C. G. ;
Duthie, R. McC.; Eccles, C. J.; Elder,
W. J. C.; Evitt, T. A.; Ferguson, K.
B. ; Ferguson, M. W.; Field, J. F. ;
Fogo, I. T.; Gatley, C. A.; Gascoigne,
B.; Gibson, H. 0.; Godfrey, PI. E.;
Goodlet, J.; Gordon, F.; Gray, R.;
Guyton, L. J.; Halley, A. M.; Hand,
L.; Hankin, N. J.; Hartnett, T.; Haw-
kins, H.; Headifen, S.; Hellyer, A. E.;
Heppell, R, N.; Herbert. W. J.; Hill,
J. E. ; Hitchman, G. ; Hooper, G. F. ;
Hordern, A. H. ; Horton, S. B. ; Irving,
W. ; Jar vie, W. ; Kaler, W. F.; Kay,
J. M.; Keith, I. R. ; Kennedy, J. F.;
Kennedy, R. McV.; King, A.; Marr,
W. J. ; Millar, J. L. ; Miller, L. R.;
Mitchell, J. : Morris, R. N. ; Morris,
W. J.; Molley, H.; Muller, E. ; Mur-
doch, C. C. C. ; Munro, J. L. B. ; Mur-
ray, C. G.; Murray, J.; Murray, M. ;
MacCallum, H.; McDonald, A. ; Mac-
Farlane, li. ; MacGregor, S. ; MacKav,
J. A.; MacCarthy, J. ; McCallum, R. :
McCormack, L. E.; Mclntyre, H.; Mc-
Lean, D. L.; McLean, R.; McNab, D.
W.; McPherson, J. G.; Newton, H. C :
O'Dea. E. ; O'Grady, M. K. ; O'Neill,
J. P. ; Packman, L. W. : Parkes, H. ;
Parish, E.; Parry, W. A.; Patterson,
J. ; Peppier, W. ; Pettigrew, G. D. H. ;
Phimester, R. C. : Pickard, D. ; Pink,
C. C.; Pope, J. T. ; Poulter, A. T. ;
Rawstorn, C. IT. P. ; Reeve, W. H. S. :
Reid, G. R.: Richardson, W.; Robert-
son, E. O.; Robinson, C. J.; Robson,
R.; Roebuck, S. W.; Rose, W. A. ;
Ross, W.; Russell, J. ; Schaffer, D. W.;
Seal on, R. : Smith, H. McD. ; Smith,
W. M. ; Sonntag, T. R. ; Spier, C. ;
Staeev, H. W. ; Stevenson, G. ; Steven-
son, T. W. ; Stewart, M.; Stokes, M.
IT.; Sudden, F. E.; Symes, V. G. ;
Tavener, F.; Tulley, L. F. ; Turley, J.
1). : Von Tur.zelmann, A T.; Wallis.
F.; Warren, E. G.; Watson, L. H.;
Waterston, W.; Weir. W. G.: Whiting,
G. R. ; Williams. W. D. J. ; Wilson, A. :
Wilson, PI. ; Windsor. A. R. ; Wood-
cock, W. : Wvlrow, J. ; Wynyard, G.
C.; Young, H. L.
Attached.
Army Pay Corps.
Staff-Sergeant Nugent, J. S. ; Private
Smith, J. L.
C Coy., 42nd Reinforcement.
2nd Lieut. Mabee, A. G. (0.C.); 2nd
Lieut. Innes-Jones, E. S.; 2nd Lieut.
Blackie, A. S.
C.S.M. Dunning, R. J.; Q.M.S.
Firth, H. L.; Sergeants: Ching, N. A. :
Hill, F. ; Leckie, E. J. T.; Popen-
hagen, G. W.; Stowe, W. B. L.-Sgt.
Dyson, A. R. Corporals: Anderson,
H. ; Barnett, W. D.; Bartlett, W. A.:
Batchelor, G. J. ; Chisnall, H. W. :
Dadly, W. F.; Enwright, M. P.;
Greenwood, F. H.; Moller, R. C. ;
Melody, W. J. ; McDonald, F.; Mc-
Master, A.; Twigg, W. G. ; Wallace,
C. A. L.-Corporals: Ball. W. B. D. :
Barclay, J.; Beavis, H.; Burch, G. R.:
Burnett, C. M.; Drydcn, A. P.; Eus-
tace, W. H. : Forbes, R. J.; Forster,
W. L. N.; Gardiner, W. E.; Higgins,
J. J. A.; Mulholland, E. J.; McCartie,
W. G. ; McHardy, W. G.; Reid, E.
C.; Renner, A. W. O.; Turpin, 0. W.
Privates: Ashworth, J. C.; Audinwood,
H. 0.; Anderson, W. ; Adams, J. L. ;
Baker, J. W.; Baldwin, A. E.; Bar-
row, N.; Beer, G. W. : Beckett, F.
R.; Bouge, A. G.; Black, D. H. :
Blackwell, S. G.; Bond, G.; Boyd,
A. J. ; Bradley, G. H. ; Brewer, H. T.;
Brennan, J.; Brockelbank, E.; Brogen,
J.; Bullard, C. A.; Butt, A. G.; But-
ton, L. W. D.; Bulliff, W. R.:
Brockelsby, W. A.; Bennet, T. ; Byrne,
J. J.; Burt, J. F.; Blanchett, U. F. :
Barton, W. M.; Cameron, J. ; Carkeck,
T. O.: Carruthers, G. A.: Cashman, P.
J.; Clarke, W. H.; Clarke, W. J. T. ;
Collins, S. R. ; Cunningham, P.;
Daines, G. E.; Davis, F. L. ; Dickison,
A. B. ; Dixon, P. C. ; Dooley, T. ;


Dron, E. T.; Drury, A. W.; Dynan,
B.; Edwards, F. H.; Evans, A.; Fair,
G. 0.; Fechan, A.; Ferguson, J.:
Fletcher, C. G.; Forster, J. L.; Frost,
L. A.; Fullford, A. A.; Flynn, W. P.;
Gardner, R.; Garley, W.; Gaynor, L.
F. ; Georgeson, R.; Gerrie, W. H.;
Gibbs, C. E.; Gibson, J. B.; Goer, J.
A. B.; Goer, A. J.; Grant, C. L.;
Gray, D. C.; Gregory, A.; Green, J.
A.; Green, A. E.; Green, P.
R.; Gillson. E.; Gillson, T.;
Hall, A.; Hall, E.; Hall, N.; Hall,
T. R.; Hall, F. M.; Harris, C. R.;
Heath, W. M.; Hildreth, H. C.; Hol-
land, A. A.; Holmes, R. J.; Hooker,
L. E.; Horgan, T.; Hunt, H. T.; Jane,
L.; Jeffries, A. A.; Jenner, H. J.;
Johnson, A. D.; Jones, G. W.; Jones,
L. V.; Kerby, M.; Knowles, S.; King,
R. A.; Lamot, L. L.; Lowe, S. C.;
Luke, C. S.; Lyell, A. J. V.; Lythberg,
A. E. W.; Lerwill, A. E.; Magee, R.;
Malm, C. E.; Maussen, C. M.; Mar-
shall, A. M.; Maxwell, J.; Meade, J.
F.; Meads, A. E.; Melrose, A. F.;
Millington, C. W.; Matthews, C. Y.;
MeCauley, A.; Mcintosh, A.; Mc-
intosh, T.; McKenzie, J.; McMahon,
G. F.; McMillan, C. R.; McNeil, A. A.
W.; McPherson, A. G.; McShane, A.;
Neill, J.; Newman, W. C.; Nicholls,
C. H.; Nixey, F. E. G.; Norton, R.;
O'Connor, F. J.; Olsen, A. 0.; Pareell,
L. F.; Parsons, C. W.; Paskell, L. G.;
Peet, C. V.; Penaluna, J.; Peters, R.
G.; Porter, G.; Powick, C. T. C.;
Price, T. N.; Priddle, C. F.; Pulham,
C. C.; Reader, A. E.; Reardon, R.;
Reilly, H. J.; Rutland, J. P.; Shar-
land, C. F.; Silcock, H. F. S.; Sil-
cock, T. W. M.; Smith, A. J.; Smith,
H. J.; Stilwell, W. L. F.; Taylor,
F.; Taylor, J. H.; Todd, R. K.;
Thomas, A. A.; Walker, A.; Wallace,
H. B.; Wells, A. V.; Windleborn, P.
H.; Winstanley, W. D.; Wilkins, W.
A.; Wooster," A. H.; Walters, H.;
Waters, R. J.
D Coy., 42nd Reinforcement.
2nd Lieut. Neave, D. E. (0.0.); 2nd
Lieut. Bacon, A. T.
C.S.M. Allan, J. C. Q.M.S. Gollan,
H. Sergeants: Goudio, F.; Gudgeon,
M. Q.; Martin, N. Mc.; McKeown,
B. A.; Pfeifer, C.; Richter, A. W. ;
Rowland, V. W.; Wenden, C. R.
L.-Sgt. Lester, H. M. Corporals:
Asher, L. I.; Craig, R. McD.; Free-
man, H. J.; Fry, J.; Harper, J. G.;
Johnston, G.; Rowe, H. V.; Shearer,
W. H.; Wallace, W.; Vialoux, H. R.
A. L.-Corporals: Buchanan, C. A.;
Butler, G. T. W.; Byatt, B. B.;
Childs, 11. E.; Dawber, H. A.; Fowler,
W. H.; Fowlcs, W. V.; Haycock, H.;
Hellier, A.; Marshall, G. A.; Martin,
M. J.; Mason, K. E.; Monteith, W.
F.; Northcroft, E. F.; Notman, R.;
Schroeder, F. G. Cpl. Campbell, C.
A. Privates: Ablett, P. G.; Adamson,
W. J.; Alexander, W. F.; Alton, A.;
Anderson, A. C. T.; Anderson, A. J.;
Andrews, C. A.; Angus, H.; Apple-
yard, C. B.; Askew, E. J.; Austin, N.
C.; Bagley, W.; Bamfield, F. A.; Ben-
nett, C. T.; Benstead, N. W.; Blake,
D. W.; Bland, T.; Black, C.; Bartrum,
L.; Blee, G. E.; Bowman, W. F.;
Boyle, W. M.; Boys, H. W.; Brad-
bury, E. L.; Bradshaw, G. F.; Brisco,
H.; Brooking, F. W.; Brown, L. F.;
Brunsdon, H.; Bunting, W. A.; Bur-
rows, L.; Butt, J. R.; Campbell, R.
S.; Candy, A. J.; Cahill, S. T.; Carey,
J.; Cartwright, J. F.; Chaafe, S.;
Christopher, R. F.; Clark, F. C.;
Cleaver, W.; Collins, F.; Conway-King,
T. M.; Cook, A. L.; Cosgrove, T.;
Couper, F.; Crawford, F.; Davie, G.
W. K.; Denholm, A. E.; Douglas, A.
B.; Easthope, E. R.; Elliott, A. N.;
Elliott, R.; Erickson, A. J. P.; Fargie,
C. C.; Finch, A. F.; Finn, A.; Farrow,
L.; Finlayson, J. R.; Fletcher, C. T.;
Fotheringham, R. B.; Fryday, T.;
Gempton, W. J.; Gill, W. W. H.;
Good, M. H.; Goodman, V. H. T.;
Graham, P.; Gray, E. D.; Grumball,
E.; Grundy, J. G.; Guy, J. 0.; Hall,
A. E.; Harris, A.; Harris, H. J.;
Hartnady, J. J. M.; Harman, A. A.;
Hayes, F. J.; Heney, F. C.; Herlc, R.
R.; Herivel, T.; Hight, D. R.; Might,
C. T. A.; Hill, W.; Hill, S.; Hinckes-
man, F. V.; Hobson, L. T.; Hooke, J.;
Howard, C. S.; Hunter, A. D.;
Hutchinson, W. W.; Inch, J. H.; Jas-
pers, L.; Jones, S. J.; Kelsey, K. A.;
Kennedy, H.; Kennedy, P.; Kirk, J. P.;
Keane, T. D.; Knight, M. IT.;
Knowles, J.; Larsen, F.; Leat, W. J.;
Lee. P. C.; Lever, W.; Lockie, H. E.
J.; Manifold, T. E.; Mann, D.; Mann,
S.; Martin, H.; Marshall, W. A.;
Matheson, D. K.; Marks, P. H. ; Maw-
son, J. J.; Middleton, A.; Miller, G.
H.; Monk, A. W.; Morris, J.; Morri-
son, C.; Morgan, P.; Moyle, L.; Mur-
phy. J. P.; Mudford, N. F. N.; Muir-
head. W.; McCarten, N.; McCaldon,
F. W.; McDermott, J. J.; McDowell,
W. A.; McGehan, G. O.; McGovern,
H. A.; Mc Kerchar, J. L. ; McKie,
W. McMillan, W. C. A.; McNaughton,
R. J.: MeNamara, J. 15.; Naughton,
J.; Neal, T. H.; Neill, R.; Nicolson,
H. E.; Noble, R. J.; Oldham, C. H.;
Oliver, H. L.; O'Connor, D.; O'Far-
rell, P. W.; O'Grady, P. T.; O'Sullivan,
D.; Parr, T. A.; Pascoe, A. J.; Pay-
ton, J. B.; Pearce, E. E.; Pezaro, S.
A.; Peterson, T. G.; Peck, G. S.;
Patrick, A. F.; Poulter, W. B.; Polton,
T. W.; Rattray, E. B.; Ridder, A. C.;
Roberts. T.; Robb, A.; Robertson, R.;
Robertson, J.; Robertson, A.; Robson,
E. L.; Ronberg, E. P. ; Ryan, T. M.;
Ryan, W. L.; Sayers, V. W.; Shanley,
•T. J.; Shield, W. N.; Sehultz, L. A.;
Scott, V. R. L.; Simpson, G. A.;
Sibbe, C. T.; Simpkin, J. A.; Simp-
son, T. E.; Smith, C. J.; Smith, J. L.;
Smith, S.; Smith, E. J., Speck, T. A.;
Speirs, W. A.; Stevens, A. P.; Stephens
A. E.; Stokes, T. G. ; Stevens, W.;
Stewart, F. M.; Storey. T. H. ; Swin-
ard, J. E. ; Swan, R. V. : Taylor, F. ;
Thomas, J. W.; Walsh, L. j.: Wat-
son, J.: Walter., W. K.: Weir, W. H.;
Weenink, E. W.; White, G. B.;
White, F. R. A.; White, L. A. M.;
Warner, J. A.; Willetts, W. H.;
Withell, J. W.; Winter, C. C. R.;
Willy, T. J.; Windleborne, L. G.;
Young, R. P,
N.Z. Medical Corps.
Major Monk, H. G. H. Captain
Gilmour, J. R.
Cpl. Shaw, L. F. Privates: Schlitta,
A. H. F.; Warner, A. H.; Backons,
W. P.; Bennett, F. 0.; Best, H.;
Bond, H.; Davis, H. H.; Halse, H. S.;
Legg, F. J.; Mcßae, H. T.; Melvin,
H. V.: Nagle, J. W.
N.Z. Dental Corps.
Captain Dodgshun.
N.Z. Army Nursing Service.
Staff Nurses: Affleck, M. E.; Chitten-
den, D.; Everett, C.; Everett, D.;
McNab, M. D.; Smale, M. R.
Army Chaplain's Dept.
Rev. Olds, C. H., C.F. (4th Class).
Y.M.C.A. Representative.
Taylor, W. R.
■ MAY K'IT WAKTS "HEAVE'.S


»
.
i




-


