

F *m
New Australia Colowj,
PARAGUAY
AN OPEN LETTER FROM GILBERT CASEY.
Las Ovejas, New Australia,
Asuncion, Paraguay,
September 7th, 1897.
Dear Comrade,
\ou may safely disregard all reports to tile effect that this Colony has been abandoned
or, having tried Socialism, has reverted to Individualist lines. It is true that at the beginning
of this year the Association technically went through the process of legal dissolution, but that
process was necessary in order to enable us to assign a due share of the common property to those of
the members who were desirous of leaving, and tile Association was immediately reconstituted on
the old communal lines. We took the opportuni y, however, to make certain alterations in the
constitution, which our experience had shown to b| necessary, and which now, after six months’
trial, are found to work smoothly and well. The main alterations (which should be taken in
connection with the constitution as given in the 11 New Australia Report" ) are these :
1. Teetotalism is no longer necessary, but
I have not seen any signs of drunkenness in
the place.
i 2 * The shares are £lO each, but while evei
I such payment may be excused to those who cannot a:
V 3. Horses and live stock are now individual
| of these did not work well in practice.
member is expected to take a share if he can,
brd it.
property, as we found that communal ownership
4. Members are allowed to leave the Colon
they like, without forfeiting their rights of membershi]
for a holiday when they like, and for as long as


Being by no means ashamed of our record, we still stick to the old name, and are registered as
the “ New Australia Industrial Co-partnership,’' and as Ave have safely got through all our early
troubles, I think there is a prosperous future before us. The land is wonderfully fertile, and though the
i climate is trying at first, our health remains excellent. The Government is absurdly generous, and
1 not only grants us a monthly subsidy, but pays the salaries of a schoolmaster and other officials, whom
we appoint from our own members. And those w 1 > eft us to settle individually, are in many cases now
returning to us. A man soon finds out that it is quite impossible for him single-handed to cut down
the jungle, fence and cultivate his land, look after .Ids cattle and milk them, build his house, and live
in decency or comfort.
We are still, of course, poor as yet, but we are better off than we were under Individualism.
Our food, though plain, is plentiful. We have got together a fair quantity of stock and tools, and we
work about seven hours a day, agriculture occupying most of our time.
To those in England who wish to join us I should say as follows :
i. You pay your own passage to Buenos Aires, where you obtain a free pass to Asuncion from
the Paraguayan Consul; or the North German Lloyd Boats go right up the river to Rosario, and you
can get a free pass there.
2. When you reach Asuncion we obtain for you a free Railway Pass to Caballero. Here you
will be met by a conveyance that will take you to the Colony. Cost of the conveyance, with food
\en route, etc., will be about £l, which will be , y° ur account.
3, When you reach the Colony yoi cafe start work as soon as you like. For the first six
months (or in special cases a shorter period) yon art a probationer, and obtain food and accommodation
in return for your labour.
4. After six months you may either become a member or settle individually in the neighbour-
hood. If you choose the latter alternative, we wdl render you all the help we can, just as much as if
you preferred to join us. We are willing to take the risk of you disliking us and our life ; we do not
ask you to take us on trust, but we are ready to take you on trust and give you an opportunity of
seeing the country and learning its ways.
5. If you do decide to join us, you are expected to purchase a £lO share (provided you can
afford to do so) which yields no interest or dividend. You should also have some £l2 in hand,
which, as prices rule here, will provide you with a fair supply of stock.
r 6. You then select 60 squares (about ic|s acres) of Government land. You make application
to the Government for it, and they give you the made out in your own name.
7. You then transfer this land to the
cannot at any time be claimed by you, but you
management and administration of the communa
Association, and it becomes common property, and
ave an equal vote with all the other members in the
property.
8. Your membership, besides giving you'The right to the personal use of the 105 acres selected
by you, gives you the right to use the six leagues of commonage granted by the Government to the
Colony as a whole.


>n "
9. From the time of your arrival on the Colony, you participate with us in the Government
subsidy of 10 dollars a month per head, (about 6/8 in English money) which of itself is almost enough
to maintain a man in Paraguay, where food is so abundant. If you have a family, your grant is
increased in proportion to the number of adults and children composing it.
10. If you subsequently withdraw from membership, we return you, either m cash or m
movable property equivalent thereto : (I)—Whatever money you have paid in, (2)— An equal share
of all movable communal property, any dispute head being referred to .an. outside arbitrator.
But land and permanent fixed improvements remain the property of the Association.
n. If you do not intend to join us, remember that the Government grants to individual settlers
the same privileges as we have, and if you settle near us, we shall be glad to give you all the help and
information so much needed by strangers in a new country. Most of our difficulties have arisen from
people joining the movement in too great a hurry, and we do not wish you to join us unless you are
quite convinced that that is your best step. |
12. For a description of our land, our early history, and our mode of carrying on business, you
will do well to consult the “ New Australia Report ,” written by an English visitor and published by
Murdoch & Co., (26, Paternoster Square, London, E.C.), at sixpence.
ther information apply to the British x\gen
Square, London, E.C.
iEbERT ' dASEY, ' '
President of the N.A. I.C.
* - ' v
c/o Murdoch & Co., 26, Paternoster
i
3 1508 02236147 6
A 133,5b


0
* ' ■ >
% * 4 .
.
