

NEW TRUTHS
AND THEIR RECEPTION:
■
A LECTURE
IJELIVEREI) AT
THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, SYDNEY,
ON THE 17th AUGUST, 1858,
CHARLES MEYMOTT, ESQ , M.R.O.S,LA.C„
&C. (fee. &c.
. , SYDNEY:
1 PUBLISHED BY J. R. "CLARKE, GEORGE STREET.
• FOR SALE BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1 85 8.
PRINTED AT THE “ SPECTATOR ” OFFICE,




NEW TRUTHS
AND THEIR RECEPTION:
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT
THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, SYDNEY,
ON THE 17th AUGUST, 1858,
CHARLES MEYMOTT, ESQ., M.R.C.S.,LA.O„
&c. &c. &c.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY J. R. CLARKE, GEORGE STREET.
FOB SALE BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1 858.
PRINTED AT THE “ SPECTATOR ” OFFIOE.




PREFACE.
Any one who has read a work, written by Marmaduke
Sampson, called “ Truths, and their Reception considered in
relation to the Doctrine of Homoeopathy,” will, on the perusal
of the following Lecture, at once perceive that I have
borrowed somewhat largely from that work ; and I write
this Preface, not merely to acknowledge that I have done
so, but also with the view of pointing out the source from
whence I derived my ideas, in order that those who are
interested in the subject may know where to find the best
and fullest explanation of it.
I have also gathered somewhat from George Combe and
Dr, Hancock ; in short, if there be any originality in the
following pages, it emanates from a careful study of the
writings of men whose names will be handed down to
posterity as philosophers and philanthropists, amongst
which will shine conspicuously George Combe and Marma-
duke Sampson.




k\3>3sS \ f\2SSM
-"1
NEW TRUTHS AND THEIR RECEPTION.
The wisest mortal that ever existed said, “ There is no new
thing under the sun.” And so, when we speak of something
new, we shall find, generally, that the thing itself is not new,
but that its newness is in ourselves, it is new to us. For
instance, when it was first discovered that iron was attracted
by the magnet and was capable of being rendered permanently
magnetic itself, we say a new truth was discovered, by which
we mean that it then became new to us. The fact itself was
not new—iron had not then for the first time become mag-
netic. This property as well as all the other properties of
iron belonged to it when it was first created. Again, when it
was first ascertained that the earth revolved round the sun, it
became a new truth, because before that time it was believed
that the sun revolved round the earth, but the law of nature
was not altered, the earth always did revolve round the sun,
and, therefore, the fact itself was not new. It was called a
new truth because it then became new to us—and this is the
case with all laws in nature. By new truths then, I mean, all
recent discoveries which are found to be true; these may con-
sist, in the first place, of simple facts, or phenomena, (commonly
so called); and, secondly, of fixed laws, or principles by which
these facts are governed. The circulation of the blood is a
simple fact; discovered by Harvey, and, in his time, it was a
new truth. Again, it is a simple fact that four satellites, or
moons, revolve round the planet Jupiter. In neither of these


instances do we speak of any law or governing principle, we
merely speak of the facts themselves. But when it is ob-
served that certain phenomena always occur under certain
conditions, that is to say, when we find certain effects inva-
riably follow certain causes—we at once become acquainted
with the laws which govern those facts. Newton observed
an apple fall from a tree: he endeavoured to find out the cause
of this, and the result of his meditations was the discovery of
the law of gravitation, expressed thus :—“ All bodies attract
each other directly as the mass, and inversely as the square
of the distance. And as this law was never heard of before
his time, it then became a new truth —and by its light man
was permitted to have a glimpse of the wonderful manner in
which the great Creator of the universe keepeth all the stars
in the places appointed for them. We ought to hear in mind
that all truth emanates from the Supreme Being, who created
all things and made certain laws by which they are sustained
and governed. These laws are from the beginning and are
immutable. Man has been permitted from time to time to
discover many of them ; others have been revealed to him,
and there are many which are still hid from him. But we
may be sure that they were all ordained for a good purpose,
and, therefore, when any new discovery is presented to ns
(provided it comes with respectable authority), it is folly
to refuse to examine it, merely, perhaps, because it appears
contrary to what we have hitherto believed to he true ; for,
by so doing, we may perchance be throwing away a great
blessing.
Having explained what I mean by new truths, let us now
proceed to consider the reception of them by the world, and
whilst doing this, it will be interesting to take a cursory
glance at those characteristics of the human mind, which
would seem to account for the manner in which new truths
are generally received.
The reception of all great and important truths has always
been attended with more or less opposition, and, as a general
rule, I should say, the more important the truth, the greater
is the opposition to its reception.


Now this cannot arise from any natural dislike to novelty
in the human mind, for man is notoriously fond of novelty.
He seeks for it in childhood, in youth, in manhood, and in
old age. See how the child stops at the toy-shop, and how
his little eyes glisten with pleasure when you buy him a new
plaything, observe how the school-hoy is continually chang-
ing his games, now marbles are in, now hoops, now football,
and then cricket; he loves anything fresh, new amusements,
new pleasures, in fact, new anything. In manhood how we
all seek for new gratifications, travel to see new places, love
to hear new music, to sec new spectacles, and to read novels
and newspapers. In old age the desire for novelty is more
blunted, but it ceases not until our faculties become incapable
of enjoying new sensations, as Sampson observes:—“The
undiscovered good is the temptation that carries us all upon
our road, and when we cease to desire what is new, or, in
other words, when we lose the wish to improve—we become
dead lumber, waiting to be removed.”
We may -well ask, then. How it is there is so much oppo-
sition to the reception of new truths ? If man is so fond of
novelty, what can be the reason of his objecting to it when
it is presented in the form of a truth ? Let us endeavour to
find a solution of this apparent incongruity. Phrenology
teaches us that man is endowed with a number of faculties,
whose aggregate constitutes the “ human mindit also
teaches us that each faculty has a separate organ by which it
is made manifest to the world. The aggregate of these
organs forms the mass called the “brain.” The size of an
organ “ coeteris paribus” is an index of its power of manifest-
ing the faculty to which it belongs.
If the brain were perfect as to size and health, the manifes-
tation of the mind would be perfect, but this does not occur
in any individual under the sun. The varieties we observe
in character are accounted for by the difference in the size of
the various organs of the brain in different individuals ; and
as there are no two brains precisely alike, so there are no two
characters precisely alike; at the same time there are many
resemblances, both as to the size of certain organs, and also


as to certain dispositions, to be found among men—and this
brings me to the point under consideration.
There are no two organs of the brain so universally large,
or so universally abused, as those of firmness and self esteem ;
and as an undue developement of these organs invariably
tends to produce—pride, obstinacy, and selfishness ; so we
find that pride, obstinacy, and selfishness, always have been,
and are still, the prominent characteristics of the human
race—and it is to these we must look for man’s rejection of
truth—not because it is truth, but only in so far as it touches
either of his prevailing qualities. For instance, suppose some
new truth were discovered by which any body was enabled
at once and without any difficulty to ascertain »what time it
was, either by night or day, without the use of a clock or
watch. It is from the watch and clockmakers we should
expect to find the greatest opposition to its introduction, and
the reason is obvious, because, not only would they be the
greatest losers by it, but they would have to give up all their
old notions and habits. On the other hand, there would be
little or no opposition on the part of those who never had any
particular ideas about the best way of keeping the time, nor
any interest in the sale of watches or clocks, And so
also we almost always find that the professors of the sub-
ject concerning which any new truth has been discovered
are the slowest in receiving it themselves, and, at the same
time, the strongest enemies to its general reception, be-
cause, in the first instance, they have to divest themselves
of all pre-conceivcd notions which are in opposition to the
new doctrine, notions which, perhaps, they have always con-
sidered to be correct, and by which they have hitherto been
guided in their opinions and conduct; and, in the second
instance, because, in consequence of their having devoted
the best part of their lives to this particular subject; they
are considered to be the most competent judges in anything
concerning it, and their opinions are eagerly sought after and
adopted by the multitude. There are some new discoveries
which are only interesting to a few ; and although they are
made public, yet they possess so little interest to the gene-


rality of people that they scarcely bestow a thought upon
them; and yet even in these cases the same thing may be
Observed. An instance of this kind has occurred within the
last 18 months. Some gentleman, whose name.l have for-
gotten, discovered that the moon did not revolve on its axis;
and he published a statement of this fact in the Times, show-
ing how impossible it was, in as much as the moon always
presented the same face to the earth. This announcement
immediately brought down upon him a torrent of abuse from
several people who felt that their self-esteem would suffer, if
it were true, because they had held a contrary opinion all
their lives, and some of them had taught it in books, and in
lectures for years. How was it possible so many clever men
had been mistaken so long ? It was absurd and ridiculous !
Whereas if we can only divest ourselves of all pre-conceived
notions about it, nothing is more palpable, or more easily
demonstrated, than the fact, that the moon does not revolve
on its own axis at all. This, no doubt, is a startling announce-
ment to those who have paid any attention to the movement
of the heavenly bodies, but by way of a check upon any hasty
expressions of condemnation with which you might be dis-
posed to meet such a novel idea, I will remind you of a story
about Galileo. Professor Baden Powell relates it thus; —
“Galileo having sufficiently improved upon his instrument,
now began assiduously to direct it to the heavens. ....
Jupiter formed the next object of examination, and no sooner
was the telescope pointed to that planet than the existence
of the satellites was detected, and their nature soon ascer-
tained. These and other observations were described by
Galileo, in a tract entitled 4 Nuncius Siderius,’ which excited
an extraordinary sensation the moment it appeared. Many
positively denied the possibility of such discoveries, others
hesitated; all were struck with astonishment. Kepler de-
scribes, in a letter to Galileo, the impression made on him by
the announcement. He considered it totally incredible. Sizzi
argued seriously with Galileo, that the appearance must be
fallacious, since it would invalidate the perfection of the
number 7 which applies to the planets, as well as throughout


all things natural and divine. Moreover these satellites are
invisible to the naked eye ; therefore they are useless ; there-
fore they do not exist. Others took a more decided, but still
less rational mode of meeting the difficulty. The principal
professor of philosophy at Padua (in which university Galileo
himself was also a professor), pertinaciously refused to look
through the telescope. Another pointedly observed that we
are not to suppose that Jupiter had four satellites given him
for the purpose of immortalising the medici, (for Galileo had
called them the medicean stars,) and a German named Horky,
suggested that the telescope, though accurate for terrestrial
objects, was not true for the sky.”
In this account of the reception of Galileo’s discovery, per-
haps the mast striking part is the refusal of the professor of
Padua to look through the telescope. This conduct appears
very strange, and we are apt to wonder how it is that a scien-
tific man could so wilfully shut his eyes, as it were, to the
light of truth; and yet if wo look around us, we see the same
kind of thing occurring amongst us every day.
One of the best illustrations of the way in which new
truths are received occurs in one of Miss Martineau’s “ Game
Law Tales,” which, although it is a work of fiction, manifests
a thorougli knowledge of human nature. She is alluding to
Harvey’s discovery of the circulation of the blood. It is in
the form of dialogue :
“One object of old Parr’s going up to London is, that
Harvey may study the case, and see- if he can gain hints
from it for lengthening our lives.
“ ‘ But, surely,’ said the clergyman, ‘it can matter but
little what Dr, Harvey concludes and gives out about this
old parishioner of mine, or any other case, No one can have
any respect for his judgment in the face of the wild doctrine
ho gives out about the blood.’
“ * Does he still adhere to that,’ asked Lord Southampton ?
“ ‘ Yes,’ replied Lord Holland. I He will, ere long, publish
another tract upon it. It is astounding to see a man, who
seems otherwise rational and sensible, lose himself on this


one point. There is no making any impression upon him, he
persists as quietly as if all the wise people in the world
agree with him.’
“ ‘ Quietly ?’ said Lord Seymour, ‘ I thought heovas a pas-
sionate, turbulent fellow, who thought all the world a fool
but himself.’
“ ‘ Whatever he may think,’ replied Lord Holland, ‘ he says
nothing to give one such an idea, on the contrary, the most
amusing and yet melancholy part of the business is his entire
complacency. He is so self-satisfied that nothing can move
him.’
“ ‘ Dr. Oldham,’ said Southampton to the family physician,
who sat smiling, while this dcsciption of Harvey was given,
‘ you have looked into this business, this pretended discovery,
what have you to say of it ?’
“ ‘ But little, my Lord, it is not worth so many words as
have just been spent upon it, There is not a physician in
Europe who believes in this pretended discovery.’
“ ‘ After examination ?’
“ * Surely, my Lord, any announcement of a discovery made
by the physician whose merits have raised him to Dr. Har-
vey’s post, cannot but meet with attention from a profession
whose business it is to investigate the facts of the human
frame and constitution.’
“ ‘ Then known facts are against him ?’
‘“Entirely. No point, for instance, is better understood,
than that the arteries are occupied by the vital spirits, which
are concocted in the left side of the heart, from the air and
blood in the lungs,’
“ * And what says Harvey to this ?’
“‘ He controverts it, of course. Neither the opposition of
all living physicians, nor even the silence of Gralen on this
notion of his, has the least effect upon him. It is sad and
pernicious nonsense, and ruinous to a man who, but for this
madness might have been an honour to his profession. Of
course his opinions on any subject arc of no value now.’
“ ‘ In the profession, do you mean, or out of it ?’
“‘ I believe there are a good many out of the profession who


listen to him, open-mouthed, as to every professor of new
doctrines ; but it is an affair in which no opinions but those
of physicians can be of any consequence ; and, as I said, not
a physician in Europe believes Harvey’s doctrine.’
“ ‘lt ought to be put down,’ said Lord Salisbury, to which
the clergyman gave an emphatic assent, observing, ‘ that in
so important an affair as a great question about the human
frame, false opinions must be most dangerous.’
‘“And how is new knowledge to fare, when it comes?’
said Lord Southampton, ‘By ray observation, Dr, Harvey’s
notion is so following the course that new knowledge is wont
to run, that I should almost suppose it to be true. It has
been called nonsense; that is the first stage. Now, if it bo
called dangerous, that is the next. I shall amuse myself by
watching for the third. When it is said there is nothing new
in it, and that it was plain to all learned men before Harvey
was born, I shall know how to apportion to Harvey his due
honour.’
“‘ I thought, my lord, you had held my profession in re-
spect,’ said the physician, with an uneasy smile.
“ ‘ Am I not doing homage to a most eminent member of
it —perhaps the most eminent in the world? said Lord
Southampton; ‘ and it appears that lam rather before than
behind others in doing so. There is no man, not even the
greatest, who may not stand hat in hand before the wise
physician, and I, for my humble part, would do even so.’ ”
I will now, with your leave, say a few words about another
discovery made by another eminent physician, whose name,
like Harvey's, will be handed down to posterity as one of
the great benefactors of his day. I allude to Dr. Hahnemann,
and his discovery, that there is a natural relation between
the disease-producing and the disease-healing powers of
drugs—that is, a medicine, which, when taken in health,
produces certain symptoms; is capable of curing similar
symptoms arising from another cause. This law is called
the law of Homoeopathy—expressed by the words “ similia
similibus curantur”—“ likes are cured by likes.” This dis-
covery has been called nonsense. That is the first stage ;


and it has also survived the second stage, it has been called
dangerous. And, as I believe it to be true, and as I know
that truth must prevail over error, so I express my conviction
that, in time, it will be as universally acknowledged as the
fact of the circulation of the blood is.
Some years ago I, myself, was one of those whonot only re-
fused to look through the telescope of Hahnemann, but laughed
at those who did, and even had the temerity to write against
them, trying to prove that it was absurd to look through the
telescope, Since that time, however, I was induced just to
have one look; this was more than 12 years ago, and,
although at first I could not see very distinctly, owing to
my having kept my eyes closed for so long a time, by de-
grees I became accustomed to the light, and I can now with
sincerity affirm, that whereas I was blind, I now can see.
There is one thing with respect to the progress of Ho-
moeopathy I will call your attention to, which, of itself alone,
tends to a conviction of its truth.
Notwithstanding the opposition and persecution, it still
meets with among medical men, some of whom speak of it
in the same manner in which Dr. Oldham is represented to
speak about the circulation of the blood, yet it is a remark-
able fact that more than 2000 medical men in England and
America have already adopted it. In America there are two
Homoeopathic colleges, where students are educated and
degrees conferred; there are also three Horn ceopathic hos-
pitals. In other parts of the world, also, the doctrine is daily
gaining ground. In Sydney, we already have a dispensary,
and, after a time, I expect there will be an hospital, and.
eventually, a professor of Homoeopathy attached to the
University.
Most of you, no doubt, have heard the subject heartily
ridiculed by medical men of the old school, and, perhaps,
have been told that all the medical men of any standing in
the profession consider it absurd nonsense. I know that
this has been said, and I also know that the opinion of a
medical man on anything connected with his profession lias
great weight in the circles in which he visits, and what he


says is generally relied upon as the truth. Nevertheless, all
men are not to he entirely relied upon either for their opinions
or for stating the truth, especially when their pride or interest
is affected. To show you that the above statement is not in
accordance with the real fact, I will give you a few short
extracts from the writings of some of the most eminent men
in the profession on this subject, I mean from men who had
not adopted the new doctrine.
Dr. Sigmond, lecturer on materia medica and therapeutics,
speaks of Hahnemann as “ a man of high intellectual
attainments, of great sagacity, of inflexible courage, and of
unwearied industry, who, amid difficulties of no common
kind, has laid the foundation of a system which, whilst it
cannot hut create a few smiles at its singularity, is the work
of great erudition, much toil, and striking ingenuity.”
Mr. W. E. Wilde, author of the well-known work called
“ Austria and its institutions,” also editor of the “ Dublin
Quarterly Medical Journal,” in alluding to the Cholera Hos*
pital established in Vienna for treating patients on the
Homoeopathic principle, says : —“ Upon comparing the report
made of the treatment of cholera in this hospital with that
of the same epidemic in the other hospitals in Vienna at a
similar time, it appeared that, while two-thirds of those
treated by Dr. Fleischmann,” that is Homoeopathically,
“ recovered, two-thirds of those treated by the ordinary
methods in the other hospitals, died.” He afterwards gives
an analysis of the cases treated at this hospital, and adds :
“ Whatever the opponents of this system may put forward
against it, I am bound to say, and I am far from being a
Homoeopathic practitioner, that the cases I saw treated in
the Vienna Hospital were fully as acute and virulent as those
that have come under my observation elsewhere, and the
statistics show that the mortality is much less than in the
other hospitals of that city.”
Dr. Andrew Combe, Physician in ordinary to the Queen,
says • —“ After the presumptive evidence which has been
produced, if I were now in practice, I should hold myself


bound, without further delay, to test its truth by careful and
extensive experiment.”
Amongst the celebrated practitioners of the old school who
speak favourably of Homoeopathy, are Dr. Millengen, Pro-
fessor D’Amador, of Montpelier, Dr. Forbes, Physician to the
Queen’s Household, and editor of the the “British and
Foreign Medical Review,” and many others too numerous to
mention.
There is, however, one name that I should not be doing
right in passing over without a few words ; it is that of the
late celebrated Mr. Liston. I even feel constrained to give
you a short extract from a biographical letter which was
published in 1849. It is as follows :—“ His usefulness has
been cut short by the mysterious decree of Providence, but
his fame will endure while the science of surgery is known,
and the name of one of the first surgeons the world ever
saw, will be associated with the brightest example of un-
tiring energy, prudence, and tenderness, adorning a private
character of unspotted integrity. He has left a widow and
six children, and many a sincere friend to deplore his loss.
But it is not among his immediate circle alone that sorrow
will be felt that his bright career is closed. There is many
a sigh in the lordly mansion, and in the cottage of the poor.
He is wailed in the hospital of the sick, in the hall of instruc-
tion. The grey haired practitioner looks in vain for the aid
of his energj r and skill; and the zealous student hears no
more his voice of encouragement, and has now but his
memory to cherish for example.” Mr. Liston was induced by
his friend, Dr. Quin to try some of the Homoeopathic reme-
dies in the North London Hospital; and the results of some
of his experiments may be seen in the reports of that hospital
published in the Lancet of the 6th and 13th February and
the 16th of April, 1836. I have only time to give you one or
two short extracts. Speaking of a case he had been treating,
he remarked that it was one of the most satisfactory and
successful cures of erysipelas he had ever seen, the disease
entirely, though not suddenly, disappearing in the course of
a very few days. He was inclined to attribute this to the


treatment, both local and general, which had been adopted,
but more particularly to the administration of Belladonna.
This, the student might be aware, was given on the
Homoeopathic principle, the doses only being somewhat
increased. They had all probably seen the good effect of the
aconite, and some of the other remedies employed by the ad-
vocates of Homoeopathy.” On another occasion he said, “ I
believe in the Homoeopathic doctrines to a certain extent,
but I cannot as yet, from inexperience on the subject, go the
length its advocates would wish, in as far as regards the very
minute doses of some of their medicines.”
In his clerical remarks he tells his pupils that “they ought
not to reject its doctrines without due examination and
enquiry.” Mr. Liston died from ameurism of the aorta. A
few days before his death, he said to his friend, Dr. Quin,
“ If, in a short time, I do not mend quicker than I am now
doing under Allopathy, I shall certainly send for you to treat
me Homosopathically.”
I have thus made you acquainted with the opinions of
men of the highest standing in the profession, on the subject
of Homoeopathy, and I leave it with you to compare them
with what you have heard from other medical men ; and it is
for you to draw your own inferences. One thing, however,
is very clear ; when Homoeopathy was first introduced, it met
with the same kind of reception that other important truths
have always encountered, but it has now attained (as Pro-
fessor D’Amador remarks) a practical foundation beyond all
cavil, so that although it is still ridiculed and abused, the
ridicule and abuse can only emanate either from those who
qxq professionally ignorant of the facts connected with it, 01
from those (few, I hope,) who degrade themselves by uttering
what they know to be false.
Time will not permit me to enter into any full description
of the manner in which many other discoveries have been
received.
1 have already alluded to the circulation of the blood, to
the law of gravitation, to Galileo, to the recent, discovery
that the moon does not revolve on its axis, and I have spoken


somewhat at length about Homoeopathy. I can now only
remind you of the opposition Columbus met with, especially
from men of his own profession; of the persecution of Dr.
Gall, the great phrenologist; of the difficulties encountered
in the introduction of steam; the wonderful electric tele-
graph, and of many other important truths, all of which met
with more or less opposition. There is one truth, however,
which requires a little more consideration than a mere passing
notice, not only on account of its magnitude, but because of
this peculiarity as regards its reception, viz,, that although
it was introduced upwards of 1850 years ago, it has never
yet been fully received even by those who profess to believe
it. It may be said that the task of expounding it exclusively
belongs to those who profess to teach it. But as lam on the
subject of the reception of truths, it cannot be out of place
to speak of this, the most importont of all. Of course I am
alluding to the truth of Christianity, which includes all those
doctrines taught by our Saviour, as the rule of life to all who
call themselves by his name—all without any exception. It
is a truth which affects, indeed, the whole human race, and
in which every one is interested, and, therefore, it has met
with more universal opposition than any other truth ever
encountered. It bears particularly on our moral conduct, and
the duty we owe one towards another; and as it requires a
complete and thorough change from what was taught before
its introduction, so we find that the strongest enemies to its
reception were those whose profession it was to teach
morality. It was from the Chief Priests and Scribes that its
Great Author met with the most persecution ; it was through
their instrumentality and by their authority he was con-
demned and sentenced to an ignominious death. They took
the responsibility upon themselves: “His blood be upon us
and upon our children.”
The conduct of these men in doing their utmost to prevent
the introduction of Christianity cannot be justified: but
while we pass sentence upon them, it will be interesting and
perhaps instructive to inquire a little into the way in which
it is received in the present day: and if those whose conduct


we condemn could now see what was going on upon earth,
they would look in vain for a single nation whose laws are
founded on the Christianity which they in their time perse-
cuted ; they would still see prevailing the same kind of spirit
which animated them, only in a modified form. Yes,
although so many years have passed away, they would still
mark how any attempt to make Christianity the foundation
of an universal law, is ridiculed as absurd and impossible.
There are individuals who receive it, and endeavour to act up
to the great precepts it contains. There are families who
perceive its beauty, and acknowledge its laws; and there is
at least one sect amongst us who uphold its doctrines, and
affirm that the world would be happier if its laws were regu-
lated by them —and who are therefore laughed at and held up
to ridicule for maintaining such curious and absurd notions
yes, the notions, which were introduced by the wisest legisla-
tor that ever existed, whose name is reverenced in Heaven
and earth, are ridiculed and laughed at, as absurd, by men
who call themselves by His name. I recollect some years
ago, when I was Surgeon to the Surrey County Gaol, I
was laughed at, and thought very eccentric, by some of the
Magistrates with whom I was conversing, for expressing
sympathy for a prisoner who was then an inmate of the gaol,
and, in reply to some observations of mine, one of them said,
“ you would then pity a murderer, I supposeand on my
answering, “ the more wicked a man was, so much the more
was he an object of pity.” They seemed perfectly astonished
that I could hold such extraordinary opinions.
With your permission, I will just mention a few of the
precepts of this great truth, which were intended by the
Great Law Giver to be the guiding strings in our walk
through this great labyrinth, the world.
“ Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you.” “ Resist not evil, but whoso-
ever shall smite thee on the right cheek turn to him the
other also.” “ Overcome evil with Good“ Suffer persecu-
tion patiently;” “Do not kill;” “Do not swear“ Do no


injury to any man “ Love all men ;” “Do unto others as
you would they should do unto you”—and there are many
other precepts, all breathing the same spirit of good will
towards man. And in case there should be any misunder-
standing as to the meaning of them, the Master himself
practically showed what they meant throughout His Jife on
earth. Once, when I was conversing on the subject of non-
resistance, a gentleman said to me, “ Do you really mean to
say that if a person struck you on one cheek that you ought
to turn the other to him ?” and he then tried to prove that
this was absurd. My reply was, “If you want to know what
our Saviour meant by this, read the 26th chapter of St.
Matthew, and imagine how He behaved when they spat in
His face and buffetted Him, and others smote Him with the
palms of their hands. We are told that He is brought
as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth. This is
the meaning of the passage—and He wishes us all to go
and do likewise. Although there may be found some, who
because they cannot comprehend such extraordinary beha-
viour as this, which appears so repugnant to “ common
sense” (as it is called), become infidels; yet I trust the
number is small. I have found that the general notion
is something like this : —“ These precepts are easily enough
understood, for they are plainly written; and it is all very
well to act up to them to a certain extent, but the world
is not yet in a fit state for their universal application, for
instance, it would be absolutely absurd to have our criminal
laws founded upon them, or for any nation to be guided by
them in its intercourse with the rest of the world;” and this
notion is upheld by the majority of those whose duty it is
to expound the meaning of Scripture.
At the commencement of the war with Russia, a day was
set apart for humiliation and prayer, and many of the ser-
mons preached on that day were published, Teachers of the
Gospel of Peace contended that war was sometimes allow-
able !! One of them went so far as to say that war, under
some circumstances, is actually required by the principles of


the New Testament! !! This may appear startling to those
who take the words of the Gospel for the foundation of their
creed. But the following quotation from the sermon in
which the above remark occurs, will shew how far the true
spirit and meaning of the Scriptures can he forgotten or laid
aside, when it is desirable to make them appear to warrant
our own long cherished opinions (for it is much easier to
wrest the Scriptures to our purpose than to shake off our
old ideas, and seek for information in God’s word, with a
child-like mind). The quotation is as follows: —“ In con-
templating the evils of war the question will naturally arise,
is it legitimate for a Christian nation to engage in the
hostilities of war? Some have deemed it to,he the duty of
a Christian Government to abstain from war altogether—
war, if purely aggressive, and which contemplates the
aggrandizement of one nation and individual at the expense
of another’s rights and liberties, certainly cannot be justified
on the principles of the religion of Christ; but war that is
undertaken in self-defence, or upon the ground of a pure
love of justice—war in defence of liberty and right, against
unprincipled aggression, and in vindication of the weak and
injured, which is intended to humble the proud, ambitious,
and cruel, and to resist the powerful efforts of tyrannical
despotism—such war, I think, is not only justifiable and
laudable, not only not forbidden by the New Testament, but
required by its principles.”
That a minister of the Gospel of Peace should be so blinded
by his own preconceived notions, as to be capable of giving
such an opinion as this, is more lamentable by far than the
conduct of the Professor who refused to look through the
telescope at Jupiter’s satellites. All those who contend that
war is compatible with Christianity look at the Scriptures
through the medium of their own preconceived notions, and
have not as yet become sufficiently childlike to look at them
through the telescope of humility. War compatible with
Christianity I Why, two of the greatest warriors of this
century knew better than this. Napoleon’s maxim was,
“ the worse the man, the better the soldier;” and Wellington


has said, “ a man who has nice notions of religion had better
not become a soldier.”
It is true that pious men are to be found, not only in the
army but among slave-holders. Witness the pious Newton,
and the late Hedley Vicars; yet the one was a dealer in
slaves, and the other used to go into the trenches at Sebas-
topol and shoot down the Russians, as a deer stalker in
Scotland shoots down the deer; but this only shows that
men, otherwise followers of Christ, were not following His
example in these respects.
In the same sermon, from which the above quotation is
made, there is the following passage :—“ A military despot
must not be allowed to go on crushing kings, invading and
changing dynasties, and depopulating cities, without being
met by the only arguments which he will recognise, the
cannon and the sword. In such a case, all the sin and
responsibility of the war rests upon the head of him who
makes it necessary.”
Again, the same preacher says;—
“ Can that Gracious Being, who has appointed law to pre-
serve justice and order in human society, and requires the
appointment in civil society of institutions to maintain equity
—can he design that an ambitious and iniquitous man should
meet with no resistance ? Impossible.. Such a thought is
opposed to the plain dictates of sound reason. Some excel-
lent persons argue against all war, even that which is
defensive; and in support of this they delight to quote those
distinctive precepts of our Hply religion, ‘ resist not evil
love you enemies ‘ to him that smiteth thee on one cheek,
turn the other also.’ Now, let me just say that these pre-
cepts do not apply at all to the subject under consideration.
They forbid resistance under religious persecution ; they also
prohibit revengeful feelings, and a spirit of retaliation. It is
obvious that that they were not intended to be obeyed by
nations in a literal sense.”
And so say hundreds of other ministers of the Gospel of
Peace, and such is the opinion of all the advocates of war ;
and, after all, what does it amount to ? To a non-reception


of the truth of Christianity in its full sense. All Christians
receive it to a certain extent, but they limit its application,
according to the different notions they entertain. For
instance, those who advocate defensive war say that it does
not apply to that particular. Those who support slavery
assert that its precepts are not intended to be acted up to in
their intercourse with slaves. Those who think judicial oaths
are right, endeavour to prove that the very distinct command
not to swear at all, does not apply to an oath before a magis-
trate. Again, those who believe it right to permit letters of
marque to be given to privateers, giving them legal authority
to plunder trading vessels belonging to the nation with
whom they happen to be at war, satisfying themselves with
the idea that Christianity does not prohibit that; also, those
who contend that it is right to punish criminals on the prin-
ciples of retaliation and self-preservation, argue that the
doctrines which strictly enjoin non-retaliation and self-
sacrifice for the good of others, cannot possibly apply to
criminal legislation; and, indeed, whatever the prevalent
notion may be, there are not wanting advocates who will tell
you that the precepts of Christianity do not apply to that
particular But in the New Testament we do not find any of
these limitations mentioned.
I look upon St. Paul as a very good authority in this
matter. In a letter, which he addresses to the Saints at
Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. He says :
“ Bet all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and
evil speaking, be put away fqom you, with all malice —and
be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.”
Also, he beseeches them to “ walk with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in
love.” Of course Ido not contend that this letter was written
to people or nations who disbelieve Christianity, although
even they might profit by it; but it certainly is addressed to
all Christian people, and it is read in our Churches, and by
all of us I hope at other times, as applicable to us. By what
authority, then, do we limit the application of these precepts ?


What is the reason, for instance, that some of us say they
were not intended to be obeyed by nations (mind Christian
nations), or even amongst ourselves in our treatment of
criminals ? lam told, because such an idea is absurd and
opposed to the plain dictates of sound reason.
I readily grant that it does, at first sight, appear absurd to
those to whom such an idea is new, in the same manner that
many other new ideas have appeared opposed to the plain
dictates of common sense, until they have been proved to be
true. I have already given several instances of this, and
many others of the same kind will suggest themselves to
you. It is not impossible that, at this very moment, people
in England are conversing with the people in America by
means of electricity. Fifty years ago such an idea would
have been thought preposterous in the extreme. So much,
however, has been proved concerning the electric telegraph
and its capabilities, that now we do not even call it absurd
to talk of a communication between Australia and England
by its means.
You will observe that I have classed Christianity among
the new truths which have not yet been received by the
world. I trust you understand that I allude to the universal
application of its principles amongst Christian nations as the
foundation of their own laws, and in their intercourse with
each other, and with the rest of the world. It is in this view
I regard it as a new truth; for, strange as it may seem, it is
new to a great many. During the forty years of peace, it
slumbered, as it were, but since we have commenced hostili-
ties with other nations, it has again been brought forward,
and those to whom the idea was new began, as is usual, to
abuse it and call it absurd.
It may be said, “ Although many things have been called
nonsense which were, after a time, proved to be true, how is
it, if this be true, that so very many years have passed with-
out its having been proved to be true?” The answer is
obvious, viz., because the difficulty of proving it is much
greater in this than in any other of the instances. I have
mentioned the telegraphic communication between England


and America. The proof of this depends only upon a few
persons who have had little or no opposition to contend with,
and, by this time, it may possibly be fully established; but,
in order to prove that a nation would be happier and better
if its laws were founded on Christian principles, it is neces-
sary that the majority of that nation be willing to put it to
the proof; but as there has never been any nation yet which
had such a majority, it has never been put to the proof. This
much, however, is worthy of consideraton. Whenever the
Peace Principles (as they have been called), have been con-
sistently acted up to, either by individuals or by small com-
munities, they have been found to be the best. The early
history of Pensylvania shows the advantage of adopting
them, and is of itself a significant answer to those who say
it is obvious they were not intended to be obeyed by nations.
You may recollect that William Penn planted his colony
amidst the most savage and warlike tribe of North America,
taking the precepts of Christianity as the guide to his con-
duct, —and how he and his followers were preserved from
destruction and lived in friendship with their savage neigh-
bours. Contrast .the result of this enterprise with that of the
parties who established themselves in New England. The
Puritans took the precepts of the world for their guide, and
went with weapons of destruction in their hands, they imme-
diately became objects of suspicion and hatred to the natives,
and, as Wiight says in his book on Defensive War, “ Mutual
injuries and incessant wars between them was the result.
The warwhoop, the tomahawk, and scalping knife of the
Indian carried dismay and death into the dwellings of the
Puritan, and, in turn, the Puritans extinguished the council
fires of the Indian tribes, one after another, in the blood of
their helpless women and children.” “ What constituted the
difference between the circumstances of the Puritans and
of the Quakers ? But one answer can be given—it was the
sword. ,•
vuru.
Let us take another example. During the Irish Rebellion,
in 1798. How was it so many families and individuals
escaped unhurt amidst all the horrors of a civil war ?We


find the answer in the following extracts from Dr. Hancock’s
narrative of this Rebellion :
“ A party of the King’s army, stationed in Newtown-berry,
came to Perns to disperse the United Irishmen who held
possession of the place. The latter at first made some
demonstration as if they would risk a battle, but seeing that
the regular troops opposed to them, were provided with
cannon, they fled away from the town. On hearing that the
army were coming in, the Friend, (an individual alluded to
several times in this narrative,) stood at his own door, lest
he should be suspected of being an enemy. When the
military came near his door, one of the soldiers, stepping
out of the ranks, presented a gun at his breast, and was on
the point of drawing the trigger, when the Friend called to
him to desist from murder. The soldier, like one struck
with amazement, immediately let the gun fall from his
shoulder, and presently his officers interfered for the Friend’s
protection, whose life was thus preserved, as, on the right
hand and on the left. Some of the inhabitants of this village,
who were found unarmed in the houses, being made prisoners
by the soldiers, they pleaded their innocence, but in such a
state of things they could not easily prove it; the com-
manding officer therefore desired that if their were any
Quakers in the town, they would get certificates of good
behaviour from them, which, he added, he would he willing
to accept and then to liberate them.”
The following particulars were received from a Friend who,
during the rebellion, resided in the County of Kildare :
“We escaped personal injury from either party but seemed
often in great danger from both. The country people,
especially of our own neighbourhood, generally spoke and
acted friendly towards us, and appeared to be sensible that
though we would not join them, we would take no part
against them. I was asked for anything of a green colour.
I refused, and told them we could not join either party.
‘ What, not the strongest ? ‘ None’—and though they saw
green cloths on our tables, they took none from us. Some-
times great crowds of strangers caused an alarm, and one


man was very violent, wanting the men of the place to join
them They frequently spoke well of the
Quakers, and hearkened calmly to advice given them, and
when the soldiers came to quell them, the priest ran to borrow
a Friend's coat to disguise himself.''
I could give you a number of other instances of the same
kind, proving the great advantage of adopting the Principles
of Peace. It is certainly true that they have reference only
to individuals and to small classes and communities of men;
but I think it is reasonable to say, if these principles have
been proved to be the best guide to these individuals and
communities, in their intercourse with the world, they would
in all probability be so to a nation, or nations, which are
made up of individuals and classes. At all events, I trust
you will see nothing absurd in such an idea. One thing is
very clear, if nations were to adopt these principles, they
would, in that particular, be acting up to the precepts of the
New* Testament, and, by so doing, they would not only be
acting consistently with the religion they profess, but, in
my opinion, they would also be using the wisest and best
policy.
I have yet to speak of the application of the precepts of
Christianity to our criminal laws, but I must necessarily be
very brief. Mr. George Combe, in his work on Moral Philo-
sophy, recommends a system for treating criminals, founded
on the physiology of the brain, which is in strict harmony
with Christianity. In the present state of our criminal laws
very little enquiry is made into the causes of crime, or into
the effect of the punishment upon the individual. In Combe’s
system great attention is paid to those points. He divides
criminals into two classes. First, These in whom the animal
organs are large, while those of the moral sentiments and
intellect are deficient. This class is small; he describes
them as “morally idiotic,” and adds, “Justice, as well as
humanity, dictates that they should be treated as moral
patients. They labour under great natural mental defects,
and it is no more either just, or beneficial to society,
to punish thenv for actions proceeding from these na-


tural defects, than it would be to punish men for having
crooked spines, or club feet. It is true that their actions are
injurious to society ; but they cannot help their actions ; and,
therefore, while society has an undoubted right to restrain
them during life, as incorrigible beings, disposed continually
to evil, it is bound to treat them with humanity ; that is to
say, to give them employment, food, clothing, and comforta-
ble lodging, with as much liberty as they can enjoy without
abusing it, and no more.” The following case, taken from
Sampson’s “Criminal Jurisprudence,’’ is an example of this
class :—“ He had been confined for ten years in the Rich-
mond Lunatic Asylum, Dublin. He exhibited a total want
of moral feeling and principle, yet possessed considerable
intelligence and sensibility. He had been a scourge to his
family from childhood —had been turned out of the army as
an incorrigible villain—had attempted the life of a soldier—
had been repeatedly flogged—and had since attempted the
life of his father, Respecting this man, Dr. Crawford, sub-
stitute Physician at the Asylum, made the following
remarks:—“ He never was different from what he now is; he
has never evinced the slightest mental incoherence on any
one point, nor any kind of hallucination. It is one of those
cases where there is great difficulty in drawing the line be-
tween extreme moral depravity and insanity, and in deciding
at what point an individual should cease to be considered
as a responsible moral agent, and amenable to the laws.
The Governors and medical gentlemen of the asylum have
often had doubts whether they were justified in keeping him
as a lunatic, thinking him a more fit subject for a Bridewell.
He appears, however, so totally callous with regard to every
moral principle and feeling, so thoroughly unconscious of
ever having done anything wrong—so completely destitute
of all sense of shame and remorse, when reproved for his vices
or crimes, and has proved himself so utterly incorrigible
throughout life, that it is almost certain that any jury, before
whom he might be brought, would satisfy their doubts by
returning him insane, which, in such a case, is the most
humane line to pursue. He was dismissed from the Asylum,


and sent there for the last time for attempting to poison his
father, and it seems fit he should be kept there for life as a
moral lunatic; but there has never been the least symptom
of diseased action of the brain, which is the general conco-
mitant of what is usually understood as insanity.”
The next class of criminals consists of those in whom the
animal organs are large, but in whom the moral and intel-
lectual organs also are tolerably well developed. In the
treatment of this class there are two indications; first, to
improve and strengthen the moral and intellectual powers;
and, second, to weaken the animal feelings. Solitary con-
finement, regular habits, and hard labour, effect the latter;
but this treatment not only weakens the animal feelings, but
it also weakens the moral and intellectual powers. To
strengthen those it is necessary that they should be exercised,
trained, and habituated to action ; and this can only be done
properly by competent men, who are well acquainted with
the physiology of the brain.
In the whole scheme recommended by Combe, there is, as
he says, “ not a particle of resentment or revenge, there is
no retribution for the injuries committed—but good is
returned for evil—that is to say, measures of moral reforma-
tion are put in practice towards the offender as the return for
the injury he has done to society. Suffering to him will
attend the use of these means, but it is not inflicted by
society designedly as punishment: it is the chastisement
appointed by the Creator under the natural laws; it is the
pain which the wicked feel in being stript of their vices ;
but it is doubly compensated by the pure enjoyment which
alternately accompanies a reformed mind. Finally, if crimi-
nals be the great enemies of their own welfare, is there a
more effectual method of loving them, than by reforming
them, and restoring them to the dignity and happiness of
virtue.”
Mr. George Combe published his Moral Philosophy in 1840;
shortly after this, appeared Sampson’s Criminal Jurispru-
dence, and it is in a great measure, owing to the light of
these two works that reflective men have begun to think that


it w®uld be better for nations to leave off acting In direct
opposition to the precepts of Christianity—and I trust the
time is approaching when one nation, viz., our own, shall
set the example to the rest of the world, by fearlessly
taking the Word of Cod as revealed in the New Testament
for our guide. Then shall be seen what has never yet bedn
seen since the world began. A nation, unarmed, inoffensive,
and actuated by the spirit of love and good will towards all
men.
In conclusion, I may remark that I cannot expect to have
made any impression on those who have firmly resolved that
their own long cherished ideas cannot possibly be wrong.
But I do entertain a hope, that what I have said may be the
means of inducing some of you to investigate the truths I
have so feebly endeavoured to advocate ; for however new or
strange they may appear to you, bear in mind there are many
men of high intellect who have made them their peculiar
study. To their works I refer you, with a conviction that
after you have carefully studied them, the only thing that
will appear new or strange to you then, will be the fact, that
the light of these truths should have been so long hid in
obscurity.


Fißs"6’4-


■ i.j
ERRATA.
* “■ 8«. for “ alternately,’* resd


