

JlEtai ©ffices of “ fffjc *.jifcncjj iWoiniug l^craltr,”
NEW SOUTH WALES.
This new building is among the most striking and conspicuous edifices of the City. Intended as a great workshop, where literary and
mechanical operatives are to produce daily an enormous sheet, its design has been subservient to its use. Its situation is most prominent, being
erected on a site of land forming a junction with Pitt, Hunter, and O’Connell streets, immediately opposite the Union Bank, and in a line with
the Royal Exchange.
In the Design, a marked expression is given to the strength and solidity of its construction ; the peculiar nature of the site rendered
a more elaborate form incompatible with the business to which it is devoted. The bold Cantaliver cornice, however, stamps the design with a
revived Italian character of the seventeenth century ; in which style of architecture, many noble edifices have been erected on the Continent
of Europe. The famous “ Palazzi Strozzi,” at Florence, —the “ Palais Farnese,” and the “ Meti Papazzuri,” at Rome, are among its
earliest examples. In the keystone of the arch over the principal entrance is the head of Caxton, the first English printer. This beautiful piece
of work was executed by Mr. M. Willis.
The principal, or Pitt-street front is 75 feet, and the height from the pavement 61 feet; the other two fronts are in extent 54 feet and
30 feet respectively. The internal arrangements of the building, show by what a combination of labour a daily journal is produced ; every floor is
occupied by a department, and the whole combined by various artificial facilities. In the basement, are four printing machines, two steam engines
and boilers. Of the former, one is a powerful one-cylinder machine, manufactured by Brown, of Kirkaldy ; two others, are the two-cylinder, and
one the four-cylinder, invented by Mr. E. Cowper, the celebrated mechanist, of Birmingham and Manchester. The engines also, are the manufacture
of the latter gentleman. In the basement, are the engineer’s workshop, and the paper wetting room. The ground or street floor, is occupied as
the place of publication, and general mercantile business of the office. A folding-machine of beautiful construction, with others shortly expected
to arrive, will be driven from the steam shaft in the printing room below. The first floor is devoted to the editorial and reporting departments,
being divided into convenient and suitable apartments. Above, the entire floor is warehouse and store-room; here is a kitchen for the use of the
men, where boiling water for tea and coffee will be procurable at all hours. The upper story is the compositor’s room, of most ample dimensions,
and so arranged with overseer’s and reader’s closets, as to provide every facility for carrying on during the night the business of the mornmg
publication. From a tank in the roof every floor will be supplied with water ; and care has been taken so that in case of accident by fire
appliances for immediate extinction have been provided. Messrs. Goold and Hilling, architects.


