

New Caledonia:
A Menace to White Australia.
New Caledonia
June 1. 1911-THE LONE HAND
The remarkable Colony of Japanese who have become Australia’s
nearest neighbor.
BY A. K. SHEARSTON-MAY.
THERE is a shadow of a mighty
hand over Australia to-day. A
grim, armored hand, a brown
hand that is stretching its fingers out
over the Pacific Ocean. The United
States is feeling the first hesitating
touch of that hand. It spans the
waters from San Francisco' across to
our own Queensland, casting, on its
way, small shadows and big shadows
on all the isles of the Pacific. Even
now America is preparing—for what?
Signs of the times make it plain to
the student of Far Eastern affairs that
Japan has designs upon the Union.
America knows it, and she is just
getting her house in order to resist
the brown hand.
Australia is at the other extremity
of the span of the hand. But Aus-
tralia has not awakened from her leth-
argy yet. The shadow, perhaps, has
not become definite enough to rouse
her from her slumber. She is not even
sleeping with one eye open.
A few enthusiasts, it is true, have
had ideas about defence, and have
brought out a great general and a cap-
able admiral to tell Australia how to
put a fence around her shores. Those
two gentlemen have done their work,
and done it well; and by about 1917
the Commonwealth will have an ac-
tive army of 80,000 men, and by 1933
a slap-up navy of 52 ships. That is,
provided to-day’s Government does
not go out of office before matters are
well on their way. If that happens,
and another Government, with other
defence ideas, comes i-n, then Austra-
lia may get her army and navy sooner,
or she may get it in the year 2011
a.d. Then there are other people who
have broad and brilliant ideas about
immigration. They put forward the
perfectly logical contention that while
Australia’s population is so small that
it will fit into a pint pot it cannot be
expected to get up to the edge of a
two-gallon measure.
And so the talk goes on, and mem-
bers of Parliament blissfully prate
about the defence of a grand and
glorious country when they are seek-
ing the suffrages of Walla-Walla or
Eurianda; and then, when they are
permitted to sit upon the cushioned
seats of the House of Representatives,
haggle over the spending of a few
hundred thousand pounds for ships and
men and guns. Meanwhile Australia’s
army is still 27,000 strong, her navy
11 ships strong, half of them obso-
lete and others only partly manned,
her forts useless and her shore
guns worse than useless; and
80 per cent, of her good harbors silted
up with sand instead of filled up with
ships. And meanwhile, the menace of
the brown hand is ccming nearer and
nearer. The shadow is getting big-
ger. When the fight comes we shall
be crying across the oceans for Eng-
land to come over and help us. But
supposing she cannot?
Nine hundred miles away from the
coast of Queensland lies the French
island of New Caledonia, a pretty lit-
tle spot, a valuable little property. It
is hardly more than two days’ swift
steaming away from the nearest point
on our seaboard. At this moment" it
has at least 2500 Japanese within its
gates, men who profess to be miners
in the employ of the Societé le Nickel,
a wealthy corporation backed by Roths-
child gold. I have just returned from
those mines, after an eighteen days’
stay, in the course of which every ob-
stacle was put in my way by the offi-
cials of the company and by Japanese
officers whom I shrewdly believe to be
2.p.123 Samarai Island(New Guinea)


something other than appearances
suggest.
I have seen the Japanese who are
settled there. They were not always
miners. Nearly every man-jack of
them fought for Nippon in the Jap-
Russo war. Many of them to-day wear
the ulster military overcoats that were
served out to them when they marched
to beat the Bear. Numbers of them
have a smattering of English. But
the most important phase of their pre-
sence in the island only 900 miles away
from coveted Australia is that they
include among their numbers civil and
electrical engineers, and skilled masons
and carpenters and bridge-builders and
telegraphists. There are 1036 of them
newly arrived in one shipment from
Japan. They are not coolie labor.
Yet they are working for Bs. a week;
and Japan is urging more and more
to join the band. Le Nickel denies
it; but the Japs themselves say that
there are 2000 coming to keep them
company. Yet 350 more are on the
high seas now, consigned to another
corporation in the island; and that
corporation wants a further 2000. In
addition, there are at least 1500 who
have come over in small batches from
time to time and who have broken
their contracts as miners. These are
spread out in every nook and corner
of New Caledonia.
Wtihin eighteen months New Cale-
lonia will have a brown population of
over 6000 capable, fighting Japanese,
even judging the future only on fig-
ures that I know of to-day. That is
the position in a nutshell. An army
a fourth as large as Australia’s less
than 1000 miles from her back door.
An army in possession, to all intents
and purposes, of an island that has a
fine strategical harbor, which could be
made into a splendid naval station,
and that has coalfields sufficiently rich
to provide an excellent coaling-base
for Japanese ships in the Pacific. Ihe
island is defended by 213 soldiers and
18 artillerymen, with one antiquated
gun ; has no forts, no submarine mines ;
sometimes has one warship, either
the Montcalm or the Kersaint;
and has a total white population, free
and ex-convict, of 20,000, with 60,000
Kanakas, Loyalty Islanders, Javanese,
Tonkinese and Solomon Islandlfe—to
say nothing of the little brown men
from in and around Tokio.
If these facts point in any direction
at all, do they not point toward Aus-
tralia? And when we read of Japan-
ese encroachment in Hawaii, and
when we know that on every island in
the Pacific Ocean, the Council of Elder
Statesmen, who rule the destinies ot
Japan, are strenuously endeavoring to
place little garrisons of Japs, can it be
denied that to-day is the day to do
things?
France will do nothing. There are
already rumors that she is.prepared to
swap New Caledonia for British pos-
sessions in Africa contiguous to her
own. Perhaps she will, perhaps she
will not. Even though the French
people of the island would welcome
the change—for the Rothschild grip
has screwed them down and down un-
til New Caledonia is nearly bankrupt
—the very influence of the great Jew-
ish banking houses may prevent the
deal. Rothschild wants all the nickel
of the world. The precious metal ex-
ists only in Canada and New Cale-
donia. They already have the Can-
adian supply cornered and a major in-
terest in New Caledonia’s wealth.
Therefore, they would barter New
Caledonia only at a big price.
Is Japan prepared to pay that price?
She wants a naval base and a coaling
station and an arsenal in the southern
part of the North Pacific Ocean—wants
them badly. Is it not merely a ques-
tion of how soon Japan will come for-
ward with her price for the article that
will give her a big pull in the destinies
of the Far East?
Put into bare, cold facts, the situa-
tion in New Caledonia is this. There
can be no doubt at all that there are
secret service spies on the other side
of the narrow strip of sea that separ-
ates the Barrier Reef from the multi-
tudinous reefs that surround New
Caledonia. Even the Governor of the
French possessions in the Pacific,
whose headquarters are at Noumea,
the capital of New Caledonia, admit-


ted that point when I had a long in-
terview with him. And more than
that, he announced his intention,
should the attentions of Japan become
very much more marked, of cabling
his Government in Paris to know what
he should do.
Away at Thio, on the more north-
erly coast of the island, are the mines
and the bureaux of le Nickel, where
the rule is like unto that of Russia,
where none come and none go but le
Nickel knows of their doings. There
are the Japs, ensconced in as isolated
a spot as even they could find in our
wild Northern Territory. There they
work, supervised by men as gangers,
who are non-commissioned officers in
the Japanese army. Every inch of the
coastline of the island has been sur-
veyed by them, and every ell of the
mountain sides and valleys inland.
And in passing it may be as well to
mention that that island could, with
a proper arrangement of forts, be made
almost impregnable. It is an island
terribly difficult of approach. Ship-
masters who know the coast like an
open book will not risk their ships
along it at night-time. As soon as
dusk begins to fall they drop anchor.
The harbor could be made practically
unassailable in a very few months. At
almost every land point the hills rise
abruptly from the sea-level; and an
attacking squadron that managed to
overcome the difficulties of navigating
between and around the reefs would
stand little chance of existing when
the war-forts on land began to boom.
From all parts of New Caledonia
and the rest of the islands of the New
Hebrides come reports of Japanese
activity. Japs surveying with theodo-
lites, Japs who practise flag-signalling
from hill toTiill, Japs who sail about
in little boats ostensibly engaged in
the occupation either of trepang or
beche-de-mer gathering, and Japs who
live in Noumea and in different parts
of the main island who are periodi-
cally visited by others of their fellows
from Thio.
An incident in this alleged business
of fishing that came under my notice
should be enough to show the direc-
tion in which the tide is setting. Some
months ago it was reported that two
boats, containing Japanese, were
sojourning in the neighborhood of
Filou, on the north-western corner c*f
the island. Officialdom was spoken
to by telegram and by letter again and
again, and at last decided to take ac-
tion. Those Japs were inveigled into
Map showing how what may become a Japanese
base is being established 900 miles from
our coast-line
Noumea and their boats detained. Then
it was found that they had not the
usual papers that denote the trepang
or the beche-de-mer collector; and
France fined them £2OO each. They
did not pay the fines themselves, but
the money was forthcoming in less
than no time, and one of the boats
sailed away. Afterwards it was dis-


covered that the owner of this boat
had carried an official of. the Japanese
contingent, who. is still in the island,
along the coast in his boat; while the
second Japanese is walking about Nou-
mea to-day, or was until a few weeks
ago, living the life of a gentleman.
But that was not the end of the
chapter. Those two Japanese, and
dozens of others, are known to have
made periodical voyages from the New
Caledonian coast across to Queens-
land. Many, many trips they made,
as. they said, on pleasure bent. A
missionary in one of the Loyalty Is-
lands spoke with them in English ; and
Map of New Caledonia, showing Nickel and Coal Mines.
they told him that they had been to
Australia more than once.
When I started my investigations I
had a suspicion from what I heard
in Noumea that the Japanese were en-
deavoring to get wireless to work close
to Thio. I could, however, find no
signs of any apparati, nor any erec-
tions on the coast or a little way in-
land that gave room for further in-
vestigation. I did find, however, that
there were among the Japanese men
who understand the Morse and Con-
tinental codes and who could soon be-
come expert wireless operators. Then,
since I have been back in Sydney, I
have found evidence that-plainly points
to the probability of a wireless instal-
lation being put up a few miles away
on the soutb-west side of Thio. This
evidence has been taken cognisance of
by our Defence Department in Aus-
tralia.
It is also known to many that away
to the north-west there is an island
where a depot is kept by Japanese. This
place is visited frequently by the small
boats in which the Japs are wont to
make their wanderings; and from time
to time a tramp steamer arrives from
Japan and brings cargoes and stores
which are placed on the island and
re-conveyed farther south. This fact
has been officially reported. Month by
month other vessels travel from Japan
to Thio, bringing stores of rice and
fish.
Only a few weeks ago Japan
bought a huge stock of rice, far more
than her usual purchase. Experts
contend that that rice was purchased
for use in the campaign against Am-
erica, though it is said that it is to be
used in the probable attack, with Rus-
sia, on China. Might not a proportion
of it find its way towards New Cale-
donia? It has been noted, too, that
parties of Japanese have been down to


Moueo, on the south-west side of the
island, and have carefully examined
the great, undeveloped coal field there.
Japan wants coal badly, and will want
it in still larger quantities if she starts
in to fight somebody. She does not
want to go to China for it; she pro-
bably would not get it at Newcastle,
and it would be much cheaper for her
to have her own coal field somewhere
A View of the Splendid Harbor of Noumea.
Photo. —Kerry & Co., Sydney.
in these parts if she could get it—much
cheaper, for instance, than bringing it
all the way from England or France.
Of my own personal knowledge I
know that only a brief twelve months
or so Japanese emissaries were round
and about the Newcastle and Maitland
fields, inquiring as to output and prices
and the extent of the mines. Japan
buys any number of horses from Aus-
tralia ; and wherever there is a stock
sale up country you may almost be
sure of finding a Japanese agent. Add
to all this the fact that there is a
regular system of couriers between
Japanese in all parts of the French
possession, and that they obtain news
and money from home in a most mys-
terious manner, and there should be
enough evidence to wake Australia ou f '
of that slumber.
A strong argument in favor of any
theory of the kind that I have been
advancing is the underlying hatred that
the French people in New Caledonia
have for the Japanese. This, in part,
arises from the fact that Nippon’s chil-
dren are taking the bread out of the mouths
of French children. But, on the other
hand, the result that the Frenchmen would
most dearly love to have happen in their
little land, would be its cession to Eng-
land. They appreciate that Japan may
be the higher bidder; and the outcry
in the leading newspaper in Noumea—
a sane, carefully directed and alto-
gether worthy journal —has always
brought out fully the question of inter-
national complication with England.


They have a deep and abiding regard
over there for the English and for the
Australian. If their land cannot pros-
per under French rule, they say, let
England have it. Let it come under
the sway of Australia. If that were
to follow they all believe in their hearts
that New Caledonia would once more
return to its old prosperity; that the
Japanese would be shipped back to
their own country, and that life and
work and money-making for them-
selves would be easier and happier.
We know as well as can be known
that our own Commonwealth harbors
to-day many Japanese spies. Instances
have been given in the press of
the inner knowledge that Japan has in
its bureaux in Tokio of our de-
fences—such as they are —and our
ports. Any defence officer will tell
you vaguely that Japan is cognisant of
our “dead water” areas, of the posi-
tions of our puny guns, and of the spe-
cial points in the general scheme of
defence of the island continent. All
that must always be. Governments
come and governments go, but espion-
age goes on for ever.
Australia’s defences are a menace to
herself in that they leave a sense of
false security in the bosoms of her peo-
ple. Her navy and army are mere
apologies. The country is rich. Money
is spent on Federal capitals and State
Governors and gorgeous banquets and
receptions to welcome the arrival of
mosquito ships. Premiers and mem-
bers of Parliament are thrown wads
of notes to give them free holidays
for the Coronation. But half a dozen
coronations would not build a battle-
ship for Australian waters; and money
that is being invested in many direc-
tions might easily be diverted to de-
fence.
Now that Australia has had placed
before it the position as it exists to-
day in our back yard, New Caledonia,
it will, maybe, be not too much to hope
that the authorities will want to
know a little more of the life and hab-
its and proclivities of the little brown
men only 900 miles away.
CAMPING OUT.
BY SYDNEY JEPHCOTT.
Close, close beside me as I lie
Gushes a lade of living water cold—
Tirelessly gushes with imaginary hushes,
Like harmonious thrushes singing
Stringing incessant beads of melody i
Singing its subtlety of Kindred with the seas and sKy,
Singing of issue from the orey hills afar;
Rippling and wrinkling, and weaving a twinkling tissue
From the glory of each star
That, up the lift of constellated hours creeping,
Pauses peeping at some rift to heaven cloven
Through the branches woven manifold.
