





MW LIGHT ON THE OLD PAGE:
EIGHT SERMONS
ON THE
Revised Version of the New Testament,
PREACHED IN
ST. PAUL’S CHURCH, WEST MAITLAND,
J. B. PEARSON, D.D.,
BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
In studying the Word of God, digest it under these two
heads: either as removing some obstructions that keep
God and thee asunder, or as supplying some uniting
power to bring God and thee together, — R. Cecil.
S PT,’. U B
■ar j /.KtT
*r,\ $ r»Mir




TO THE READER.
Lest you should be disappointed in the perusal of the following
pages, I wish to make it quite clear that I do not profess to criticise
critics, nor to revise the Revision. It would be something worse
than absurd for me to set my judgment upon points of scholarship
against the united learning of the Company who last year gave to
the world the fruit of their labour of many years. If the history
of similar enterprises in the past had not prepared us for such a
result, one would be surprised at the boldness with which sundry
writers have rushed into print with their denunciations of the
Version of 1881. It does not, however, come within the limits of
my purpose to defend from their attacks a body of scholars who
are quite able to fight their own battles.
Why, then, it may be asked, are these sermons printed ? Their
story is soon told. Last year I was invited by certain laymen of
West Maitland to give a lecture on the Revised Version. The
pressure of diocesan work prevented an immediate compliance with
their request; but in Lent and on Easter Day of this year these
sermons or lectures or “ lecture-sermons,” as a friend called them,
were delivered in response to the invitation ; and they are now
printed at the request of some who heard them, and wished to read
them at their leisure. In their preparation I consulted many
valuable contributions to the literature of the subject, and some
contributions that I can scarcely put under that category. In the
former class I may specially mention papers by the Bishop of
Durham, Professor Westcott, Dean Plumptre, and Dr. Roberts.
The Bishop of Durham’s well-known essay “ On a Fresh Revision
of the New Testament” is a mine of information on the subject, to
which I would refer any who desire a more critical treatment.


While I do not wish to disown any mistakes which I have made, I
am desirous of acknowledging fully my obligations to him and to
other writers who have made the Text of the New Testament a
special study.
My principal aim has been to show the bearings of new
readings upon some of the chief articles of the Christian faith. It
appears to me that one great benefit which we may derive from the
Eevisers’ work is the simplification of our thought upon some points
which have been overlaid with much dogmatism. Ido not speak of
this as in any sense the aim of those who were engaged upon the
task of revision. To attribute such a purpose to them would be to
accuse them of allowing themselves to be influenced by motives
which lay outside their proper sphere. Their one work was to
express truthfully and accurately in English that which they
believed to be the nearest approach which they could secure to the
original text. But when this has been done, it is quite allowable
for us to try to estimate the results thus arrived at in their relation
to our thoughts about holy things.
It is impossible to predict confidently what may be the ultimate
fate of the Revised Version. But this I must say —that no book
has been published for many generations so well calculated to
promote intelligent reading of the Scriptures among English people.
It has placed within reach of all an untold amount of textual
information, for which aforetime students had to search among the
notes of commentators It has enabled men of ordinary education
to judge of the present condition of the critical study of the New
Testament, and thus has thrown “ a new light on the old page.”
May Giod bless this instrument of religious learning, so that
through its use the promise may be fulfilled to many minds and
hearts: “Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
you free.”
J. B. NEWCASTLE.
Morpeth, August 13, 1882.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Things Written Aforetime 1
The Bible in English 9
The More Noble Character 17
Reading, Exhortation, Teaching 27
The Person of Christ 35
The Sacraments of the Covenant 43
The Death of the One for the Many 51
The G-ospel of Easter 57


CORRIGENDA.
Page 16, line 15 —For Holy Scriptures, read sacred writings
Page 29, line 30—For the root , read a root.
Page 33, line 44—For converted , read converteth.
Page 39, line 10—For this Way , read this way.
Page 48, line 13—Omit up.
Page 64, line 42—For look, read wait.


THINGS WRITTEN AFORETIME.
Romans, xv., 4.
For whatsoever things were written aforetime
were written for our learning , that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope.
The Apostle was teaching the Roman Christians the duty of
mutual helpfulness. They were not to regard self-pleasing as their
life-work. Let every one of us —so he lays down the law of the
higher life of self-denying love — Let every one of us please his
neighbour for his good to edification. He leads their thoughts at
once right up to the great example of all human excellence : For
even Christ pleased not himself; hut , as it is written , The reproaches
of them that reproached thee fell on me. And then, as if to justify
his citation from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and to show
the position which he took up in referring that description of a
patient sufferer to Christ, he gives them this lesson in the use of
Law and Psalm and Prophecy: For whatsoever things were written
aforetime were written for our learning , that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.
If there were any of the Apostle’s correspondents who had got
into the habit of reading the Scriptures of the Old Testament
mechanically, they must surely have been stirred to something
better by these words —they must have been led to think of the
high moral purpose which should inspire and pervade all study-of
holy things. When next they read or heard read the words of the
precious manuscript, they surely valued it more for their Teacher s
reminder that it was intended to be to them no dead letter, but the
fountain of a living hope. I do not think that we are doing any
violence to St. Paul’s thought and teaching if we regard the
Scriptures of the New Testament as coming within the scope of his
statement. They are for us among the things written aforetime,
and the Divine purpose is one through all the ages. Let us
approach them in the spirit of this apostolic word determined
to learn for ourselves by careful attention and by diligent study all
that we can of what the followers of the Lord Jesus wrote
concerning Him and His words and works. I shall have to
bring before you on these Sunday evenings some details of
a more or less critical character with regard to that body of


literature which we commonly describe as the New Testament; but I
hope that I shall not forget that the preacher should always have a
practical aim before him, that he should never lose sight of the
great work of his calling, which is not merely to state facts
wherewith the mind may be enriched, but also to urge motives
whereby the heart may be purified and the character improved.
May God grant that as from week to week we examine the record
of His revelation to our race, through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures the power of the Christian’s hope may be strengthened
and confirmed within us.
I have described’the subject of these lectures in general terms
as the Revised Version of the New Testament, more especially in its
relation to the principal articles of the Christian faith; and I have
then enumerated some particular points on which the changes that
have been made seem to throw light, such for example as, the true
place of Repentance and Conversion in Human Life, the doctrine
of the Atonement, and other leading truths of the Church’s faith
In order to prevent any possible misunderstanding, let me say at
the outset that I do not intend it to be inferred from this that the
Creeds will require revision, because the New Testament has been
revised. Do not think that the result of the labours of these
learned men, who for more than ten years have been working in
order to give us a New Testament as nearly correct as they can
make it, is of an unsettling or disturbing character. It is no doubt
rather startling to be told that a comparison between the New
Testament now in common use and this Revised Version shows no
fewer than 36,000 changes ; but it is satisfactory to find testimony
coming in from all sides to the effect that when the revisers have
done their work, when to the best of their ability they have
exhausted the latest discoveries bearing upon the text of the sacred
volume, the Faith that is witnessed to is substantially the same ;
the Faith into which we were baptized may still afford us its old
strength and comfort
I said just now that testimony was borne on all sides to this.
Thus the Bishop of Lincoln, in a recent address read at a Diocesan
Conference, while he criticises some points in the Revised Version,
speaks of it thus : “ Here, however, we may express our
‘‘ thankfulness that, whatever may eventually be the destiny of this
< £ New Version, not one of these 36,000 changes affects a single tittle
or iota of the Christian Faith.”
To the same effect the Watchman, which is, I believe, the
English organ of the Wesleyan Methodist body: “Nothing now
“ proposed will cause the New Testament of the future to differ in
“ its truth from that of the past. The old doctrines are untouched,
“ and the old promises are unchanged. Everything abides —nothing
“ passes. That which Christian experience is daily doing for us,
“ with respect to the Gospel itself, this scrutiny has done for the
“ Book which our fathers at the first placed in our hands.” And if


1 may add the expression of an opinion from the Baptist
denomination, in order that on such a point as this we may have
such a variety of witnesses as may be reassuring : “ A great work
“ has been done-done reverently, nobly, and thoroughly : the Word
“of the living Clod has been anew interpreted for us by men of
“ pre-eminent gifts, and, most of all, men themselves deeply imbued
“ with its spirit, and in the issue that Word now stands before us in
“ still more full-orbed brightness than before. After all the sifting
“ through which it has passed it remains substantially the same as of
“ old; no doctrine of our holy faith shaken, no heavenly hope
“ blasted.”
I have called these three witnesses before you this evening in
order (1) to prevent disappointment. You must not think that a
Revised Version gives us a new G-ospel. The glad tidings of great
joy are the burden of the old and new alike. Lovers of mere
novelty will not find much to attract them : but, on the other hand,
lovers of truth, of faithfulness, of accuracy, will, I venture to
promise, find much to reward careful reading, if they will bring
their minds to the study of the old story in this new form.
(2) I wish to allay any fears which may harass some as to
the possible disturbance or unsettling of the minds of Christian
people by so many changes in a book which they have been taught
to regard from early years as possessing a sanctity peculiarly its
own. It may be that some devout hearts have been shocked at the
thought that the book which has been to them, and to their fathers
before them, a book of final appeal, should be touched by the
innovating hand at all. To such persons it may be comforting to
hear voices from various points of the denominational compass in
harmony on this point at least. The old lessons of patience and
comfort are still to be learnt —the old fountain of hope is still
flowing for the refreshment of weary souls in their journey
through this earthly life.
If this be so, the question may fairly be asked —What bearing
can these changes, so many in number, so carefully studied, have upon
the principal articles of the Christian faith ? If they are changes
which change nothing, are we not exactly where we were with
regard to the teaching of Christianity ? I think, and I hope from
time to time to show, that some difficulties have been removed, that
some statements appear in harmony which it was impossible
before to reconcile, and generally that such light has been thrown
upon the pages of Grospels and Epistles as to make really intelligent
reading much easier than it was. You could not have a better nor
a cheaper commentary on the Authorized Version than this revised
version of it. You will find again and again that just by a very
slight alteration it has brought out a hidden meaning or added point
and force to a meaning already apprehended.
Now to-night I wish to give in as few words as are compatible
with clearness, some notion of the material that exists for such


work as the revisers were engaged in. What is the New
Testament ? Where is it to be found ? The name implies a
contrast with the Old Testament The distinction has been traced
back to that prophetic page, wherein we read the promise : Behold
the days come , saith the Lord , that I will make a new Covenant with
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah , not according to the
Covenant that I made with their fathers. . . . The Lord Jesus
adopts this thought when in instituting the Last Supper, he speaks
of the blood of the Covenant—for so the word translated
Testament should probably be translated; and you will remember
that in the Epistle to the Hebrews great stress is laid on the
distinction between the two Covenants —the old and the new.
Thus the writer speaks of our Lord as the Mediator of a better
Covenant than that proclaimed by Moses, and at great length he
shows the superiority of the Christian to the Mosaic economy.
Into that argument we need not enter now : this reference may
just remind us how much that familiar term New Testament really
means. It is the new covenant or agreement between God and His
people—inspired by love, wrought out by sacrifice —and therefore
fitly named a Covenant of Grace.
Think then of Gospel preaching as the proclamation of the
good news that God offers terms of salvation to fallen, sinful
man —that He proposes to man such a contract as love divine alone
could prompt, and power divine alone could carry out. The
familiar name becomes full of meaning thus, and from the thought
of our Father’s great goodness we derive a fresh inspiration of hope.
Thus then, strictly speaking, the New Testament or Covenant was
in existence before a single page of the volume which we commonly
call the New Testament was written. It was proclaimed by earnest
heralds—it was received by thankful hearers—before pen was put
to paper for the writing of it The message told of Him of whom
the volume tells—the true Word of God—-the utterance of the
Father’s thoughts to His children. It is important to bear this in
mind, for it puts the Bible in the right place as the record of God’s
revelation, rather than itself the revelation. We must look for the
true unveiling of the Eternal, not in the book, but in the man—
the Son of Man—Christ Jesus. It was faith in Christ, and not in
any book or books, that made the early Christians the men they
were. In Him they saw the brightness of the Father’s glory and
the expression of His love. I think that if we realised this more
fully we should be less troubled about what is sometimes called
the Inspiration of Scripture—in fact, we should not want any exact
theory of inspiration at all. If we have reason to believe that we
possess the true accounts of trustworthy witnesses of the Life, and
also lessons in the form of letters about the meaning of the Life
written by men who were guided by the Spirit of Christ —we need
not trouble ourselves by trying to decide how this guidance was
effected, and what were its precise limits.


Things Written Aforetime. §
Such books we have. “It lies on the surface,” writes a careful
“ student of Christian antiquity, “ that within sixty or seventy years
“after the Death and. Resurrection of the Lord Jesus there were
“ written records of His words and deeds, epistles purporting to be
“written by His apostles and disciples, revelations of the future of
“ His kingdom.” Besides the books which we now receive as coming
to us with authority, there were in those early days others in
circulation, which have since dropped comparatively out of sight.
The books that had been read in church, that had been quoted by
Christian writers, that possessed certain marks of style, that were
known to have been handed down in the Church from one generation
to another with reverence—these books were naturally grouped
together; lists were made of them ; some of these lists were
probably made within 200 years of the birth of Christ. So early as
the year a.d. 397 a Church Council or Assembly gives a list of the
books of the New Covenant, which includes ail those that are now
recognised, and does so on the very noteworthy ground that this
was what had been received ‘ from the Fathers.’ From that day to
this no doubt has even been expressed by any Synod of the Church
as to what books ought to be thus honoured. We too may say very
truly that we accept this literature which gathered round the glad
tidings of Christ’s G-ospel ‘ from the Fathers.’ Thus then we must
not think of the New Testament as coming to mankind in a neat
volume stamped from the first with a divine approval. What is
sometimes called the Canon of Scripture had a period of growth.
The common sense and critical power of Christian people were
brought to bear upon the variety of records and documents before
them It was to a certain extent by a process of selection that our
present New Testament was formed. “It is,” writes one of the
first biblical scholars in England, “ to the Church as a ‘ witness and
« keeper of holy writ’ that we must look both for the formation and
« the proof of the Canon. The written rule of Christendom must rest
“ finally on the general confession of the Church, and not on the
“ independent opinions of its members.”
And if it be asked how learned men, such for example as those
who have been lately engaged upon the revision, decide what
Evangelists and Apostles really wrote, the answer must be that it is
only by diligent study, by careful comparison of authorities, by
most patient endeavours, that they can come to conclusions which
satisfy them on various points, and that in some instances after all
their pains there remains room for differences of opinion concerning
certain passages. W"hile making this statement I would guard it
by the remark that there is in the main among them a wonderful
agreement, and that differences of opinion about verses here and
there in the books of the New Covenant do not alter the substance
of the covenant itself. Again I must remind you that the book is
not the covenant, and that the covenant in its broad outlines, in its


gracious offers of forgiveness, in its assurance of strength and
blessing, in its mighty power to save from all that degrades and
defiles, was itself prior to the book and was preached and received
before the book had existence. The mercy of God does not depend
on a phrase here and a phrase there. We have not to read our
Bibles in fear and trembling lest a flaw in a manuscript or the
mistake of a copyist should deprive us of our hope. Such a spirit
would be fatal to our trust in our Father. Why, my brethren, if
all the bibles in Australia were burnt to-night, still God, even our
own God, would be the same God He is now. His covenant of grace
does not depend upon the accuracy of a document
While I think it thus important that we should not identify our
Father’s revelation of Himself to His children with any book, I
have no wish to underrate the importance of having as accurate a
copy of the Scriptures as can possibly be secured, nor the labours
of those who have lately devoted so much time and thought to this
worthy purpose. In order to get at the true text of the New
Testament —in order to be satisfied that they have come as nearly
as they can to a true text —they had much work to do of a character
that needed the utmost care. For bear in mind that we have not
now any of the manuscripts written by St. Paul, St. Peter, or St,
John. The text has to be decided upon not from one source but
from many. Imagine the process of copying going on in early
times, and you will soon see a fruitful source of possible variations.
Picture to yourself a man with a copy of St. Matthew’s Gospel before
him If you have ever tried to make a copy of a long letter, you
will readily realise how very easily some errors would creep in. Or
picture to yourself three or four at work writing out whilst one read
aloud, how easily mistakes might be made. Suppose the manuscript
were in English, how easily one might write “ another,” although
the reader said “a brother,” or might mistake such an expression
as “ God of love” for “ God above.” It seems that such variations
as these were made as copies w 7 ere multiplied in Greek Sometimes
no doubt the person making the copy was tempted to improve the
grammar,, as he thought, or to soften down a hard saying, or to
support what he conceived to be some true doctrine, or to make the
words recorded by one Evangelist more like those recorded by
another, or to insert a word or two in order to make the sense
clearer. Allowance has to be made for these natural tendencies on
the part of transcribers. One copy has to be compared with
another, and those who are skilled in such work have laid down
certain rules for their guidance—such for example as this, that the
more difficult of two readings is likely to be the true one, because
a person copying is more likely to try to make his copy easier
rather than harder to understand. Manuscripts of the whole, or
of parts of the New Testament in Greek, are extant, the earliest of
which is supposed to have been written about the year 350, and the
latest in the sixteenth century. Besides these, there are also


versions or translations into other languages, which are valuable as
showing the Greek text from which they were made Suppose that
I was anxious to make out the true text of some English writer,
and I possessed a translation made into French soon after the book
was written, that translation might help me very much in determining
what the English really was ; and just in the same way translations
of the Greek Testament into Latin and other languages are found
very helpful by critics of the Greek Testament. Add to these
quotations in early Christian writers —men who looked upon the
Apostles as authorities in matters of Christian doctrine —and you
have another source which revisers have to use in trying to make out
exactly what Apostles and Evangelists really wrote. I have gone a
little out of the ordinary course in mentioning these things to you,
but I wished you to realise the kind of work that has to be done
before the actual form of the English phrase can be even considered.
And when the work has been done, we are told that these various
materials tend as a general rule towards one result —they are like
lines converging towards one point, —so that there is a fairly
harmonious judgment among those qualified to judge on most
important passages. It will be my aim on future Sunday evenings
to show how these considerations affect our reading of the books of
the New Covenant, and in what way we may enter into the labours
of those who have been trying to make the English Testament as
perfect a representation as they can of the original writings.
“ Revising,” says one who was engaged upon the work, “ and
“ rightly using the fruits of revision both bring some disappointments,
“ and, as we are inclined to think, some losses. But both works stir
“us to fresh and invigorating inquiries. And who will not rejoice in
“ a call to high effort ? No superstition can be more deadening than
“ that by which a man is made to leave his noblest faculties
“ unconsecrated by devout and unceasing exercise. The Bible does
“ not supersede labour, but by its very form proclaims labour to be
“ fruitful. This is a conclusion which we can no longer put out of
“ sight. The Bible does not dispense with thought, but by its last
“message it lifts thought to sublimer regions.” I would fain, my
brethren, impress this lesson upon you. I speak this evening to a
congregation composed mainly of fairly educated men and women.
And I would ask you how much thought, how much time, how much
pains, you individually spend over trying to arrive at the real
meaning of the holy books? Now in this revised version you
have a new and a valuable help, and I feel sure that if you use it well
it will do you good both in mind and heart. I say nothing about
its superiority or inferiority to the older version just now. I
simply wish to put clearly before you an advantage which has come
to your hand. I want you to take a fresh interest in what Christ
spake and his followers wrote, and I want you to read your Bibles
as if it were worth while to find out what the writers meant by what
they wrote.


But some one may be ready to say to me, ‘ Is this a gospel for
the poor ? You have been describing the labours of learned men
over ancient documents. Can it be that the Maker of us all has
entrusted the precious jewel 01 eternal truth to a casket which
needs so much skill in the opening ?’ Once again let me remind
you of the difference between the Covenant and the literature of
the Covenant. The Message in its broad outline is for all: there
are points about the transmission of the Message which call for
deep study and learned investigation. A bold man has indeed said
that if God had intended to give a revelation to mankind Ho would
have written it on the sky in letters of fire, so that none could miss
seeing it —none could misunderstand it. My brethren, it is
dangerous for us to say what God would have done. It is more
wholesome for us to ask what He has done. I certainly dare not
say that God can have no part in the New Testament, because there
is a call for work and thought in the understanding of it. If He
thought good to place His treasure in earthen vessels, who are we
that we should deny His right to do so ? If, instead of speculating
as to what He must have done, we ask how He deals with man in
regard to natural truth, truths of earth and sea and sky, we find
that there He rewards hard work and diligent inquiry. Is it not,
then, on the face of it, probable that He may reward hard work and
diligent inquiry, devoutly undertaken and honestly carried through,
in the region of spiritual truth —truths of heart and soul and
conscience ? 4nd may it not be that just as the astronomer in his
midnight watches observes facts and makes calculations whereby
the practical art of navigation becomes safer, and just as the
chemist toiling in his laboratory is rewarded by discoveries which
are found afterwards to be of use in a thousand practical matters,
so the student of the things written aforetime may be the instrument
of the Divine hand in clearing away difficulties and in enabling us
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures to have hope in
fuller measure p
I do not think that the process which I have been describing
to-night is so very much unlike the way in which other truth is
reached as to lead us to suspect it. We need not go through the
process to share in the result. Just as many a man uses the light of
a lamp who would be puzzled to explain the operations by which the
oil is prepared, the construction of the lamp itself, and the manner
in w r hich light is diffused from it, so thousands have enjoyed the
light of the Gospel message who are strangers to the apparatus of
manuscripts and versions and quotations. The light is common to
all. Not to scholars and professors only, but to you is the word of
Christ’s salvation sent. Whether the scribe brings out of his
treasury things new or old, regard all holy teaching as a help to
holy living, and then as day succeeds to day, and year to year, you
shall grow in the highest of all knowledge—the knowledge that is
theirs who know whom they have believed.


THE BIBLE IN ENGLISH.
ii Timothy, hi, 14-15.
But continue thou in the things which thou hast
learned and hast heen assured of, knowing of whom
thou hast learned them ;
And that from a child thou hast known the Roly
Scriptures, which are ahle to make thee wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
These words are from one of three Epistles commonly known as
the Pastoral Epistles. They were written by a pastor to pastors,
and contain instructions in the discharge of„ the pastoral office.
In addressing his fellow-workers, Timothy and Titus, the Apostle had
in view that solemn charge which had been committed to their
t rug t—in the one case at Ephesus, and in the other in Crete—and
naturally he treats mainly of these two great subjects, the
preaching of the Word and the organization of the Church. There
is something very fresh and life-like about the style of them. We
feel as we read them that we are reading letters, not essays or
treatises. There is, too, a personal tenderness in their tone, at
once friendly and fatherly. They are the letters of a man we
know not how old in years, but certainly old in Christian
experience—to certain persons entrusted with great responsibilities,
who, so far as we know, endeavoured faithfully to do their duty in
the difficult posts which had been assigned to them. Consider
the position in which Timothy was placed. Teachers of
false doctrine had arisen in the Christian community, and he
needed counsel and guidance. There was danger of error, there
was danger of despondency. One surrounded by apostacy was
himself in danger of falling : one surrounded by difficulty was in
danger of fainting by the way. Warning and encouragement
they run side by side throughout the writings of St. Paul Of
Timothy we do not know much. He had the priceless blessing of
early training in the ways of righteousness. His mother Eunice,
and her mother Lois, taught him the best they knew —they taught
him the Holy Scriptures. Themselves pious people, they brought
up the boy in the faith and fear of G-od, and the child was father


to the man. He was in due time chosen and solemnly set apart
to do the work of an Evangelist. Watch thou in all things ,
such was the Apostle’s charge to him, endure afflictions, do the
work of an evangelist, make full ‘proof of thy ministry. It was to
him that the exhortation of the text was addressed. Ye who have
been brought up in godly homes; ye who have been early taught
the way of truth —hear how St Paul, the Apostle of Christ, would
address you, if you could hear his voice in the time of your
temptation. He would remind you of those who once made your
highest welfare their especial care ; he would recall the lessons of
faith and duty with which your young minds were enriched and
your young hearts touched ; he would have the memory of those
godly households into which you were born act as a preservative
against evil in dangerous days when the world has to be faced ;
Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been
assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them.
Of whom thou hast learned them. There can, I
think, be little doubt that in this phrase St. Paul
reminds his friend of the religious instruction which
he had received in his childhood from those who had made his early
home a place of education not for time only, but for eternity also.
Here was one of those happy instances in which piety had become
traditional—l had almost said hereditary. From one generation to
another the truth was handed down : it was recommended by the
living power of holy example : it was linked with early associations
and loving memories. The education of Timothy was indeed a
convincing proof of the blessing of family devotion to God. Very
beautifully was that divine purpose illustrated there, which the
Psalmist describes: He made a covenant ivith Jacob, and gave
Israel a law, which he commanded our forefathers to teach their
children ; That their posterity might know it, and the children which
were yet unborn, to the intent that when they came up they might
show their children the same ; That they might put their trust
in Ood, and not to forget the works of God, but to keep his
commandments.
Now it is quite conceivable that such a process as this might
have gone on from age to age without any written law, without any
written gospel. Parents might have told to those who in the course
of life’s changes were rising up to take their place the most precious
knowledge which they possessed—the knowledge of the covenant of
God —without its having been committed to writing at all. If the
idea of a written character had never occurred to mankind, there
might still have been a Lois teaching a Eunice and a Eunice in her
turn teaching a Timothy what God bestows, what God requires.
W e thus arrive by another path at the conclusion which occupied
our attention last week that there might be a divine covenant
without any literature belonging to it, and the knowledge of that
covenant might be kept alive. A body of truth might be possessed,


and might serve as a light to our feet and a lamp to our path,
without its being exhibited in a book. It might be learnt as
children generally learn'the Lord’s Prayer without the intervention
of the written page. And truth would still be truth, and would
still possess all its power to bless and to save, howsoever we
had acquired it. I can imagine a gospel without a Bible —a
gospel handed down as a treasure dear to the heart of the best and
purest of each generation of mankind —but a Bible without a
gospel!—the very thought robs the Bible of all that makes it what
it is.
Asa matter of fact we know that in Cod’s good providence a
literature has gathered round the divine covenant of grace, a
literature which in its original form is couched in a language that is
strange to most of us —a literature that demands, and I may say
receives, very patient and unwearying study from those who would
ascertain the true text amid the variations of manuscripts, versions,
and quotations. Still you will remember how important it appeared
to bear in mind that the Covenant was prior both in order of
thought and in order of time to this literature. We will see then
in the Scriptures the record of Cod’s revelations to mankind, and
we will try to learn from them what Cod has done for us, what Cod
would have us be.
These are matters that belong to us all, of the very last
importance to all whom the word of the divine salvation reaches. If
the Bible is to be a guide through life and a guide to life for learned
and unlearned both—if it is to be not the peculiar property of a
class of rabbis, but the common property of the workers in the
world’s busy market-place —then it is clear that translation must
come to the aid of those who have no opportunity of making the
originals their study; and it has been truly said that “ wherever
“ men have believed in earnest that they had the groundwork of their
“ faith in Cod mainly or wholly in a written record, it is natural
“ that they should desire, if their religion has any life and energy,
“ to have that book in the speech to which they were born and in
“ which they think.” And I may add to this remark the assurance
of a well-read student of many books in various tongues “ that of
“ all books the Bible loses least of its force and dignity and beauty
“ from being translated into other languages wherever the translation
“is not erroneous. One version,” he says, “may indeed excel another
“ in that its diction maybe more expressive, or more simple, or more
“ majestic, but in every version the Bible contains the sublimest
“ thoughts uttered in plain and fitting words. It was written for the
“ whole world, not for any single nation or age ; and though its
“ thoughts are above common thought, they are so as coming from
“ the primal fount of Truth, not as having been elaborated and piled
“up by the workings of abstraction and reflection.”
In speaking to you of our English Bible, and of the process by
which it grew into its present form, I am sorely tempted to linger


over one or two incidents in the early history of our fatherland. I
should like us to go back to Anglo-Saxon times, and read together
how, more than a thousand years ago, the venerable Bede died, as
his disciple tells, in the very act of finishing the translation of the
last chapter of St. John’s Gospel; and again how, nearly a thousand
years ago, good King Alfred prefixed to his code of laws a translation
of the Ten Commandments and some other portions of Exodus,
thinking no doubt that he and his subjects would find in the divine
law the best preface to, the surest basis for, human law; or again
how, five hundred years ago, Wycliffe, the morning star of the
English Reformation, as he has so often been called, completed the
first English New Testament. But we must not tarry over these
early efforts at rendering the holy writings into a tongue under-
standed of the people. Such attempts at making Christian teaching,
the teaching of the literature of the Covenant, in the best sense of
the word popular, deserve our highest admiration. They were
undertaken iu the midst of great difficulties, frequently in the face
of most determined opposition, not seldom at the risk of cruel
persecution. Of all the pioneers in this noble work there is one
whose name stands forth pre-eminently among his fellows. The
well-known historian of England, Froude, says of the English
Bible:—‘‘The peculiar genius, if such a word may be permitted,
“ which breathes through it, the mingled tenderness and majesty, the
“ Saxon simplicity, the preternatural grandeur, unequalled, unap-
“ proached in the attempted improvements of modern scholars —all
“ are here, and bear the impress of the mind of one man, and that
“man, William Tyndale.” William Tyndale is the man who, at the
age of thirty-six, declared his purpose, “ if God spared his life, to
“ make a boy that driveth a plough to know more of Scripture than the
“ Pope, ’ and of whom it is recorded that from that purpose, through
all the changes and chances of his life, he never swerved, even for a
single hour. His was not the most prominent figure in the English
Reformation ; but his was among the best work done in it and for
it. While others were moving but slowly, and trimming their sails
in order to catch the breeze of royal patronage and favour, he just
went on with the work he had in hand, tiring from it neither through
fear nor favour. Of six editions of his translation, 15,000 copies
were printed ; and some notion of the bitter opposition with which
his attempt was met may be gathered from the fact that four or five
copies only have come down to our own time, and even these are
described as incomplete and mutilated. Tyndale himself died a
martyr s death. Less than 360 years ago, the King and Bishops of
England combined in ordering his English Bible to be seized or
bought up and burnt. But it was as bread cast upon the waters to
be round after many days. He, or rather the work he did,
contributed very much to the work of the reformation of the Church }
and to him students of the English language attribute the popular
and intelligible character of the English Bible as we have it now.


There is no doubt that knowledge of the Greek text has grown very
much since his time. It is in the power of scholars and critics to
put into our hands a much more accurate representation of that
which Apostles and Evangelists wrote. But there seems to be no
doubt that to him was in great measure due that in the English
Bible which has made it a book for the English people. There were
in his day those who wished to secure for the Holy Scriptures a kind
of false dignity by the use of scholastic terms, and desired to keep
the language of the sacred page as free as possible from such words
and phrases as were used by the common people. Let us be thankful
that this brave man would not yield to this worse than foolish
demand. He longed to see a book available for every class and
degree —a book that might be profitable everywhere for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the
man of God might be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good
works. The complete truthfulness of the man seems to have been
one of his highest claims to the respect and veneration of all
succeeding generations. In a period of fierce conflict like that in
which he lived, the temptation must have been very great at times to
minds of the weaker sort to tone down a phrase here and a phrase
there to make it less offensive to the powers that were ; but about
Tyndale there seems to have been a noble independence of character,
which gave an untold value to his work. A man must have been
either a hero or a hypocrite —and I think that Tyndale was a hero —
who could describe the principle on which he had worked thus : “ I
“ call God to record, against the day we shall appear before our Lord
“ Jesus to give a reckoning of our doings, that I never altered one
“ syllable of God’s word against my conscience, nor would this day, if
“ all that is in the world, whether it be pleasure, honour, or riches,
“ might be given me.”
My brethren, it is not given to many to do such a work for the
Church of God as this man did; but lam sure that it would do us
all good, whatever our work is, to enter a little into the spirit of
such a worker. The frailty of our mortal natures so often renders
us liable to the temptation to secure ease or praise for ourselves by
adapting our course according to the rule of agreeable rather than
the rule of right, that it may do us good to come face to face with
a character like this. Our studies of the English Bible will not
have been thrown away if they lead us to value truth more, and
surely to contemplate the character of one who loved truth
even to the death, may brace us up to more earnest love for it, and
more steadfast adherence to it in all our works begun, continued,
and ended. Those who value singular sincerity and uncompromising
honesty, those who rejoice to possess in the English Bible a book
for English-speaking people all the world over, will not begrudge
this brief tribute to the memory of one who counted not his life
dear unto himself if he might do the work which, as it seemed to
him, needed most of all to be done.


I need not pursue the history of the various versions and
revisions which succeeded this. What is now known as the
Authorised Version hears date A.n. 1611, but for some years
it was accepted side by side with some of the older ones. In
their preface to the reader the translators disclaim all desire to
bring out a new translation. They never thought that they should
need to make a new translation, nor yet to make of a bad one a
good one. Their endeavour, they say, was to make a good one
better, or out of many good ones one principal good one.
And it was truly a great work which they did. It is a
possession that should not be lightly exchanged —this English
Bible, which has wrought itself so marvellously into our national
life and our national language. One wonderful feature about it is
this —that it has formed “ a sacred bond of union” between eighty
millions of Christians in all parts of the world. Just think what a
mighty link this is. Amid endless differences of Church
organisation —amid a variety of opinions as to what is taught in it
and what is not, on various points of discipline and doctrine —not
one denomination only, but many have looked up to that volume
as to their standard of appeal. It is, too, a long period over which
the influence of this volume has extended—27o years. One who
some years ago advocated revision wrote thus : “ The language of
“ the Authorised Version has intertwined itself with the controversies,
“ the devotion, the literature of the English people. It has gone
“ wherever they have gone over the face of the earth, The most
“ solemn and tender of individual memories are for the most part
“ connected with it. leaving the Church of England for the
“ Church of Rome turn regretfully with a yearning look at that
“ noble ‘ well of English undefiled ’ ”
And the revisers themselves, in their preface, speak of the
work which they have revised in these words: “We have had to
“ study this great version carefully and minutely line by line ; and
“ the longer we have been engaged upon it the more we have learned
“ to admire its simplicity, its dignity, its power, its happy turns of
“ expression, its general accuracy, and we must not fail to add the
“ music of its cadences, and the felicities of its rhythm To render
“ a work that had reached this high standard of excellence still more
“ excellent, to increase its fidelity without destroying its charm, was
“ the task committed to us.”
To explain what the revisers have done, and why, and how
the results of their work may affect our view of holy things, will
be my aim on future Sunday evenings. Meanwhile, may we not
well pause and ask ourselves whether we have valued as we should,
and used as we ought, the treasure which was purchased for us by
the blood of martyrs, and preserved to us by the good hand of our
G-od upon us ?
The order of my subject has led me this evening to speak to
you of the history of the English Bible, and to bring some testimony


as to its general accuracy, and the influence which its language has
had upon those who have made it a careful study—comparing it
with less successful efforts, and so being led to assign to it the first
place among the literary treasures of our country.
But, before we part, let us bring home to ourselves some
practical questions as to our past and present use of that which is
thus ours. Supposing that, in the course of my remarks, I had
expressed the opinion that the free circulation of the volume had
proved to be mischievous in its tendency ; supposing that I had
argued that it would have been better for Christian people in
general for Holy Scripture to have remained a book in a dead
language —a book sealed to all but the learned —your hearts would
have arisen in rebellion against me; you would have regarded such
suggestions as unworthy of any minister of a Beformed Christian
Church ; you would, to use a common phrase, have been up in arms.
But, sad to tell, many Protestants do for themselves that
which they would most bitterly resent if bishop or priest tried to
do it for them. For what matters whether an unread Bible is in
Hebrew, or Greek, or English ? If there were among us more real
desire and effort to read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest,
Christian people would not be so soon shaken in mind by novel
teaching or destructive comment. So far as I know, at this
present time, those who have studied Holy Scripture most carefully
—those who have devoted some of the best years of their life to
the establishment of the sacred text, and the removal of blemishes
from our own version—are among the firmest believers in the
truth of that Gospel which is contained in those honoured pages.
It is for each of us, according to his leisure and his powers, to be
a Bible student, to try to ascertain what its message to man really
is ; what are these ways of God to man which it concerns us most
of all to know.
It is possible that I speak this evening to some young men, who
in their childhood enjoyed the privilege of Christian teaching in
their homes. As they look back upon the years that are gone, the
memory of one or two who were to them what Lois and Eunice were
to Timothy comes back to their minds. Knowing of whom thou
hast learned them. There is a power in these words for such as
you. It may be that you have had to go out into the rough world,
and have found that early teaching laughed at, and the convictions
which it impressed upon you scorned. Let me ask you to open
your hearts again to the memory of that tender loving teaching of
your early years. You may have grown more clever, as the world
counts cleverness; you may have seen much of what the world
counts life ; you may look upon yourselves as having outgrown the
lessons of faith and duty that then were received by you as from
one who had authority to teach; —but are you any better, purer,
truer ? Have you found a more trustworthy guide in life than the
law of God’s commandments ? Have you found a brighter example


of human excellence than was set before you when the Gospel
story of the Life of Christ was told in your hearing ? If not,
would it not be well for you to consider whether that word of St.
Paul’s to Timothy may not have a direct and personal meaning for
you ? Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast
been assured of \ knowing of whom thou hast learned them.
And is there not in my text a word for Christian parents ? If
Eunice lived to see Timothy the honoured companion and fellow-
labourer of the Apostle, how great a joy must have been hers —
how full the reward, even upon earth, for the pains she had taken
to bring up her boy in the fear and love of God. Be it yours to
follow in the same path. The power of early impressions can
scarcely be insisted on too strongly. The Revised Version brings
out this point even more emphatically than it is done in the words
read as the text. And that from a babe thou hast known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation. Parents,
carry that home with you as one of the lessons from the Revision.
Do not leave the world and self to take possession, but claim young
hearts for Christ.


THE MORE NOBLE CHARACTER.
Acts xvii., 11, 12.
These were more noble than those in
Thessalonica , in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind , and searched
the scriptures daily, whether those things
were so. Therefore many of them believed.
I need scarcely tell you that the text describes the conduct of the
Jews of Berea. They are credited with a certain nobility —not, as
some have thought, of birth or position —but of An emphatic
contrast is drawn between the temper and disposition with which
they received Christian teaching when it was brought to them, and
the temper and disposition with which the Thessalonians had
received it. This contrast has often formed the subject of
addresses to Christian congregations, and the example of the
Bereans has been set before them as worthy of all imitation.
Assuredly the conduct of certain of the Jews which believed not
at Thessalonica had been anything but noble They had not
scrupled to avail themselves of the co-operation of the idle and
needy loiterers in the market place, lewd fellows of the baser sort,
the Authorized Version calls them ; vile fellows of the rabble,
according to the Revised Version —men ready for any mischief
noise and uproar and assault. These were the arguments brought
against St. Paul’s reasonings, when from the Scriptures of the Old
Covenant he had tried to shew them that the Christ whom they
expected must needs have suffered and risen again ; and then had
expounded to them the grounds of his own belief that the Jesus
whom he preached was that very Christ for whose coming the
expectant people looked. We need not enter into details of the
result of that commotion. It must have been a very pleasant
change for the Apostle to find himself for a while among the more
noble, more open-minded and candid, Bereans. His experience
among them is worthy of notice, as one of the very few instances
of his being well received by his fellow-countrymen, who were
always so near to his heart, and for whose conversion to the faith
of Christ he laboured and prayed so earnestly. In this rare
incident he no doubt found strength and comfort. This was the


best refreshment which men could minister to his weary soul.
They exhibited true nobility both in its passive and active
elements, sincere readiness to accept the truth and earnest
determination to investigate the truth. They received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily whether
those things were so —that is, whether they were as the Apostles had
represented them. And the natural consequence—so it appeared
to the historian of the Acts —followed : Therefore many of them
believed
Now there are always at work certain influences which
tend to send us in the direction of the Thessalonian method
of receiving anything that is new to us It is disturbing to have
our habitual ways of looking at things and our settled opinions
about them called into question There is in human nature a
strongly conservative spirit, which has its uses, and important uses
too, when it comes to our aid as an echo of the Wise Man’s caution :
Meddle not with them that are given to change, or, as we should
perhaps describe the character, who love change for change’s sake.
So far, good; but there is a demand upon our effort when
improvements or supposed improvements in established institutions
are put before us, which demand it is not always agreeable to comply
with. To attend, according as we have power to attend, to
reasoning and evidence is sometimes very hard work. It is far
easier either to take things for granted or to let them slip altogether,
but it is not the nobler part. Is it not, however, on the face of it
probable that as our eyes were given us to see with, so the higher
faculties of our minds were given us in order that we might attain
the knowledge of truth ? The people of Berea set us a good
example of that most excellent virtue—willingness to take pains.
They set themselves to test what was said to them with sincerity
and earnestness, and for this they are commended.
Now, I am going to ask you to extend to what I have to say
this evening a noble patience. The subject that is to be dealt
with scarcely admits of rhetorical treatment. We have just to try
to get hold of certain facts about that literature which has gathered
round the divine covenant of grace, and to see how they bear upon
our understanding of the volume which has been to thousands as a
light to their feet and a lamp to their path while they made the
journey that we are all making from our first home to our last. I
told you last Sunday evening something of our English Bible and
of the changes through which it has gone, and I put some testimony
before you as to the general accuracy of the version now in use and
of its value regarded as a treasury of good strong English. In all
fairness, then, the question has to be faced—Why interfere with
the volume around which pious feeling has gathered for so many
generations ? Why disturb in any way this memorial of the
devout labours of our forefathers, confessedly so beautiful, and,
speaking in general terms, so true to the purpose for which it was


designed ? There were no doubt dangers in the experiment—twin
perils, as one of the most learned of the revisers calls them, by
which it was sought to scare the advocates of revision—“ the danger
“of estranging diverse churches and congregations at present
“ united in the acceptance of a common Bible, and the danger of
“ perplexing the faith of individual believers by suggesting to them
“ variations of text and uncertainties of interpretation ”
What have we to set against these dangers? Just this, I
think —the Church’s duty of putting before her children as accurate
a representation as can possibly be secured of the writings which
she teaches them to reverence. JVe can do nothing , so St. Paul
once wrote, against the truth , hut for the truth. A greater danger
than either of those just named is the spread of anything like
distrust of our English Bible. If the impression had prevailed that
those who had made it one main business of their lives to study the
sacred text were keeping any discoveries of error to themselves lest
their publication should do harm —-if ordinarily educated people
had, or supposed themselves to have, grounds for thinking that
scholars and critics of the Bible were hiding from them doubts and
difficulties lest their faith should be disturbed—the result would be,
I think, not a danger merely, but a terrible disaster such as one
scarcely dare contemplate If the notion were to prevail that the
students of the records were false to them whose heritage the
records are, a grievous mischief would be done such as man could
not undo I confess that I rejoice in the Revision, in the first
place, not so much because of the improvements made, but because
it seemed to me so thoroughly and completely the honest thing to
do. You can all read and compare now, if you will; you are put
in possession of results arrived at very carefully; you have a new
instrument given into your hand to help you to follow the good
example set by these Bereans of old With regard to many
statements made in books and sermons, in tracts and magazines, all
who can read intelligently have a valuable help in searching
whether the thing is so or not.
Now if you take up the Revised Version and open it at
random, the first thing that will strike you is the arrangement into
paragraphs of varying length, instead of into verses —the verses
being marked by numbers at the side just for convenience of
reference. Although this is not the first time that the English
Bible has been presented in this form, yet I suppose that the
books of the New Testament have never been so much read by
Englishmen in this form as within the last year. Now I think that
this is a decided gain. It is much easier to follow an argument
when presented in this way. It is brought out more clearly to the
eye, at its opening and its close. And more than this: the
arrangement in paragraphs is a protest, which it is to be hoped will
have some good fruit in religious discussions, against the isolation
of texts ; the quoting of a few words without regard to their place


and context, as if they were decisive of some question that is being
talked about or written about. I cannot think that this is the
really profitable way in which to use our Bibles, as though they were
intended to be armouries from which we may choose weapons to fight
each other with. Many mistakes—some ludicrous, some serious—
have been made by putting together a verse here and a verse there,
and then triumphantly saying, It is written. Do not misunderstand
me. lamby no means intending to underrate the force and value
of appeals to Holy Scripture, but then the appeal to be of any use
must be to the spirit and sense of Scripture. The words are for
our guidance in trying to get at the spirit and sense, and therefore
they should be studied in their place; due account should be taken
of the occasion on which they were spoken or written —they should
be read along with their context. The letter may be used so as to
kill; it is always the spirit that giveth life. Perhaps if this
consideration had more generally been borne in mind, and had due
weight given to it, there would have been fewer sects and parties
among Christians than there are.
If from this observation of the form of the book you passed to
an examination of its contents you would soon miss many familiar
words and phrases. You would soon find some that were not so
familiar, and you would naturally ask as to the reasons to be given
for these changes and to what they amount.
Now, as I showed you in my first lecture, by the mouth of two or
three witnesses, the changes made do not amount to anything at all
like an attack on our ancient creeds. There have been some new
lines engraved —some old lines obliterated —on the casket which
contains the jewel, but the jewel is there still.
But whence came these changes ? Some of the most important
of them from variations in readings of the Greek Text. Manuscripts,
versions, quotations, those three sources of information as to the
words which Apostles and Evangelists wrote, have been studied
again and again, and it is undeniable that much light has of late
thus been brought to bear on the text. As to the result of this,
one of the best Greek Testament scholars of our day says : —“ I can
“ only state my own conviction that a study of the history and
“ condition of the Greek text solves far more difficulties than it
“ creates. More especially it brings out the fact of the very early
“and wide diffusion of the New Testament writings with a
“ clearness and cogency which is irresistible, and thus bears most
“ important testimony to their genuineness and integrity.” You
see the drift of his argument: it is this—that if at an early date
we find a great variety in the copies, this is proof how widely they
were scattered abroad, and this in its turn gives the testimony of a
wide general consent to the trustworthy character of the accounts
given as to the authorship and authority of the books. These
were not writings which were hidden in a corner.


In comparing the Authorized and Revised Versions, it would
perhaps be the easiest plan for me to go through book by book, and
point out what seem to be important changes ; but lam desirous of
putting before you not the variations only, but some illustrations of
the reasons for them. I take them this evening under two heads.
Let me give you specimens of actual variations of text first It is
not unlikely that you have turned to the Lord’s Prayer to see how
it has been dealt with. Perhaps some one may have been inclined
to say, “ Oh, surely that has not been altered ; it is the first prayer
“we all learnt, and its very words are dear to us ” Now it may
not perhaps have struck you that the Lord’s Prayer, as we
learnt it in our childhood, is not in the Authorized Version at all.
In fact I doubt very much whether a dozen persons in this church
could write out the words which Christ himself hath taught us, as
they are given either in St Matthew’s G-ospel or St. Luke’s, and it
is very remarkable that the Lord’s Prayer as we use it in our public
worship, and most of us I suppose in our private devotions also, is
not found in any of the English Bibles at all It appears that it
was inserted in one of the earlier English forms of prayer, and so
was adopted into our prayer book in the form to which people had
been accustomed. There amid varying versions it has retained its
place. Turning now to the form of the Lord’s Prayer given in
St. Matthew’s Gospel, we observe as an important variation in the
Revised Version that it omits the doxology, which is placed in the
margin with a note to the effect that many authorities, some
ancient, but with variations, insert it. Still its position on the
page shows that the balance of opinion was against its forming
part of the original gospel. Probably it made its way into the
text from the early use of the Lord’s Prayer in the congregations
of Christian people. "We may compare its use with the use of the
Gloria at the end of the psalms. It is a very old form of praise,
reminding us of David’s thanksgiving: Thine, 0 Lord, is the
greatness, and the 'power, and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty, for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine. Thine
is the hingdom, O Lord, and Thou art exalted as head above all.
It need not disturb us then in our prayers to find that we are using
these words in addition. They were used by Christians at a very
early date. If I were so minded, I think that I might draw in
passing a strong argument from this in proof of the early use of
a liturgy. Here is a form of words added to the Lord’s Prayer,
giving it a rounded conclusion as for recital in the assembly of the
faithful.
I will give one other instance of the way in which study of the
text has led to change. I refer to the statement of the doctrine of
the Trinity, in I John, v, 7, where we read : For there are three that
hear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are one. These words disappear altogether, and the
latter part of the 6th is made into a new 7th verse. At first sight


it seems as though the leading article of our creed were seriously
endangered by this omission. I do not think so for one moment.
The evidence is distinctly against that verse, whether the creed is
endangered by its absence or not, and therefore honest men ought
to let it go In one way this is a gain. It has been truly said that
“ no more serious damage can be done to a true cause than by
“ summoning to its defence a witness who is justly suspected or
“ manifestly perjured.” We walk better without a staff than with
one which fails us in the hour of need. Now what is the connexion
between the doctrine of the Trinity and this passage? As plain
matter of history, the doctrine came first. The doctrine was the
Church’s inference from the words to be used in Holy
Baptism —the benediction used by the Apostle, so familiar to
us as the closing words of Morning and Evening Prayer, and
similar passages. It was also arrived at as the best expression of
the fulness of the Divine life and love shown in the Creation of the
World, the Redemption of Mankind, the Sanctification of the
Church. It was, if I may so put it, a statement drawn up to
embody on their Grodward side the facts of grace and goodness
which the Grospel had revealed to man. Thus the doctrine appeared
before the verse ; the verse could not then have been the foundation
of the doctrine. The true way of stating the case would be that
the doctrine, being already held and confessed, led to the insertion
of the verse. Are we then to conclude that some scribe, on the
principle that “ the end justifies the means,” put the verse in
in order to make the doctrine already sure doubly sure? Not
necessarily. It may in the first instance have been of the nature
of a comment or explanation, which found its way into some
manuscripts, notwithstanding its not being found in any of the
chief documents upon which reliance is placed. Let me illustrate
how this might be. Suppose that I were copying out a letter of the
late Bishop’s in order that I might send it to be printed There is
some expression in it that seems to me to require explanation, and I
write a few words in the margin, intending them to appear as a
foot-note. The printer thinks that lam correcting an omission,
not adding an explanation, and places them in the text. Neither
the printer nor 1 would be guilty of trying to pass off my words as
Bishop Tyrrell’s; but yet any editor of his writings afterwards
would be quite right in striking out the passage as spurious Now
apply this to the verse in question. Revisers may omit it without
imputing any dishonest motive to him by whom it was inserted. It
is a bad thing for us, my brethren, to be over-suspicious—to be too
ready to bring charges of fraud either against our contemporaries
or against those who live for us only in history Where we can
reasonably believe them honest, let us do so Thus then, in the
case before us, if anyone were to ask me, Where is the Christian
doctrine of the Trinity —Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in one G-od
—now that the clearest statement of it which the New Testament


contained is rejected as no part of St John’s writing? I should
answer —it is exactly where it was before the statement was
written I have thus put before you two of the most important
variations of the text I do not think that either our prayers or
our faith need be disturbed by the omission of the doxology at the
end of the Lord’s Prayer, or of the passage relating to the three
heavenly witnesses in the first Epistle of St. John.
I will now give one or two instances of another sort of
alteration, which I select as good specimens of the kind of work
which had to be done where there was no doubt about the Greek
text, but where there was some mistake, more or less serious, about
the way in which it was expressed in English. You will, of course,
see that this is quite a different field of the reviser’s work from that
spoken of just now.
Here is a well-known passage of the Epistle to the Hebrews, as
we read it: These all died in faith, not having received the 'promises,
hut having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims
on the earth. How that description of the Saints of Old Testament
times we have read and heard read again and again Has it
occurred to us to ask —how these worthies could embrace promises
which they had not received ? There is surely some ambiguity here.
A reference to the Revised Version clears it up : These all died in
faith, not having received the promises, hut having seen them and
greeted them from afar, and having confessed that they were strangers
and pilgrims on the earth.
So when the weary traveller gains
The height of some commanding hill.
His heart revives, if o’er the plains
He sees his home, though distant still
There is a great difference between embracing and greeting
from afar ; it is just this difference which is now brought out and
makes the writer’s estimate of the position of patriarch and prophet
quite clear. They greeted from afar the fulfilment of the promises
of God.
Take another instance of decided improvement —the doing
away with all ambiguity as to St. Paul’s meaning when he writes to
the Corinthians : For I know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby
justified; but he that judgeth me is the Lord. That is simply ah
old usage of ‘ by’ where we should use ‘ against.’ I know nothing
against myself. No doubt many have thought that the Apostle
meant to express how completely he relied upon divine inspiration
to enable him to know things. What he really meant was that he
was not conscious of any wrong on his part done towards the
Corinthians. He thought that he had behaved fairly and justly to
them, but yet he distrusted his own judgment of himself; he left
himself humbly to the judgment of the Judge of all the earth.
Here, again, is a passage Which more careful rendering has


converted from an exaggerated and therefore false statement to a
wholesome truth. We have been accustomed to read, and I dare
say to quote : The love of money is the root of all evil. We know
as a matter of fact that the love of pleasure, the love of power,
mere bodily appetite, the madness of revenge and lust, are all roots
of evil not necessarily connected with the love of gain. A very
slight change demanded by the Greek gives us : The love of money
is a root of all evils , or all kinds of evil. There you have a thought
that may serve as a warning in dangerous days when temptation is
strong to make Mammon the master whom you serve.
I will just mention one passage more —the last petition of the
Lord’s Prayer —in which a change has been made which is distasteful
to many. We can scarcely be reminded too often that the business
of the revisers was as honest men to tell us what in their judgment
was the best equivalent in English for that which the Evangelist
wrote. They had not to say what they would like a passage to be,
nor what in their opinion the public would like it to be. Their duty
plainly was to put the words before us in the nearest English phrase
which they could secure. May I be allowed to illustrate how the
doubt arises in this case? We have been accustomed to say —
Deliver us from evil. In that we have, I suppose, in a general kind
of way included whatever might injure soul or body. Now the literal
rendering is — Deliver us from the evil. In the text of the Eevised
Version it appears — Deliver us from the evil one —the word one
being in italics in order to show that it was inserted by the revisers.
Why did they thus insert it ? Possibly it appeared to some that the
Greek words corresponding to our Deliver from would naturally be
followed by the mention of a person, just as if you were to read —
That was cut with, you would naturally,.expect the mention of an
instrument; if you were to read—That was cut by, you would
expect the name of a personal agent, either a proper name, or the
name of a trade, or some equivalent description. But the main
arguments in favor of the change are that it was more in harmony
with the usage of the New Testament writers to employ that
expression the evil in a personal than in an abstract sense; that it
is supported by the mention of temptation in the context, suggesting
the thought of the Tempter; and also by the interpretations of early
Christian writers. It was not a question of personal preferences as
to which phrase should be used in the Lord’s Prayer, but it was
strictly one of the natural force and meaning of words. The
petition which we put up in the Lord’s Prayer, Deliver us
from evil , includes, as the Church Catechism teaches us, prayer
for deliverance from our ghostly or spiritual enemy. It may
be that some of us may attach a more definitely personal
meaning to the phrase than we have done hitherto. There
are other passages, remember, in the New Testament which
attribute a personal character to the power of evil. For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested , that he might dt stray


the works of the devil. For my own part, I can see no great
advantage in getting rid of the devil from our thoughts about life
unless we can thereby get rid of the devilish from thought and
deed, from character and conduct.
I know quite well that this is not the doctrine of what calls
itself modern thought. But I must ask you to listen to a few
words from one who was brought up, I believe, as a Unitarian, but
who afterwards became one of the greatest teachers of our church
in this century. I mean Frederick Maurice Commenting on St.
John’s words, He that committeth sin is of the devil, for the devil
sinneth from the beginning, he writes thus : “ The word ‘ Diabolus’
“ means Accuser or Slanderer. What St. John says, giving his
“ words their most literal sense, is, that one who sins or goes astray
“ from Giod does so by listening to the voice of a spirit who accuses
“or slanders God. I have often been told by persons whose
“ learning I respect, that this is the doctrine of an old Jew, which
“we in the nineteenth century have long outlived They speak, no
“ doubt, for themselves; they mean that there are no facts in their
“ own experience to which this doctrine of the old Jew corresponds.
“If it were so with me, I should be silent. For I have found so
“ much in my own mind which his teaching has explained, which I
“ could not have understood without it, that I should think he was
“ probably right where I could not follow him, and that hereafter
“ he might discover something to me which was now hidden from
“ me. But I cannot pretend that this is the case. What he said
“to the Ephesians about this accuser does answer to the inmost
“ witness of my conscience. I know that I did not learn this
“ doctrine by the precept of men. I was not taught it in my
“ childhood ; those I reverenced, and still reverence, considered it
“ a fable As I grew up, I felt the same motives to retain that
“ opinion, which act upon many of my contemporaries. The notion
“ of a Devil was associated in my mind with many superstitions
“ which science had confuted ; it was held by vulgar people, among
“ whom I did not wish to be reckoned. It was quite possible, if I
“ cared for that, to pass muster with the orthodox and respectable,
“ though I was sceptical on this point. But there are some things
“ which are more terrible than being confounded with vulgar
“ people. It is more terrible not to be honest with one’s self It
“ is more terrible to think that one is given over hopelessly to work
“ iniquity. It is more terrible to be cut off from all fellowship
“ with human beings, if they are vulgar.”
Perhaps these words may give you some reason to think that
the prayer Deliver us from the evil one may not be out of place for
any of us. I know that they have very often recurred to my mind
since I first read them, and particularly during the recent discussion
upon the wording of the Lord’s Prayer.
But I must conclude. I have been somewhat discursive
to-night, but I wished to shew you that there was much in this


Revised Version to set you thinking in a new way on some old
subjects, much to clear up points which may perhaps have been
difficult before. I have purposely chosen passages for this
miscellaneous kind of illustration which will not fall naturally under
any of the special subjects of which I hope to speak on future
evenings.
Meanwhile, my brethren, let me recur to the example of the
Bereans. Let me urge you to think it worth while to find out what
is true. Such a search as theirs is in some sense possible for us,
and depend upon it that if carried on in a humble, earnest, sincere
spirit, it will not be without its reward. Let the prayer for light
and strength and guidance, and the effort to live according to the
light which is already ours, go well together, and then we need fear
neither man nor devil. Greater is He that is for us than all that
are against us.


READING, EXHORTATION, TEACHING.
I TIMOTHY, IV., 13.
Till I come, give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine.
This was St. Paul’s advice to that overseer of the church whom he
stationed at Ephesus —part of the charge given to him in order that
he might know how to behave or conduct himself in the Church of
G-od. Observe the Apostle’s mention of reading. Perhaps he may refer
here specially to the public reading of Holy Scriptures. With the
Jews of course such lections or lessons were taken out of the Law
and the Prophets. So we read of the Lord Jesus himself : And he
came to Nazareth where he had heen brought up, and as his custom was,
he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read.
So too when Paul and Barnabas in their missionary travels came to
Antioch in Pisidia, they went into the synagogue on the Sabbath
day and sat down. After the reading of the Law and the Prophets,
the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them saying, Ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.
In following this admirable custom of the Jews, Christians from a
a very early period of the Church’s history adopted the plan which
still prevails of reading partly from the Old and partly from the
New Testament writings. Thus Justin Martyr, writing I suppose
about one hundred and thirty years after our Lord’s death, describes
the weekly assembly of the Christians in terms that would apply
pretty closely to our own assembly to-night: “ And on the day called
“ Sunday all who live in cities or in the country gather together to
“ one place, and the memoirs of the apostles, or the writings of the
“ prophets, are read, as long as time permits ; then when the reader
“ has ceased, the president verbally instructs, and exhorts to the
“ imitation of these good things.”
But that is a picture of a later time. Timothy’s reading would
be out of the Scriptures of the Old Covenant. You will remember
that it is he whom St. Paul reminded of the godly home in which
he had been brought up —how that even from infancy he had known
the holy writings. How far in later life he had the opportunity of
private study we cannot tell. But whatever opportunity he had
the Apostle would have him put to good use. Even in apostolic
times they who ministered in the Church were not so to depend


upon divine assistance as to neglect the use o£ the ordinary means
of learning and understanding You see what stress St. Paul laid
upon careful and intelligent reading : Till I come, give attendance
to reading. So the teacher was to seek increased knowledge of holy
things —so he was to prepare himself for the duties of exhortation
and doctrine, or teaching, as the last word of the text might be more
simply rendered.
Having learnt, he was to teach. There were those around him
who had manifold duties to perform, which left them perhaps little
leisure for study The needful cares of family and business took
up much of their time. Timothy’s reading was not to be undertaken
in any narrow and selfish spirit. His aim was not to be the mere
acquisition of knowledge, but the imparting of it. It entered into
the special work of his life to do his best to enrich the minds of
others with the knowledge of the truth, and as far as in him lay to
make clear that w r hich was to them obscure.
Now I am disposed sometimes to think that the pulpit
utterances of our day do not in general sufficiently recognise this
element. There is for the most part abundance of exhortation in
them, but there might perhaps with advantage be more teaching.
I do not mean that the preacher should set himself to lay down
opinions dictatorially, but that he should endeavoixr to give the
results of his own reading and thought in such form that they may
be helpful to others. If I were asked for an apology or defence of
the addresses which I am giving from this place on Sunday
evenings, I should plead that to the best of my knowledge and
ability they were given in the spirit of St. Paul’s counsel: Give
attendance to reading and to teaching. I should be very thankful if
I could think that any among you were being led thereby to a
closer and more careful study of those ancient writings, which have
clustered round, and which give continual witness to, Hod’s
covenant of grace.
Let me remind you briefly of one or two points raised last
Sunday. I mentioned two sources of difference between the New
Testament as we have it, and the New Testament as the revisers
now give it to us. One of these was actual variations of the text
which they had to put into English. The other was improvements,
as they appeared to them, in the way of putting the Greek into
English, even when they had no doubt as to what the Greek was.
Under the first head, variations of the text, we considered two cases
as being among the most important. Both of these had led to the
omission of familiar words. The Lord’s Prayer appears without the
doxology, which it was thought had been added to the model of all
prayers after its use in public worship had become general. In
the words For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
we saw a scrap from an old liturgy that possesses the
recommendation of a great antiquity, not a part of the form of
words taught us by Christ himself. The other example under this


head was the omission of a verse which has caused much disputing
in the Church for many long years. The First Epistle of St. John
appears without the passage telling of the three heavenly witnesses
who are described as one, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost. The learned in New Testament lore are now generally
agreed that this verse‘was no part of what St. John wrote, but was
added by some copyist long afterwards by way of comment on
what he wrote. The doctrine which it states rests on other grounds,
and was held by the Church quite independently of this passage.
In fact, the doctrine gave birth to the verse, not the verse to the
doctrine..
Passing then to the other class of differences between the two
versions, those arising from the attempts of the revisers to improve
the translation where there was no doubt about the original, or in
other words, to express the Greek in English more correctly than
it had before been done, we had before us one instance of this in
the change of by into against in St. Paul’s phrase, I know nothing
by or against myself: that is, he was not conscious of any evil
motive or wrong-doing in regard to that particular matter of which
he was writing
A second instance we had in the description of the worthies of old
time, who are described in the Authorised Version you will remember
as embracing promises which they had not received but had seen
afar off, in the Revised more intelligibly as having seen and greeted
them from afar, the notion being that of a sailor or traveller
beholding with gladness in the distance that which he had not yet
reached.
So again I mentioned that the exaggeration The love of money is
the root of all evil had been transformed into The love of money is
the root of all evils or all kinds of evil—a wholesome warning this,
for well nigh all possible varieties of sin have been committed
through greed of gain.
The fourth example of these changes that I brought forward
was, I think, the one which has caused more disquiet than any of
the others —the alteration of the last petition in the Lord’s Prayer
from Deliver us from evil to Deliver us from the evil one. Now,
when we bear in mind that no change was made in the
text unless it was approved by two out of three 'of
those of the revisers present at the meeting for final
revision, we must accept this rendering as most likely the
correct one. Remember, let me again ask you, that these learned
men were not asked to tell us what they wished to read in the New
Testament, but what they actually read there. What I may call
personal preferences they were bound to put on one side in
undertaking and carrying out such a work. A remarkable illustration
of this need, in connection with this very passage, has come to my
notice since I spoke to you last Sunday. I received the other day
a small pamphlet called ‘ A Word on the Revised Version of the


New Testament,’ by a well-known London clergyman, himself one
of the revisers. He says —“ The new reading of the petition
“ Deliver us from the evil one has given a greater shock to hallowed
“ associations than any other that has been made. I have found it
“ so with myself, though I have become reconciled to it, now that
“I am persuaded that it is right. I resisted it as long as I could.
“ When it was carried by a large majority at the first revision, I
“ still hoped that the Company, on second thoughts, would see
“ grounds for restoring the old words, Deliver us from evil." And
then after referring to some of the arguments brought forward in
favour of the change, this reviser tells us that he very reluctantly
joined.the large majority in its favour. “ I can feel,” he presently
adds, “ with a child of whom I have heard, who was reading the
“ Sermon on the Mount to her mother in the Revised Version, and
“ after reading the Lord’s Prayer in a tone expressive of surprise
“ and dislike, she said, ‘ Mother, if I am obliged to say this new
“ 1 Lord’s Prayer, I shall always say to myself the dear old Lord’s
“ ‘ Prayer after it.’ But surely” —and here he gives the key to the
whole position—“ but surely it was incumbent upon us, in this
“most sacred form of words, to set forth faithfully and fearlessly
“ as nearly as possible the language and the thoughts of our
“ Blessed Lord.”
I have recurred to that subject again, and have given you that
extract, for I do wish you to believe, as I do myself, that the
disposition with which the work was undertaken was a thoroughly
honest and candid one. In that description of a change of opinion,
we see the mind of one of these revisers at work upon one of the
most sacred passages upon which it could be engaged, and we see
that which should be reassuring to us —that his previous preference
for one form of words was not allowed to stand in the way of his
deliberate conviction in favour of another. I think that you will
agree with me that this was as it should be. I leave this passage
now, feeling sure that if you are taking any real and living
interest in the searching of the Scriptures to see what they really
tell us, you will not be sorry to have had this further reference to
it, which I was unable to make last week.
I can scarcely tell you how the subject which I have undertaken
to bring before you grows upon me from time to time; —so many
passages might be brought forward, so much might be said upon
them. I am compelled to select a few where selection is very
difficult. My purpose is a practical one, so I choose passages
where it appears to me that changes made in this Revised Version
may help us to clearer thoughts and thus indirectly strengthen us
for Christian action. Let me then point out an important change
which should widen our Christian sympathy, in that familiar part
of our Lord’s teaching, the parable of the Gfood Shepherd. We
read, And other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also I
must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold,


and one shepherd. Here a distinction is lost sight of. Our Lord’s
promise is not that there shall be one fold, but one flock ; and
herein lies very much of the force and meaning of the promise
The Jewish Church was a fold ; it was hedged in by barriers ; for
the time then present, it was well that should be so ; there were
sufficient reasons, of some of which we are able to judge, why the
earlier manifestations of the divine will should have had a national
character, and be definitely limited in their scope But in Christ the
fold is not perpetuated, but done away. In making the distinction
between fold and flock, the revisers were not only representing the
G-reek correctly, but they were going back to Tyudale’s version, of
which you may remember I spoke in my second lecture. It is a
distinction well worth preserving—that between fold and flock.
¥e may never see one fold include all Christ’s people on earth ;
but his own promise stands sure, that there shall be one flock, cared
for by one shepherd. "Was he not here anticipating the teaching of
His apostle at a later day, when he wrote of a state, where there
is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all ? We will hope and pray
then for the unity of the one flock under the one shepherd, while
we dare no longer hope for the uniformity of one fold.
The second chapter of the Acts of the Apostles recounts the
triumph of the Gospel Message, as spoken by St Peter on the day
of Pentecost. The historian tells how that thousands joined
themselves to the disciples’ company, and describes the patient
continuance in well-doing of that goodly company of believers in
the Lord. It is a beautiful picture of the Church of Christ in those
early days. And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple,
and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat icith
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God and having favour
with all the people. One feels for the moment almost envious of
that precious possession of a new-found faith—that joyous harmony
of a wide-spread love. But as we read the last sentence of the
chapter, And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved,
a painful feeling must have affected many hearts. Only such as
should be saved I Was there then an arbitrary selection of
persons who could join this happy throng? Was the message
professedly universal really particular? Was it meant for this
man and that man, and not for all men? These unpleasant
questionings and suspicious, which as many of you know well, have
saddened the hearts of some of the purest and truest and best
among Christian men and women, are set at rest by the more exact
rendering, And the Lord added to them day by day those that were
being saved. We are thus taught not to look upon salvation as
something altogether in the future. There is something about it
that must be going on now. Begun in this life, in earnest effort
after that which is good, in steadfast abhorrence of that which is evil,
it will be perfected hereafter. The process is present, the being


saved, the completion of the process is in the future and will come
in God’s good time. Do not let your idea of salvation be just
that of being saved at some future time from the pains and
penalties incurred by you in this life, but think upon it more and
more as “ a rescue from sin through the knowledge of God in Christ.”
This should be going on now —progressively, increasingly. Surely
the path of the saved should be one and the same with that path of
the just which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. There
is then no manner of doubt that those added daily to the Church
were those who were finding that righteousness is life. They were
those who had taken to heart such a word of exhortation as that
with which St. Peter had testified, saying, Save yourselves from this
untoward generation.
And this brings me naturally to speak of a class of passages,
in which a change has been made which seems to me by no means
unimportant, bnt which has scarcely been noticed in the reviews
and discussions which I have been able to read. For the expression
‘he converted,' in the Authorised Version, there is substituted, in
the Eevised Version, the much simpler one ‘ turn.' I will illustrate
this by reference to one or two places : —Our Lord is rebuking the
self-seeking and ambitious spirit which his disciples had shewn in
putting the question, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven ? They seem to have been thinking of place and pomp and
power, when they should have been thinking of character and of
those features which make up character. You remember that
acted parable with which our Lord rebukes them. And Jesus called
a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said —as
we have it in the Authorised Version — Verily, I say unto you,
Except ye he converted, and become asi little children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Eevised Version has, Verily,
I say unto you, Except ye turn.
Again, St. Luke gives us the solemn words with which St. Peter
was warned by his Lord of the coming struggle in his heart and
conscience. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat : Rut 1 have prayed
for thee, that thy faith fail not : and when thou art converted, strengthen
thy brethren. In the Eevised Version we have, And do thou, when
once thou hast turned again, stablish thy brethren.
I turn to the Acts of the Apostles, and there read how St.
Peter addressed the people near the beautiful gate of the Temple:
Repent ye, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, ivhen the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. In the Eevised Version we find a new force given to the words.
Repent ye therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out,
that so there may come seasons of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord.
Now I have no desire to frame from these passages a new
theory of conversion. To be candid with you, I think that we have


theories enough on such subjects. Divines without number have
attempted to give definitions and to lay down conditions. I take
up a volume of theological extracts, and turn to the index. I find
how many points have been discussed with regard to conversion.
Is it needful to be able to fix definitely the time and place of the
change ? Is it always instantaneous ? and the like. I listen again
to the terms in which Christ and they that followed him in early
days spoke of these things. There is a directness, a straightfor-
wardness, a truly practical character, about that word ‘ turn.’
When we are convinced that we are travelling on the
wrong road, we have not to wait, however longingly, for a
mysterious operation to be performed upon us. We have to turn.
That is the way to get back again. That is the sure method and
the only method of reaching once again that home of love from
which we have wandered. Let no long words-no fine-spun
phrases —stand between us and our Hod His voice speaks so that
all may hear : Turn thou to thy God.
St Paul bade Timothy give attendance to exhortation as well as
to reading and teaching. And surely there is material for exhortation
here. What of him who is living in the practice of any known
sin—in whose life there is that which is unclean, dishonest,
malicious, cruel ? What of him who loves his money or his
pleasure more than he loves his Hod P What of him who is
careless about his neighbour, instead of trying to do him good ?
What of him who counts man or woman but a tool for his own
emolument or gratification ? What of him who in his heart goes
from the Lord further and further day by day, never striving to do
His will ? Why to him, the word of the loving Saviour is this
night, Turn, —turn in prayer for a Father’s forgiveness and a
Father’s blessing. And while he turns in prayer, let him turn in
conduct too. Let him cease to do evil and learn to do well. He
may find it hard and uphill work —that homeward walk, for the
turn does not bring him all at once where he fain would be ; but
benediction is around every step of that path, and the highest
benediction of all, the very peace of Hod, is that which rewards the
effort, coming it may be very gradually into the heart, comforting
and strengthening it with heaven’s own calm. Hod help us, dear
brethren, to make our whole lives a progress towards Himself.
But in examining this Eevised Version, although I find this
simpler word turn take the place of he converted , 1 find that the
word convert remains in a very remarkable passage. These are the
closing words of the Epistle of St. James : My brethren , if any among
you do err from the truth , and one convert him ; let him know, that he
which converted a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul
from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins. The conversion of
which St. James here speaks is clearly a work which can be done by
man for man. They who have turned are to persuade erring
brethren to turn. You and I, Christian people, are intended to be


converting agents in the world. How can you set about this ? It
may be that you have a relative, a companion, who is step by step
going in the wrong direction. When you can put in a wholesome
word, let not that word remain unspoken. When you can draw the
attention to higher things, use your opportunity. We can never
know what good we can do in this world until we have tried; and
when we have tried, we can never know what good we have done.
Let us heartily do our best. Whatever our place and our name on
earth, let us use the influence of that place and name on the side
of purity and honour, of God and goodness.
Think not that in thus exhorting I am forgetting our need of the
grace of God. lam simply endeavouring to put before you God’s
message as I read it. lam not careful to balance my statements,
to hedge them about with cautions, so long as I am within the lines
of what Christ and his Apostles said to the sinners of our race,
whom they taught and exhorted. The more we try to turn, the
more we try to convert others, the deeper will be the need we feel
of a voice that shall say to us when we grow faint and weary: My
grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.


THE PERSON OF CHRIST.
St. Matthew, xxii., 42.
What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he?
I have been speaking to you of a literature—a body of histories
and letters which we have come to regard as forming one book
rather than many, and which we familiarly term the New Testament.
Believing that it is one of man’s duties to think, I have endeavoured
to show how our thought about holy things may be helped, and
perhaps in some instances corrected, by the recent revision of that
literature. We have had side by side before us the Authorized
Version, handed down to us through many generations, and the
Revised Version, the gift of our own generation to all Christian
people who speak the English tongue. In the half-hours that we
have spent together, some points have been noticed and some
questions raised that are not generally noticed or raised in addresses
frorn the pulpit This naturally follows from the nature of the
inquiry before us. If that word of a devout writer be true, that
“ Gr°d is not honoured by a tame, dull, torpid acquiescence in the
revelations of His truth—that He would have us not only attend
“ with interest, but also inquire with intelligence”—then I would
fain hope that what I have said and you have heard has not passed
away altogether useless and unblessed.
And now, as the time draws near to the yearly memories of the
uplifted cross and the empty grave —the time when mind and heart
are fixed with more special attention upon the precious death and
glorious resurrection of Him whom we call our Saviour and our
Lord, it may be well for us that we should concentrate our thoughts
a little, that we should be guided in our study more absolutely by
some central idea or subject. This evening then we have the person
of Christ as the subject of our inquiry. Next Sunday I hoj e to
speak of the two Sacraments ordained by Christ, while Good Friday
and Easter Day leave the preacher no choice ; by a kind of happy
compulsion he must speak then of the Death that purchased Life
and of the Life that conquered Death. These are great themes
indeed. May God help you to remember and to profit by any words
that may be truly and fitly spoken ! May He forgive me any that
are spoken unwarily and unworthily ! We may well pray for the
grace of reverence, for while we discuss such topics as these we are
of a truth treading on holy ground. What think ye of Christ?


Can you tell me who He is, and wdiat? One of the New Testament
writers expresses his own conviction in confident words like these :
We know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life. Manifold are the answers that have been given to this
question of questions. Some have said that He teas a good man,
others have said Nay, hut He deceived the people It is no part of
my design this evening to traverse the wide field of inquiry which
‘ Lives of Christ’ by various authors have opened up. We have a
more definite aim before us, which may conveniently be stated in
this form ; It cannot be denied that the whole literature which we
are studying has gathered around one Person and His work, His
humiliation and His glory, in a most remarkable way. If it is the
literature of the Covenant, He is the Mediator, the worker-out of
the Covenant; it is represented as depending upon Him —upon what
He was, and did, and is doing. In some sort He represents both
parties to the Covenant —He represents the mind of God to man,
He represents the race of God to man. Without doubt He is the
principal person in the history of the Christian movement, His is
the prominent place in that which is proclaimed among men as an
economy of grace divine Can we derive any assistance in thinking
about this Christ from the labours of those who have lately been
studying afresh so carefully that literature ? Is it any part of the
result of their researches that we can see His place more clearly,
and discern more distinctly the features of His character and the
purpose of His work p
First, then, we remark that this Son of Man —as He was wont
to name Himself —did not come before the world without a herald
of His coming. There was one sent to prepare His way, to whose
character and gifts very high testimony is borne. John the
Baptist appears upon the scene emphatically for this one purpose
—to prepare the way for a Greater One to come. He himself was
great, when judged as a man among men. He constantly spoke
the truth, boldly rebuked vice, and patiently suffered for the
truth’s sake. One may describe him as the last hero of the Old
Covenant, as he was the herald of the New. And in all his
greatness there is perhaps no nobler feature than this —his
readiness to give way when the time was come for the work of the
Greater One: He must increase, hut I must decrease. Our Lord
quite accepts this position of superiority assigned to Him, this
higher dignity. If He had been of the same class as the Baptist—
a teacher and preacher and nothing more —there would surely
have been something of arrogant self-assertion in His claims. He
was at once so meek and lowly in heart, and so bold and
uncompromising in His demands upon our allegiance and obedience,
that we may well ask with the wondering citizens of Jerusalem,
Who is this ?


There is one passage in which this comparative depreciation of
the Baptist occurs, the full force of which we miss in the Authorized
Version. In John v, 85 our Lord is represented as saying of Bis
forerunner, He was a burning and a shining light. We naturally
take this as expressing the Baptist’s position of honour and
possession of excellent gifts—so much so that ‘ a shining light’ has
come to be a familiar expression applied to a man who is proving
himself to be a man of parts and influence among his fellows In the
Revised Version we read, tie was the lamp that hurneth and shineth.
Our Lord spake of himself in ever-memorable words as the light of
the world,' of him who came to prepare his way as the lamp. It
was distinctly said of him that he was not the light —not that light,
as though there were more lights than one. Thus then our Lord s
expression was not intended to glorify John. He gave him due
but not undue honour. “ Christ himself,” says one commenting on
this passage, “ Christ himself is the centre and source of light; the
“ Baptist has no light of his own, but draws ail his Humiliation from
“ this greater one. He is only as the light of the candle, for whose
“ rays indeed men are grateful, but which is pale, flickering,
“ transitory, compared with the glories of the Eternal flame from
“ which itself is kindled.” Such was the relation of the Lord to the
Baptist. What can we learn of His relation to that social and
religious life, in the midst of which the Word was made flesh?
How did He stand in respect to that Church and people—tne
Jewish Church, the chosen people —among which He tarried for a
time while He wrought the Bather’s will on earth P We are told that
He came unto his own, hut his own received him not. Now there is
a distinction by no means without interest which is lost in that
reading The first His own — He came unto his own, is neuter—
His own things. The second His own — His own received him not,
is masculine —His own people. We have it revised thus : He came
unto his own, and they that were his own received him not. Thus
the distinction is restored, and it helps us, I think, to realize the
full force of that rebellious rejection. He came unto his own.
The Holy City —the Temple in all the magnificence of its restored
beauty, adorned with goodly stones and gifts —the worship which
was daily performed there, with all the elaborate ritual of sacrifice
and offering—the literary treasures of law and prophecy— they
were all His. But they that were his own received him not.
They had not learned, as they should have done, the lessons that
were embodied before their eyes in holy places and in holy things
The sacrifices that pointed onward to the great sacrifice —the
purifications that set forth in symbol the need of the great
purification —these were not to them the revelation of the divine
purpose that they might and should have been. The letter of the
law, as they valued it and used it, only too effectually hid the spirit
and meaning of these things from their eyes, and hence that saddest
of lamentations — O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which hilleth the prophets,


and stoneth them that are sent unto her ! hoio often would I have
gathered thy children together even as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not !
They closed the ear against His tender words,
They chose another lord, and spurned His sway:
He would have drawn them, hut they snapped his cords,
He would have blessed them, hut they turned away.
My brethren, we too are His own, baptized into His name, members
of His Church. Does it not behove us one and all to pray, Prom
hardness of heart, good Lord, deliver us p
But while the many received Him not, there were some who
received Him, and gladly accepted Him as their teacher, their guide,
their Saviour. In due time such humble teachable spirits were
united in a holy bond, a sacred society, the Church of Christ. We
are informed of the time and place when the disciples were first
called Christians. This application of a distinctive name was a
sign that the Christian Church was now recognized as living an
independent life, having—to use an expressive phrase of Archbishop
Trench’s —‘ chipped its Jewish shell.’ Christianity was a fact in the
world —the mightiest influence at work among nations and men.
And what is Christianity? It has been said again and again, and
it can scarcely be said too often, that Christ is Christianity and
Christianity is Christ Devotion to and heart-union with a Person
—and not the acceptance of a neatly trimmed and rounded system
of teaching —was the distinguishing feature of them who believed
and were baptized. The teaching came, the system came, as it was
natural that they should, when Christians thought and wrote about
their Lord —His person and offices >and work. But Christ was
before the system in order of time. He was, and is, and must be,
before the system in order of importance “It is true of Chris-
“ tianity,” says a careful student of the history of religious thought,
“ It is true of Christianity, as it is true of no other religious system,
“ that the religion is identified with, is absorbed in, the Person of
“ its founder. The Gospel is Christ and Christ only. This fact
“ finds expression in many ways, but more especially in the appli-
“ cation of the same language to one and the other and of this
application he gives as an instance the New Testament use of the
word ‘ way.’ A careful reader of the Revised Version will find in
this use a very remarkable identification of the person of Christ
with the religion of Christ. I scarcely need remind you that our
Lord called himself 1 the way’ in a very emphatic utterance He had
been preparing the minds of his disciples for His approaching
departure. Naturally enough they were disturbed and perplexed
at the prospect of losing their best friend, the guide of their little
company. They find a spokesman in Thomas—the hesitating,
questioning Thomas. He could not enter into that spirit of confi-
dence wherewith his Master had spoken. He could not make his


own that tone of trust in regard of the things of the Unseen World.
Thomas saith unto him. Lord, we know not whither thou goest, and
how can we know the icay ? Jesus saith unto him, lam the way.
Now just trace in the Revised Version the use of that expression
‘ the way’ in the Acts of the Apostles. First, we read in the ninth
chapter that Saul, yet breathing threatening and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, and asked of him
letters to Damascus unto the synagogues, that if he found any that
were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem ; not any of this Way as we have been accustomed to read
it, but any of the Way. We find a second instance of this in the
nineteenth chapter. St. Paul has been preaching in the city of
Ephesus, reasoning and persuading as to the things concerning the
Kingdom of God. As often happened, even when Apostles spake,
some were hardened and were disobedient, speaking evil of the Way
before the multitude. Presently we are told in the same chapter of
a great commotion that arose in the city. Demetrius the silversmith
was at the head of the tumult But just notice how the incident is
introduced. We read in the Authorized Version, And the same
time there arose no small stir about that way. It may be that some
of us have supposed, without thinking much about it, that
‘ about that way’ meant in those parts or in that neighbourhood.
But the Revised Ve sion has it more accurately, There arose no
small stir concerning the Way. The Way was the subject of commotion
Once more, Felix the Governor is described as having more exact
knowledge concerning the Way Thus the expression ‘ the Way’
appears to have been used as synonymous with the Gospel, the
faith of Christ, or the profession of Christianity To use an ugly
word, with which we are unpleasantly familiar, it seems to
have been used to designate what a newspaper might have called
‘ the Christian denomination.’ When we look back to the origin of
its use, we see what a grand name for a believer that simple word
was —He was ‘ one of the Way.’ You miss this in the Authorized
Version It speaks sometimes of this way —sometimes of that way,
but in not one of these four instances from the Acts of the Apostles
is the term ‘the Way’ used. When you read of the Gospel or the
Faith thus spoken of, just call to mind who it was that said, I am the
way. Christ is Christianity. Let no books and systems, however
holy, however learned, stand between you and Him. Use them thus :
Seek Him through them. Remember the word which He spake to
his disciples, No man cometh unto the Father but by me. See then
that you are in the way, as well as by profession of the way.
And if our thought about the relation of Christ to His people
is thus made clear by the reflection that He is the Gospel, we may
naturally inquire whether any new light has been thrown upon the
relation of the Word or Son of God to the Eternal Author of all
Being, the Father Almighty. I have on a previous occasion referred
to the disappearance of the passage about the three heavenly


witnesses from St. John’s First Epistle, and need not dwell upon
that now. Let me refer you to another change which may perhaps
he thought to tend in the same direction As I have undertaken to
speak to youupon the bearing of this Revised Version on the principal
articles of Christian faith, lam bound to tell you all sides. The
familiar passage, so often quoted as a Christmas text Great is the
mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh, now reads : Great is
the mystery of godliness, He who was manifested in the flesh ; and we
are told in a marginal note that the word God in place of He who
rests on no sufficient ancient evidence. When I tell you that a
horizontal bar placed across a letter like our capital 0 with a
similar bar over the two letters OS, would transform the Greek
word for He who into the Greek word for God, you will not be
surprised that there should have been some uncertainty about the
reading of this passage.
But let me remind you once again that the creed of Christendom,
the faith of our fathers, does not rest upon a letter here and a letter
there in an ancient manuscript, but upon the whole scope and
tenour of the divine manifestation to the world in the covenant of
grace. We must indeed study the text of the literature—the more
carefully the better—but we need not do so in any spirit of nervous
fear Though individual texts have been altered, yet what has been
well called ‘ the balance of doctrinal statement’ has been little if at
all disturbed by the total result. Weigh well these tributes to the
glory of the divine Son.
St. Paul to the Colossians, i, 19. It was the good pleasure of the
Father that in Him should all the fulness dwell —not merely, as we
have been accustomed to read, all fulness, but all the fulness —a
word being used that signifies the'■sum of the divine attributes.
Could the fulnes be said to dwell in any creature ? And in the
same epistle, instead of reading of the mystery of God and of the
Father and of Christ, we now read of the mystery of God, even
Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and Tcnowledge
hidden.
In the epistle to Titus again, where the Authorized Version
has The Great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, the Revised
Version has Our Great God and Saviour Jesus Christ —a clearer
declaration of His godhead. One of the most noticeable of these
changes is that in i Peter, m, 15, where the Authorized Version
has Sanctify the Lord God in you,r hearts, the Revised Version has
Sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord If you will just think what
such words mean from the pen of one, who from his youth upward
had been taught as the first commandment of all, Thou shalt have
none other gods hut me, you will see the hold that Christ had upon
him The Christ wdio was crucified was to have the place of honour
in the heart as Lord. It is admitted that the Apostle borrows his
language here from that word of the prophet Isaiah : Sanctify the
Lord of hosts himself. I think that we are driven to the conclusion


that to St Peter’s faith at all events Christ was one with the one
God —that to him these words meant what they seem to mean,
I and the Father are one.
I shall bring before you but one more passage that may help
us to give an answer to the question, What think ye of Christ ? In
that grand description of the successive revelations of God to the
sons of men, with which the Epistle to the Hebrews commences,
you will remember that the Son is described as the brightness of the
Father's glory. The word effulgence has been substituted for the
word brightness. If it were a mere matter of liking for words, as
some seem to think, I confess that I like the sound of the old word,
brightness, better But just think of the meaning. Effulgence is
not simply brightness, but it is a shining forth. Brightness belongs
to the glory in itself, but the shining forth comes out to them to
whom the glory is unveiled. Thus we see in this passage Christ in
his relation both to the Father and to man. You have in this new
word, the effulgence, a parallel to that well known title the Word
or utterance of the Father’s mind and will. How exactly scriptural
then is that old confession of our faith, in which we acknowledge
Christ as Light of Light—light coming forth from light. Thus,
then, I think that the .Revised Version may help us to see what He
claimed for Himself, what his messengers claimed for Him.
Let me ask you in conclusion to think of His character and of
His claims side by side. Think of the witness of His life on earth.
See there the force of His will, His resolute self-government, His
perfect sincerity, His tender pity for the distressed and sorrowful,
His anxious seeking for them that were out of theway,Hisworld-wide
philanthropy, His humility and patience, His elevation of character
and devoutness of spirit. Was ever man like to this man in
character ?
And then look at His teaching. How thoroughly at home He
seems among the things of Heaven, the thoughts of God. There is
nothing of conjecture in His way of speaking about them. Looking
at what He was and listening to what He said, are we not constrained
to believe that the things which He spake He spake as the things
which He had seen with His Father? Does not St. Peter’s
confession rise from heart to lip, Thou art the Christ , the son of the
living God? And then just think what a life such a faith requires
in us. If God has spoken to us by His Son, if He has allowed His
glory to shine forth upon the darkness of the world, what manner
of persons ought we to be to whom that divine speech—the speech
of perfect truth —has come, upon whom that divine brightness—the
brightness of perfect holiness—has shone ? What manner of
persons ? Hot mere triflers surely, as though life could not be made
a worthy and a noble thing by daily duties daily done in the name
of the Lord Jesus —not mere lovers of money, as though Mammon
were that Lord whom we are bidden to enshrine in the best


affections of our hearts—not mere idolaters of place and pomp and
power, as though Glod had chosen the mighty things of the world to
oppress the weak instead of the weak things to confound the
mighty —not mere livers to self in any form, as though Christ had
never died for us and for all men.
What manner of men ought we to be ? Let the Master himself
tell us : I have given you an example, that ye should do as 1 have
done to you. Let His Apostle tell us : He left us an example, that
we should follow his steps, who did no sin. Let the Master speak
again the word of the great beatitude : If ye know these things,
blessed are ye if ye do them.


THE SACRAMENTS OF THE COVENANT.
St. Matthew, xxviii, 19.
Go ye therefore, and teach all nations.
It was indeed a wide commission—far wider than those to whom
it was first given could possibly conceive. “ All the nations” is a
notion that has grown wonderfully since that command was laid by
Christ upon his followers. They that go down to the sea in ships
have brought to the knowledge of civilised people fair and fertile
lands with teeming populations which could not be present to the
minds of those whom Christ sent forth to proclaim far and near the
glad tidings of the covenant of grace. And yet, all through the
long ages, what England’s warrior-duke called “ our marching
orders” remain the same. By the very charter of her foundation
the Church of Christ is a society for the propagation of the Gospel.
She loses her life if she ceases to be a Missionary Church. This
wide commission is closely connected with a yet wider claim to
authority. The disciples had just been encouraged by the thought
that however hard the struggle might seem to be at times between
the love of God and the evil that is in the world, yet right and
authority were on the side which was represented by the Incarnate
Word—the shining forth of the Father’s glory upon mankind.
The fulness of power to govern was to be regarded as vested in the
Lord of angels and of men —and therefore His messengers were to
go forth strong in the strength of a divine message, brave through
their confidence in Him whose name they bore, whose kingdom
they proclaimed. I think that a few verses from the context will
shew this connexion between the universal power and the universal
mission. We read the last paragraph of St. Matthew’s Gospel
thus in the Revised Version ; JBut the eleven disciples went into
Galilee, unto the mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And
when they saw him they worshipped him, hut some douhted. And
Jesus came to them and spake unto them, saying, All authority hath
been given unto me in heaven and on earth. Go ye therefore, and
make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and 10, lam with
you alway, even unto the end of the world. You will observe the
form in which our text appears there: Go ye therefore, and make


disciples of all the nations. Far and near, they who were converted
through the agency o£ the Christian messengers—they who saw the
wisdom of turning —they who were being saved—were to be
incorporated, made members of one body. They were not to be
regarded simply as so many units for whom a great work had been
wrought, they were not to live simply as individuals wh > had each
to work out his own salvation ; but they were to be regarded and to
live as disciples who were being trained in one school of spiritual
discipline, as soldiers who were engaged under one Captain against
a common enemy, as subjects who were united in their allegiance
to one King. It has been suggested that the word “ Christianize”
would express the meaning in the text more nearly than the word
“ teach,” but I think that we may well be content with the phrase
“ make disciples of.” All the nations were to be invited with that
gracious invitation, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
What a distinction between the Jewish and the Christian
Churches here —between the old covenant and the new ! What a
contrast! Catholicity —and let me ask you not to give up those
good old words, Catholic and Catholicity, to any other use than
this as applied to the Church of Christ throughout the world —
Catholicity took the place of Nationality. In Christ there was to
be neither Jew nor Gentile—that is, the distinction was to be lost
in the Catholic Church—the Church of “ all the nations.”
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision, hut faith which worketh hy love.
Now if the Gospel was to be preached to all the nations, there
must have been a certain power in it which appealed to all the
nations ; there must be a universality in the message itself if it is to
be universally delivered and universally received. If the Gospel
had been a ready-made system of thought—a body of statements
about existence and creation and virtue and vice, all expressed in
abstract phrases —I can well imagine that it would have been
impossible to express it, and therefore impossible to impart it, in
many countries of the world. Take the Athanasian Creed for
example, and think of some of the hard words which it contains.
No doubt there are scores of languages into which it would be
impossible to translate it, through the absence of corresponding
words. It may be useful for some branches of the Church to have
such statements drawn up in order to guard against error, but they
are not the world-wide message. “ The earliest Christian
“ instruction,” says an eloquent German divine, “ was everywhere
“ the relation of the Gospel History, for to preach the Gospel was
“to preach Jesus Christ. The great facts of His life, the words
“ which He spoke, the fate which He experienced, His sufferings,
“His death, His resurrection—such were the themes of apostolic
“ preaching. All the interest of the Christian Church was
“ concentrated upon the person and history of Jesus Christ.


“Never yet was there a religious community that had anything
“ like a similar interest in the history of its founder to that which
“ the Christian Church had. For the facts of His history are the
“ matter of its religious faith, and the certainty of the facts is the
“ foundation of the faith.” You will perhaps remember how this
position is illustrated by the use of the term ‘ the Way,’ as one of the
titles of our Lord, and also as the name by which the Christian faith
was known —the stir at Ephesus, for instance, was about ‘ the Way.’
But the point which I wish you to notice just now is this : the
universal fitness to the spiritual need of man of a gospel which
tells of a life of perfect goodness, a love so strong that it was
content to endure a death of shame, a victory over evil so complete
that death itself was conquered. Here you have something which
can be told, something intelligible everywhere and always. With
this gospel in her hand the Church can indeed go forth to make
disciples of all the nations.
Now much of what has been said of the Grospel of Christ is
applicable also to the Sacraments ordained by Christ. Water,
Bread, Wine : outward signs of an inward cleansing, an inward
strengthening, an inward refreshing. Just put on one side all
the elaborate discussions that have arisen about Baptismal
Regeneration, the Real Presence, Transubstantiation, and the like.
Gro back in thought to the time when the Master was instructing
His disciples on the foundation of His Church —on the institutions
which were to be the symbols of the divine working in the heart of
man. If there are to be institutions in the Church at all —if any
signs are to be used, you will find it difficult to conceive of
any simpler, clearer, that carry their own meaning more
completely with them, and that would consequently be more easily
understood by men of every clime and every tongue. Ido not
deny that there are depths of meaning in these holy mysteries,
which may well engage the highest powers of thought; but I assert
that I have tried again and again to imagine ordinances which
would carry some meaning—and that a true and wholesome one—
more easily and readily to all minds, and I have utterly failed. It
is in harmony with the idea of a universal religion that its
institutions should be universally intelligible. Let me ask you,
whatever other teaching you read or hear about the Sacraments,
never to lose sight of these elementary meanings, Cleansing,
Strengthening, Refreshing. You will find that the Sacraments
interpret themselves better than many would-be interpreters of
them. We regard these two then, Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord, as standing out among the observances of the Christian
Church with this distinctive mark upon them—that they were
ordained by Christ himself. To prevent any confusion, we appro-
priate to them, and to them only, the old word Sacrament, which in
its Latin form was used for the oath which Roman soldiers had to
take —that they would do true and loyal service.


Let me ask you to observe tbis carefully—that whatever room
there may be for questions about the nature of the Sacraments,
there is no room for doubt as to who appointed them. I think that
is beyond all question It has been truly said of them that “ each
“ is mysterious in its own nature, and each announces a mystery.
“ In the words in which He instituted the rite of Baptism Jesus
“ inserts his own name between those of the Lather and the Holy
“ Ghost, thus inserting it within the boundaries of tbe divine life
“ and nature, and saying of Himself that He is the Sou of God in the
“ sense of being a partaker in the divine essence, while in the words
“ in which He instituted the Holy Supper, saying of His Body and
“ Blood that He gave them for the sins of the world, He declares
“ the ultimate object of His appearance upon earth, in which the
“ eternal counsel of God’s love is manifested and fulfilled. Baptism
“ teaches us who it was that appeared on earth in the person of
“ Jesus Christ, the Lord’s Supper teaches us for what purpose He
“ appeared. The two mysteries of the Trinity and the Atonement
“ are actually announced to us in these two institutions of Christ.”
Thus you see that along with the literature we have in these two
observances handed down in the Christian Church from age to age
a kind of Gospel record, a witness to the fact of Christ’s work upon
earth, a kind of traditional creed in which both act and word bear
testimony to His claims of whom it is written that God so loved the
world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever beheveth in
Him should not perish, but have everlasting ' life. My brethren, we
ought, if our eyes were but open, to see in Holy Baptism and in
Holy Communion such an unwritten gospel —a gospel in the
Church ; and we ought to value them accordingly. And yet how
many, who set a high value upon Scripture, seem to estimate at a
very low rate indeed these outward signs which our Lord himself
appointed, and which have been handed down to us as marks and
tokens of our membership in the Body from generation to generation
of Christians. Ido not care in the least whether the critical hearer
calls this expression of opinion High Church or not, or what name he
applies to it If Christ bade us baptize, if Christ said Take, eat,
and again, Drink ye all of this, I cannot speak lightly of His
words ; I cannot think it a matter of indifference whether Christian
people estimate highly the symbols of His gospel, or count them or
either of them but as optional appendages to our united worship, as
matters concerning which it is of little importance whether they
will hear or whether they will forbear. Some preachers are supposed
to preach the Sacraments, while others are supposed to preach
Christ. If Christian people would only let the Sacraments preach
to them of Christ, they would receive from them some of the
best Christian instruction that it was ever their privilege to have
offered for their guidance in the Christian life. Bearing in mind
these general principles, let us again take the Revised Version in
our hands, and see whether we can gather from it any hints for the


due appreciation of what one of our greatest English divines calls
‘ these moral instruments of salvation.’
With regard to Holy Baptism, we observe that the words of its
institution appear in a slightly different form. Instead of baptizing
them in the name we have baptizing them into the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Does this change mark a
real distinction ? What does ‘ I baptize thee in the name’ mean ?
We might fairly take it to mean that the Minister was not acting
simply on His own authority —that he received the person baptized in
the name of the Triune God, speaking as the voice of a power which
is outside of himself and above himself. Not in his own name, but in
the name of our Creator, our Saviour, and our Q-uide, is he speaking
when he dedicates any child of man to the service of the one God,
and thus solemnly admits a new member into the Church of God.
This is a true view of Holy Baptism, but it is not the view which
that more exact rendering of the words into the name suggests This
emphasizes the no less important thought that baptism brings the
baptized into close union with Him who is named by the name.
And we must always remember that the word name has in Holy
Scripture a very real meaning. In common life we are apt to
distinguish between the name and the thing, but not so in such
passages as this. There is implied a life and power divine when we
read of the name of God, the name of Christ. Baptism signifies
according to this view of its formula the being brought near to,
entering into, a life which has for its source and spring the eternal
life of God. It is a lesson in the relationships of the Christian
Family, it is a pledge and token of the blessings which flow forth
from the Redemption which was wrought by Christ. Baptism into
the name represents admission into the very holiest and highest of
all possible communions and fellowships.
Let me next refer you to St. Paul’s teaching about Baptism.
It has been said of him that “ he surveys the whole field of the
“ spiritual life from the baptismal point of view.” Thus, for
example, in the Epistle to the Galatians, he writes, For as many of
you as were baptized into Christ did put on Christ. That passage is
remarkable as occurring in an epistle in which the Apostle is most
of all careful not to attribute undue importance to externals—an
epistle in which with some severity of tone he warns those who had
begun in the Spirit not to expect to be made perfect in the flesh.
No teacher could possibly be more clear and explicit than St. Paul
was on the danger of trusting to ceremonial, while none could be
further removed from making light of these Sacraments, which
were appointed as means of grace —as symbols of spiritual realities
and of a hidden life. If you will read Romans vi. in the Revised
Version, you will, I think, find a new light thrown upon St. Paul’s
view of Baptism. What shall we say then ? Shall we continue in sin,
that grace may abound ? God forbid. In the Authorised Version
we read next : How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer


therein ? but more accurately in the Revised Version, We ivho died to
sin, how shall we any longer live therein ? We who died to sin —not
we who are dead. He sends his readers back in thought to a
definite event of their lives, not speaking of them indefinitely as
dead, but as having died on some occasion which was capable of
being specified It is just the difference between our saying of
some old acquaintance, He is dead, and our saying, He died at such
a time. Now what was the event, what the time to which the
Apostle referred ? We who died to sin, how shall we any longer live
therein ? Or are ye ignorant that all we ivho were baptized into
Christ Jesus were baptized into his death ? We were buried therefore
with dm through baptism into death ; that like as Christ was raised
up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also
might walk in newness of life. Now that seems to me the very
highest possible view of Baptism. The Apostle speaks of it as
effecting a union with Christ. It is much more important that we
should hold fast to this, than that we should try to determine how
much or how little grace is given in that Holy Sacrament.
“In short,” writes Bishop Lightfoot on this point, “ St. Paul
“ regards this change —from sin to righteousness, from bondage to
“ freedom, from death to life —as summed up in one definite act of
“the past; potentially to all men in our Lord’s Passion and
“ Resurrection, actually to each individual man when he accepts
“ Christ, is baptized into Christ. Then he is made righteous by
“ being incorporated into Christ’s righteousness, he dies once for
“ all to sin, he lives henceforth for ever to Hod. This is the ideal.
“ Practically we know that the death to sin and the life to
“righteousness are inchoate, imperfect, gradual, meagrely realised
“ even by the most saintly of men fin this life ; but St. Paul sets the
“ matter in this ideal light, to force upon the consciences of his
“ hearers the fact that an entire change came over them when they
“ became Christians, that the knowledge and the grace then
“ vouchsafed to them did not leave them where they were, that they
“ are not and cannot be their former selves, and that it is a
“ contradiction of their very being to sin any more.”
Let me try to put the same thoughts more briefly. St. Paul
makes baptism represent the height of the standard of the Christian
life, and this by reason of the close union therein established
between Christ, the Sinless One, and those whom He came to redeem
from sin. The Apostle’s exhortation to holiness therefore takes a
form something like this : Live your baptism ; make it the keynote
of your whole being; let its meaning be ever present to you ; the
thought of it as an event in your lives whereby you became one
with Christ, should make you feel sin to be something contrary to
your nature—your second and higher nature Thus, as you say to
a man, Act the manly part, because you are a man ; so the Apostle
would say to a Christian, Live the Christian life, because you
are a Christian. So much did baptism into Christ mean to him.


My brethren, such a word of teaching as this surely needs no word
of exhortation It should set us all asking —-Am I trying to be that
which I am in the thought and purpose of the Q-od who has called me
with a holy calling, called me out of darkness into His marvellous
light ?
I pass on to say a few words about the Sacrament of the Lord’s
Supper. I think that I shall best introduce what I have to say by
reading the passage so often misunderstood, in which St Paul
corrects certain grievous abuses which had crept into the most sacred
part of Christian worship in the Church of Corinth, i Cor. xi. I will
ask you to observe that what one of the revisers calls the dreadful
word ‘ damnation,’ which stands at the 29th verse in the Authorized
Version, and which has had the very worst consequences, disappears :
As often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the Lord's
death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat the bread or drink
the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and the blood
of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of the
bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eateth and drinketh, eateth and
drinketh judgement unto himself, if he discern (or, in margin,
discriminate) not the body. For this cause many among you are weak
and sickly, and not a few sleep. But if we discerned ourselves, we
should not be judged. But when we are judged —mark this, when
the judgment does come upon us, how are we to regard it ? We
are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.
The judgment is intended as the starting point of reformation.
Wherefore, my brethren, ivhen ye come together to eat, wait one for
another. If any man is hungry, let him eat at home; that your
coming together be not unto judgement. I will ask you to remark
how exactly that passage is the Apostle’s rebuke of them who had
fallen into sins of selfishness and excess, of gluttony and drunken-
ness, even when they met for the highest act of Christian worship
What the condition of things was he had told them before : When
therefore ye assemble yourselves together, it is not possible to eat the
Lord's supper : for in your eating each one taketh before other his
own supper ; and one is hungry, and another is drunken. He tells
them plainly that these things ought not to be. He would check
the evil, he would restore the good. Not for one moment coun-
tenancing the notion that any Christians should refuse the invitation
to the Lord’s own table, he tells them how to come. The disorder
they were to put away as a profanation of that which was holy ; the
evil results they had seen already in physical sickness following the
moral sickness But the order, Christ’s own order, they were to
observe with reverence and godly fear ; and it has been the law of
the Church’s extension from land to land—the law of the Church’s
tradition from age to age —that this order should form part of its
life everywhere and always. St. Paul appeals to it as a recognised
thing that all Christians should be communicants. We, he says,
who are many, are one bread, or one loaf as in the margin, one body,


for we are all partakers of the one bread. You see how he argues
from the fact of their communion in the Lord’s Supper to the fact
of their union in a Christian society, in social Christianity. His is
an argument which could only be used when it was the universal
rule, and not the exception, for Christians to take their place at the
table of their Lord. My brethren, the Revised Version may perhaps
have removed one hindrance that has stood between you and that
table. To hear some speak of the Lord’s Supper one would suppose
that they regarded it not as a help to their weakness given
to them by a Glod and Saviour who wishes their welfare, but
rather as a trap for the unwary, who might, notwithstanding
their good intentions, be the worse instead of the better
for accepting His invitation. Oh think not so of Him who
loved you and gave Himself for you, but rather believe that He is
ready to do for you more than you ask or think, and bold in that
belief, draw near at this coming Eastertide, and seek the presence
of your risen Lord. How much brighter and stronger our lives
would be if we could only trust our Grod as one that giveth to all
men liberally and upbraideth not !


THE DEATH OF THE ONE FOR THE MANY.
ii. Corinthians, v., 14-15.
For the love of Christ constraineth us; because
we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead:
And that he died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, hut
unto him who died for them, and rose again.
Ton will naturally feel that on this day of the memory of the
Cross of Christ, a mere essay on the comparative merits of
translations, or a disquisition on points of grammar, would be
altogether out of place —that the Christian heart needs other food
than this. In the preparation of previous sermons I have tried to
bear in mind that I was not called to lecture on a subject of
literary interest only, but that I was bound by the most sacred
obligations not to let the evening of the Lord’s own day pass by
without trying to speak some word, whereby, with God’s blessing
upon it, the Church might receive edifying; for so the Apostle
describes the end of prophesying or preaching—that all might
learn, and all might be comforted.
With two-fold force do such thoughts as these come to one’s
mind when one thinks of Good Friday and its work of love. If
any day calls us to meditate on the very truth itself, and not on
the mere expression of it, this day does. But that distinction
between the truth and the expression may easily be pressed too far.
The study of the expression of the truth in Holy Scripture may
help us to apprehend and to appreciate aright the truth itself; and
in the hope that this may be so, I shall ask you to notice some
variations between the language of the Revised Version and that of
the Authorized, in certain passages in which St. Paul speaks of the
atonement wrought by Christ in our behalf I trust that increased
clearness of thought may tend to increased devoutness of spirit and
thankfulness of heart.
Let me ask you to notice two changes. The first is with
regard to the use of the word corresponding to our definite article
the by St. Paul. This sounds perhaps a trivial matter; but as you
will see presently, it affects our understanding of a most important
passage which has for its theme no less a subject than the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ. Our translators
seem to have been quite indifferent as to the use of the article.
Often this carelessness destroys the point of a passage. Thus, for
instance, in the Epistle to the Hebrews (xi, 10) we read of


Abraham that he looked for a city ivhich hath foundations, where the
original was he looked for the city which hath the foundations.
Possibly the mind of the writer was running upon the description
given in the Revelation of that new Jerusalem, of which it is
written that the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them
the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Again, very frequently
where we read Christ in the Gospels, the Revised Versionhas more
accurately the Christ, that is, the expected Messiah, the title being
used officially —the Christ, rather than personally, Christ. So again
in St. John’s account of our Lord’s triumphal entry, instead of
took branches of palm trees, we have now took the branches of the
palm trees —the trees which St. John knew so well, clothing with
their grey green foliage the eastern side of the Mount of Olives,
and giving its name to the village whose friendly quiet and shelter
were often sought after days of conflict and contradiction —
Bethany, the house of dates.
I have mentioned these two or three instances of passages
which gain strength by the insertion of the article, just for the
sake of illustration, not because of the great importance of the
results. But there is one passage, of which the world-wide meaning
of to-day’s great act of divine self-sacrifice is the subject, where the
result of the change is very important. Let me refer you to St.
Paul’s statement of the work of Redemption in Romans v, 15.
We read in the Authorized Version, If through the offence of one,
many be dead, much more the grace of Cod and the gift by grace,
which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. In
the Revised Version, For if by the trespass of the one the many died,
much more did the grace of God, and the gift by the grace of the one
man, Jesus Christ, abound unto the many. And at the 18th and
19th verses, still in the Revised Version : So then as through one
trespass the judgement came unto all men to condemnation; even so
through one act qf righteousness the free gift came unto all men to
justification of life. For as through the one mans disobedience the
many were made sinners , even so through the obedience of the one shall
the many be made righteous. Now the point to be made clear is the
difference between many and the many. What is this difference ?
Well, you naturally understand many as opposed to all. If I say,
“ Many who were invited came,” I am understood to mean that all
did not come ; some or many stayed away. But the many as
distinguished from the one has surely quite another force One of
the greatest Greek scholars that England has produced—Richard
Bentley —urged the importance of the insertion of that little word
the nearly two centuries ago. “By this accurate version,” he
wrote, “ some hurtful mistakes about partial redemption —the
“ redemption, that is, of some not of all —and absolute reprobation
“ had been happily prevented. Our English readers had then seen,
“ what several of the fathers saw and testified, that the many in
“ distinction from the one, are equivalent to all in verse 12, and


“ comprehend the whole multitude, the entire species o£ mankind,
“exclusive only of the one." That verse 12, to which he refers
tells us that through one man sin entered into the world, and
death through sin ; and so death -passed unto all men, for that all
sinned.
Here we have surely a lesson whereby all may be comforted.
One alone of all the sons of men —He who was emphatically the
Son of Man —needed not redemption, needed not the forgiving
mercy of the all-merciful Father. He did no sin, and therefore
there was no room for pardon in his solitary case. Being tempted,
He stood firm—never convicted of any transgression of the law.
He was in truth the One as distinguished from the many. But it
was for the many, not for a few, that He left the throne of glory,
and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the Cross. The benefits of His obedience —the blessings of His
redemption—extend to all men so far as His power and will to save
are concerned. They extend to all men potentially—“ Whosoever
will” —to him is the Gospel message addressed. There is no
partiality in the love which rules above. The extent of the
application of the Redemption wrought out by Christ in His life of
suffering and His death of shame is not limited by the divine
decrees. Where they have placed no limit, human self-will steps
in and does place limits. That is where the real hindrance lies.
So the world’s Saviour once said to some who stood around, Ye will
not come unto me that ye might have life. Thus, my brethren, we
learn that this day’s great deed of sacrifice was wide as the need of the
many ; and there is great reason to insist upon this truth. I have
known a life conspicuous for its gentle day-by-day living for others,
a life to which pleasure in our popular sense of the word was
almost a stranger, a life in which pain was the daily lot, a life that
was scarcely worth living from this world’s point of view, but yet
so full of the lessons of constant suffering patiently borne as to be
abundantly worth living, I doubt not, in the sight of Him who
chasteneth whom he loveth ; —I have known such a life harassed by
doubt of the love of the Father which is in Heaven, distracted and
distressed by the question whether or not the choice of God had
indeed fallen upon it for the bestowal of the life that cannot die.
In such cases, my brethren, these questions about words become
questions about the most real of all realities. It is something to have
our estimate of the Covenant of Grace made clearer, truer. It is
something to learn a new lesson in that love which passeth
knowledge. It is something to be able to read in a light undimmed
by any doubt of the purpose of mercy behind the economy of
salvation: God sent not His son into the world to condemn the world
hut that the world through Him might he saved. But we must pass
on to another inquiry. We have seen a new light upon the
all-important question : What is the extent of the redemption
wrought by Christ ? Let us see if we can learn anything of its


method, the way in which it works among men, in human hearts
and lives. I must refer you, as I did on Sunday evening, to
Romans vi, where St. Paul dwells again and again upon our having
a part or share in the death of Christ. With Christ we died
to sin ; we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into
His death —made partners or partakers in it. We were buried
with Him through baptism into death : our old man was crucified
with Him. If we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also
live with Him. It has been truly said of St. Paul that to him
“ the very idea of Christian life is death to sin, death with Christ,”
Sometimes no language seemed too strong to express the fulness
and freeness of the grace of God. And if it were hinted that that
fulness and freeness might tempt us to continue in sin, he would
answer, “No, we died to sin.” The state of grace itself is a
union with Christ, in which we follow Him through the various
stages of His life. When we think of that state as death, sin dies
within us; when we think of it as life, we are risen with Him.
Think then of this as the method of Redemption, the effecting of a
real union between Christ and man, so that what He was and did is
in some sense repeated in those who are truly His ; and with this
thought in your minds turn to my text, and instead of reading,
We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead ; let us
read as in the Revised Version, We thus judge, that one died for all,
therefore all died, and we shall have, I think, in the two verses a
subject of thought for Good Friday, which ought to be fruitful in
holy resolution and in holy action.
For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judge,
that one died for all, therefore all died ; and He died for all that they
which live should no longer live unto themselves, hut unto Him who
for their sakes died and rose again.
The love of Christ constraineth us. So the Apostle describes
the principle of his life. It is a strong word—that word constraineth.
It is a word that is always used of some powerful outward pressure,
like that of a crowd for example, or of some overwhelming anxiety.
It constrains, holds, presses. St Paul’s was a life under the
influence of one mighty motive. But what does he mean by the
love of Christ that constrained him P Does he mean Christ’s love
to him or his love to Christ ? I think that he means Christ’s love
to him, which had indeed awakened in him a kind of answering love
to Christ. The two were thus closely, inseparably, connected ; but
the source and spring was the Saviour’s love. Christ’s deeds bore
witness to the heart that was in Him ; and it was the love which
Christ had shown that urged His apostle on his way —the love that
made the Saviour content to be dispised and rejected of men —the
love that led Him to live a life upon our level, bearing our
weaknesses and carrying our sorrows —the love that supported Him
while He endured the kiss of the traitor, the desertion of His friends,
the contradiction of sinners, the agony of the sin-bearing, the


bitter shame of the felon’s death—this surely was the love that St.
Paul had iu his mind, when he wrote, The love of Christ
constraineth us.
The life of St. Paul must have been a problem to many who
had known aim in early years. He had indeed made what the
world admires perhaps at a distance, but does not much relish for
all that —great sacrifices. He had in the most practical way
declared that the things which had been gain to him, he now
counted but loss for Christ. He had given up a high place in his
nation and much that men hold dear. He had embraced a life of
labour, danger, and suffering. He proved himself willing to spend
and be spent. If we ask how the Apostle had come to appreciate the
love of Christ so highly, how he came to give up much that men count
dear —dignity, position, wealth —for it, he answers that question for
us in the words of the text. He had learnt the love of Christ by
reflecting upon the death of Christ; the Cross had been his lesson-
book. At a certain time in his life he had come to this conclusion,
and he still held it with all the tenacity of his strong nature,
That one died for all, and therefore all died.
One for all —“ Here,” exclaims a devout writer, “ Here
“we have the sweetest kernel and best sample of Christ’s love.
“ Faith in one who died for me, and in whom I died, can only come
“by hearing of this wonderful exhibition of his love. My faith
“ creates no Saviour for me, it is only the act by which I receive a
“ Saviour offering himself to me.”
One for all, that is the Gospel of Good Friday. The death of
Christ had reference to the whole race whose nature and whose sin
He bore. His death is sometimes spoken of as having been a
vicarious sacrifice. Think not indeed of the burden of the Father’s
anger, but think of the burden of the world’s wrong-doing, as laid
upon that sinless one. For it is written : He hore our sins in His
own tody on the tree. We cannot indeed enter fully into the mind
of the all-pure and all-holy one with regard to sin. We cannot
tell how exceeding sinful it appeared in his sight - how terrible it
seemed to him for man to depart from the living God. We know
indeed that in proportion as men love goodness, evil becomes to
them a dark and loathsome thing. How dark and loathsome then
it must have seemed to Him who was goodness itself, incarnate
purity, incarnate love ! The weight of the world’s sin may well
have broken the heart of the sinless Redeemer even before the pain
of crucifixion had time to do the work of death. The soldiers, when
they came to Jesus, marvelled that He was dead already. We need
not marvel, knowing that he died—One for all.
Now if we were asked, why Christ died thus, it would perhaps
come as a natural answer for us to give—He died that we might not
die. Ido not say that such an answer would be wrong ; but if we have
read St. Paul aright this evening, we might answer more in
accordance with the teaching of the text: He died that we might


die with him—die to sin—so that we should not live unto ourselves,
but unto Him who died for us, and rose again. Thus death with
Christ is the birth of a new and a better life —the life unto Christ.
My brethren, ye see what the men for whom Christ died are in
the thought and purpose of their God about them. Ye see that the
death of Christ had in it a parable of all that higher life which was
to be lived in His name—in His spirit! If this be the divine idea
with regard to us, let us see what the facts of our human lives are
like when looked at with the light of that divine idea shed abroad
upon them. How very small our narrowness and selfishness, our
paltry suspicions and mean revenges, our harsh judgments and
bitter speeches, our slowness to do aught or to suffer aught for the
Master’s sake, all look ! Oh it is a humbling thing to take our
stand as on this day by the side of the Cross of Christ, and to think
One died for all, therefore all died ; and then to think again, what
manner of men we are, for whom He died, who died with Him. As
we contemplate the death of Him, who tasted death for every man,
let the desire be quickened within us —let the determination be
strengthened within us —to try to be more like Him in His way of
regarding and doing the will of the Father, more like Him in His
pity for the needs of the brethren—yes, one with Him in His zeal
for what is right and true, one with Him in His self-sacrificing love.
So the death of Christ shall be repeated in our lives. For though
it be true that the great sacrifice was once offered, once and once
only, that saying of a good man is also true: “ The sacrifice of
“ Christ is done over again in every life which is lived not to self
“but to God.” This is the genuine spirit of self-sacrifice —with
Christ, for them for whom Christ died. My brethren, do our lives
shew anything of death with Christ —death to sin p Is the love
which he had to us and to all men a power within us urging us to
love Him, and as the natural outcome of our love to Him constrain-
ing us to live to Him ? Then we shall not think much of giving
money, or time, or trouble, in effort to make the world better than
it is. However lowly our station, however narrow our sphere, we
have all scope enough for the active exercise of love to Christ and
for earnest endeavour to be doing good. Whether we desire to
influence those around us or not, we cannot avoid doing so. ‘ All
are links in being’s endless chain.’ But whether that influence is
an extension of Christ’s influence through us depends upon our
real union with Him in aim and purpose. Oh let us pray for more
of the mind that was in Him ; so in little acts of kindness, in little
deeds of love, as well as in greater enterprises for the world’s
improvement, shall the sacred influence of Calvary’s Cross be spread
from man to man, from place to place, from age to age : the world
shall come to know its Saviour better, and enter more into the
spirit of His death, who died, the great example to all time of
heroic unselfishness — the just for the unjust, that He might bring us
to God.


THE GOSPEL OF EASTER.
Romans vi, 8,9, 10.
Now if we he dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him :
Knowing that Christ being raised from the
dead dieth no more; death hath no more
dominion over him.
For in that he died, he died unto sin once:
but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.
Those of you who have tried to understand St. Paul’s interpretation
of Baptism into Christ as Baptism into His death, and to appreciate
what he meant by our dying or having died with Christ, will be
prepared to hear a slight change proposed in the first of these three
verses. As I read the words from the Authorized Version, they
imply that Christ is dead, and that Christians are in some sense
dead with him ; and yet immediately afterwards the Apostle asserts
his conviction—his knowledge—that death no more hath dominion
over Christ. We shall find, however, that instead of this apparent
reference to death as the present state of Christ, the real reference
is to the past act of dying —an experience undergone once and
once for all. Let me remind you of the passage which was before
us on Friday evening, in which the purpose and meaning of that
day’s wondrous act of self-sacrifice are exhibited : For the love of
Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that one died for all,
therefore all died; and he died for all, that they which live should no
longer live unto themselves, but unto him who for their sakes
died and rose again. And now you will be able exactly to fit in this
evening’s text in its right place in your minds as in fact a parallel
passage to that, but at the same time going beyond it into a fuller
treatment of the meaning and power of the Resurrection : But if
we died with Christ —died with him, you will observe, when he died,
not be dead with him now — if we died with Christ, we believe that
we shall also live with him: knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead dieth no more ; death no more hath dominion over him. For
the death that he died, he died unto sin once; but the life that he
liveth, he liveth unto God.
So, my brethren, would we preach unto you this day the
Hospel of the Resurrrection, Easter’s glad tidings of great joy;
not forgetting that the practical outcome of this preaching should


be a kind of perpetual Easter in character and conduct —a
resurrection-life, life with the risen Christ: Even so reckon ye
vlso yourselves to he dead unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord Now before I pass on to the special subject of
this day’s teaching, I should like to set before you in its main outline
that view of the Christian life which has been before us of late.
In order to see it clearly, we must, first, fix our eye on the suffering
Saviour. As we watch Him die, and listen to His few solemn words
spoken from His cross —as we then trace His subsequent history,
the burial in the new tomb, the safe custody, the glorious
resurrection, we must enter as best we may into the thought that
the One died for All —that the whole human race was represented
by that Son of Man. Perhaps we may find it helpful to us to call
to mind how, in human affairs, a whole nation is sometimes
represented by a single ambassador, or, in the conduct of worship
in olden time, a crowd of worshippers by a single priest offering
sacrifice in their behalf. By such means we try to realize that
according to the divine thought and purpose in redemption, the
whole race Christ came to save dies with Him and rises again with
Him—the many with that One. It is a great thought-—this share
of yours in Christ. Let it get well hold of you, and life will be a
new thing to your mind.
And then, secondly, pass to the consideration of that which is
the pledge and token —the seal and symbol—-of this oneness.
Putting aside all questionings and disputings of later days, the
teaching of the New Testament is that they who have been baptized
into Christ have put on Christ, that they have been baptized into his
death. ') hese are St. Paul’s phrases, and they set us looking at
Baptism as a formal embodiment of that great spiritual fact—
oneness with Christ. Perhaps in these days of hereditary Christian
institutions, in which Church order has become part of the social
order, we scarcely feel the full force of these references to Baptism,
“ Imagine,” writes one whose word-picture may help us to
realize a far-off scene, “ imagine not infants but crowds of grown-up
“ persons already changed in heart and feelings ; their life hidden
“ with Christ in God, losing their personal consciousness in the
“ laver of regeneration ; rising again from its depths into the light
“ of heaven, in communion with God and nature ; met as they rise
“ from the bath with the white raiment which is the righteousness
“ of saints, and ever after looking on that moment as the instant
“ of their new birth, of the putting off of the old man, and the
“ putting on of Christ. Baptism was to them the figure of death,
“ burial, and resurrection all in one, the most apt expression of the
“ greatest change that can pass upon a man, like the sudden change
“ into another life when we leave the body. If we wish to think
about Baptism on the same level of thought that St. Paul did,
perhaps that passage may help us to do so. We lose something by
ignorance of the freshness of a new-found faith, just as we gain


something by being born as members of a nation in which
Christianity has been at work for many generations, and has
entered largely into the arrangements and institutions of family
and civil life.
But, thirdly, after having thus stamped upon our minds these
two thoughts of Death with Christ, Baptism into Christ, we must, in
order to complete our view of the Christian life, look at the life
after Baptism. In order to fulfil the thought of God, that after-
life must be a life of daily endeavour after a character that is in
harmony with this new, this Christian condition of things, and
here we shall find one practical turn that St. Paul gives to the
Resurrection. A life of daily endeavour: —let us make no mistake
as to what it is really to be a Christian. We speak of the advantages
of living where the influence of Christianity has been felt in raising
up them that were fallen and releasing them who were oppressed ;
and we do well, for Christ in history has been a mighty power. He
of whom the four gospels tell has written a fifth gospel in the
history of Christendom We speak of the blessing of early Christian
education, of being trained from the tender years of childhood in
that wisdom which is from above ; and we do well in speaking thus,
for it is a blessed truth for us to know, as we grow up from infancy
to man’s estate, that we are not just waifs and strays on a great ocean
of life, but children of a Father whose tender mercies are over all
His works, members of a Saviour who died for us, with whom we
died But do not think that this view of our relation to Him with
whom we have to do can make us careless as to our own effort, our
own conduct. Rather the very perception how much it means to
be a Christian should lead us to a real striving after the fulfilment
of this high calling of ours. If we look for something manly about
the speech and deeds of a true man —if we think there should be
something kingly in the doings of a king—then there should be
something Christ-like about the Christian, for union with his Saviour
is the very basis of his calling and the keynote of his life If I
read the first part of this epistle for the day from the Revised
Version, you will find that it gives us yet another passage in which
St Paul asserts this as the very meaning of Christianity —this oneness
with Christ in His death and in His resurrection. If ye then were
raised together with Christ —not be risen , but were raised — seek the
things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God
Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are
upon the earth. For ye —not are dead, as in the Authorized Version,
but — died, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When
Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then shall ye also with
him he manifested in glory. It is difficult, without lingering too
long over detail, to bring out the various corrections of grammar
made in these passages, but I hope that I have made it sufficiently
clear that the thought about Christ which made St. Paul what he
was —the thought which he desired with a great desire to impress


upon those who had joined the Christian brotherhood —was this,
that redeemed humanity was one with its Redeemer, one with Him
in His death, one with Him in His resurrection. Now, with this
principle of interpretation in our hands, let us apply ourselves to
the finding out of what the Resurrection means to us —what the
special gospel of Easter Day has to tell us as to our duties in the
present, our hopes in the future.
But before we deal with any inferences from the Resurrection,
let me speak briefly of the event itself: ‘He rose again from the
dead.’ Without exaggeration this may be called the central article
of the Christian Creed. The other articles do in a manner gather
round this. Without a real victory won in behalf of our race by
its Head and King, the Gospel would lose much of its power as an
inspirer of hope. It seems to me that no other light, no other gospel,
could fill the void which would be caused by the loss of Gospel of
the Resurrection. INo teaching of a pure morality, no bright
example of an unselfish life, no spotless pattern of patience and
devotion, could bear such witness to the life of the world to come
as is borne by the great victory of the Lord of Life. It is the one
feature in the external history of Jesus which emphatically
proclaims His unique position in regard to the world which He
came to redeem. The Creed was declared to the world in the
uplifted cross and in the empty grave, as well as ‘ wrought with
human hands, in loveliness of perfect deeds ’ The victory over
death was the triumph and the crown of the life that was lived on
earth by the One who did no sin, the One who needed no
repentance, the One who died for us men, and for our salvation.
There is no manner of doubt that the preaching of the resurrection
was an important —I had almost said —the important factor of the
testimony by means of which the Church of Christ was founded.
To it the apostles testified wherever they went with their message
of hope for mankind. Take, for example, the testimony of St.
Paul—a testimony that was so early before the world that if it had
been open to contradiction it must surely have been contradicted.
Writing from Ephesus, twenty-five years after our Lord’s death, he
thus refers to his previous preaching to the Corinthians: I
delivered unto you first of all that which also I received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that he was
huried ; and that he hath heen raised on the third day according to
the Scriptures; and that he appeared to Cephas ; then to the twelve ;
then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the
greater part remain until now, but some are fallen asleep ; then he
appeared to James ; then to all the Apostles ; and last of all, as unto
one born out of due time, he appeared unto me also. Now I venture to
say that no fair judge of character could doubt whether or not those
were the words of an honest man. Indeed it has been remarked
with truth of St. Paul that it cannot be said of him, as it might
possibly be said of the other Apostles, that his previous life biassed


him ; or if it did, it was in a direction precisely opposed to the
gospel; for to preach the resurrection was to give the lie to the
whole of his past life, to his whole career as a Pharisee. And when
he summons so many witnesses, there is surely no room left for
any theory of vision or hallucination created by a morbid state
of mind. These witnesses could scarcely be all the dupes of their
imaginations, fancying that they saw and heard things which really
took place only in their own minds. Their whole lives—their work
and witness in the world —bear witness to their sincerity That
saying of one who did not start from the ground of gospel faith,
but who approached it by degrees, is not too strongly expressed :
‘ It is upon an empty tomb that the Christian Church is founded.’
But I must say a few words before we part on the meaning of
the Resurrection in our lives. St. Paul regards it as a lesson in
Christian holiness, as the spring of Christian hopefulness. A
lesson in holiness— Like as Christ was raised from the dead through
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.
It was not without a very deep meaning in the choice that the early
Church chose Easter Eve as one of the special times for Holy
Baptism. They who thus arranged secured for themselves a yearly
reminder of the nature of their Christian calling—that it brought
with it a renewal in spirit —that it claimed newness of life. “It is
“ natural to us,” as an old writer quaintly puts it, “ it is natural to
“us when we rise to shew ourselves If we rise to honour you may
“ see us in the streets, like Agrippa and Bernice, with great pomp.
“ H we rise in our estates (for that is the worlding’s resurrection,
“ and not to rise thus, with him, is indeed to be dead) you may see
“it in the next purchase. If we arise and increase in knowledge
“ (which is a rising from the grave of ignorance) then knowledge is
“ nothing, if the world cry us not up for men of knowledge. And
“ shall we be so ready to publish that which the world looks upon
“ with an evil eye, and conceal that from men’s eyes which only is
“ worth the sight, and by beholding of which even evil doers may
“ glorify Gfod in the day of visitation ? Shall Dives appear in his
“ purple, and Herod in his royal apparel, and every scribbler appear
“in print ? And do we think that rising from sin is an action so low
“ that it may be done in a corner ; that we may rise up, and never
“ go abroad in our Easter Day apparel, in the white garment of
“ innocency and newness of life; never make any shew of
“ the riches and glory of the gospel; have all our
“ goodness hushed up in secret, nothing set forth and
“ published to the world ? What is this but to conceal,
“ nay, to bury our resurrection itself ?” So spake one of the
noblest of our English preachers more than two centuries ago.
That is a startling phrase, ‘to bury our resurrection.’ This we do,
when there is no effort in us to live resurrection lives, no effort to
rise in thought above the things around that pass from us or we
from them, no prayer that we may be renewed in the spirit of our


minds after the image of Him that created us From St. Paul’s day
to our own —through all the centuries—there has been one Lord
who died and rose again, one faith in Him, one baptism which sets
forth our burial with Him who was made like unto His brethren, in
order that He might in behalf of His brethren win a power of
goodness and the crown of life. Yes, a power of goodness, which
may be felt, if we will have it so, in every relationship of life,
bringing all into harmony with tbe will of God concerning us.
The duties of common life do not suffer because a man believes that
his highest life is hid with Christ in God. Rather is it true that
the whole of life is transfigured to the eye of faith, illumined by
a light from heaven The call of Easter to us, my brethren, is a
call which, if we obey it, shall prove the spring of holy activity in
what we count small things as well as in what we count great;
through evil report and good report; for it is a call that is sounded
in our ears not by human voice alone. It is our God that speaks
to us by the Saviour’s empty grave: Arise, shine , for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee The Resurrection
then is a lesson in holiness; let me speak of it briefly as the spring
of hopefulness. And surely that is what we all need in a world
like ours. We need
(1) Hopefulness in effort. The Resurrection of Christ is the
pledge to us of the final victory of good ; it is the foreshadowing
of an end, which shall not be the mere failure of physical forces,
the mere exhaustion of energies—though possibly coinciding in
time with such failure or exhaustion—but an end in the higher
sense of the word, the accomplishment of a purpose, the
consummation of a kingdom. Such being the Christian anticipation
of the event towards which creation moves, there is surely great
encouragement herein to those who are willing to identify the aim
and purpose of their lives with the aims and purposes of goodness.
Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold,
the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath
long patience for it. This parable is needed by many a longing
heart. The advance of the Kingdom of God, which is the rule of
righteousness and peace and holy fellowship, does at times seem so
slow, that even the sanguine are disposed to despair, and the
brave-hearted to fear. But, standing as we do this day by the
empty grave of our risen King, we cannot thus lose hope for
ourselves or for our race. Though the end tarry, it will come.
Our works are marked by haste, because time flies ; but God has
eternity to work in. Be patient, therefore, brethren—be patient
and be strong. Just think of the end which God has in store for
the world Think of it as the final triumph of all that is pure and
true —the triumph of right over wrong, of joy over sorrow.
Think of it as the dispersion of all doubts, the explanation of all
suffering, the extermination of all sin, the destruction of death,
the open manifestation of the life that cannot die. Think of it


as the exhibition of the divine purpose, the completion of the
Redeemer’s work. Think of it as such a fulfilling of all creation
with a yet unknown grace and glory that the inspired writer is fain
to describe the is.-ue in the words — that God may he all in all. The
Christian’s is indeed a great hope. Shall we lightly cast it aside as
though it were a vain thing, and trust —as some would persuade us
—for the world’s improvement to morality without mention of
Christ, to rules of conduct with the least possible flavour of a creed
about them ? Shall the sailors on life’s sea throw overboard as
mere burden without profit—mere over-belief, the very anchor of
their souls ? God forbid.
(2) The Resurrection is also the spring of hopefulness in
sorrow. St. Paul argues with the Thessalonians, that ye sorrow not ,
even as others which have no hope. Need I speak to you of sorrow P
Life is the clearest exposition of that. A verbal definition is open
to criticism ; it may be too wide or too narrow, may offend in a
hundred ways. But about the feeling of sorrow there can be no
mistake; for it is at one time or another present to every heart,
and often in such a way as to baffle the attempt to tell it to
another ; and the best account we can give is just this, that we can
give no account at all, for the heart knoweth its own bitterness. The
pains that are experienced by man through his afflictions of love
have been said to embrace “ all the various grades from the gentle
“ longings of brief absence to the overwhelming sorrow of the
“ new-made grave.” Who has notan In JHemoriam hidden from his
neighbour’s eye —a shrine within his heart sacred to a past
companionship ? Who knows not that Love is ever closely followed
by her dark-robed sister Grief ? But, we ask, Has stern nature, who
pierces the hearts of men with many sorrows, no balm for the wounds
she thus inflicts ? Has she no healing power ? We are often told,
and with some truth, that she has. Time has been said over and
over again to be ‘the great healer.’ As days pass by, and months,
and years, the first poignancy of grief is subdued ; the world seems to
go on again ; even the recollection of the past sorrow comes to
have an element of saddened pleasure in it. “ When time has
“ healed the rupture,” says Mr. Bain in his Treatise on the
Emotions and the Will, “ and adapted the mental currents to the
“ new state of things, the tender affection still survives as one of the
“ pleasures of life. Doubtless the regret continues to have a mixture
“of the sting with the tenderness, which is what we mean by
“ sorrow, but the one may abate while the other remains. Grief
“ and lamentation give way to cherished memory,” My brethren,
that is the gospel of Nature: Your grief shall be turned into
cherished memory. Do not despise it, for Nature’s voice is God’s
voice; her healing is His healing. But Easter Day brings to our
ears a higher gospel than Nature’s highest. Like St. Paul to the
Athenians, it preaches Jesus and the resurrection. It tells of One
who with His own right hand, and with His holy arm hath gotten


Himself the victory—a victory complete, far-reaching: Christ the
first-fruits ; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.
(3) And what of hopefulness when flesh and heart fail ?
Surely that same faith in a risen Lord which is the best comfort in
sorrow is the best support in death. Has it not been —is it not
the wish of many hearts ;
Oh that I less could fear to lose this being,
Which, like a snow-ball in my coward hand.
The more ’tis grasped, the more it melts away!
St. Paul seems to have found the secret of this diminished fear.
The shadow had lost its terror for him, when he said —I had almost
said, sang, so like a hymn of triumph are his words— O grave, where
is thy victory ! O death , where is thy sting ? . . Thanks he to
God which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. In
the strength of Christ, His apostle was ready to descend this side
of the dark valley with a psalm of thanksgiving on his lips, for before
him there arose the vision of a home, far above the place of sorrows,
high beyond the reach of death —the home with Christ of them
that are Christ’s. We know indeed but little of the conditions and
circumstances of that home. We believe that in some sort of
bodily form they who have been faithful shall receive the reward of
the inheritance. The pure in heart shall see God. We cannot
conceive the spirit of man acting independently of all corporeal
organization ; and yet we do well not to dogmatize on the nature
of that body that shall be. That it will be suited to its
surroundings —that it will in some manner link us on to the life we
have lived on earth—these things seem clear from the little that
we are told, I will only refer you to one more passage, where a,
great improvement has been made in-the expression of the Apostle’s
meaning We have been accustomed to read that the Lord shall
change our vile body. One does not like the phrase ;it scarcely seems
consistent with a due thankfulness for creation ; it seems to cast a
slight upon that organism full of wondrous adaptations, which is so
closely connected with all the energies of our present life. More
accurately we read in the Revised Version the body of our
humiliation. That indeed we can say truly when we think of our
liability to disease and accident, when we think how often the body
proves itself but an inefflcient servant of the mind as witnessed in
brains overwrought with anxieties, in aching brows and failing
vision. We can indeed accept ‘ humiliation’ as part of a true
description of our condition here. But what of the future ? Our
citizenship is in heaven , from whence also we look for a Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ; ivho shall fashion anew not simply raise— the
body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of His
glory according to the working whereby he is able even to subject all
'things unto himself. Wherefore, my brethren, beloved and longed
for , my joy and crown : so stand fast in the Lord, my beloved.


ti .'":
i)


%& WM& $m ; , ~&r W ip silS /it* 5 r ’
- I H $ -• H If. p pll
3 >£*. «■- V 'v -3 - vSrl - * '*> s -• Sa "I '“•••'
ii|| i I v^ v ,’ 4 Sfis&> -« , *•»,?--
''V- ggs s - Igai Ig > i%-#J|il I k P3P& I * f*# ? *
■
* i■ i » i| S« mi : - H - fe| ~
■
.v: v ;:p ■. - S,«S?t k•- - gSt; , £'* iC-Jsj
sip r I i
J flipl |Si ill : >? - 1
|1» :, %s».i| ■ gill £1 &£
•~ s»bS^ aSSi£WS ; N?s£«l
'J? '■ , v^^.-^V^' , ’-'r r ''V'ts
i m T - -s M ® I * y '
'mi ? MWm§iP I: i I p 111 >\ I sfe|
" V ‘4- V"" C?" '"> £ £r* |T ?v- I |||l p||
i„ ‘ ■' , Sag * S * , , '•« ' *, f -.V' ■
i4p k* ft " v ,lte I U M> f 'J w l
- ” - .-’ ■..< 1 -, „.- • S ;-.. % " & Sg &$ ,- ,0< |
:■•; •;'•<■. •.*?. Sfe^y, 4 ie«lis^ l £*- .as ■ :>--,>;?> •■liwfc*!»>.
J sgg :3 ■ |j IrasSJg fel SEE s
- K iS H* v J-
ZSWjp$ E ,; ' *is'; ¥*•'''
wim&mi,
& J >- J
