

f*™ Panted Mr
Nfai-L'
The AGENT-GENERAI/
ANDBOOK NO. 2.
for NEW SOUTH WALES
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
9. ictor a Street.
LONDON, S.W
NEW SOUTH WALES HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Open daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. ; Saturdays, 10 A.M, to 1.30 P.M.
Note I.—This Office has been established by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment for the purpose of supplying intending Emigrants with useful and
trustworthy information respecting emigration chiefly to the British
Colonies, and is under the direction of the Colonial Office.
Note 2. —The Australasian Colonies Circular should be read with this.
The Circular is revised quarterly, and may be obtained gratis. Per
List of Publications, see Back of this Cover. 0
Note 3. —This Office organised branches at the following places,
where their publications 'Sam'’ information may also be obtained:—The
Free Public Libraries at Bffyiford (Yorks), Cardiff, Leeds, Manchester,
Nottingham, and Swansea, the Mitchell Library at Glasgow, and the
Government Emigration Office at Liverpool. Information may also be
obtained from the various Colonial Sections at the Imperial Institute,
South Kensington.
Note 4. —Letters to this Office need not be stamped, but prepayment
for Handbooks must be made.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
By DARLING & SON, Ltd., 1-3, Great St. Thomas Apostle, E.O.
And to be purchased from the EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE)
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.; or
BYRE & SPOTTISWOODB, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, 8.C.;
or JOHN MENZIES & Co., 12, Hanover Street, Edinburgh, and
90, West Nile Street, Glasgow ; or
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., Limited, 104, Grafton Street, Dublin
April 1898.
Price One Penny.


>
■* f
%


Handbook No. 2.
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
NEW SOUTH WALES HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Open daily, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. ; Saturdays, 10 a m. to 1.30 p.m.
Note I. —This Office has been established by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment for the purpose of supplying intending Emigrants with useful and
trustworthy information respecting emigration chiefly to the British
Colonies, and is under the direction of the Colonial Office.
Note 2.—'The Australasian Colonies Circular should be read with this.
The Circular is revised quarterly, and may be obtained gratis. For
List of Publications, see Back of this Cover.
Note 3. —This Office has organised branches at the following places,
where their publications and information may also bo obtained: —The
Free Public Libraries at Bradford (Yorks), Cardiff, Leeds, Manchester,
Nottingham, and Swansea, the Mitchell Library at Glasgow, and the
Government Emigration Office at Liverpool. Information may also be
obtained from the various Colonial Sections at the Imperial Institute,
South Kensington, . . • . •• •
Note 4. —Letters to this Office need not be stamped, but prepayment
for Handbooks must be made.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
By DARLING & SON, Ltd., 1-3, Great St. Thomas Apostle, E.C
And to be purchased from the EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE*
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W. ; or
EYRE & SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C.;
or JOHN MENZIES & Co., 12, Hanover Street, Edinburgh, and
90, West Nile Street, Glasgow ; or
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., Limited, 104. Grafton Sireet, Dublin,
April 1898.
Price One Penny,


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page Page
Agricultural College 12 Maize ... 18
Agricultural resources... ... 16 Manufactories ... ... ... 28
Apprentices 11 Market gardens 19
Arrangements on landing ... 14 Merchant Shipping Act ... 18
Arrival (best time fori ... 9 Mines 21
Money and banks ... ... 12
Bathurst 7 Newcastle 6,21
Bee keeping 16
Broken Hill Mines 4
Building stone ... ... ••• 22 uats ... ... ... ...
8 Occupiers (number of) ... 29
Orange 8
Climate 9,19 -Orangeries 19
Coal 10,21 Outfit 14,24
Conciliation, Councils of ~ 10
Copper 22 Parramatta 8
Cost of living 23 Pastoral districts 4-8
Counties ... ... 6 „ resources ... ... 15
Crown lands 26-29 Population 9
Customs 29 Ports 8
Post and telegraphs 15
. „ 1C Professional classes 12
Dairy farming Provisions (price of) 24
Education 11 Rabbits ... ... 22
Railways 15
Factories and shops 11 Rainfall 9
Fares 13 Religion ••• ••• **
Fish ... ... ... ... 22 Revenue and debt ... ...
Friendly Societies ... ... 12 Riverina district ... ... 5
Fruit 18
Savings banks 12
Sheep 15
Gold 21, 29 Shipping companies 12
Government 10 Silver 21
Sugar 18
Hospitals 12 g y dne y 8
House rent ... 23
Timber 20
Tin 22
Imports and exports .., ... 29 Tobacco 18
Irrigation 22 Tramways 15
Iron 22
Vineyards 18
Labour, demand for 30
Labour settlements 10 Wages (rate of) 24
Laws 10 Weights 17
Libraries 12 Wheat 17
Wool 15


NEW SOUTH WALES.
New South Wales was discovered by Captain Cook in 1770, Settlement
and first settled in 1788. In 1851 the south-western districts
were formed into the Colony of Victoria, and in 1859 the
northern districts into the Colony of Queensland.
The Colony lies on the eastern side of the Australian con- Geography,
tinent. It is bounded on the north by Queensland, on the
east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by Victoria, and on
the west by South Australia. The coast line from Point
Danger to Cape Howe is about 700 miles long. The extreme
breadth is about 850 miles, and mean breadth 600 miles.
The greatest length is 900 miles. The total area of New
South Wales is 810,700 square miles, or about 199,000,000
acres, being a little over 2 \ times the size of Great Britain
and Ireland, or about the size of Great Britain and France
joined together.
There is considerable diversity of physical aspect in this Mountains,
large extent of country. At a distance varying from 25 to
120 miles from the seaboard, a range of mountains (called the
Dividing Range) from 8,000 to 7,000 feet in height, stretches
from north to south, throwing out spurs in every direction.
Between this range and the ocean lies the eastern division
of the Colony described below. On the western side of the
range lie the central tablelands, which again further west
develop into the vast western plains.
Besides the Dividing Range and its spurs, the principal
ranges of mountains are the Interior and the Coast Ranges.
The former lie near the western boundary of the Colony ;
the latter lie on the east side of the Great Dividing Chain,
and run parallel to it for a considerable distance.
All the rivers (with a few exceptions) rise in the Great Rivers.
Dividing Chain, and flow thence into the sea by the eastern
or western watershed. The great rivers of the western
watershed are the Darling, the Lachlan, the Murrumbidgee
and the Murray, with their affluents. The Darling is navigable
in favourable seasons for 1,758 miles (from Wentworth to
Walgett), the Murrumbidgee and Lachlan for 900 miles, and
the Murray for 1,120. The principal rivers flowing eastward
are the Hawkesbury, the Hunter, the Clarence, the Macleay,
the Richmond, and the Manning,
The Colony falls into three natural divisions, the Coast District.
District, the Table Lands, and the Plains of the Interior.
The Coast District is a strip of undulating land varying in The coast
width from 35 to 125 miles, 60 or 70 miles being its average, district.
It extends back to the Dividing Range. The soil of this part
of the Colony is for the most part very rich. It is well
watered, and though much damage is caused by floods*a rich
766r—500—10/98 Wt 14098 D & S—s (B) £ %


alluvial deposit results from them, that produces any kind of
crop in abundance, without the need of fallowing or manure.
The Table Lands are a high plateau or elevated district
traversing the entire length of the country, and extending
westward to about the 141st meridian. Beyond this point
there is a gradual fall to the great Plains of the Interior,
which form the chief pastoral lands of New South Wales.
The Colony is divided into thirteen pastoral districts,
Albert and Darling (which between them form a good deal
more than one-third of the whole Colony) in the west;
Warrego, Gwydyr, Liverpool Plains, Bligh, Wellington,
Lachlan, and Murrumbidgee in the centre ; and Clarence,
New England, Macleay, and Monaro in the east.
Bourke (503 miles N.W. of Sydney ; fare, 565. 3 d.) is the
chief town of the western district. It is the centre of an ex-
tensive and wealthy pastoral and copper mining district.
When the River Darling is navigable there is connection by
steamer with Adelaide. The Bourke district is mainly
occupied by large sheep and cattle stations. The want of rain
is often severely felt, but this is in part made up by the sink-
ing of artesian wells, a large supply of water being obtained
by this means at a depth of 1,000 feet to 2,000 feet.
Wilcannia, in Albert (538 miles N.W. by W. of Sydney ;
rail from Sydney to Hay, bi-weekly coach from Hay ; total
fare, 81. 55.), is a great crossing place for stock. The district
has over two million sheep.
About 809 miles west of Sydney, and 17 miles south-east
of Silverton, is Broken Hill (population about 20,000), the
centre of the valuable Barrier Ranges silver mining district.
The best route from England to Broken Hill is by Adelaide
in South Australia. The distance from Adelaide to Broken
Hill is 334 miles, and the lowest railway fare, 365. ‘6d. ; the
lowest fare from Sydney is 5 1. 15s. Bd.
Wentworth, in the extreme south of Darling (500 miles W.
of Sydney ; coach from Hay), is the centre of an important
pastoral district and has a large river trade.
Of the western districts Darling is generally adapted for
grazing purposes, and Albert has much rich land available
for either grazing or farming.
Of the central counties, Warrego is for the most part barren;
and Gwydyr consists principally of open plains. About
Moree, 413 miles N. of Sydney (fare 495. M.) ; a man
might start farming with about 40 acres and 150£. capital for
agricultural land, or with about 1,000 acres and 500£. capital
for pastoral. Partial clearing at a cost of Is, an acre enables
the land to be used for pastoral purposes, but to eradicate
* Districts and counties are in italics, towns in ordinary type. The
railway fares given are 2nd class : there is no 3rd class.


the timber costs 3 1, per acre. Only a small portion of the
district is suitable for agriculture. A flock of about 1,500
sheep requires about 2,500 acres.
Much of Liverpool Plains is under cultivation and the
district contains several gold diggings ; Bligh, Wellington, Murruvlm
Lachlan and Murrumbidgee districts are generally adapted udgee.
for grazing. Forbes, on the River Lachlan, 276 miles W. of Forbes.
Sydney, is the centre of an important agricultural and pastoral
district, in which there is still abundance of Crown land
available for settlement. Near Wagga Wagga (309 miles Wagga
S.W. of Sydney), in Murrumbidgee , a man might start Wagga-
farming with about 160 acres and 200?. capital. The cost of
clearing is from ss. (cutting down scrub and splitting large
timber) to 4 1, per acre (completely eradicating and burning off
timber). The southern portion of the Murrumbidgee forms
what is known as the Uiverina district. This was at one Eiyerina du
time entirely pastoral, consisting of vast plains of native trict .
grass and salt-bush, but the land is now to a great extent
being cut up for farming purposes, though there are still
very large numbers of sheep in the district. Good land
fetches about 3?. per acre, and upwards. The chief town is
Deniliquin, 481 miles S.W. of Sydney (Sydney to Jerilderie, Deniliquin.
by rail, thence to Deniliquin, 43 miles by coach). The cost
of clearing varies from 3 1, to 10?. per acre, but for grazing
purposes it costs about 10s. per acre. A man might start
general farming with about 500?. to 600?. capital; the small
holders have been most successful. Deniliquin is more
easily reached from Victoria, being 200 nailed by rail from
Melbourne ; the produce of the Riverina thus in great
measure comes to the Victoria markets. In the south-east
of Murrumbidgee, on the borders of N.S. Wales and
Victoria, is Albury (fare to Sydney 445.), the chief vine- Albury.
growing district of the Colony. Government uncleared land
fetches, if it is good land, about 10?. per acre; and cleared
land about 20?.
Of the eastern districts, Macleay and Clarence are suitable Macleay and
in many places for agriculture. Owing to the competition Clarence.
of cheap labour in other countries, sugar growing is not now
very profitable, and dairying is taking its place. Grafton, on Grafton,
the Clarence River, 450 miles N.E. of Sydnej by steamer
(fare, 1?. to 21.), is the centre of an important agricultural and
mining district. Grazing land can be bought from about 245.
per acre, but rich land, suitable for sugar or maize cultivation,
fetches as much as 30?. per acre. Land is rented at from ss.
to 21. per acre per annum, the latter price being paid for sugar-
cane land, or for land on the banks of the river, or close to
the town. A man might start with about 40 acres and 500/.
capital. The cost of thorough clearing is from 10?. to 15?.
per acre, and of partial clearing 21. to 10?. In the uplands
of the Richmond River much settlement is going on, the
land being especially adapted to growing artificial grasses,


maize, and potatoes. Near Byron Creek, in Rous County,
improved land costs 21. 10s, an acre ; 150 acres would be
enough to start on, and a capital of 500/. would be required
to stock, and work it as a dairy farm ; clearing unimproved
land and sowing with English grasses costs 4 1. 10s. an acre.
Monaro is rugged, but there are some choice spots of land.
Cooma (257 miles S.W. of Sydney, fare 345. 9 d.) is the centre
of a pastoral, agricultural, and mineral district. A man
should have about 200/. capital, to grow wheat, oats, hay,
fruits, apples, &c. ; the local markets are fairly good. The
cost of clearing is, on the coast, about 11. per acre ; and on
table land from 30s. to 40s.
New England is a high table land, over 3,000 feet above
the level of the sea. Much of its soil is adapted for agri-
culture ; it contains several gold diggings, as well as silver
and tin mines, and large numbers of sheep and cattle. The
most important tin mines of the Colony are at Vegetable
Creek, 28 miles from Glen Innes (399 miles N.W. of Sydney,
fare 48s. 9 d.), an agricultural and pastoral centre. Near
Tenterfield (479 miles N. of Sydney), a farmer might start
on 100 to 200 acres with a capital of 200/. to 300/., exclusive
of the cost of clearing, which is about 21. 10s. or 3/. per acre.
The Colony is also divided into counties, of which there are
141, known as the Old or Proclaimed counties and the New.
The old.counties, with their principal towns ar q, Macquarie,
Port Macquarie ; Gloucester , Stroud ; Northumberland,
Newcastle and Maitland ; Cumberland , Sydney ; Camden,
Wollongong; St. Vincent; Argyle , Goulburn ; King, Yass ;
Murray , Queanbeyan ; Georgiana ; Westmoreland ;
Bathurst, Bathurst ; Goolc, Lithgow ; Roxburgh; Bligh,
Cassilis; Wellington, Mudgee and Orange; Durham; Bris-
bane ; Hunter and Philip.
About Port Macquarie (180 miles N. of Sydney, 15s. to
30s. by steamer) the principal industries are maize growing
and wine making. Improved land in this district is dear,
and at least 51. per acre capital is required to start farming,
besides the cost of clearing, which is estimated at from 51.
to 7/. per acre,
Stroud (124 miles N. of Sydney, by steamer about 15
hours) is the centre of an agricultural and pastoral district,
which is well watered, and has an abundance of fine timber.
Maize is extensively grown, and gold is mined in the
district.
Northumberland contains the most important coal mining
district of the Colony. In Newcastle (100 miles N. of
Sydney, fare 4s. to Bs., by railway or by steamer ; population
about 29,000) and the immediate neighbourhood numerous
seams of coal, varying in thickness from five to 12 feet, are
being worked. These employ many thousand miners. The
deepest pit is some 450 feet. Newcastle is the principal
seaport on the northern coast. There are also boot


manufactories, copper works, an extensive brewery, a ship-
building yard, a fellmongery, a steam biscuit factory, and
engineering establishments, and at Cockle Creek in the
neighbourhood there are some large new smelting works.
Maitland (120 miles N. of Sydney, population about Maitland.
10,000) is the centre of an agricultural and vine growing
district.
The rich lands of the Hunter Valley district embrace the Hunter
towns of East and West Maitland, Morpeth, Largo, and Hunter ,
and Durham counties. The soil is capable of producing
heavy yields of almost any crop, but is mainly given over to
growing lucerne, maize, pumpkins, potatoes, and fruit, and
to dairying, poultry farming, pig-raising, &c. On the ridges
are vineyards which grow excellent wine. Land costs 21. 10s.
to 15 1, an acre, or is rented at from ss. to 20s. an acre a year ;
from 200 to 400 acres would be required for mixed farming.
The south coast districts, Illawarra, Shoalhaven, Kiama, Camden.
and Eden, are the chief centre of dairy farming in the Colony,
and largely supply the Sydney and other Colonial markets
with milk and butter. Pigs, poultry, eggs, cheese, and bacon
are also exported. Much land in this district is laid down
with English grasses. Land near the town of Kiama fetches
20?. to 30?. per acre to buy, or 1?. to 2?. an acre to rent; about
40 acres are enough for a farm.
Wollongong (64 miles S. of Sydney) is the third seaport of Wollongong
the Colony. Coal is found near, and extensive seams of fire
clay and iron ore abound.
Argyle is mainly agricultural (maize, potatoes, &c.), its Argyle.
mineral wealth, which is great, not being yet developed.
Goulburn (134 miles S.W. of Sydney) ; population about Gculbum.
11,000, is the principal depot of the southern inland trade
and an important agricultural and pastoral centre. Lime
burning has become a very important industry. The mineral
resources of the district are as yet undeveloped.
King and Murray are pastoral and agricultural counties. King and
Yass (187 miles S.W. of Sydney) is an important agricultural
centre. Wheat, maize, barley, oats, and potatoes are grown,
and the mineral wealth of the district is great, though as yet
undeveloped.
The county of Bathurst is agricultural and pastoral, con- Bathunt.
sisting of extensive fertile plains, especially suited to the
growth of crops; but mining is also largely carried on.
The city of Bathurst (144 miles of Sydney ; fare 19s. 3c?.) Bathurst,
has a population of about 9,000, and is an important agri-
cultural and mining centre. Valuable slate quarries are in
the neighbourhood. Bathurst has tanneries, coach factories,
flour mills, Government railway workshops, &c.
Near Lithgow, the chief town of Cook (96 miles W. of Litbgow.
Sydney), coal, iron ore, and freestone abound ; coal mines
are being worked, and there is an iron foundry in the
neighbourhood.


Mudgee (190 miles N.W. of Sydney) is the centre of a rich
gold mining, pastoral, and agricultural district.
Orange (192 miles W. of Sydney) is principally noted as
the centre of a wheat producing district; but copper also
abounds, as well as gold. About Orange a man might start
farming with about 200 acres and from 300 Z. to 400 1, capital.
The cost of clearing is from 2 1, to 5 1, per acre.
Brisbane is agricultural and pastoral, with some not very
important mines.
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, picturesquely
situated on the southern shore of Port Jackson, resembles in
many ways an English town. The estimated population of
Sydney and its suburbs at the end of 1896 was 410,000
persons. The principal buildings are the University, St.
Andrew’s Cathedral, St. Mary’s Cathedral, and the Govern-
ment offices. Hyde Park, The Domain, the Botanical Gardens,
and the Centennial Park (opened to commemorate the
centenary of the Colony), are some of the reserves laid out
for the public. The National Park, about 15 miles from
Sydney, is one of the largest public parks in the world. The
land about Sydney is very fertile, but is very expensive to
buy ; small areas for poultry farming let at 5 1, an acre a
year.
Parramatta (14 miles W.) is the centre of an important
fruit-growing district, containing orangeries and orchards.
Good fruit growing land can be purchased at from 20Z. to 40Z.
per acre within easy distance of Parramatta, and very fair
land at from 10Z. to 15Z. per acre. The cost of clearing is
from 3Z. to 10Z. per acre. A man might start with about 10
acres, and if he can afford an outlay of 50Z. per acre for five
years, should then be obtaining a return of not less than G4Z.
per acre. Near Richmond laud is cheaper ; a farmer could
begin on 100 acres of improved land with a capital of about
3Z. 10s, an acre, exclusive of rent or price of land.
Among the principal towns in the new counties is Dubbo
(278 miles N.W. of Sydney; fare, 365.). The district is
mainly a pastoral one, but considerable quantities of land
have also been taken up by free selectors for farming purposes.
Coal and copper are found in the neighbourhood. Coota-
mundra (253 miles S. of Sydney) is the centre of a large
pastoral and agricultural district. Improved land can be
rented at 2s. to ss. per acre, or on the “ share system ” by
which the owner provides land and seed, and the farmer
provides machinery, horses, and labour, and each takes half
of the returns. A man might start on about 100 acres, with
200 Z. capital, exclusive of the cost of the land. The cost of
clearing unimproved land is Bs. to 255, per acre. The land
north of this is pastoral ; from 3,000 to 5,000 acres are required
for sheep-farming, and a capital of I,OOOZ.
The magnificent expanse of water called Port Jackson, on
which Sydney stands, is almost unrivalled as a harbour, both


for beauty and for convenience. The high and rocky coast
of the Pacific is suddenly broken, and the cliffs form an
opening to an estuary of sufficient capacity to shelter all the
navies in the world, and of sufficient depth for the largest
ships afloat. From the Heads to Sydney is a distance of four
miles, beyond which the harbour extends for eight miles
further. The breadth varies from three-quarters of a mile
to over two miles. The principal other ports are Newcastle
and Wollongong. There is communication by steamer
between the various coast towns.
Theclimate of the Colony varies greatly according to locality, Climate,
and depends less upon latitude than upon height above the sea-
level ; see also p. 19. Sydney and the low coast settlements
have a more equable and moister climate than that of the dry
elevated regions of the interior. In the summer there are
occasionally hot winds which sometimes raise the temperature
above 100° in the shade. These are unpleasant on account of
the dust which they raise, but they are not unhealthy, and do
not last long. The air is clear, the light brilliant, the sun hot,
and the sky generally cloudless. Snow is almost unknown, ex-
cept at high levels, and the frost is never severe. The climate
is very healthy, especially in the hilly parts. The mean tem-
perature of Sydney is 63° (the mean daily range being from
56° to 71°). On the New England table-land, the heat in
summer is about the same as at Sydney, but the winters are
much colder. In the western districts, which include
Albury, Deniliquin, and Bourke, the range of temperature is
much greater than at Sydney, the winters being colder and
the summers being much hotter.
The rainfall varies considerably in the Colony; the greatest Rainfall,
amount being found along the coast-line, ranging from 30
inches south of Sydney to 73 in the extreme north. In
Sydney, upon an average of years, there falls about 50 ixiches,
at Tenterfield (479 miles N. of Sydney), 35 inches, at Denili-
quin 17, and at Wentworth (on the Darling River, 500 miles
west of Sydney), 12. It must be remembered that, owing to
the dryness of the air and soil, moisture is absorbed much
more quickly than it is in England. The recurrence of
droughts, especially in the interior, is the chief evil against
which the Colony has to contend.
Any time of the year is suitable for arriving in the Colony; Best time for
September to November being perhaps the best months of all. arriving.
December to February are the summer months, the seasons
being nearly opposite to what they are in England. The
shearing season is in October and November. The busiest
month for harvest operations is December.
The estimated population of the Colony on 31st December Population.
1897 was 1,323,4(10, of whom a majority of nearly .100,000
were males. An Act of 1888 restricts the immigration of Chinese.
Chinese, and prohibits any in the future from being


naturalised in the Colony, and these restrictions are extended
by an Act of 1896 to other coloured races.
Government. The members of the Legislative Council hold their seats for
life, and are appointed, with the advice of the Executive
Council, by the Governor (who is himself, appointed by the
Crown). The Legislative Assembly consists of 125 members,
elected by manhood suffrage and vote by ballot (Act of 1893).
Parliaments are triennial: and the system of payment of
members (3007. per annum) is in force.
Local govern- Local government by means of “ municipalities ” prevails
ment. throughout the “ incorporated districts ” of the Colony ; but
the area of such districts is not large, although they include
more than half of the total population. The ordinary rates
seldom exceed Is. in the pound, but many of the boroughs
have additional special rates varying from 3c7. to M.
Masters and The administration of justice, and of laws, such as that
Servants’ Act. between master and servant, is substantially the same as it is
in England.
Employers’ The “Employers’ Liability Act,” 1897, consolidates the
1897 lhty ACt ’ exten di n g an d regulating the liability of employers
to make compensation for personal injuries suffered by
workmen in their service.
Coal Mines Managers of coal mines must be certificated. Mines must
Regulation be properly safeguarded and ventilated. No boy under 14
Act, 1896. ma y b e employed in or about a mine, and no boy under 18
may be employed for more than 51-53 hours a week; no
female may be employed. Miners’wages may not be paid in
a public house (C. M. R, Act, 1896).
Contractors’ The Contractors’ Debts Act, 1897, consolidates the Acts
ACt ’ facilitating the recovery of wages by workmen from contrac-
tors employing them, by attaching money due from other
persons to such contractors in respect of the contract work.
Liquor laws. A modified form of Local Option prevails in the Colony,
and Sunday closing is enforced. Wages may not be paid in
public houses, and children apparently under 16 years of age
may not be served with liquor.
Death duties. Death duties are paid upon an ascending scale, according
to the value of the property, beginning with one and ending
with five per cent.
Councils of An Act of 1892 provides for the establishment of councils
Conciliation 0 f conciliation and arbitration for the voluntary settlement of
Act, 1892. industrial disputes.
Labour Recent Acts facilitate the establishment of Labour Settle-
Acts 1e i893-4 • ments and fk® advancement of loans to the settlers. The
and S Regs. of ’ principal settlement formed was that at Pitt Town,
27 June 1893. which was however converted into a Casual Labour Farm
in 1896. The other two settlements are at Bega, where the
population is 114, and Wilberforce, where it is 86.


The Apprentices Act, 1894, authorises the binding of an Apprentices
apprentice to a master, for the purpose of his learning a trade. Act, 1894.
The Factories Act, 189 G, applies only to those districts Factories and
which are officially declared to come within its scope. Under Shops Act,
this Act, (1) factories and shops must be kept clean and yen- 1 896 > a » d
tilated, (2) seats must be provided for females, (3) machinery January 1897.
must be fenced, (4) no child under 13 years may be employed
in a factory and no child under 14 years without special leave,
(5) no male under 16 years, and no female, may as a rule be
employed in a factory for more than 48 hours a week, nor *
any female for 4 weeks after her confinement.
Vaccination is not compulsory in New South Wales. Vaccination.
There is no established church in New South Wales. At Religion,
the Census of 1891, 45 per cent, of the population were
members of the Church of England, 25 per cent, were Roman
Catholics, 10 per cent, were Presbyterians, and 8 per cent,
were Wesleyan Methodists.
The educational system of New South Wales is under the Education,
control of the Minister of Public Instruction. Teachers are
recognised as civil servants, are paid by fixed salaries (the
system of payment by results not being in force), and are
appointed by the Government in the Colony ; see the Pro-
fessional Handbook, 1898, issued by this Office, price 3 d. In
addition to public»schools, evening public schools, high
schools, and superior public schools have been established,
and itinerant teachers and workmistresses are provided for ;
the fees at High Schools are about SI. Bs. to 12/. 12s. a year.
The public school fee is M. per week per child, but not more
than Is. per family, and children going to school travel on the
railways free ; the compulsory school age is 6to 14. Pro-
vision is made for the education of children who are unable
to pay school fees, and for schools for neglected children. A
local board is appointed for each school district. Public
schools are erected wholly at the expense of the Government.
Denominational schools have ceased to be supported by the
State, but general religious instruction is provided for.
Clergymen of the various denominations are entitled to
appropriate one hour a day for religious instruction in the
tenets of their respective churches. The New South Wales
educational system is spoken of as highly successful.
In addition to the various classes of public schools main-
tained by the State, there exist several institutions receiving
annual subsidies from the Government ; the most important
of these is the Sydney Grammar School, with a daily attend-
ance of over 360 pupils.
The Sydney University was established in 1852, the charter Sydney Uni-
being framed after the model of that of University College, versity.
London. Three denominational colleges and a college for
women are affiliated to it. There is a Technical College in
Sydney open to students of both sexes, and having a largo
number of students. Branch Technical Schools have also


been established in the suburbs, and in the northern, south-
ern, and western districts of the Colony. Technical work-
shops have been fitted up in Sydney, where teaching with
practical illustration is given.
At Sydney there is a Mechanics’ School of Art, with a
Working Men’s College in connexion with it.
Agricultural A special Department of Agriculture was started in 1890.
College. In connexion with it the Hawkesbury Agricultural College is
at work at Richmond (38 miles N.W. of Sydney). Candidates
from 16 to 25 years, are admitted in order of application, and
pay 28/. a year; the course includes practical work upon
the farm, and lasts for 2 years.
Free libraries. The State also supports free libraries, schools of art, and
mechanics’ institutes. The Sydney Free Library is open to
the public daily.
Hospitals. New South Wales possesses various hospitals, asylums,
orphan and industrial schools, and other charitable institu-
tions. There is no poor-rate, but the State subsidises many
benevolent institutions, generally in the proportion of 11. to
every 1/. privately contributed. There is a Charity Organisa-
tion Society at Sydney,
Friendly All the leading English friendly societies are largely
societies. represented in the Colony. Members of friendly societies in
England should apply to their oavu sotiety for letters of
introduction to the corresponding society in the Colony,
Professional For information as to the architects, auctioneers, civil
classes. service, clergymen, barristers, solicitors, dentists, medical
men, police, teachers, surveyors, chemists, railway men, &c.,
see “ Professional Handbook,” 1898 (issued by this Office,
price 3d.).
Money. English money is used throughout the Colony. There is
a branch of the Royal Mint in Sydney. Emigrants are
recommended not to carry their money in cash, but by means
of one or more money orders payable to themselves at any
post office in the Colony (see p. 15), or by means of drafts,
which can be obtained through a bank.
Banks. The Colony possesses several banks ; among others the
Bank of New South Wales (London Branch, 64, Old Broad
Street, E.C.), Union Bank of Australia (London Office, 71,
Cornhill, E.C.), Bank of Australasia (London Branch, 4,
Threadneedle Street, E.C.), London Bank of Australia
(London Office, 2, Old Broad Street, E.C.), &c. &c. These
allow 3to per cent, interest on deposits for 12 months.
Savings There are two institutions of this kind ; the Savings Bank
banks. of New South Wales, and the Government (Post Office)
Savings Bank. The rate of interest allowed on deposits up
to 200/. is 3tt to 4 per cent. The aggregate deposits, and
the numbers of depositors, increase annually.
Shipping New South Wales is in easy and constant communication
companies, with all parts of the world. Steamers and sailing vessels are


despatched to Sydney from London, Plymouth, and other
English ports, and from Glasgow. Among the principal lines
are the following :
The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Shipping Co., 122,
Leadenhall Street, E.C. N.B.—No steerage passengers are
taken by this line.
Orient Steam Navigation Company, 5, Fenchurch Avenue,
E.C.
Anderson, Anderson, and Ca., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
Aberdeen Line. G. Thompson & Co., 7, Billiter Square,
E.C.
German Australian Steamship Co. (via Antwerp), (Smith,
Sundius, & Co.), 158, Leadenhall Street, E.C,
Bethell, Gwyn, and Co., 22, Billiter Street, E.C.
Messrs. Houlder Bros, and Co., 14, Water Street, Liver-
pool.
Milburn Line, 2, Billiter Avenue, E.C.
The North German Lloyd (via Antwerp for 3rd class pas-
sengers), 2, King William Street, E.C.
Messrs. Trinder, Anderson, and Co., 4, St. Mary Axe, E.C.
Aitken, Lilburn, & Co., 80, Buchanan Street, Glasgow.
W. Lund, 3, East India Avenue, E.C.
The P. and 0. and Orient lines leave with the mails on
alternate weeks, and go by the Suez Canal direct to Australia.
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, requires emigrant ships Merchant
to be seaworthy, have proper accommodation, furnish good Shipping Act,
and sufficient food, provide medicines, and on large ships, a 1894 -
surgeon, and in other ways protects the interests of emigrants.
If the ship improperly fails to start on the day contracted
for, the emigrant, or any emigration officer on his or her
behalf, may claim subsistence money till it does start.
Short summaries of these regulations are posted up in every
ship ; emigrants who find they are not being treated fairly
should immediately complain. Emigrants by the North
German Lloyd, and other companies, whose vessels do not
clear from English ports, are not protected by these regulations.
There are no free, assisted, or nominated passages. The Fares.*
passage by steamer from England takes from 42 to 50 days.
The fares are Ist class from 40/. to 70/.; 2nd class steamers.
from 35/. to 40/.; 3rd class from ] 3/. 13s. to 18/. 18s. In
the case of the first and second class, passage-money covers
every requisite except wines and spirits, but the third-class
passengers must in some cases provide their own bedding and
mess utensils (these will be supplied, if wanted, by the ship-
ping company, at the cost of I/.). Third-class passengers by
steamers are allowed 15 cubic feet of luggage free.
There is frequent communication by coasting steamers
* Only fares by British ships are given, see Merchant Shipping Act above,


between Sydney and the other Australian ports (fare tc
Melbourne or Brisbane 1 1, to 3 1.) as well as Tasmania (fare
11. to 21. 10s.) and New Zealand (fare to Auckland 21. ss.
to 4/.)
Sailing ships. By sailing ship the passage takes rather less than three
months, and the fares are about 45/. to 55/. Ist class.
The amount of luggage allowed free is generally 40
cubic feet for Ist-class passengers. Sailing ships, which
only leave occasionally, go round the Cape of Good Hope,
meeting afterwards very cold weather, and in general do
not touch anywhere on the way.
Children. As a rule, in steamers, children from three to twelve years
of age travel half price ; one child under three years, free ;
other children under three years, quarter fare. In sailing
ships, and in some steamers, children from 1 to 12 year
travel half price ; under one year, free.
Boats from Steamers leave Glasgow also regularly for Sydney via the
Glasgow. Cape of Good Hope, calling at Liverpool ; fares are : —3rd
class, 13/. 135. to 14/. 14s. ; Ist class, 40/. ; no 2nd class ;
children from 3 to 12 years go half price, special terms for
younger children. There are also regular sailing ships from
Glasgow (involving transfer at Melbourne) ; no 3rd class ;
2nd class, 21/.; Ist class, 42/. ; children from 1 to 12 years,
half price ; under one year, free.
Dates of The dates of sailing are advertised in the daily newspapers,
sailing. or ma y be obtained from the shipping companies, or from
this office. There are no boats going direct from Ireland.
Irish emigrants must go from Glasgow, or some English port.
Arrange- There is a Government Labour Bureau in Sydney, which
ments on has some 35 branches in country districts. Among private
landing, agencies for emigrants at Sydney are The Young Women’s
Christian Association, 49, Phillip Street, and the Young
Men’s Christian Association, 329, Pitt Street. Emigrants
having friends in the Colony should communicate with
them beforehand, and all emigrants would do well to write
beforehand to one of the above Institutions also, and to take
characters with them.
Outfit, etc. No large outfit is necessary, nor need it be new. Emigrants
having knives, forks, spoons, bed and table linen, kitchen
utensils, sewing machine, light tools, and other small articles
or ornaments, should take them, but not heavy furniture nor
rough common tools, as free luggage is limited. Emigrants
should take all the clothes they have, but not less, if possible,
than the following for the voyage and subsequent use. For
for men ; men , two pairs boots, one strong suit, two pairs white or light
tweed trousers, and one jacket of similar cool material, one
cloth cap and one broad brimmed straw hat, one pair slippers
or canvas shoes, one overcoat, and six articles of each
for women ; kind of underclothing. For women , two pairs strong shoes,
one warm and two cotton gowns,, one broad-brimmed straw
hat, and one close-fitting hat, one pair slippers, one cloak or


shawl, six articles of each kind of underclothing, and sewing
materials. For children , one warm cloak or great coat, two for children.
pairs strong shoes, two warm suits, and six to nine articles
of each kind of underclothing. Two or three coloured serge
shirts for men, and an extra supply of flannel for women
and children will be very useful. If the emigrant is going by
sailing ship, extra warm clothing will be required. There
are not many opportunities of washing clothes on board. On
sheep and cattle stations in the Colony a man generally
wears white moleskin trousers, and a flannel shirt; coats
being only worn at times.
The postage from the United Kingdom is for letters, 2\d. Post and
per \ oz.; for post cards Id. ; \d. for newspapers not exceeding Telegraphs,
2 oz.; parcels, Is. for 1 lb., and &d. for each subsequent lb. up
to II lbs.; money order rates, 21. and under, 6d. ; 21. to 6Z., Money
Is.; (jl. to 10G, Is. 6d.; telegrams, 4s. 9 d. and 4s. 1 Id. a word. Orders.
Railways except as mentioned below are Government lines. Railways.
In June 1897 there were open 2,639 miles of railway.
Owing to the railways having been better managed during
the last few years the net earnings have much increased, and
there has been a substantial return upon the railway capital
invested, after paying all working expenses. For the
different lines, see map.
The main railways of the Colony are divided into the
Southern , Western, and Northern systems. The Southern
runs from Sydney to Albury, and has several branches,
one of which is the Illawarra line. Through Albury,
Sydney is in direct communication with Melbourne (576
miles) ; fares, 81 s. and 60s. B d. (by express about 18 hours) ;
and with Adelaide in South Australia (1,059 miles), fares,
117 s. and 795. 3 d.
The Western has its terminus at Bourke (503 miles N.W.
of Sydney) on the river Darling. The principal towns along
it are Parramatta, Lithgow, Bathurst, Dubbo, and Orange.
The Northern runs from Sydney to Newcastle, and from
Newcastle to Tenterfield and the Queensland frontier, where
it connects with the Queensland line to Brisbane. The
journey between Sydney and Brisbane takes about 36 hours ;
fares, Ist class, 5 1. ; 2nd class, 3 1.
There are also in New South Wales two private lines of
railway, one 45 miles in length, from Deniliquin in the
Riverina to Moama on the Victorian border, and a second,
35 miles in length, from the silver mines at Broken Hill to
the South Austialian border.
Sydney and Its suburbs are served by steam, cable, and Tramways,
electric tramways. There is also a tramway between New-
castle and Plattsburg.
The natural resources of New South Wales are (1) Pastoral, Natural
(2) Agricultural, (3) Mineral. Resources.
(1) Pastoral. —The value of land and stock has fallen C 1) Pastoral,
greatly during the last few years, and immense losses of stock Sheep.


have been caused by drought. The principal product of the
Colony is wool. As a wool-producing country it stands by
far the first among the Australasian Colonies. In 1896 the
quantity of New South Wales wool exported was 2/2 million
lbs., valued at nearly 9,000,000/., which was less than in any
year since 1890.
In December 1896 there were 48,300,000 sheep in the
Colony (being 700,000 more than in 1895) ; nearly all the
sheep are Merinos. The chief sheep-owning districts are
Coonamble, Bourke, Dubbo, Hay, Walgett, Tam worth, Young,
Wagga Wagga, and Forbes. Some of the flocks are very
large, and consist of over 100,000 sheep.
Horse breeding (especially of saddle and light harness
horses) is extensively carried on in many parts of the Colony;
over 8,000 horses were exported in 1896, India being the
best customer.
The breeding of pigs appears to be much neglected ; and
the number was less in 1896 than in 1895.
Cattle rearing has not advanced so quickly as sheep farming,
and the number of cattle is less than in some previous years.
But there were over 2\ million head at the end of 1896,
some of the largest numbers being in the districts of
Armidale, Casino, Glen Innes, Tam worth, and Teaterfield.
Dairy farming has made very rapid progress, dairy cows
being found in every district, but the most important
district is that south of Sydney, comprising Eden, Camden,
Shoalhaven, and Kiama. A marked feature of the last few
years has been the starting of butter factories worked upon
co-operative principles, and the great increase in the export
of butter and cheese to England. In 1896 there were some
460 cheese, butter, and bacon factories and creameries chiefly
in the Eden, Shoalhaven, and Kiama districts, south of
Sidney, employing many hundreds of hands. It is found
tliat factory-made butter commands from Id. to 2d. per lb.
more than home-made butter. The establishment of factories
has caused land in their neighbourhood to increase in value
from 1/. to 21. per acre. Bees are kept in all parts, except in
the West, the coast and mountain districts and the neigh-
bourhood of Sydney especially having a large number
of hives.
Natural pastures exist throughout the Colony, but especially
in the Western districts,where are to be found many varieties
of the best fattening grasses, herbage, and salt-bush.
(2) Agricultural.— The extent of its territory ranging
through so many degrees of latitude and longitude, from
temperate south to semi-tropical north, and from the com-
parative moisture of the coast to the prevailing dryness of
the interior, accounts for the variety of agricultural resources
contained in the Colony. Clearing land costs from 15s. an
acre in sparsely-timbered districts to 30/. in the dense forests
of the northern districts.


of the
The following table shows the relative importance
chief crops during the last three years
Year ending
31st March,
1895.
Year ending Year ending
31st March. 31st March,
1896. 1897.
Wheat
Maize
Oats
Barley
Potatoes
Sugar cane (productive)
TT ( Wheat
i Oats
Grape vines
Gardens and orchards ...
Orangeries.
Acres.
647,483
208,308
30,636
10,396
30.089
14,204
125,797
96,856
86,265
12,204
Acres.
596,684
211,104
23,750
7.590
2i,722
14,398
172,614
120,857
7,519
35,679
11,956
Acres.
866,112
211,382
39,530
6,453
31,170
18.194
161,136
133,946
8,061
39,378
12,490
The standard weight of a bushel of wheat is 00 lbs., maize Weights.
56 lbs., English barley 52 lbs,, and oats 40 lbs.
The following are the average wholesale or market prices Prices of
stock, &c
for farm stock and produce :
Wheat, per bushel 4s. 4 d.
Oats „ 2s. 2d.
Maize „ 2s. 4 d.
Potatoes, per ton —
21. 4s. 3 d. to 0/. 18s. V/.
Hay (oaten or wheaten),
per t0n...3/. Bs. Od. to 5/. os.
Lucerne, per ton 21. to 3/.
Batter, dairy, per lb. 7 d. to 10c?.
„ factory „
Cheese, per lb, \\d. to6£c/.
Bulls 0/. to 12/.
Cows and heifers 21
'. 10s. to 51.
Dairy cows
41. to 101
Good flock rams 21. to r SI.
„ ewes 46-. to 10s.
Pigs, each ... 18s.to21s,
Horses, heavy draught,
each ... ... 20/. to 30/.
Horses, first class
saddle
... 18/ to 30/.
In ths Western Division
very
little wheat is grown, and Wheat,
in the Northern Division the area is comparatively small.
The best and largest wheat-growing districts are in the
central and southern divisions of the Colony, situated on
the high table land and western slopes of the main range
dividing the coastal region from the Great Western Plains ;
the principal wheat-producing counties are Ashb irnham,
Bathurst, Clarendon, Monteagle, Harden, Cadell, Tirana,
Lincoln, Forbes, Gordon, Bland, Bourke, Mitchell, Denison,
and Hume, Denison growing much the most. The yield
per acre for the Colon)’ daring the last ten years has varied
from sto 16 bushels ; the average being 11 bushels. The
average cost of growing an acre of wheat varies from 15s. 6c/.
on large farms to 275. on small farms ; the average return
per acre is 21. ss. if it is grown for grain, and 3/. 10s. if it is
grown for hay. In addition to the grain grown, increasing
large areas of wheat are grown for hay and dry fodder for
766r—6 B


cattle. The rainfall in the wheat districts varies from 15 to
28 inches a year. Large quantities of flour are imported
into the Colony.
Maize or Indian corn is grown in almost every part of the
coastal region, along the river valleys, especially north of
Sydney, and yields an abundant return. The production is
greatest in the north and south coast districts. A rainfall of
30 to 35 inches a year is needful, but irrigation gives good
results. The yield during the last ten years has varied from
27 to 34 bushels an acre.
Maize.
Oats are cultivated as a grain crop principally in the wheat-
growing districts, but the production of this grain is far from
satisfying the wants of the Colony, and large quantities have
to be imported. The average yield is 14 to 24 bushels an
acre. It is more extensively grown for hay and green food,
which sells readily at remunerative prices.
Barley, &c.
Barley, rye, millet, and sorghums do well, and are grown
both for grain and for hay, but only to a limited extent. The
average yield of barley is 11 to 21 bushels per acre.
The cultivation of potatoes is large, its principal centres
being the Bathurst, Argyle, King, Sandon, Camden,
and Durham districts ; the average yield is nearly 3 tons an
acre. The other root crops are very small, turnips being the
most important.
Potatoes.
The area under permanent grasses is much larger than it
used to be. Lucerne and sown grasses are laid down prin-
cipally in the Hunter districts and the southern table-land.
They are also being extensively laid down in dairy-farming
districts.
Permanent
grasses.
Both the soil and climate of the Colony are well fitted for
growing tobacco, and it is cultivated principally in the
counties of Wynyard, Buccleugh, Bathurst, Roxburgh, and
Parry, being grown almost exclusively by Chinese. The
area under crop has much increased during the last few
years.
Tobacco.
Sugar growing is carried on in the valleys of the Rich-
mond, Tweed, and Clarence Rivers in the north, and the
productive area is larger than formerly. But, owing to the
cheapness of labour in other sugar-growing countries, the
production in New South Wales is not as profitable as it
was, and farmers are turning their attention to dairying.
The Customs’ duties, moreover, on imported sugar are
gradually being reduced, and will cease altogether in July,
1901. The yield in New South Wales varies from 14 to 33
tons of sugar cane per acre, the average being 22. The sugar
beet industry is increasing.
Grapes flourish all along the Coast district, especially near
the Hunter, and the wines of the Albury district, near
the Victorian border, have a high reputation throughout
Australia. The phylloxera has appeared in the Camden
district south of Sydney, and in Parramatta, but, so far,
Sugar.
Vineyards.


without doing much harm. The produce of wine per acre
on an average of years is about 200 gallons ; the industry is
a most promising one for a man of small capital. A con-
siderable area is also given up to the cultivation of table
grapes, especially in the districts surrounding Parramatta.
The Vine Diseases Act, 1893, is intended for the special
protection of vineyards.
The area under orange and lemon trees is greatly increasing, Oranges and
and is now 12,000 acres ; Parramatta, and the Hawkesbury lemons,
districts being the most important centres of this industry.
Fruits of all kinds common to England grow in abundance, Other fruits.
as well as bananas, pineapples, and other semi-tropical fruits,
but at present the cultivation of all fruits except grapes,
oranges, and lemons, has made no great progress. The area
of production is indeed increasing, but New South Wales
still imports fruit, so that there would seem to be a great
future for the fruit-growing industry in the Colony. With
a view to the development of the fruit industry, prizes are
now offered by the Department of Agriculture, and it is
hoped to establish an export trade to England, consisting
principally of oranges, lemons, bananas, grapes, and other
tropical fruits. Much the largest fruit-growing district is-
around Parramatta and Sydney ; but there is a considerable
area also in the New England and Hawkesbury districts in
the north, and in the Camden and Argyle districts to the
south of Sydney.
Market gardens exist in all parts, the largest area being Market
round Parramatta and Sydney, the average size of each gardens,
garden being 3 acres. Market gardening offers good openings
for a man with small capital ; most of the market gardeners
at present are Chinese. Pumpkins and melons are largely
grown along the coast north of Sydney.
Flowers for the manufacture of scent, eucalyptus oil and Articles
essence, olives, the castor oil plant, flax, hemp, cotton-seed which can bt
oil, indigo, silk, sunflowers, wattles, and hops are some of pro uce
the other products which might be successfully grown or
made in NeAv South Wales.
The following is a sub-division of the Colony according to Climate and
climate and agricultural capacity. ImShWahS
The North Coast has a sub-tropical climate, rich alluvial k
soils, dense vegetation, and a heavy rainfall. The principal
crops are sugar-cane, maize, oaten hay, potatoes, and sorghum
for green fodder.
The North Tableland (a high region, extending from the
Hunter Valley to Tenterfield) has a climate resembling that
of England, varying soils (basaltic and granitic), moderate
rainfall, and facilities for mixed farming, horse, cattle, sheep,
and pig breeding, fruit growing, etc. The principal crops
are wheat, oaten hay, and maize.
In the Central Tableland the principal crops are wheat,
oaten and wheaien hay, and maize.
766r-5 B 2


The South Tableland is a high region of great agricultural
promise as yet undeveloped, and has a fairly regular rainfall.
The principal crops are wheat, oats for hay, maize, and
lucerne.
In the Western District (the agricultural land on the
western slope extending from the western border of Cook to
Dubbo), there is great variety of climate, the winters being
cold, and the summers hot and dry ; it has a moderate rain-
fall, and rich basaltic soils, where agriculture is slowly
supplanting pastoral pursuits ; a considerable area is also
devoted to grape culture.
The Western Plains District is a dry country of rich
soils and very small rainfall, where agriculture is only
possible with the aid of irrigation ; the principal industry is
pastoral.
The Central Coast District extends northwards from
Sydney to the tropical district, and includes the County of
Cumberland, which is pre-eminently the fruit-growing
county of New South Wales, and grows the following as its
principal crops : —maize, lucerne, oaten hay, orchard fruits,
citrus fruits, potatoes, wheat, grapes, sorghum, pumpkins and
melons, and barley.
Southern Coast District. —This district is especially the
home of the dairying industry, but also grows maize, oaten
hay, sorghum, potatoes, orchard fruits, wheaten hay, and
lucerne.
Taking the lines of railway, good arable land extends along
Lands opened the Southern , as far as Marulan (114 miles from Sydney),
up by rail- The Northern passes, along nearly its whole length, through
WayB ‘ a good agricultural and grazing country. Along the Western
are orangeries, vineyards, and homesteads, but until the
Bathurst plains are reached, the land is for the most part too
mountainous for agricultural purposes.
Lands near The most fertile land of the Colony is to be found on the
riyers. margin of the rivers, particularly the flats of the Hunter,
Clarence, Macleay, Manning, Hawkesbury, and Shoalhaven,
but these are inevitably exposed to loss from floods.
Timber. New South Wales is rich in timber of all kinds, many of
the woods, as the tulip wood and rosewood, possessing a
beautiful grain suitable for decorative woodwork, but, in
spite of this, very large quantities of timber are imported.
The cedar is the most valuable tree, and is found in the
northern parts of the Colony. Next come the different
varieties of the Eucalyptus known as the iron bark, blue
gum, stringy bark, grey gum, &c. More than a hundred
kinds of acacia abound in the Colony. It is to be observed
that the trees are almost universally evergreens, and when
their leaves, which are destitute for the most part of salts,
fall, their decomposition into mould is prevented by the heat
and dryness of the climate.


The necessity of preserving the timber resources of the
Colony has been recognised, and State forests and timber
reserves are now protected by the State. Licences are issued
to cut timber on these reserves, and also on ordinary Crown
Lands. There is a large number of saw mills in the Colony.
(3.) Mineral. —New South Wales abounds in minerals, the (3) Mineral
most important of which is coal, the Colony possessing the
most extensive coal and cannel coal seam in the Southern
Hemisphere. The aggregate value of all minerals in 1896
was 4,478,368*., which exceeded the decennial average,
but was less than in 1895, and many previous years. There
was a very marked increase in the value of silver-lead and
ores, copper, and coal won during the year, but a considerable
decrease in that of gold and tin. The number of miners
employed is very large. There is a School of Mines at
Sydney, where students may be trained in mining.
The coal-producing area is estimated at 24,000 square Goal,
miles, the richest portion of which is near Newcastle, in the
northern or Hunter River district. Owing to the long
strikes of 1890 and 1896 a considerable foreign trade
left Newcastle to the advantage of the Bulli mines and of
mines in Japan, but it is now gradually increasing again ;
the successful working of coal in Victoria has also affected
the output. Other coal mines are at Bulli, in the Illawarra
district, south of Sydney, and at Lithgow, 96 miles west of
Sydney by rail. In 1896 the aggregate amount produced
was 3,909,516 tons, valued at 1,125,280*., the quantity being,
with the exception of that in 1891, the largest output on
record. The average selling price of coal, however, in
1896 was only ss. 9 d, per ton, which is the lowest average
yet, so that the total value of the coal increased by some
30,000*. only. The coal trade is likely to benefit greatly
from the erection of the extensive smelting works, near
Newcastle, and on Lake Illawarra in the south. Over 9,400
hands were employed in the coal and shale mines. For
Regulations as to Coal Mines see p. 10.
296,071 ozs. of gold, valued at 1,073,360*., were produced Gold,
in 1896, the out-put being as much as 64,094 oz. less than
in 1895, owing to the great scarcity of water on many of the
gold fields. The principal seats both of alluvial and quartz
gold mining are the Bathurst, Peel and IJralla, Lachlan,
Tumut and Adelong, Tambaroora and Turon, Southern,
Cobar and Mudgee districts. Quartz mining is, however,
yearly growing in importance as compared with alluvial.
There were 22,207 gold miners in 1896, being nearly 800
more than in 1895 ; over 700 were Chinese. The estimated
output in 1897 was 292,217 oz.
Of late years the production of silver has become of great Silver,
importance owing to the discovery of silver deposits
extending over an area of about 2,500 square miles in the


Barrier Range District beyond the River Darling, upon the
borders of South Australia (see p. 4).
The amount of silver produced in 1896 was 202,789 ozs.
valued at 26,518/., and of silver-lead and ore 286,936 tons,
valued at 1,758,933/. The output of silver was less than in
the previous year, and that of silver-lead and ore was more.
These mines employed 7,645 miners in 1891, the numbers
gradually falling to 4,100 in 1894 : but in 1895-97 they
rose again and reached 5,500 in the latter year, work being
more plentiful.
Tin mines are being worked in the extreme north of the
Colonj’, near Tenterfield and Vegetable Creek, and other
districts of New England, and copper chiefly in the Cobar
district between the Macquarie, the Bogan, and the Darling
Rivers, and employ over 2,200 hands, 500 being Chinese : the
value of the copper raised or exported in 1896 was 200,311/.
(being 59,426/, more than in 1895, the industry remaining
prosperous in 1897 also), and that of tin 102,117/., which
was 36,506/. less than in 1895. Iron is found through-
out the Colony, especially in the mountain districts ; but as
yet the only ironworks are at Eskbank, near Lithgow, where
over 100 men are employed in manufacturing finished iron
castings and galvanised iron from scrap iron.
Other minerals raised are shale (the value of which, in 1896,
was 34,201/.) ; antimony at Hillgrove in the Peel and Uralla
Mining District; bismuth in the Glen Innes district; chrome
at Gundagai ; a few diamonds at Bingara ; and opals at
White Cliff, 60 miles from Wilcannia, to the value of about
25,000/. in 1896, some 400 miners finding constant employ-
ment there.
Copper.
Other
minerals.
Stone.
The Colony possesses an abundant supply of various kinds
of stone. Marble limestone is found near Bathurst, Mudgee,
and several other places. Granite is found near Goulburn, &c.,
and Sydney itself has an inexhaustible supply of building
sandstone. Clays, for brickmaking purposes, abound through-
out the Colony.
The waters of the Colony abound with fish, such asschnap-
per, rock cod, whiting, mackerel, mullet, garfish, oysters, &c.
Deep-sea fishing has been hitherto much neglected.
The principal indigenous animals of New South Wales are
kangaroos, wombats, dingoes or native dogs, and opossums.
Deer and hares have been introduced and thrive. Rabbits
have increased so as to become a great pest. It is estimated
that considerably over a million and a half sterling has been
spent in the destruction of rabbits, but it is now generally
recognised that nothing but a system of connected wire fenc-
ing throughout the Colony will do much to abate the nuisance.
Little has been done with regard to irrigation, especially of
late years, as the average rainfall has been generally higher ;
the Government, however, has been engaged in obtaining
materials to form the basis of a comprehensive scheme.
Animals.
Rabbits.
Irrigation.


Nearly 40,000 acres are being irrigated by private enterprise,
most of which, are situated in the Riverina district. Artesian
boring has met with considerable success at Coonamble,
Bourke, and elsewhere.
Millions of sheep have perished through drought in recent
years, and many experiments have been made with the object
of avoiding such ruinous losses. For instance, land on the
Lower Darling, which in its natural state was scarcely capable
of sustaining one sheep per 10 acres, was, when irrigated and
laid down in lucerne, proved to be able to support 20 sheep
per acre. An irrigation colony upon the lines of Mildura, in
Victoria, has been tried at Mulgoa (near Penrith, 40 miles Mulgoa.
west of Sydney) : but only a few acres are at present under
cultivation.
The total number of manufactories and works in existence Manu-
during 1896-7 was 2,944, as against 2,409 in 1895. The total ketones,
number of hands employed was 49,609 (being nearly 6,000
more than in 1895) of whom 6,932 were females. More than
half of the hands employed were in Sydney and its suburbs.
The following are some of the more important manufactories
(for wages see p. 24).
Printing and bookbinding
Railway and carriage
Saw mills
Ship building and repairing
Smelting
Sugar mills
„ refineries
Tanneries
Aerated water
Boiling down
Boot
Breweries
Brick
Butter, cheese, and bacon
Clothing
Coaches and waggons
Flour
Tobacco
Woollen
Machinery and engineering
Meat preserving
Wool washing
the rents of
rather higl
:s of dwellings occupied by Cost of living
high, and are as follow : Home rent.
/eek, or at the rate of 2s. Sd.
In the city of Sydney th
the labouring classes are r;
Three rooms from Bs. to 9s.
per week,
j- i UUIUO O.X V/XJLA KSKJ* vw VW. 7 - /, 7
to 3s. per room ; four rooms, from 10s. per week, or 2s. b a.
per room ; and five rooms, 12s. per week, or 2s. 4c?. per room.
Dwellings of more than five rooms are not often occupied by
labouring-class families, unless there are grown-up sons and
daughters who contribute to the family earnings ; the rent of
one with seven or eight rooms is from 65/. to 100/. a j ear. In
the suburbs of Sydney houses of the kind referred to bring
somewhat lower rents, the ratio varying from 2s. to 2s. bd.
per room ; while in the provincial towns, except in rare cases,
rents are still lower. Many working men, however, own their
houses, and in the country wooden houses can be put up
very cheaply and rent is seldom paid.


Board and Board and lodging in Sydney and its suburbs cost from 15s.
lodging. 20s. per week for single men, and from 12s. for women. In
country towns they cost 12s. to 20s. ; and in country districts
farm and station hands are usually boarded and lodged by
their employers.
Price of pro- The retail price of provisions
Visions. as follows at S
Bacon B d. to Is.
Beef 3 d. to s^c?.
Bread ... per 21b.
loaf.
Butter (fresh) 9 d. to Is. 2d.
Cheese 6c?. to 10c?.
Coal (per ton) ... 16s. to2os.
Coffee Is. 6c?. to 2s,
Eggs, per doz. ... Is. to Is. 6c?.
Food is abundant and meat
is per lb. is approximately
Sydney:
Flour 10s. 3c?. to 15s.
per 100 lbs.
Gas (per 1,000 ft.)... 4s. 3 d.
Milk (per qt.) ... 4c?.
Mutton ... ItjC?. to 2 fyl.
Potatoes (per c wt.) ... 4s. to Bs.
Sugar to 4c/.
Tea Is. to 2s. 6c?.
Tobacco (Colonial) 4s.
,t is much cheaper than in
England. In Sydney there are restaurants where an excellent
meal may be got for 6c?.
Clothing.
The cost of clothing is 5 to 10 per cent., or Is. to 2s. in the
£, dearer than in England.
The rate of wages is approximately as follows
Wages.
Without Board and Lodging
Mechanics,
Artizans,
AND OTHERS.
Per day —
Bricklayers ... ... 10s.
Per day —
Coach painters Bs. to 10s.
Coachsmiths ... Bs. „ 10s.
Bricklayers’ labourers
(is. Id. to Bs.
Brickmakers ... ... 7s. 2d.
Compositors ... piece-work,
11 d. to Is, 1c?. per 1,000 ;
Carpenters and joiners 9s. 6c?.
Gas-fitters ... 6s. 6c?. to 9s.
or 525. per week, for good
jobbing hands.
Coppersmiths 95.4 c?. to 10s.8c?.
Masons and stone-
cutters ... 9s. to 10s.
Engine drivers
ss. 10c?. to 13s. lid.
Navvies ... 6s. 7c?.
Painters ... 9s.
Plasterers ... 10s.
Engine fitters 95.4 c?. to 10s.8c?.
Iron moulders 9s. 4c?. to 11s.
Plumbers ... 6s. 6c?. to 9s.
Iron turners 9s, 4c?. „ 12s.
Shipwrights ... 7s. 6c?. „ 11s.
Tinsmiths ... 7s. 6c?. „ 10s.
Lumpers & wharf labourers,
10c?. to Is, per hour or 425.
Blacksmiths ... 9s. 8c?.
455. per week.
Pattern-makers Bs. to 11s.
Brass finishers
and moulders Bs. to 10s,
Saddlers ... ss. „ 11s.
Sawmill hands (Is. „ 10s.
Boilermakers... 10s. 2d.


Per day —
Wheelwrights... Bs. to 10s.
General labourers, 4s. 6d. to
Bs., or 20s, a week.
Per week —
Aerated water
makers ... 11. to 4/
Bakers ... 11. to 3 1. 6s. Bd.
Boiling down hands
1/. ss. to 21. ss.
Bookbinders .. 525. to 655.
Bootmakers, male 20s. „ 50s.
Bootmakers, female
12s. 6d. „ 255.
Brewery hands 30s. „ 50s.
Butchers ... 40s. „ 70s.
Butter makers 40s. „ 60s.
Cabinet makers 355. „ 575.
Dressmakers ... 14s. „ 30s.
Electricians ... 40s. „ 70s.
Hairdressers ... 40s. „ 60s.
Millers ... 60s. „ 70s.
Milliners ... 15s, „ 30s.
Omnibus drivers 255. „ 40s,
„ conductors 10s. to 125. 6 d.
Sugar mill la-
bourers ... 30s. to 355.
Sugar mill me-
chanics ... 48s. „ 80s.
Per week —
Tailors (1) in factories —
Cutters ... 50s. to 60s.
Coat hands 30s. „ 70s.
(2) In shops 445.
(3) Women working
at home 20s. to 225. 6d.
Tanners ... 30s. to 50s.
Tobacco hands—
Male ... 30s. „ 50s.
Female 15s. to 375. 6d.
Upholsterers—
Male ... 40s. to 575.
Female ... 15s. „ 255.
Wool washers ... 30s. „ 50s.
Woollen mill spinners—
Male ... 40s. to 50s.
Woollen mill weavers—
Female ... 17s. to 30s.
Per month —
Seamen in coasting
steamers ... 5/. to 61.
Firemen in coasting *
steamers .. ... SI.
Seamen in coasting sailing
ships ... 41. to 51.
Officers in ships 9/. to 15 1.
Engineers in ships 12/. 10s. to
22/. 10s.
Miners (44 hours per week),
Coal (northern miners) hew-
ing rate is 2s. lid. a ton ;
average earnings are 7s, to
9s. per 8 hour.
Coal (southern and western
miners) hewing rate is
Is. 10 d. to 2s. a ton ;
average earnings are Bs. to
9s. for 8 hours.
Gold miners ... 40s. to 50s,
per week.
Silver miners... 9s. per shift
(8 hours).
Tin „ ... 50s. a week.
Municipal Workmen.
Per week — Per week —
Carpenters ... 21. 14s. to 3/. Gangers... 21. ss. to 3/. 9s.
Unskilled labourers .. 21. 2s. Park rangers ... ... 2/. ss.
Carpenters ... 21. 14s. to 3/.
Carters (finding Street cleaners ... 21. 2e,
horse and cart) ... 3/. 3s.


With Board
Station
Per year —
Married couples
(without in-
cumbrances) 50/. to 70/.
Farm labourers... 26/. „ 50/.
Boundary drivers 40/. „ 50/.
Bullock drivers... 40/. „ 52/.
Horse-team drivers 40/. „ 65/.
Stockmen ... 50/. „ 52/.
Shepherds ... 35/. „ 45/.
Gardeners ... 40/. „ 52/.
and Lodging.*
Hands.
Per year —
Country black-
smiths... ... 75/. to 80/.
Useful boys ... 25/. to 35/.
Shearers (per 100
sheep shorn) 17s. 6c/. to 205.,
without'** board, and in
Southern Riverina, 18s. 6c/.
Orchard hands 10s. to 20s.
per week.
Yignerons ... 50/. to 52/.
Domestic Servants.
Per week — Per week —
Cooks (female) ... 12s. to 16s. Nursemaids ... ss. to 10s.
Laundresses ... 12s. „ 20s. Grooms and
House and parlour coachmen ... 20s. „ 30s.
maids... ... Bs. „ 12s. Waitresses ... 10s. „ 15s.
General servants Bs. „ 15s
%
Note.—Farm labourers are usually boarded and lodged,
and single men are, as a rule, preferred to
married men with families. A high rate of
wages does not necessarily imply a demand for
labour. The ordinary working day for artizans
is eight hours.
How to get Under the Crown Lands Acts of 1884,1889,1895, and 1896,
land. and the Regulations of 3rd June 1895, the whole Colony is
Land sub-divided into the Eastern, Central, and Western divisions,
Divisions of each of which is further sub-divided into various land dis-
ihe Colony. trictgj one or more districts forming local divisions under
a local land board, from which there lies an appeal to the
Land Court at Sydney. The Eastern Division has an area
of 60,452,000 acres and includes the coastal district of the
Colony, as well as the northern and southern table lands.
The Central Division includes an area of 55,460,000 acres,
and embraces the upper basin of the Darling River in the
northern part of the Colony, and portions of those of the
Lachlan, Murrumbidgee, and the other affluents of the Murray
* Rations are plentiful, and generally consist of 8 to 10 lbs. of flour, 10
to 14 lbs. of beef or mutton, 2 lbs. of sugar, and £ lb. of tea per week, but
do not, as a rule, include cheese, butter, or bacon. The lodging is poor ;
several persons occupy the same hut, and there is but little furniture or
bedding.


The Central Division has been hitherto mainly pastoral, but
much of it is suitable for agriculture. The Western Division
embraces an area of 79,970,000 acres, watered entirely by the
Darling River, and is purely pastoral.
Conditional purchases may be obtained in the Eastern and Conditional
Central Divisions by any applicant who is of or over the age purchases.
of 1G years. The price of the land is 1/. per acre, 2s. per acre
being deposited on application, with a survey fee, and the
rest paid by instalments of Is. per acre per year (which by
the Act of 1896 may be reduced to <6d.) together with interest
at 1 per cent, on the unpaid balance : the instalments to begin
at the end of the third year. The applicant must within
three months of confirmation of application by the local land
board commence hand fide residence and continue it during
10 years. He must within three years of confirmation fulfil
certain conditions as to fencing ; or substitute other improve-
ments to be approved by the local land board. Holders of
conditional purchases may make additional conditional pur-
chases adjoining their holdings, provided the same, with
their original purchases, do not exceed GlO acres in the
Eastern and 2,560 acres in the Central Division.
Applicants of the age of 21 years and upwards may apply Conditional
for Crown lands in the Eastern and Central Divisions,
without conditions of residence, in quantities not exceeding reff id C nce.
320 acres ; the deposit and other payments are double those
in the case of conditional purchases proper, the fencing must
be performed within 12 months, and 11. per acre must be
expended in improvements within five years after the date
of confirmation of the application for such purchase.
Every residential conditional purchase in the Eastern and Conditional
Central Divisions carries with it the right of taking up a con- leaseholds.
ditional lease of land adjoining the conditional purchase, not
exceeding three times the area thereof, if available. The area
of the entire holding, however (both purchased and leased),
must not exceed 1,280 acres in the Eastern and 2,560 in the
Central Division ; the term of the lease is 28 years.
Annual leases of unoccupied land may be obtained in any Annual
land division at a rent not less than 21. per 640 acres or any leases.
less area.
Special areas may also be reserved from the operations of Special areas.
the ordinary conditional purchase clauses of the Act, and
may be thrown open to selection under different terms as to
payment, and with or without the condition of residence.
But in such special areas the price of the land cannot be less
than 1/. 10s. per acre, or 3/. if the purchase be non-residential,
and the maximum area of one such purchase is 320 acres in
the Eastern, and 640 acres in the Central and Western
Divisions.


Pastoral In the Western Division the term of a pastoral lease extends
leases. to 28 years upon an assessment made for seven years, and a
re-assessment made every seventh year of the lease’s currency.
Occupation Occupation licences may be obtained in any division for
licences. resumed areas or vacant land. They are to be granted pre-
ferentially to a run-holder over the resumed area of his run.
They are to be granted for each year ending December 31,
and the rates, when appraised, are to be published.
Homestead In the Western Division homestead leases may be granted
leases. within resumed areas or of vacant land in areas not less than
2,560 acres, nor exceeding 10,240 acres, for a term of 28 years,
the lands to be appraised every 7 years. The lessee must
fence, within two years of occupation, with a fence according
to a prescribed design, and the holder must reside upon the
land for at least six months of each of the first five years of
the term ; but the land board may grant a postponement of
the fencing and residence
Scrub leases. Land, in any district, which is wholly or partly covered
by scrub may be declared “ scrub land,” and, as such, leased
for a period not exceeding 28 years. The holder must begin
to destroy the scrub within three months of the commence-
ment of the lease.
Snow lands. “ Snow Lands ,” i.e., land in any district covered with snow
during part of the year, may be leased in areas not less than
1,280, and not more than 10,240 acres, for a term of seven
years, with a right of extension for three more years, subject
to a rental fixed by assessment.
Auction sales. Crown lands to the extent of 200,000 acres per annum may
be disposed of by auction in each Land Division at upset
prices per acre of not less than 8 1, in the case of town lands ;
21. 10s. in the case of suburban; and 11. ss. in the case of
other lands. In 1895 about 20,000 acres of country lands
were sold by auction at an average price of 21. 2s. 3 d. an acre.
Homestead The Land Act, 1895, provides, amongst other things, for a
selections. new class of holding, viz., homestead selection, the leading
characteristics of which are the cheap and easy terms on
which land may be acquired in the Colony. A great many
of such homestead selections have been taken up, in the
Eastern and Central Divisions of the Colony.
A selector is confined to one block, and no block can
exceed 1,280 acres. The standard adopted in regulating the
area of each block is that the selector may, by agriculture,
or by agriculture combined with any other ordinary pursuit,
be enabled to establish and maintain his home on the land.
A person under the age of 16 years cannot apply, nor can a
married woman unless living apart from her husband under
a decree for a judicial separation. The rent for the first five


1894. 1895. 1896.
£ £ £
Total Imports ... ... ... 15,801,941 15,992,415 20,561,510
Total Exports 20,577,673 21,934,785 23,010,349
years is per cent, of the notified capital value of the block ;
for the next ten years it is per cent, of the same capital
value ; and for each succeeding ten years the rent is 2 \ per
cent, of a re-appraised capital value. The selector must
erect a dwelling house worth 201. and must reside on the
land.
For the sale or disposal of public lands, the Colony has Crown Land
been divided into 80 land districts with 89 land offices, at en s '
each of which a Crown Land Agent is stationed, whose
duties are to receive all applications for the purchase or
lease of Crown Land and to give the public all necessary
information as regards the alienation of land.
The authority to dig or mine for gold and other minerals Gold and
costs ss. a year (Mining Amendment Act, 1896). Hcences.
For the year ending March 31, 1897, there were in New Number of
South Wales 63,143 occupiers of more than one acre of land occupiers,
(excluding those for pastoral purposes). Of these, 17,547
occupied from 1 to 30 acres, and 32,741 from 31 to 400 acres
each. The average area of holdings has been gradually
declining. Of the total extent of holdings 90 per cent, are
freehold ; a very small proportion is cultivated.
The Customs Duties Acts of 1892 and 1895 may be seen at Customs,
this office. The tariff is now practically a free trade one, and
is limited to the imposition of duties on spirituous liquors,
wines, beer, tobacco, cigars, and opium ; and of certain
duties on candles, sugar, biscuits, fruits, confectionery,
dried fruits, jams, and preserves, gradually diminishing and
finally expiring in 1900 and 1901.
The ordinary revenue in 1896-7 was 9,287,000/., and the Re y® nae
expenditure was 9,320,129/. The Public debt in June 1897 an e fc-
was 61,074,498/., or 46/. Us. s d. per head. Nearly all the
revenue comes from customs, railways, post office, and dis-
posal of Crown lands. A land and income tax is imposed.
The following table shows the fluctuations in the exports Imports and
and imports during the last three years : exports.
d and income tax is imposed,
the fluctuations in the exports
hree years :
1894. 1895. 1896.
£ £ £
15,801,941 15,992,415 20,561,510
20,577,673 21,934,785 23,010,349
Most of the trade of the Colony is with the United
Kingdom and British Possessions. The principal articles of
import are apparel, beer, boots and shoes, drapery, fruits,
gold, grain and flour, iron, live stock, machinery, paper and
books, skins and hides, spirits, sugar, tea, timber, and wool.


1894. 1895. 1896.
The following are the principal articles exported of
Colonial produce or manufacture, and their values: —
Butter
Cattle
C0a1...
Copper
Fruit
Flour
Gold
Hides and skins
Horses
Kerosine shale
Leather
Meat, frozen and preserved
Sheep
Silver
Tallow
Tin ...
Wool
150,263
108,753
804,769
73,481
103,057
0,508
325,302
407,122
94,834
49,187
230,917
399,814
293,289
2,289,489
890,691
187,197*
9,011,790
57,575
117,437
773,954
140,866*
68,723
12,540
419,082
611,504
94,075
77,934
279,281
684,177
284,477
1,648,103
773,105
138,623*
8,958,690
102,502
152,128
900,264
200,314
99,999
196,335
283,093
339,474
123,448
32,846
324,989
561,985
242,283
1,785,451
353,566
102,117
8,776,529
* Includes that refined from both New South Wales and imported ores.
Demand
labour.*
Prosperity is returning again to New South Wales, and
work has improved during the last year. The numbers
of the unemployed gradually decreased, hundreds having
been sent by the Labour Bureau to work in the country
at draining Crown lands, on various river works, in
improving the railway grades, and at prospecting for gold.
By the end of 1897 the number of the unemployed at
Sydney became inconsiderable. Drought continued more or
less through the year, to the injury of the pastoral and
agricultural interests. The sugar season was good and
dairy-farming made excellent progress : miners were busy
at the coal and silver mines, but gold mining was checked for
a time by the strike at Lucknow. Applications for homestead
selections under the Act of 1895 were very numerous, and
settlement on the land showed good progress. Work for
mechanics in most trades improved throughout the year,
but there is no demand at present for more hands. The
only demand is for domestic servants.
As a general rule a man who can make himself useful as a
market gardener, or on a farm or station, or in a dairy, or in
a stable (liveried coachmen are rarely employed) can gener-
ally find work without much difficulty, if he can afford to
wait a little after his arrival. The best openings, however,
are for men who are experienced in fruit growing, in the
r For changes, see quarterly Australasian Colonies Circular, issued free
by this Office, and the monthly report compiled by it in the Labour Gazette,


drying and packing of fruits for export, in the manage-
ment of irrigated and unirrigated orchards, in wine-making,
and in the manufacture and packing of butter and cheese.
Apart from the uncertainty of obtaining work, New South
Wales undoubtedly possesses many attractions to working
men ; wages are high, the recognised working day in skilled
trades is eight hours, and in no country outside the Australian
Colonies is the political and social status of the working class
on a higher level. A New South Wales writer says : “ The
“ people of New South Wales eat and drink and spend
“ more, work less for the necessaries of existence, have a
“ larger share of food luxuries, and in a general way get more
“ out of life than the masses of any other country in the
“ world.”
For persons with some small capital there is undoubtedly Persons with
a good opening. The resources of the country are great, and small capital,
to a very large extent as yet undeveloped, and the I.and
Laws give all possible facilities for settling on the land. It is
true that, unless irrigation can altogether change the nature
of things, large tracts of country must always be given up to
sheep, but even under the present circumstances the area of
land fit for agriculture is said to equal the whole area of
Victoria, while the area under cultivation is much less than
half of the area under cultivation in that colony. New indus-
tries, such as fruit farming (vide p. ID), &c., are becoming
year by year of more importance, and irrigation, which is
being undertaken, will, as in Victoria, tend to cut up large
estates. Of course money should in no case be invested until
knowledge and experience have been gained of the condition
of things prevailing in the colony. Those who wish to take
up land should work for wages on a farm in the colony for
12 or 18 months, till they acquire some knowledge of the
climate, soil, and general conditions of farming.
For the main business of the colony, which is sheep farm- Sheep
ing, a return of good seasons should ensure a period of pros- farming-
perity, but sheep farming is becoming more and more the
concern of the large capitalist.
For female domestic servants there is a steady demand Female
which is likely to continue. domestics.
Emigrants who go out from this country should, if they Advice to
have no friends of their own in the colony, try to take intro- emigrants-
ductions to some one who would be able to put them in the
way of work, or at least to some trade or friendly society ;
they should take with them characters ; they should be pre-
pared not to remain in Sydney, but to pass on without loss
of time or money to the country districts ; they should be
ready to turn their hands to the first job which presents it-
self ; and they should be careful not to leave England without
the certainty of having some money in their pockets when
they arrive at Sydney to keep them while looking for work.


They should also remember that trades are not so sharply
defined as they are in England. A carpenter, for instance,
especially in country districts, will often be called upon to
act as a joiner, wheelwright, or cooper, &c. ; and a mason, as
a bricklayer or stone cutter.
Authorities consulted for the above Handbook.
Coghlan’s exhaustive “Wealth and Progress of New South
Wales, published in 1896”; “Statistical Register of New
South Wales, 1896 ; ” “ New South Wales, the Mother Colony
of the Australias, 1896; ” “ The Seven Colonies of Austra-
lasia, 1895-6,” by T. A. Coghlan ; “ The Mines Report for
1896 ; ” Messrs. Gordon and Gotch’s “ Australian Handbook ”
(St. Bride Street, London, E.C.) ; the “ Sydney Mail,” and
other newspapers; various Parliamentary Reports; the
Statutes ; and in some cases, which the Committee of
Management would gladly see largely multiplied, the
answers of private correspondents. See also the Colonial
Office List, Harrison and Sons, 59, Pall Mall, London, S.W.
The Emigration Statutes and General Handbook, 1898
(published at this Office, price 3d.), contains a list of British
Emigration Societies, &c.
FurLher For further particulars respecting the Colony apply to the
information. Agent-General for New South Wales, Westminster Chambers,
• 9, Victoria Street, London, S.W. ; or to the Chief Clerk at
the Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, West-
minster, S.W., where Maps and Directories may be seen.
(Office hours, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. ; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to
1.30 p.m.)
NOTE. —This Office will be glad to receive suggestions
and information, especially from colonists.




The following Publications are issued by this Office, and
may be obtained post free from the Chief Clerk, 31, Broad-
way, Westminster;—
Price.
I. A Quarterly Poster—exhibited in all Post Offices Free.
11. Quarterly Circulars on Canada, and the Austral-
asian and South African Colonies. They will
be sent free to anyone desiring them - - Free.
111. Circular on the Emigration of Women - • Free.
IV. The following Handbooks
Canada - - price Id.
New South Wales „ Id.
Victoria - - „ Id.
South Australia „ Id.
Queensland - „ Id.
Western Australia - Id.
Tasmania - - Id.
New Zealand- - Id.
Cape Colony - Id.
Natal Id.
Each of the above Handbooks contains a Map.
Professional Handbook: showing the necessary
qualifications in the above Colonies for architects
and civil engineers, auctioneers, barristers and
solicitors, chemists, civil service, clergymen,
clerks, commercial travellers, dentists, go vernesses,
mounted rifles, notaries public, nurses, physicians
and surgeons, police, railway servants, surveyors,
teachers, and veterinary surgeons 3d.
Emigration Statutes and General Handbook: deal-
ing with all British Statutes on Emigrant Ships,
and Emigration; and Emigration Societies, &c. - 3d.
The above 12 Handbooks, bound together, with all
the Maps - - - 2s. Od.
V. Pamphlet on the West Indies, with Map - - Cd.
Pamphlet on Newfoundland, with Map - Id.
Pamphlet on Ceylon, with Map ... Id.
VI. On Foreign Countries , occasional Pamphlets:—
United States Circular Free.
Summary of Consular Reports (North and South
America) 2d.
Pamphlet on the Argentine Republic - - 2d.
Pamphlet on the South African Republic
(Transvaal) ------- 2d.
All the above may be obtained post free from the Chief
Clerk, Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, West-
minster, S.W.; the Handbooks may also be obtained, either
directly or through any Bookseller, from Eyre and
Spottiswoode, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or
John Menzies & Co., 12, Hanover Street, Edinburgh, and 90,
West Nile Street, Glasgow ; or Hodges, Figgis, & Co., Limited,
101, Grafton Street, Dublin.


g-j HKW SOui'M " ; j-- - -. r. —.rzj|
~ * i j ** > 1 _L\| vs. I j OBflgCf'
I 1 SHOWING COACH AND OTHER ROUTES FROM THE VARIOUS STATIONS a 13 I UW (| I
=~ Together with Mileage 1 rom Sjydney —4 y, ,_ v *" v szJ^Dunbi Me i 3.
| j With Diagrams ofNorth Coast South (xxistandlTirts of Southern and Western Lines. 0 f x 4 1 1
S= I 1 "■ 1 IT V r-A,Q.4Cr iw,llin^ lli 1 : \ ' I I \ Byron I~
1 1 . 1 1896 ,.A. 0 l 0 . n__ , , ,7v , \ H. ,•/; \
GSb f 9 f WalllM>l — 7* * * -*”t k ■ ‘ / - L \ ' * tM?^ J J \ , \ < _,_„^3iTabul a^_Ji4^ n0 j =
Q—lT' ; 1 Hk *. rm U \ • // a | V | >....- ilffi*"'- i
;l / ” 6 >=r, e nt v f) ' K / W7 7 'A 'y \ i f 7*. f
-— r f !) V. 4 r L. . >. *YWeilmorip|h f / a Jy, \ 474wj/Bumuilla •7 s5 f yUT/
=S i ! / // ' y , . „ /I «o.ynn*™> aTA { p* I \ | / ) / - > W «70.|f Bluff Rock T« # Woodbind f > _
& I I <|( 595 .\ an,abulia A \ u . .4 7 / Qto(\« JlSandy Flat % ! / / M
1 / i // \ // \ \ “ da ’ \V “4* 198 /V I S
i C ““C Jiy#" 1 # V . y N *' r ;'/7 K f Ti: | s
i > ~£sT jl '''4 J ■** V y TT \ a
- \ %;r*- y -N ( I \ Bin^anf y \ 4i4sto'n>4ge „A / S
, >i -3 —3 —y? T /Ohggfegsr 1 >. —I V- S \I i •■«-Vt in -4 ha „ /, f—^ 0almort< fe~N8 8 B „ ucca^ mbl \ /
Tso; IT *■! ) //fv / I fTT I , ( J V 1 ’ ; ■=
J \ . [1 * X / f / | \ I I- \ ti k a :y«4N^ arra^a i i Araw.rf Black Mountain . / i
g j 4 - / I \*'' / \ tK ’I.3&J \| I / \ _ ,£■&„„ L.,4._4t ™J?/ "■*”' I 1
I / x \ n .‘•/ y \ ! 1 “V \ \ M \ W ’. V -W '
Ml / * v5^-j- While cl.ffs, ' / .y \ \ \ ] tfo \V \ »N I V » Man i ( / • =r^'D 3 7.fi™ s '' V Bmvravill 62 "W _
& / / \ r 56 ” { , \ \ \ \ L ({« y y\ Emerald HilLba. /’ V\ '' ..aaiKen, uokv (L (M ' "“'“H =
=■ ; / / i , i t J : \ j yy° lab T' Iv 1 -, ,[b «3^JjQKAMBty^t^»g dlne 7^ 27 -/ Wollun ; «a r- [ ( ■=
4F / \- — / 1 I \ I \ I K\ v \\ (.y|Tf 5 ><-““d \r ~ M| Wajcha I ( -A CIvlmcA, —
A r / ib^r-aF. — ****-' J X \ \ \\ \ V v v v ““'saftst Carro " ; 7 ' Vi r/ -- —- — I
— = + I J / \ I \ r . iV \ \ y \ i \ v Curlew is kessai. . r - y A- \ 3 ' p u Ai: i . AT
== j lit 'I 405«iXGinlarnboXe \ \ I V '-*k\ . A / / c^^^v^rredenckton
===== * I I ! X l \ \ 7 ( / 't ’ Xetffiabarrabran AA Kempsey j __
=; I - y' 11 M \ / / 238m. * Macquarie =|
s <| _ \ yyj\ \ '' / ! Ard i l 2 e 4^ c jjlJLI RR U R U N DI 217m, Haven I S
P 1 ' SILVEgON \ / / \ / X \\ !X \ V y C " y M .... Brook .Win^hatfS^iT [ j |
1 1 —-. - ■ Vr S I I. the Pr -c- 32^S^eTly ; s SiWyl / \ ■ 7 7,'wpi ParkviJIe i. I j AM
yji 4=y —K^«^!A Bmken Hil^V C ) A i \\ ; / ,sonTown S [vl Scone 229 w 4 -4 I
E 00 \ w u n % l / 1 i R | / Jerr)S M* i 5
& \ \ I r ) '/ \ Ulin a I y ,/ p h \ Pa M % Ex ce! sioc d i ng ( j'
M Uj 1 *L* I p&M't,***' I W\ South Coast Line Sydney to Ki am a
=£ )jk r*' / 5 » 5 ”VBeob|al I *1 S Wvatond ft *«"\\ r ,. „ \%V A*T \'l v.eh>«»' tf 7W? | WUUIO VUROI L.II1C. Ul URtl IO niAIWA N^---- =
=L 1 (f| f A_ 4sqmJ Cun bar / 3 a, 1 [_ b I and pan, of =
=■ i _ V J 77 H ~/\r 5 V R,X„ \ t - I I SOUTHERN LINE SYDNEY to MOSS VALE/ k =
—A — —%T 1 /( / i \ Baddigowefy. Xf \ \ ijct■ Mr j , a n n U h .Mnor * <
M y-Jr W0RTH / : jfcy « /" t i \ y^ rE " A 7 i JJ SYDENHAM TO BELMORE^
S 0,1 44,) <i Ia4/A^]7y,.yy^y ounc< Ljyj [ . 4 *w TrK %9 " 42 ‘r ULU jl f 1
9 TieAnvmtimnakigllml.sMica!, 7|\ , „ /// ' J!sj^32? 3^^? S >0' \ '#7, £ SaS^S& m ' mm ‘ II „ -^863^6^891^4*
S „. ?^i 68 f A n 77C - T ~r:.. / > »JteT, 4 - yu4Hk I ■■[ Jj , «Tv43y4 s
44 Showing Northern (wiast Line Har n illoA^V\%i 0 A Poonboon \ Coono£lr " ' AdelonC v | fi r, \ I l!Wh/lara£o c 4 / Aflt V I SuIherlAfklJiFi — ’V' 7=7
QvnmFY Trt NFWPAqTIF COCKLE C? 4U tn i Bundur^C?* R V u a „ » / SS-S . / M\\Po*t Hacmo S
H and Branch Lines f iv. ! C Sj TEeV»" * '/ Adelobi \ f \ 44 I # W<b (17 0 F /CUMBFa
g HorhsbytdMiison'sPT4 Bucktown to Richmond Awaba Vy 4 * *£&**•* / \ fessS" l,n 'v.™^^. 0 ”^ Ma »s»pi<«^j} lmo4 ( j QU “ N^/y^^"s ' 8aM ✓Wuwrfi. ca«ow6^^S^"^ towh " ea ' =
i ! 7 4ii/l /A ' 4, ■( ,...m -- —-y — f 1
I <#4 4 ;hy if y I 2 *Sk j: 4 g ' c IL,yf CAMDEN —£f I
\ * 4 I ( y x lMyy\ / / . I Ayhf 4 ColoVa,e • ,, |
P ; I y. mM , a J^^x kr , showing pari oE 1 11 ' ' ■ . N0TE j 8VAt£ -- , M
WoTtifkMl/.
