

NEW ZEALAND IN 1839
FOUR LETTERS
THE EIGHT HON. EAEL DURHAM.
GOVERNOR OF THE NEW ZEALAND LAND COMPANY,
&G., &C., &c.,
#ll tj)£ Colonisation of tljat Island
ON THE PRESENT CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
OF ITS NATIVE INHABITANTS,
WITH A PREFACE AND APPENDIX FOR 1873.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG,
I). D., A.M.,
MINISTER OP THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY ;
AND RECENTLY, AND FOR MANY YEARS,"ONE OP THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE CITY 7 OF SYDNEY, IN THE PARLIAMENT OF N. S. WALES ;
HON. MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OF FRANCE ;
OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY ;
AND OF THE LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA, IN THE BRAZILS.
LONDON: SMITH, ELDER AND CO., 1839.
SYDNEY, REPUBLISHED, 1873.




F'lm
NEW ZEALAND IN 1839:
FOUR LETTERS
THE EIGHT HON. EARL DURHAM,
GOVERNOR OF THE NEW ZEALAND LAND COMPANY,
&c., &c., &a,
(In % Colouration of tfjat Islaiu),
ON THE PRESENT CONDITION AND PROSPECTS
OF ITS NATIVE INHABITANTS.
WITH A PREFACE AND APPENDIX FOR 1873,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG,
D. D., A.M.,
MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY ;
AND RECENTLY, AND FOR MANY YEARS, ONE OP THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY, IN THE PARLIAMENT OP N. S. WALES ;
HON. MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OF FRANCE ;
OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY ;
AND OP THE LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA, IN THE BRAZILS.
LONDON: SMITH, ELDER AND CO,, 1839.
SYDNEY, REPUBLISHED, 1873.




PREFATORY NOTICE
ON THE REPUBLICATION OF THIS PAMPHLET
IN 1873.
In the month of January, 1839, I deemed it expedient and
necessary to undertake a voyage to England on ecclesiastical
business of importance to the Presbyterian Church of the Aus-
tralian Colonies. It was my fifth voyage from New South
Wales to England by Cape Horn. On the four previous occa-
sions I had made the voyage twice by the north and twice also
by the south end of New Zealand; but as the captain of the
vessel by which I had taken my passage for my fifth voyage—
the ship Roslin Castle—had been an old whaler in the South
Seas, and especially on the New Zealand whaling grounds,
and was well acquainted with the coasts of that group of
islands, he proposed to take us by Cook’s Straits —the short-
est route from Sydney to Cape Horn, Unfortunately, however,
as we deemed it at the time, although providentially, as I was
afterwards disposed to regard it, for obvious reasons, just as
we were approaching the western entrance of the Straits, our
vessel having sprung a dangerous leak, we were obliged to
bear up for repairs to the Bay of Islands—the only part of the
group then inhabited by Europeans.
During our stay in that port, I endeavoured to make myself
acquainted with the state and prospects of the country, which
Vt*
NOV 5992 00 i
* J?
M3355/F//37^/7


I knew was then in a very interesting and critical crisis of its-
history; and I embodied the result of my observations and
enquiries, on returning on ship-board, in the following Pamph-
let, written at sea, and entitled, “ New Zealand in 1839: or
Four Letters to the Right Honourable Earl Durham, on the
Colonization of that Island.” His Lordship was then Chair-
man or Governor of the New Zealand Land Company—an
Association formed for that purpose, and including not a few
gentlemen of distinguished position in society; who, after
having been defeated, through the adverse influence I have
indicated in my pamphlet, in their endeavours to obtain an Act
of the Imperial Parliament for the Colonization of New Zea-
land, had resolved to carry out their noble object, on their own
resources, independently of the Government altogether..
My first object, therefore, in publishing my pamphlet, was
to disabuse the public mind in England of the unfounded and
erroneous impressions that had been made upon it in regard to
the colonization of that island, or group of islands ; and to
demonstrate the urgent necessity for such a measure, for the
interests of humanity on the one hand, as well as for those of
Great Britain and her Colonies on the other ; and pointing
out, at the same time, the peculiar adaptation and eligibility of
the New Zealand group of islands for British colonization.
A further object I had in view, in the publication of my
pamphlet, was to shew that as the rejection of the Company’s
Bill for that object by the House of Commons, in the year
1838, had not only occasioned great disappointment to the
numerous and influential friends of the measure, but was lead-
ing them into courses that would certainly issue in great


pecuniary loss, if not in inextricable confusion, no Act of
Parliament was necessary in tbe case, as tbe islands of New
Zealand were included in tbe Commission granted to Captain
Phillip, R. N., the first Governor of New South Wales, in the
year 1787, and might, therefore, be taken possession of by Her
Majesty at once as a Dependency of that Colony.
A third object I had in view, in the publication of my
pamphlet, was to strengthen the hands of whatever Govern-
ment might be established in New Zealand by ensuring to the
Crown the right of pre-emption, both past and future, over all
lands belonging to the natives, and thereby to prevent and
render impossible those enormous frauds that were even then
in progress, and that would otherwise be perpetrated on the
natives to an incredible extent in the alleged purchase of their
lands.
Believing as I do, therefore, that my pamphlet, coming out
as it did at the very nick of time, when the great question of
the Colonization of New Zealand was under consideration and
was agitating the minds of thousands of the British people,,
and that it had, consequently, not a little to do with the
accomplishment of that great national object, as will appear
from the subjoined Appendix, I have deemed it expedient and
necessary to republish it for the information of those who may
either he desirous of ascertaining the particulars of the origi-
nal settlement of their adopted country, or of those who may
merely take an interest in what the great Lord Bacon justly
calls the heroic work of colonization.
Sydney, New South Wales,
July 17th, 1873.


INTRODUCTORY LETTER.
TO THE RIGHT HON. EARL DURHAM,
&c., &c., &C.
London, 6th July, 1839,
My Lord,
I have taken the liberty to address the following Letters to
your Lordship, without having previously solicited your Lord-
ship’s permission, under the assurance that, in consenting to
become the Governor of the New Zealand Land Company, it
was by no means your Lordship’s intention merely to lend the
countenance of your name to a small coterie of Metropolitan
Speculators, associated for the sole purpose of making money
by the transference or sale of shares in a joint-stock specu-
lation. From the high rank which your Lordship holds in the
aristocracy of England; from the higher character as an
enlightened statesman and distinguished patriot which your
Lordship unquestionably bears among the middle classes of
this great nation; but especially from the profound, compre-
hensive, and truly British views of national policy, exhibited
in your Lordship’s admirable Report on the state of Canada, I
felt assured that the only motive that could possibly have
induced your Lordship to patronise an Association for the
Colonization of New Zealand was a sincere desire to promote


the welfare and the moral advancement of your fellow-men,
and at the same time to extend the power and to increase the
resources of the British empire. In such circumstances I
make no apology for addressing your Lordship, as I am sure
your Lordship will not regard either as uninteresting or unim-
portant the suggestions even of a humble individual, as to the
method of procedure in which the attainment of these noble
objects may be most effectually secured.
To extend to the farthest regions of the habitable globe,
and to perpetuate to the close of time, the noble language, the
equitable laws, and the Protestant religion of this favoured
land, is indeed an enterprise well worthy of the first of Eng-
land’s nobility ; and I am confident, my Lord, there is no case
in which the British patriot, the genuine philanthropist, the
Christian man, has reason to feel more deeply interested in
the progress of such an enterprise than the one with which
your Lordship is at present associated—the Colonization of
New Zealand.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s very humble
And most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.




LETTER T.
ON THE CHARACTER AND INFLUENCE OF THE PRESENT EURO-
PEAN POPULATION OF NEW ZEALAND, AS REGARDS THE
ABORIGINES.
London, June , 1839.
My Lord,
Having been residing, as a minister of religion, in the colony
of New South Wales for the last sixteen years, with the excep-
tion of the time I have occupied during that period in several
voyages to England, my attention has been much directed for
a series of years past to the condition and prospects of the
native inhabitants of the numerous islands of the Southern
Pacific, and especially of the large island, or rather group of
islands, known under the name of New Zealand. The com-
mercial intercourse between that island and the Australian
Colonies has, during the last few years, as your Lordship is
doubtless well aware, been both frequent and intimate; and
the Australian colonists have thus acquired much practical
knowledge of its general resources and capabilities. I have
only myself, I confess, been once at New Zealand, having
touched at that island for a few days in the months of January
and February last, on my fifth voyage from New South Wales
to England by way of Cape Horn ; but I have thus been
enabled to ascertain, by personal observation, the accuracy of
much of the information I had previously received respecting
the island generally through the testimony of others ; to cor-
rect the erroneous impressions relative to its soil and climate,
and the character and condition of its aboriginal inhabitants,


which had been made upon my own mind at a distance; and to
deduce those inferences and conclusions, —in regard to what is
really practicable, and what ought decidedly to be done, forth-
with, by Her Majesty’s Government, for the preservation of a
numerous and most interesting race of Aborigines, as well as
for the advancement of the maritime power of Britain, and the
extension of her colonial empire—which I do myself the honour
to submit to your Lordship in the following pages.
There has always been more or less communication between
New Zealand and the colonies of New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land since the first establishment of these Colonies ;
potatoes and pork, obtained in barter from the natives for
articles of European produce, being for a long time the only
articles imported from that island into Sydney and Hobart
Town. Of late, however, the splendid harbours of the island,
and especially the Bay of Islands, situated on the east coast,
near its northern extremity, have been the favourite resort of
the numerous British, Colonial, American, and French whalers
of the Southern Pacific ; while European establishments have,
during the last few years, been forming from time to time by
the merchants of New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land,
along the numerous bays and roadsteads to the southward, for
the Eight or Black Whale Fishery ; as well as for the purchase
of dressed flax and the other articles above-mentioned from the
natives. The valuable timber of the island, and the facility of
procuring it with the assistance of native labour, have also led
to the recent formation of various establishments for the cutting
of timber along the banks of its navigable streams; and the
demand for European labour, which has thus been created in
various departments of industry, has already attracted a con-
siderable number of European labourers, sawyers, and mechanics
to the island, and induced them to make it the place of their
permanent abode. The resort of the South Sea whalers to the
Bay of Islands, the existence of a considerable European popu-
lation in the neighbourhood of that Bay, and the artificial wants
of the natives, have naturally led to the establishment of


various reputable persons in the capacity of merchants or
traders in that vicinity; as also to the settlement of a swarm
of individuals from the two penal colonies, of a very different
description, as retail dealers, grog-sellers, and panderers to the
worst vices of the most abandoned of men. There is thus, in
addition to the crews of the numerous whalers and colonial
traders frequenting the coast, a considerable European popula-
tion, not merely residing temporarily, but actually settled in
New Zealand, chiefly towards the northern extremity of the
land.
Of the character of this European population, now perma-
nently settled in New Zealand, it is scarcely necessary to
inform your Lordship. With a few honourable exceptions, it
consists of the veriest refuse of civilized society—of runaway
sailors, of runaway convicts, of convicts who have served out
their term of bondage in one or other of the two penal colonies,
of fraudulent debtors who have escaped from their creditors in
Sydney or Hobart Town, or of needy adventurers from the two
colonies, almost equally unprincipled. In conjunction with the
whalers that occasionally visit the coast, the influence of these
individuals on the natives is demoralizing in the extreme. Their
usual articles of barter are either muskets and gunpowder, or
tobacco and rum. Most of them live in open concubinage or
adultery with native women, and the scenes of outrageous
licentiousness and debauchery that are ever and anon occurring
on their premises are often sufficiently revolting to excite the
reprobation and disgust of the natives themselves.
I happened to be crossing the Bay of Islands in a boat, on the
evening of Saturday the 2nd February last, with a fellow-country-
man of my own, who has long been settled in that vicinity, and
I am happy to add, as the husband of a virtuous wife, and the
father of a most interesting family, when the sound of music
and dancing attracted my attention; the sound of a drum, of a
French horn, and a fiddle being distinctly audible in the dis-
tance, “Itis on board one of the two American whalers that
arrived to-day,” observed my intelligent friend ; “ they are both


temperance ships, but I know well from past experience, they
are both by this time full of native women for the worst of
purposes.” In the village of K*ororadika, adjoining the outer
anchorage ground in the Bay of Islands, I observed three or
four public-houses of the vilest character, close to the native
village in that part of the Bay ; the unfortunate inhabitants of
which are thus exposed, without hope of escape, to the worst
possible influence and example ; while at the mouth of the
Kauakaua 1 River, near the inner anchorage ground, I also
observed a whole group of English public-houses of the most
infamous description, close to another native Pa, or fortified
village, which, during a late war in the island, contained upwards
of fifteen hundred fighting men, besides women and children.
That scenes of outrageous violence, injustice and oppression
should be perpetually recurring in a community composed of
such materials, is naturally to be expected. The master of a
French whaler lately shipped two or three English sailors at the
Bay of Islands ; but during his stay in that port the latter had
run up a considerable account for ardent spirits in the house of
one of the publicans at Kororadika, who, I was credibly in-
formed, make it their business to entice sailors away from their
ships for this very purpose. This account the French ship-
master refusing to pay, the publican forcibly seized and detained
one of his whaleboats for payment; and when the English
agent of the whaler went to demand the restitution of the boat
in the name of the owners of the vessel, he was threatened with
a personal assault in the most brutal and revolting terms, and
had consequently to desist from his attempt. The Frenchman
had, of course, to put to sea without his boat—a very serious
loss indeed to a whaler. There happened, however, to be a
French ship of war at the Bay some time afterwards, the cap-
tain of which, on being informed of the circumstance by the
English agent, immediately obtained the requisite redress, by
letting the publican know, through one of his officers, that if he
did not send the full price of the whaleboat by a certain hour,
he would drag him, house and all, into the sea.


Mr. P., the author of a recent publication on New Zealand,
and the brother of a wealthy emancipist auctioneer in the town
oi Sydney, endeavoured some* time ago to set up an additional
grog-shop in the village of Kororadika; but the publicans who
had already obtained a monopoly of the business, conceiving he
would injure their trade, actually threatened to hang him up
upon the spot, and had even made preparations for the erection
of the gibbet, when Mr. P. deemed it prudent to abandon his
project.
In short, Lynch law is at present the only law among the
numerous Europeans in New Zealand ; there being no authority
to appeal to in the island, and no redress procurable for the
most atrocious injuries but by an appeal to physical force, A
few weeks before the period of my visit to the island, a Euro-
pean had been tarred and feathered by some of his countrymen,
for some misdemeanour, either real or imaginary ; and another
had been tied up to a tree and flogged, and was afterwards
compelled to sign a note acknowledging that he had not only
received the flogging, but that he richly deserved it. The note
was demanded under the idea that it would secure the flagel-
lators against all legal consequences.
It may doubtless be urged, in reference to these observations,
that there is a British Resident in New Zealand, with a salary
of £SOO per annum from the Colonial Revenue of New South
Wales, with liberty to draw for £2OO more for presents to the
native chiefs. That salary, my Lord, or rather the principle
on which it is allowed—viz., for services performed out of the
colony, and not for the colonists, —is universally regarded as a
prodigious grievance in New South Wales ; and I am sure
your Lordship will allow it is a most unnecessary cause of of-
fence to a really loyal and important colony. But from what-
ever source the salary of the office of British Resident in New
Zealand should be derived in future, I cannot help remarking
that the office itself has hitherto been totally useless ; the Re-
sident having no authority to enforce the observance of any law,
no power to support his office by the punishment of offences,


however atrocious, and no employment whatever that I could
possibly ascertain, but that of standing sentinel upon the British
ensign, which is hoisted close to his residence on one of the
headlands of the Bay of Islands ; and which I cannot help*
adding, is actually dishonoured by the prevalence of outrageous
lawlessness, injustice, and oppression around the spot where it
idly floats.
It may also be urged, as it has repeatedly been already in
this country, that the government of New Zealand is in the
hands of the native chiefs, and that it rests entirely with these
chiefs to establish a system of equal laws both for natives and
Europeans. But it is worse than idle, —it is actually dishonest,
—to use such language to Her Majesty’s Government and the
British public ; and it can only be used (I mean by individuals
at all acquainted with the real circumstances of the case) for
the express purpose of deceiving either the Government or the
public, if not both. If New Zealand had, like many of the
islands of the Pacific to the northward, been under the govern-
ment of five or even ten powerful chiefs, having each supreme
authority in his own territory, I should have been the last to
recommend any interference with that authority on the part of
any civilized nation. But the whole inhabited territory of the
New Zealand group of islands, as is well known in New South
Wales, is parcelled out among innumerable chiefs, each of
whom is independent of every other. The authority of these
chiefs, moreover, like that of the chiefs among the ancient
Germans, according to the historian Tacitus, is recognised only
in time of war ; and they have no personal property in the soil
distinct from that of every Rangatira or freeman of their res-
pective tribes, insomuch that when any particular tract of land
is sold by any particular native, the probability is that there
will be a number of other natives claiming an equal right to it
with the one who has sold it. Nay, so far from being able to
establish and to support a regular government on European
principles, the New Zealanders are actually unable to protect
their own patrimonial territories from the grasp of European


rapacity, even when practised by unaccredited individuals, act-
ing without the sanction of any Government whatever. It is
the obvious interest, however, of such individuals to speak with
great deference of the New Zealand chiefs, —of their being the
heads of an independent nation, and of their ability to form a
government on European principles for their own territory; for
so long as such ideas are entertained in England, they will be
enabled to rob the natives of their land unquestioned and unob-
served, under the pretext of having bought and paid for it; and
to produce regular deeds of sale and purchase, on some future
convenient opportunity, for lordships as extensive as those of
the Percys and the Howards.
In short, the New Zealanders can only be regarded as mere
children, incapable of managing their own property, except
through the agency of some liberal, enlightened, and Christian
Government, acting as their trustee; and I beg to assure your
Lordship, that unless some such Government interfere speedily
on their behalf, by the establishment of a system of general
guardianship for the protection of the natives on the one hand,
and the enactment of equal laws, both for natives and Europeans
on the other, there is no prospect for the New Zealand nation
but that of gradual demoralization and speedy extinction. From
the causes that are now in operation, chiefly through their inter-
course with Europeans, the number of the natives, for a large
extent of country around the Bay of Islands, as well as for a
considerable distance to the northward and southward of that
Bay, has been diminished at least one-half, during the last
fifteen years; and it is the opinion of the most respectable
Europeans on the spot, that if the present system is allowed to
continue much longer, the period of their final extinction, in the
northern division of the northern island, cannot be far distant.
This consummation, so strongly to be deprecated by every
genuine philanthropist, is likely, my Lord, to be indefinitely
accelerated by the prevalence of a system which has recently
come into operation in New Zealand, and which is at present
acted upon in that island to an extent of which your Lordship
4ft


and the British public can have no conception ; —a system,
moreover, which it is alike the interest and the bounden duty of
the British Government, as the great colonizing power of modern
Europe, and the natural protector of the aborigines of every
land to which the all-pervading commerce of Great Britain ex-
tends, to put a stop to immediately.
The unexpected and truly splendid results of the land-selling
and immigration system in New South Wales, very speedily
called into existence a class of persons in that Colony who were
known by the name of Land Sharks, and who made it their
business to attend all Government sales of land, for the purpose
of jobbing in the article, and especially of extorting money from
newly-arrived immigrants, or other bona Jide intending pur-
chasers of land, by pretending that they were desirous of
purchasing the very lands which the latter had selected, and
threatening to bid them up to an exorbitant price for their
selections, unless they were paid a certain amount of hush-
money. Now as persons of this class have not only been
enabled to ascertain the real value of waste land in the
colonies of New South Wales, Van Dieman’s Land, and
South Australia, through the working of the admirable
system now in operation for the disposal of such land in these
Colonies, but have been somewhat cramped and counteracted
of late in their nefarious operations by the judicious regulations
of the Local Governments in these settlements ; they have
turned their eyes all at once to New Zealand, where there is no
minimum price of land established under the sanction of any
Government, and where extensive tracts of the first quality can
at present be purchased from the ignorant and deluded natives
for the merest trifle. In this way, tracts of eligible land, of
sufficient extent to constitute whole earldoms in England, have
already been acquired in New Zealand, by the merest adven-
turers, —by men who had arrived in that island without a
shilling in their pockets, but who had had influence enough to
obtain credit for a few English muskets, a few barrels of
gunpowder, a few bundles of slops, or a few kegs of rum or


tobacco in Sydney or Hobart Town. And thus, my Lord, after
being despoiled of tbeir pigs and potatoes, and tlieir other
articles of native produce, in pretended barter for the veriest
trifles, the poor natives, who, your Lordship and the British
public have been told again and again, are capable of estab-
lishing a regular Government of their own, are at length
wheedled out of their land, —their only remaining possession,—■
and reduced at once to a state of hopeless poverty and moral
degradation. One of the most extensive purchasers of land in
New Zealand, at the period of my visit to the Bay of Islands, in
January last, was a person of the name of White, who had
formerly been a Wesleyan missionary at Hokianga, on the
west coast, but had been dismissed from his society for
immorality. This reputable individual is now a merchant of
the highest caste, and one of the largest proprietors of land
(purchased, of course, in the way I have mentioned), at the
Hokianga and Kaiparra rivers in New Zealand.
It is absolutely distressing, my Lord, to observe the effects
which this system of unprincipled rapacity is already producing
upon the truly unfortunate natives of New Zealand, in conjunc-
tion with the other sources of demoralization to which I have
already alluded. The more intelligent of the natives perceive
and acknowledge their unfortunate condition in these respects
themselves ; but they are spell-bound, as it were, and cannot
resist the temptation to which the offer of articles of European
produce and manufacture infallibly exposes them. Like mere
children, they will give all they are worth to-day for the trinket
or gew-gaw, which they will sell for the veriest trifle to-morrow.
Pomare,* an intelligent native chief, who speaks tolerably good
* Pomare, is a Tahitian, and not a New Zealand name. It was
adopted by the father of the present chief, in compliment to the late
King of Tahiti, with whom he had had some intercourse, though in
what way lam not acquainted, and has descended to his son. Names,
indeed, are given somewhat arbitrarily by the South Sea Islanders
generally. The New Zealanders, for example, observing that the sailors
on board the whaling vessels that touched at their ports, uniformly


English, but who has already alienated the greater part of his
valuable land in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Islands,
observed to one of my fellow-voyagers : “ Englishmen give us
blankets, powder, and iron-pots, for our land ; but we soon blow
away the powder, the iron-pots get broken, and the blankets
wear out; but the land never blows away, or wears out.” The
master of the vessel, in which I have just returned to England,
had resided for a considerable time in the Bay of Islands, about
eight or ten years ago, as the master of an English whaler, and
carried an iron pot with them, to cook their provisions when they went
on shore, conceived the words, Go ashore, which they were accustomed
to hear when preparations were making for landing, was the proper
name for an iron pot, and they have accordingly been generally adopted
as such in the New Zealand language. A small party of the passengers
of the Roslyn Castle, consisting of John Smith, Esq., Surgeon, R.N. ;
M. Lacoste, a French gentleman from JBourdeaux, who had previously
been residing for some time in Sydney, in a mercantile capacity, and
myself, were one day carried by my countryman, Mr. Mair, of the Bay
of Islands, up the Kauakaua River in his boat, to see an interesting
semi-civilized, semi- christianized, native village. One of the natives
immediately perceived that M. Lacoste was not an Englishman, and
asked Mr. Mair “if he was not a Marion ,” to which Mr. Mair replied
in the affirmative. Marion was the captain of a French frigate, who
was killed in a scuffle with the natives, in a small bay, at the entrance
of the Bay of Islands, more than thirty years ago ; and his name has
ever since been the synonyme for “ Frenchman ”in New Zealand. The
bay in which Captain Marion was killed, is called by the English, Man-
o'-war Bay, which some French hydrographer, mistaking for a New
Zealand word, has transformed into Port de Manawa. Captain M.’s
death was the result of accident, arising from misapprehension on the
part of his own people, not of evil intention on that of the New
Zealanders. He had sent a boat’s crew ashore to haul the seine for fish
in the Bay ; but as the spot where they began to fish unfortunately
happened to be a burial-place of the natives, and was, consequently,
tabu or sacred, the latter endeavoured to make the French sailors desist,
and go somewhere else. The Frenchmen, however, not comprehending
their meaning, persisted in throwing the seine. A scuffle consequently
ensued, in which the Captain, who had in the meantime gone ashore to
support his boat’s crew, was unfortunately killed.


was consequently well known to tlie natives in that part of the
island. On going ashore at the village of Kororadika, the day
after we had cast anchor, he called at the house of a native
chief, of the name of Riva, with whom he had formerly been
well acquainted, and asked him, how he had not come on board
his ship, to welcome him, as he used to do, when he heard of
his arrival in the Bay. “ I was ashamed to go,” replied the
noble-minded, but unfortunate chief, “ because I had no present
to offer you. Formerly, when I went to see my friends, I
always carried them a present of pigs or potatoes ; but I am a
poor man now. I have sold all my land, and I have nothing to
give my friends.” Riva is as fine a looking man as I have ever
seen ; tall, muscular, and athletic ; with an expression of kind-
liness on his open countenance, which it is impossible to
mistake, notwithstanding the tattooing with which it is dis-
figured. But his poverty, my Lord, is not the worst feature in
his present circumstances. Having no land to reside on, as he
formerly had, at some distance from the Bay, he is compelled to
take up his permanent residence in the village of Kororadika,
among the lawless crews of the English, French, and American
whalers that frequent the port; his daughter, one of the hand-
somest native women I have seen, being actually living, at the
time I visited the island, in open concubinage with a civilized
brute, who commands an English whaler out of London, and
who, I was credibly informed, has a wife and children in this
city.
But one of the most fruitful sources of extensive misery and
depopulation in the islands of New Zealand is, the wars to
which the demoralizing intercourse of the natives with worthless
Europeans has incidentally given rise. About eighteen months
ago the ship Roslyn Castle, in which I have just returned to
England from New South Wales, belonged to an emancipist
mercantile house, which has since become bankrupt in that
Colony, of the name of L. and W., and was employed as a
whaler, out of the port of Sydney, on the coast of New
Zealand. Touching for supplies at the Bay of Islands, either


the master, or one of the officers, secreted on hoard and carried
off to sea a native woman of some note, belonging to the Pa, or
fortified native village, at the mouth of the Kauakaua River.
The natives of that village, not being aware of the fact, accused
the natives of Kororadika, about two miles distant, of having
killed and eaten the woman, in consequence of some old feud ;
and although the latter repelled the accusation with an indig-
nant denial, a war between the two villages was the result, each
party being enabled to assemble, from the tribes in the neigh-
bourhood, in alliance with one or other, about fifteen hundred
fighting men. The war continued between four and five months,
and, during its continuance, not fewer than eighty of the unfor-
tunate natives were killed.
But injuries of this kind, on the part of worthless Europeans,
are of perpetual occurrence on the coast of New Zealand, and
will certainly continue to be perpetrated upon the helpless
natives till a Christian and energetic Government is established
in the island, under the auspices of Great Britain. During my
stay at the Bay of Islands, I saw a native woman, who had
been brought down to the Bay, by a French whaler, from the
South Cape, about eight hundred miles distant, and who had,
in all likelihood, been got on board the whaler in some clandes-
tine manner. But if there were a regular and energetic Govern-
ment established in the island, such outrages, with all the dis-
astrous consequences to which they lead, would either be
altogether prevented, or would easily be effectually punished, by
whomsoever committed. If such a Government, for instance,
had seized and detained the French whaler, till he had found
security for defraying the full expense of re-conveying the
native woman to her own tribe and vicinage, the probability is
that no whaler of any nation would have dared thereafter to
perpetrate such an outrage upon the defenceless natives, on any
part of the coast.
A person of the name of Harwood, the master of a colonial
schooner, called the Lord Rodney, belonging to the mercantile
house of Cooper and Holt, in Sydney, was lying with his vessel


some time ago in Port Nicholson, at the eastern entrance of
Cook’s Straits, when a large tribe of natives in that neighbour-
hood, amounting to about 800 souls, and pretending that they
were afraid of an attack from another tribe in the vicinity,
offered to charter his vessel to convey them all to Chatham
Island—a large and fertile island to the eastward of New Zea-
land, situated on the 44th parallel of south latitude, and famous
for its excellent potatoes. Harwood accepted their offer on the
part of his owners, agreeing to receive payment in pigs and
potatoes, and accordingly conveyed the whole tribe, with all
their movable property, at two trips, to Chatham Island ;
although he could not but know that the real object of the New
Zealanders was a predatory and murderous expedition against
the peaceful and defenceless natives of that island—whose pro-
perty and provisions they accordingly seized on their arrival,
reserving themselves as a standby, in the event of a scarcity of
food. Shortly thereafter, a Scotchman of the name of Roberton
who had been in the patriot service under Lord Cochrane,
on the coast of South America, and who was then the master
of a colonial trader, from Van Dieman’s Land, touched at
Chatham Island, and induced several of the New Zealanders
from Port Nicholson to go on board his vessel, to assist in
working her back to Van Dieman’s Land, as he was short
handed, promising to restore them to their countrymen on that
island within a certain time. The New Zealanders were urgent
on this point, and told Captain Roberton that if their country-
men were not brought back to them by the time appointed,
they would massacre the whole crew of the first vessel that
should touch at the island. On his arrival in Van Dieman’s
Land, the New Zealanders went on shore, and Captain Roberton
states, that when he was again ready for sea, he applied to
the police of that colony, and even to the Governor himself,
informing them of the conditions on which he had taken the
New Zealanders on board his vessel at Chatham Island, and of
the threat which their countrymen had held out in the event of
their not been taken back to the island at the time appointed,


requesting the interference of the Government to enable him to
get the New Zealanders on board his vessel. But the authori-
ties of Van Dieman’s Land having informed Captain R. that,
as the New Zealanders had arrived in the colony as free persons,
they could not compel them to go on board any vessel against
their will, he was obliged to put to sea again without them.
In the meantime, the day appointed for the return of the
New Zealanders to Chatham Island arrived ; but as they were
not forthcoming, their countrymen prepared to carry into effect
their murderous threat on the first vessel that should touch at
the island. The first European vessel that happened to touch
at Chatham Island, in these circumstances, was the Jean Bart ,
a French whaler, the master of which, a respectable young man
from Havre de Grace, had shortly before committed suicide, in
a fit of temporary insanity, at the Bay of Islands. Watching
their opportunity, therefore, the New Zealanders rose upon the
crew of this unfortunate vessel, when off their guard, murdered
every one of them, amounting to forty persons in all, and after-
wards set fire to the vessel.
The tidings of this massacre were brought to the Bay of
Islands by an American whaler, which had touched at Chatham
Island shortly after it took place ; and as the French corvette,
I!Heroine , Captain Cecille, was then at anchor in the bay,
Captain C. immediately set sail for Chatham Island, to punish
the murderers. This, it seems, he did effectually, by extermi-
nating the whole of the New Zealanders on the island, leaving
the miserable remnant of the Aborigines in quiet possession of
their native isle. The whole of this frightful tragedy was
enacted towards the close of the past year.
But although all the wars of the New Zealanders are by no
means the result of the intervention of Europeans, it is remark-
able with what tact and ingenuity the Europeans, resident on
the island, uniformly improve them to their own personal advan-
tage, whatever be their issue. Towards the close of the year
1838, about a hundred fighting men of one of the tribes in the
neighbourhood of the Bay of Islands, went on a predatory


excursion to Barrier Island, at the mouth of the River Thames,
about 120 miles to the southward, on the east coast. Barrier
Island is about forty miles long, very fertile, but thinly inha-
bited. The interlopers from the Bay of Islands having, there-
fore, billeted themselves on the peaceful and unoffending natives
of that island, the latter sent private information of the circum-
stance to the chiefs on the banks of the River Thames, on the
mainland, with whom they were on terms of friendship, and who
accordingly assembled in great force to give battle to the
interlopers. The latter, it seems, although fewer in number,
were better acquainted with the use of firearms than their
countrymen to the southward, and there were accordingly
upwards of twenty of the chiefs of the Thames River shot in
the fight that ensued, besides many natives of inferior standing.
The fight had evidently been very sanguinary, for the Bay of
Island natives, who had in the meantime nearly exterminated
the natives of Barrier Island, were themselves reduced to
thirty men, and were glad to embrace the opportunity of
a small coasting vessel, bound to the Bay of Islands with
pork and potatoes, to return to that neighbourhood. The
little vessel arrived in the Bay on the 2nd of February last,
having landed the thirty natives on the coast, to walk overland
to the Bay.
In these circumstances, it became a matter of question, as
well as of considerable interest, among the land-jobbers at the
Bay of Islands, to whom Barrier Island belonged. One of them
informed me himself, that he was intending to proceed to the
River Thames by the first opportunity, to purchase it from the
natives; that is, to purchase a beautiful island, forty miles in
length, and containing one or more good harbours for large
ships, from the miserable remnant of its native inhabitants,
immediately after a bloody war, in which the latter had been
all but exterminated. But Pomare, the chief I have already
mentioned, had, in the mean time, laid claim to the island, and
had offered to sell it to another European at the Bay, as being
his by right of conquest; the natives from the Bay of Islands,


who had been concerned in effecting the work of extermination
on Barrier Island, being of his tribe and district.
It will thus, I trust, be evident to your Lordship, that the
influence exerted on the unfortunate natives of New Zealand
by the Europeans at present residing on that island, as well as
by the numerous whalers and colonial traders that occasionally
visit its coasts, is demoralizing in the extreme, and must
infallibly issue in their speedy extinction. European vice and
European disease are thinning their ranks with lamentable and
incredible rapidity, insomuch that the natives themselves
perceive and acknowledge it. “ Give me a double-barrelled
gun, to keep me in mind of you when you are gone,” said the
chief Pomare to the captain of the vessel in which ! have just
returned to England, while taking his leave of him, on the eve
of our sailing : “ but of what use would it be to us ?” added
Pomare, “ for we are all dying, and we shall all be dead
by-and-bye.” This process, my Lord, will be accelerated
tenfold, if the nefarious arts that are now so extensively in
operation among the European inhabitants of the island, for
the purpose of robbing the natives of their valuable land, are
allowed to be continued. For when a native disposes of a
portion of his land to a European, the probability is, that the
portion he retains becomes of no use to him in his own esti-
mation, and he is, therefore, virtually compelled to sell it also ;
for in all probability, and perhaps for the express purpose of
realizing such a result, the European puts cattle on his
purchase ; these, of course, trespass on the native’s land, as
there are no fences in the country, and destroy his corn and
potatoes ; and the unfortunate New Zealander either disposes
of his remaining land in disgust, for the merest trifle, and
migrates to the interior, or sets himself down, with his family,
close to some European anchorage ground, to live on roots and
shell-fish, and to obtain a miserable livelihood by maintaining
a precarious and disgraceful intercourse with worthless
Europeans.
It is thus, my Lord, that one of the finest Aboriginal races


on the surface of the globe is fast disappearing from the face
of the earth. It is impossible, however, that Her Majesty’s
liberal and enlightened (and shall I not be permitted to add
Christian) Government can long remain an indifferent spectator
of such a consummation. The state of things I have endea-
voured to describe has in no respect been brought about by the
New Zealanders themselves. It has been the natural result of
the extension of British commerce, and the planting of two
British penal colonies on the adjacent coast of New Holland
and Van Dieman’s Land. It has been the corollary, so to
speak, of the land-selling and immigration system of New
South Wales. In such circumstances, I conceive, my Lord,
Her Majesty’s Government must interfere, as well for the
vindication of its own high character in the civilized world, as
for the sake of injured and outraged humanity, by placing
itself, as it were, “ between the living and the dead, that the
plague may be stayed.”
I have the honour to be,
My Lord, &c., &c.


LETTER 11.
ON THE CHARACTER AND INFLUENCE OF THE MISSIONS
HITHERTO ESTABLISHED IN NEW ZEALAND, AS REGARDS
THE ABORIGINES.
London , June , 1839.
My Lord,
If I am not greatly in error, tlie opposition exhibited to the
New Zealand Colonization Bill, during the last session of
Parliament, originated chiefly among the friends and supporters
of Christian Missions, and especially among the friends and
supporters of the Church of England’s Society’s Mission to the
Aborigines of that Island. I confess, my Lord, there was
something generous, philanthropic, and Christian in the very
aspect of this opposition ; and no wonder, therefore, that it
should have been completely successful in preventing the
passing of the Bill. It professed to treat with profound
respect the rights and interests of one of the noblest races of
Aborigines on the face of the globe. It professed to sym-
pathise with the feeble efforts of that race to rise to a higher
level in the scale of humanity, and to occupy a prominent
place in the catalogue of civilized nations. And more than all
this, it professed to deprecate the serious obstacles which a
community of European colonists might, in all likelihood, throw
in the way of the general reception of the Christian religion by
the natives of New Zealand. lam sorry, however, to be called
on, from a sacred regard to the interests of truth, as well as to
the cause of humanity and the Christian religion ; lam sorry,
my Lord, to be obliged to state, that the anticipations of


unmiugled benefit to tbe Aborigines of that island, which were
thus founded on the prospect of their being left entirely, for
the future, to the charities of the Church Mission in New
Zealand, were alike unwarranted by the past history, and by
the present condition, of that mission.
Your Lordship is doubtless aware that, for upwards of half
a century past, the missionary or apostolic spirit has been at
an exceedingly low ebb in both of the Protestant established
churches of this great empire ; and that whatever may be
asserted to the contrary, the maxim that is almost universally
acted on by the clergy of both establishments is, that after a
young man has spent a certain number of years in preparing
for the Christian ministry, at an English or Scotch University,
his time and talents are too precious to be thrown away in
promoting the great object of that ministry, either in the
colonies or among the heathen. Men, who are utterly unable
to offer a single reason why they should not have gone forth
themselves to these high places of the field of Christian
warfare, in obedience to the divine command, contrive to
satisfy their own consciences in staying at home, by sub-
scribing a guinea a-year for missions to the heathen, and by
telling the Christian public at their annual meetings, that
their “ hearts bleed,” forsooth, “ for the heathen.” My Lord,
in the course of five voyages round the globe, and a residence
of many years in the uttermost parts of the earth, where it has
been my lot to come in contact with many missionaries, who
ought never to have been honoured with so sacred a character,
I have learned to estimate, at its proper value, this fashionable
species of clerical hypocrisy.
From the cause I have assigned, it has come to pass that,
instead of sending forth to those interesting and important
stations beyond seas, that demanded the Pauls and Silases of
our national establishments, men of superior talents, and
education, and piety, and %eal, —we have been sending forth,
with only a few solitary exceptions, the lame, the halt, and the
blind of these establishments ; or in other words, we have been


endeavouring to serve God in the colonies and among the hea-
then “ with that which has cost us nought.” Hence it is, my
Lord, that instead of telling, as we might otherwise have done
(that is, if we had only followed the apostolic example), of
whole territories won from heathen darkness and superstition
to the light and liberty of the Gospel, we can tell only, at
least for the most part, of disappointment and disaster. The
history and present aspect of the Church of England’s mission
to New Zealand affords a melancholy comment on these
observations.
The Church of England’s Mission to New Zealand was
formed at the instance of the late Rev. Samuel Marsden,
Principal Episcopal Chaplain of New South Wales, in the
year 1812, but was not properly in operation till the year
1814. It was originally established, and for a long time
systematically conducted, on the principle oi first civilizing and
then christianizing , the natives; and for this purpose, a large
number of artizans, of various handicrafts, were engaged, some
in England, and some in New South Wales, as lay-missionaries,
to teach the natives the various processes of civilized life.
Reversing the apostolic plan, the missionary carpenter, the
missionary boat-builder, the missionary blacksmith, the mis-
sionary ploughman, the missionary rope-spinner, &c., were all
set to work at their various occupations, and the natives were
expected forthwith to imitate their example. In fact, the
mission settlement in New Zealand was for a long time a com-
plete lumber yard, or factory, in which all sorts of labour
were going on hut the proper labour of a missionary:
the very clergyman, for there was only one on the island,
being in no respect different from a common agricultural
labourer, except that he mounted a pulpit and read prayers in
a surplice every Sunday. That clergyman, the Rev, Mr.
Butler, told me himself, in the year 1824—the year he left the
New Zealand mission and returned* to England,—that, during
the previous season, he had ploughed and sown eleven acres of
ground for wheat, at the mission settlement, on the Kidikidi


River, with his own hands ; having previously, with the assist-
ance of his son Samuel, who was afterwards drowned in New
Zealand, grubbed up the whole of the ground, which had been
originally overgrown with tall fern. Fortunately, indeed, a
laborious occupation of this kind was more congenial to the
taste and habits of Mr. B. than labour of a more intellectual or
missionary character; for previous to his ordination for foreign
parts , and his appointment to the offices of Superintendent of
the Church of England’s mission in New Zealand, and Justice
of Peace in that island, under the Government of New South
Wales, he had merely been the out-of-door clerk or foreman of
a large London establishment, for forwarding goods by common
carriers and canal boats.
If such occupations had been indispensably necessary for the
support of the mission, it would not only have been allowable
but praiseworthy to have pursued them. But they were alike
unnecessary and unwarranted; and the result, as might have
been expected, was that they had just as little influence in
civilizing, as it may be supposed they had in christianizing the
natives. The native ware or house, and the native canoe, both
of which occasionally display considerable taste and ingenuity,
were quite sufficient for all the purposes of the New Zealander
in his unchristianized state; he was sufficiently acquainted
with agriculture to enable him to procure, in abundance, all the
necessaries of life ; and of all the missionary artisans who were
sent out by the Church Missionary Society to effect his civili-
zation, the missionary blacksmith, who could mend his broken
musket, and thereby enable him to commit murder upon his
fellow-man, was in reality the only one whose talents com-
manded his unfeigned respect. Indeed, as a general maxim, I
would say that it is by no means particularly desirable that the
New Zealanders should acquire a knowledge of European arts
till they have embraced the religion of Europeans, when they
will acquire them as a matter of course, Pomare, the chief I
have already mentioned, offered, in the month of February last,
to dispose of all his right and title to Barrier Island, at the


mouth of the River Thames, for a small English schooner, of
the value of £2OO. But what was the object of the savage in
desiring to get possession of the schooner ? Why, it was sim-
ply that he might be able to carry all his fighting-men, in one
body, to some part of the coast where the natives are still
unacquainted with the use of fire-arms' and where he could con-
sequently plunder and murder them at discretion, after the
example of the old buccaneers of America.
Whether most of the individuals who were employed to work
the preposterous system I have described, were originally bad
men, or whether the system itself (which utterly failed of
accomplishing its primary object, the civilization of the New
Zealanders,) was calculated to make them so, I cannot deter-
mine:* it is undeniable, however, that utter inefficiency and
* Bad as some of the earlier missionaries were, I consider the system
under which they were acting to have been much worse. Some of them
maintained that they were hired as mechanics, and had nothing to do
with missionary labour properly so-called. Others maintained that they
were engaged as missionaries, and had nothing to do with mechanical
or agricultural employment ; and some, as for instance, the missionary
rope-spinner, whose ineffectual attempts to adapt English machinery to
the manufacture of the native flax only excited the ridicule of the
natives, found that their particular qualifications were of no use what-
ever in the island. For some time the missionary settlement, with its
workshops, its bell to ring the people in and. out, &c., was an exact
copy of the Lumber Yard in Sydney, and some of the natives who had
been in New South Wales, were quick-sighted enough to perceive the
resemblance, and to act accordingly. For when the stout missionary
ploughman, who was the only ordained missionary on the island at the
time I allude to, arrayed himself in his canonicals, and read prayers on
Sunday, the natives shrewdly observed that he was the only Eangatira,
or gentleman, among them, and that the rest were only cookes or slaves.
The Society’s missionary rope-spinner was originally a reputable
mechanic in one of the dockyards in England, where he had probably
attracted notice by keeping a Sabbath-school for other workmen’s
children. His wife, a superior woman, having died shortly after his
arrival in New South Wales, he married a native of that colony, who
unfortunately died also, in New Zealand, a few years thereafter. He is
now settled on his own account at the Kaiparra River, on the West
Coast, where, I was credibly informed at the Bay of Islands, both him-
self and his son are actually living in a state of concubinage with two
native women, under the same roof!


moral delinquency were for a long time the characteristic
features of the New Zealand mission. I have a manuscript
account, which I drew up myself, from unquestionable authority,
so early as the year 1824, of every missionary that had set foot
on New Zealand up to that period, as well as of every impor-
tant transaction which had occurred till then in connection with
the New Zealand mission ; and I am confident, my Lord, it
would be impossible to find a parallel in the history of any Protes-
tant mission since the Reformation, to the amount of ineffi-
ciency and moral worthlessness which that record presents.
Indeed, Divine Providence appears to have frowned upon the
New Zealand mission all along, and blighting and blasting
from Heaven seem to have rested upon it even until now. The
first three heads of the mission—the last of the three so lately
as in the year 1836—were all dismissed for the grossest
immorality ; and although I have reason to believe it is now
purged from such enormities, and am happy to add that it has
several excellent and Christian men zealously engaged in its
most interesting field, there is still a most flagrant abuse
tolerated and practised by the great majority of its members,
of sufficient magnitude to neutralize the efforts even of a whole
college of apostles.
The Church Missionary Society’s establishment in New Zea-
land comprises about thirty missionaries ; the principal stations
being Waimate at the Kldi-kldi River; Paihia and Tippunah,
at the Bay of Islands; the Bay of Plenty, on the east coast to
the southward ; and the vicinity of the North Cape. There is
also a station forming at the River Thames, or rather on the
Manukau River, right across the river, on the west coast. The
population of the portion of the northern island comprehended
within these limits probably comprises from forty to fifty thousand
souls, of whom from ten to twelve thousand are thus brought
within the reach of Christian influence ; having the ordinances
of religion dispensed among them either regularly or occasion-
ally, and many of their number being taught to read and write
their native tongue. Indeed, the eagerness which the natives


evince for tlie attainment of these most important arts of civili-
zation, and the facility with which they acquire them, their
desire for books when taught to read, and their willingness to
place themselves under the regular dispensation of the ordi-
nances of religion—all of which dispositions are undoubtedly
evinced by the New Zealanders, independently altogether of
the operation of Christian principle—are the most favourable
traits in their national character, and doubtless the most deeply
interesting. In short, humanly speaking, there are probably
fewer obstacles to overcome in the way of missionary enterprise
among the New Zealanders than among any other heathen
people on the face of the earth. With the universal idea of a
God or Great Spirit, they have no disposition to idolatry ; and
even the customs and superstitions which have been handed
down to them from the remotest antiquity, seem to exert but a
slight influence on their minds, and are readily abandoned for
those of Europeans.
Why is it then that the Christian religion, as exhibited in
the teaching of the missionaries of the Church Missionary
Society, has hitherto taken so slight a hold—for such is unques-
tionably the fact—on the hearts and affections of the New
Zealander; for while the baptized natives do not exceed two
hundred and fifty altogether, there are frequent instances of
apostacy even among them? Why, my Lord, although the
ministers of the Gospel are in no respect responsible for the
success of their ministry, provided they discharge the duties of
their office honestly and conscientiously, it is nevertheless
undeniable, that if they do not engage in their work with a
single eye to the glory of God, and the extension of the King-
dom of Christ, hut endeavour to “ serve God and Mammon,”
their efforts will undoubtedly issue in disappointment, and their
failure be chargeable entirely upon themselves. Now, I appre-
hend, my Lord, that this is exactly the case of the New
Zealand mission, and the true source of that want of success
which has hitherto been experienced by the missionaries, and
is so generally complained of in the island. For instead of


confining themselves with the disinterestedness that became
their office to the conscientious discharge of their important
duties, as the professed disciples of “ Him who, though rich,
for our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might
be right,” the missionaries of the Church Missionary Society
in New Zealand, utterly incredible as it may appear in England,
have actually been the principals in the grand conspiracy of
the European inhabitants of the island to rob and plunder the
natives of their land !
Of the extent of land belonging to the Society as a corporate
body, at the principal stations of Waimate, Paihia, and Tippu-
nah, I had no means of obtaining a correct account. I have
reason to believe, however, it is by no means extensive. But the
missionaries themselves, like the ancient Gehazi, have made
ample amends for the moderation of—their Master Elisha—the
Society in England, in the extent of land of which they have
become the purchasers, forsooth, from the natives on their own
private account. For I was credibly informed on the island
that there is scarcely one of them who has not managed in this
way to secure for himself or his children in perpetuity a large
extent of valuable territory.
Mr. S., for example, a lay missionary from New South Wales,
and the son of a respectable emancipist, residing at Kissing
Point on the Parramatta Eiver, in that colony, bought a large
tract of eligible land from the natives, having a frontage of
from four to five miles on one of the navigable rivers in the Bay
of Islands, for two check shirts and an iron pot, or go-ashore,
as it is called by the natives ! I was credibly informed, more-
over, in New Zealand, that Captain Blenkinsop, the master of
a South Sea whaler, who was afterwards unfortunately drowned
by the upsetting of a whale-boat in Encounter Bay, in the
province of South Australia, along with Sir John Jeffcott, the
first judge of that colony, had, in entire ignorance of Mr. S.’s
previous purchase, purchased the very same tract from some
other person, who, it seems, pretended to be its proprietor.
During his absence on the south coast of New Holland, Capt.


Blenkinsop’s agent at the Bay of Islands, erected a house on
the land, agreeable to the instructions of his principal, who
intended to settle in New Zealand on his return ; but no sooner
was the house finished than Mr. S. gave Captain B.’s agent
notice to quit, and produced his own deeds. On the agent’s
remonstrating with Mr. S. for allowing him, in such circum-
stances, to go on with the building of the house, Mr. S. coolly
replied, that the erection of the house rendered the land the
more valuable to himself. I refrain from making any remarks
on this transaction ; hut Mr, S., your Lordship will observe, is
a native of Botany Bay, who has exported, in his own person,
a portion of the surplus Christianity, forsooth, of his native
land, for the moral advancement of the aborigines of New Zea-
land. I have reason to believe also that Mr. S. has another
estate, procured in a similar way, towards the North Cape,
where he is at present stationed as a missionary.
Mr. F., who was merely a journeyman coach-maker, and by
no means of apostolic character either, in the village of Par-
ramatta, in New South Wales, when he was engaged as a lay-
missionary for New Zealand by the late Rev. Samuel Marsden,
has purchased, forsooth, from the natives, a tract of land, to the
northward of the River Thames, having a frontage from thirty-
five to forty miles on the east cost of the island towards the
Pacific Ocean. I could not learn how far back from the sea
Mr, P, goes, or what the valuable consideration had been for
this princely estate.
The Rev. Mr. W., formerly a lieutenant in the Royal Navy,
but now the ordained head of the New Zealand Mission, has a
large tract of land, in conjunction with Mr. F., adjoining the
Society’s settlement atPaihia, in the Bay of Islands, and stretch-
ing along the left bank of the Kauakaua River.
Messrs. C. and D., who were originally sent out as missionary
agriculturists on the civilizing system, have selected their
domains on a somewhat similar scale with those of the S, and
F. estates, towards the Hokianga River, on the west coast; while
those of Messrs. K. and K. are situated towards the North Cape.


I was unfortunately unable, my Lord, to ascertain exactly
the real extent of the land possessed or claimed, on the ground
of alleged purchases from the natives, by the Church Mission-
aries and their sons in New Zealand, either in English acres or
square miles* (the latter is the usual mode of computation in
the island); but your Lordship will be able to form some idea
on the subject, when I state, on the authority of several intelli-
gent persons residing on the spot, and unconnected with the
Society, that if the valuable live timber growing on the land so
claimed, or possessed, were to be cut down and disposed of, it
would be worth, at the present market price in New South
Wales, not less than half a million sterling.
In short, the largest seigniories in New Zealand are the pro-
perty of the Church Missionaries and their sons ; and the poor
ignorant and deluded natives have thus, my Lord, been
“ scattered and peeled ” by the very men who ought to have
been their natural protectors, and to have remonstrated and
protested to the British Government again, and again, against
any attempt, on the part of British subjects, to obtain posses-
sion of any part of their land, without the express consent and
authority of the British Government. It is peculiarly aggra-
* It is extremely difficult to get at the real extent of European estates
in New Zealand. There is a laudable obscurity on the subject in parti-
cular cases, which might almost be supposed designed to hold out a
premium for the future gentlemen of the long robe in that island. Mr.
John Wright, for example, a respectable settler and merchant at the
Bay of Islands, has a property in that neighbourhood, of which three of
the boundary lines are well defined : viz. *‘ by the salt water in front
and by the lands of neighbouring proprietors on the right and left
but the fourth boundary line being “as far back as the said John
Wright shall think proper,” it will doubtless be a matter of some diffi-
culty for the future doctors of the civil law in New Zealand to decide
where that boundary shall be. It is perhaps best in such cases to go
back to the salt water on the other side, as the earlier American colonists
wished to do, when King James the First forgot to define their boundary
to the westward. They were quite willing—honest men ! —to take the
Pacific or Great Ocean for their western boundary, wherever it might be.


vating, for instance, to reflect that the patrimony of poor Riva,
of Kororadika, the native chief I have already mentioned, is
now the private property of certain of the missionaries and
their children; and that much of Pomare’s land has also fallen
into the same hands.
Yes, my Lord, it is mortifying in the extreme, to any man
of the least pretensions to Christian philanthropy, to reflect,
that instead of endeavouring to protect the New Zealanders—
the interesting and confiding people of their charge—from the
aggressions of unprincipled European adventurers, the mis-
sionaries of the Church Missionary Society have themselves
been the foremost and the most successful in despoiling them
of their land. In short, the case of these missionaries is, in
this respect, the most monstrous that has occurred in the whole
history of missions since the Reformation—the most disgraceful
to Protestant Christianity. There has, doubtless, been no
express agreement between the Church Missionary Society and
its missionaries in New Zealand, that the latter should not be
permitted to purchase land for themselves from the natives.
But the thing is universally understood, my Lord, and daily
acted on in every other instance with which I am acquainted,
that the missionary shall not be permitted to acquire property
for himself individually ; and that although the Society he
belongs to may procure, either by gift or purchase, a site for
its missionary buildings and operations, the missionaries them-
selves shall not be permitted to abuse their influence and
opportunities by becoming landholders or cattleholders among
the heathen. This abuse, however, has prevailed, my Lord,
among the missionaries of the Church Missionary Society to
an incredible extent—to such an extent as even to bring
scandal on the cause of Christian Missions altogether, and to
constitute one of the grossest breaches of trust, on the part of
its own office-bearers, that the evangelical portion of the
Christian Church has witnessed for a century past.
I should be sorry, my Lord, to insinuate that the Committee
of the Church Missionary Society is at all acquainted with


these transactions. That committee, I have every reason to
believe, consists of honourable and Christian men, whose
conduct, in regard to the missionary , affords a guarantee
to the Christian public that they will act with the same faith-
fulness in every instance. But your Lordship knows very well,
it is a long way to New Zealand, and the missionaries are not
bound to tell the whole truth to the Society respecting their
private affairs. Having sacrificed their worldly prospects in
England or New South Wales, to dwell in the midst of
cannibals in a heathen land, they may doubtless conceive, and
perhaps delude one another, as well as themselves individually
in conceiving, that they had an undoubted right to drive a
good bargain for themselves individually, as they have certainly
done in right earnest, with the ignorant natives. For what-
ever may have been the case in the days of the Divine Author
of the Christian religion, it is certainly not always the case
now that “ the children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light”
Besides, it is extremely hazardous for any man who has the
least regard for his own reputation in this country to say a
single word to the discredit of missionaries to the heathen,
either individually or collectively; for the man who does so,
whatever be his standing or profession, is instantly set down as
an enemy of missions altogether, and his testimony is forthwith
got rid of accordingly. In fact, the task of telling the plain
truth respecting missionaries to the heathen, if that truth is in
any way disparaging, is as invidious in regard to its bearings
on the truth-teller in the eye of the religious public, as that of
the parliamentary impeachment of a Minister of State, It is
thus, however, that the grossest abuses are perpetuated, and
that Christianity is wounded , as it always is the most deeply,
in the house of its friends.
The subject of the landed property of the Missionaries of the
Church Missionary Society in New Zealand, has of late been
brought frequently before the Colonial public of New South
Wales ; and I have been told myself, by the relatives of some


of the Missionaries in that colony, in reference to the state-
ments on the subject published from time to time in the
colonial press, that “ as they have families to provide for, they
are fully warranted to avail themselves of their opportunities of
doing the best for them they can.” My Lord, I have a family
to provide for in that Colony also ; but having been early
stationed, in the good providence of Cod, in a country in which
almost every man I saw, whether clergyman or layman, was a
proprietor of sheep or cattle—intent chiefly on improving his
stock or in increasing the quantity of his wool—l deemed it
my bounden duty, as a minister of the gospel, “ whose own
hands must be clean in bearing the vessels of the Lord,” never
to become the owner of a single head of either.
For every acre of land belonging to the Church Missionary
Society, as a corporate body, in New Zealand, I am confident,
my Lord, that the full price has been paid. And as that price
was, at the suggestion of the late Rev. Samuel Marsden, the
Society’s agent in New South Wales, principally paid in cattle,
sheep, and horses from that colony; and as Mr. Marsden
himself was long famous for having one of the best breeds of
horned cattle in New South Wales—the Marsden breed—there
can be no doubt whatever that the whole transaction, as far as
the Society and Mr. Marsden were concerned, was characterized
by honesty and fair dealing.* But as the natives had no idea
either of flocks and herds, or of rearing sheep and cattle for
food, they soon grew tired of the few sheep, and the bull-calf or
heifer that had fallen to their lot individually, and had
furnished them with amusement for a time, and they then sold
* There are few large proprietors in New South Wales who have dealt
so extensively in sheep and cattle as the late Rev. Mr. Marsden, long and
generally known as the apostle of New Zealand. Mr. Marsden always
prided himself, to use the mercantile phrase, on keeping a good article.
He was one of the first importers of Spanish sheep and English cattle
into the colony ; his breeds uniformly bore a high character among
colonial graziers, and his prices, as I have been informed, were corres-
pondingly high. But he was never unwilling to allow a liberal credit


them to the missionaries ! Old Riva, for instance, had been in
New South Wales many years ago, and had carried up with
him a present of four large live hogs to the Governor, who
gave him a fine horse in return, which he brought back with
him to New Zealand. But Riva having probably been the first
of his family who had ever seen a horse, and having no
imaginable use for one himself—his style and equipage as a
New Zealand chief being quite complete without any such
appendage—he soon sold the animal to the missionaries !
Whether it was in this way that Mr. K. or Mr. K. (for I
forget which of these individuals it was ; but the one of them,
at all events, was a missionary blacksmith or musket-mender,
and the other a missionary shoemaker,) laid the foundation of
his sheep stock in New Zealand, lam not aware; but it is
certainly worth mentioning, as an instance of the extraordinary
capabilities of the country, that he lately forwarded to Sydney,
from his estate in New Zealand, towards the northern extremity
of the island, his first investment of New Zealand wool,
amounting to ten bales (containing probably 250 lbs. each),
which, from its superior quality, as well as from the superior
style in which it had been got up, in consequence of the
abundance of fresh water in the island, was sold by public
auction, in Sydney, for exportation to London, at Is.
per lb., or about £234 17s. 6d. altogether.
In such circumstances as those I have thus detailed, your
Lordship will not be astonished that the New Zealand Mission
should hitherto have made so slight an impression for good, as
it has confessedly done, on the interesting natives of that
island, notwithstanding the enormous expense at which it has
to respectable free immigrants arriving in the colony with limited
means ; and many families, who are now wealthy in New South Wales,
have in this way been indebted to Mr. Marsden for the groundwork of
their colonial fortunes. As a magistrate of the territory, which he was
for about thirty years, Mr. M. was a strict disciplinarian, and was
nothing loth to prescribe the requisite number of lashes to the delin-
quents of his congregation at Parramatta, whenever they required it.


hitherto been conducted.* Indeed, if that mission had been
extensively attended with the Divine blessing, like various
other Protestant Missions in the South Seas, all our inferences
and deductions from the precepts and declarations of the
Divine Author of Christianity would have been at fault.
“ Love not the world, neither the things of the world,” is the
injunction of Christ to every professed Christian man, but
especially to each and every Missionary, Indeed, disin-
terestedness is so much a sine qua non in a Christian
Missionary, that the idea of a Missionary of an opposite
character implies a contradiction in terms. The exhibition of
that God-like attribute on the part of the individual who
professes to be seeking his welfare, is intelligible even to the
most untutored savage; and it never fails, eventually, to
produce its effect. It is humiliating, however, to reflect, that
instead of exhibiting that Christian virtue to the natives of
New Zealand, so many of the Missionaries of the Church
Mission in that island should have actually been making
common cause with the veriest spoilers of the natives in the
land ; and that the natives should have had such good reason
to say of them, as they have done again and again, that “ their
only reason for coming to New Zealand was that it was a
better country than their own.”
At all events, your Lordship will perceive from the preceding
pages, how peculiarly out of place were the reasonings and
declamations of the friends and supporters of the Church
Mission in New Zealand in opposition to the Bill for the
colonization of that island on the principles of the South
Australian Colony, during the last Session of Parliament. So
far from protecting the natives from the aggressions of unprin-
cipled European adventurers, under the system at present in
operation in that island, the Missionaries have actually set the
example of such aggression in their own persons. So far from
* Its present cost, I believe, is £15,000 per annum. It has been as
high as £17,000.


doing everything in their power to establish an effectual
bulwark for the preservation of the natives from political and
moral degradation, the Missionaries have virtually been doing
their utmost to accelerate the process of degradation, by
despoiling them of their land, under the specious pretext of
iniquitous bargains, of which any man professing the Christian
religion, but especially a Missionary, ought to have been
ashamed.
The Wesleyan Methodists have also had a mission towards
the northern extremity of the Northern Island of New Zealand,
which they are now extending along the coast to the south-
ward, for a number of years past; and I am happy to add
that, from all I could learn on the subject, from the most
respectable European inhabitants of the island, it is in a highly
prosperous state: their principal settlement being at the Hoki-
anga River, on the West Coast. Your Lordship may perhaps
imagine that the greater success of that mission may arise from
the fact that Wesleyans, as a religious denomination, are much
more likely to obtain suitable persons for carrying on such a
mission, from among their own members, than the Church of
England. This is doubtless the case to a certain extent; but
the greater success of the Wesleyan Mission, as compared with
the Church Mission in New Zealand, must, I conceive, be
ascribed in no small degree to the fact that the Wesleyan Mis-
sionaries are strictly prohibited, by the fundamental laws and
constitution of their society, from acquiring property of any
kind, whether in land or in agricultural stock, at their missionary
stations. The advantages of such a regulation, even as regards
the Missionaries themselves, are incalculable, as it removes
them at once from all temptation, so long as they remain in
connection with their society. Its advantages, as regards the
success of their mission and the reception of the Gospel by the
heathen, are self-evident.
There has also been a French Roman Catholic mission
recently formed on the Hokianga River, of which the native
population is still very considerable. It is conducted by M.


Pompallier, Bishop of Maronee in partibus, a French ecclesias-
tic of superior education, polished manners, and acknowledged
zeal; and as five Roman Catholic Priests have recently been
ordained at Lyons to act under his orders in different parts of
the island, and are now probably on their way for that purpose
to New South Wales, it is evident not only that the Church of
England’s mission in New Zealand will have a formidable rival
in the Romish New Zealand Mission, but that the friends of
Protestant Christianity, in the Southern Hemisphere generally,
have good reason to strengthen their posts, and to stand upon
their guard. The New Zealanders, as I have already observed,
are by no means predisposed to idolatry ; and their universal
idea of a Great, Pervading, Invisible Spirit, who cannot be
represented by any image, nor confined within any temple made
with hands, refers us at once for their origin and mythology, in
common with those of their evident congeners, the Indians of
America, to those times of remotest antiquity, when the primi-
tive and heaven-taught theology of mankind had not yet been
degraded into what Mr. Gibbon calls “ the elegant mythology
of the Greeks.” At the same time there is something in the
Romish religion so universally congenial to the feelings and
affections of unregenerate humanity, that I would not attempt
to conceal my own serious apprehensions of M. Pompallier’s
success ; for, considering the paralyzing influence which that
religion uniformly exerts on its votaries, I have no hesitation
in acknowledging that I should regard the success of a Romish
Mission in New Zealand in no other light than as a serious
calamity to the Southern Hemisphere. Yes, my Lord, it is
not merely the prevalence of the French race, but the paralys-
ing influence of the Romish religion that has left Lower Canada
in all the darkness and inertness of the middle ages, in the
midst of a whole continent of enlightened and energetic free-
men. Your Lordship will doubtless recollect that in the reign
of Louis XIII., the single Protestant town of Rochelle pos-
sessed a commercial navy nearly equal to that of all France
besides ; and if Protestantism had not then and shortly there-


after been well nigh extirpated from that kingdom by the strong
hand of tyranny, guided by the fiendish spirit of intolerance,
there is reason to doubt whether Great Britain, our own beloved
country, would have stood so conspicuous among the nations as
she now does, or maintained so long the empire of the seas.
It is on the prevalence of Protestant Christianity, under the
glorious flag of England, in the Southern Hemisphere, that the
hopes of millions and millions more in that hemisphere
undoubtedly depend.
One of the means of conversion to the Roman Catholic faith
which M. Pompallier employs, in his intercourse with the New
Zealanders at Hokianga, is the distribution of little brass trin-
kets in the form of crucifixes, and “ brazen images ” of the
Virgin Mary, bearing the Latin inscription Mater Dolorosa.
These the New Zealanders suspend to their ears, as they are
in the habit of doing with anything else, and especially anything
foreign, which they conceive ornamental. I have seen the
buckle of an English saddle-girth suspended in the same way,
the tooth of a shark, the wing of a bird enclosing a native herb,
which affords an agreeable perfume, and an ornament of green-
stone. Occasionally, however, the New Zealanders suspend
the crucifixes and the brazen images of the Romish goddess to
the necks of their dogs !
Of the European population on the Hokianga River, a con-
siderable proportion consists of Irish Roman Catholics, who
have originally been convicts in New South Wales and Van
Diemen’s Land, and who are now employed as labourers, saw-
yers, &c., on the different establishments for cutting timber for
exportation on that river. And as most of these depraved
individuals are living in concubinage with native women, some
of them even with the daughters of native chiefs, they doubt-
less afford a ready access to the natives to the Romish mis-
sionary, and a powerful means of influence on the native mind.


In short the accommodating spirit of the Romish system, which
allows the veriest reprobates, on the one hand, to consider
themselves religious characters, on their merely complying
with the prescribed observances of their church, and which
easily engrafts itself on the other, upon any system of heathen-
ism whatever, must afford it a prodigious advantage in such
circumstances as these.
From the preceding statement it will doubtless be evident to
your Lordship, that whether the New Zealanders remain in
their unconverted and heathen state, or adopt such a mere
nominal profession of Chritianity as they are likely to arrive at
under the influence of land-jobbing missionaries, the prospect
for that unfortunate people is gloomy in the extreme. In
either case they will infallibly disappear from the land of their
forefathers, like the snow from their native mountains on the
return of spring. The idea of the New Zealanders being able
to form a government for themselves, or even to protect them-
selves from the aggressions of unprincipled and rapacious Euro-
peans, is pre-eminently absui’d. Every succeeding year will
witness the formation of additional trading establishments from
New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land, and of additional
points of intercourse between the unfortunate natives and the
numerous whalers of the Southern Pacific, along a coast line of
upwards of two thousand miles ; and the process of demoraliza-
tion and extermination will be rapid beyond conception. In
short, as the present unfortunate and critical condition of that
most interesting people is unquestionably the result of the
extension of British Commerce and British Colonization in the
Southern Hemisphere, I cannot conceive how Her Majesty’s
Government can possibly refrain from interfering on their
behalf any longer. And as to the sort of interference which is
necessary on the part of the British Government, I am decidedly
of opinion that the establishment of a British Colony, founded


and conducted on Christian principles, in their native isle,
affords the only prospect of preserving the New Zealanders
from the ruin and extermination with which they are at present
threatened, as well from their professed friends as from their
undoubted foes.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord, &c., &c.


LETTER 111.
ON THE PROSPECT WHICH NEW ZEALAND AFFORDS FOR THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A BRITISH COLONY,
London, June, 1839.
My Lord,
It is one of the beautiful arrangements of that beneficent Pro-
vidence which governs the world, that the interest and the duty,
both of individuals and of nations, are generally conjoined;
insomuch that in discharging the one, the other is materially
advanced. It is the bounden duty of the British Government,
for example, to interfere at the present moment for the protec-
tion and preservation of the natives of New Zealand by the
establishment of a British colony, founded and conducted on
equitable and Christian principles, on their coasts. In what
way such an undertaking would promote British interests in
the tenderest point, and prove highly conducive to the national
welfare, I shall now demonstrate.
The group of islands known under the general name of New
Zealand is situated a little to the westward of the 180th degree
of E. or W. longitude, and between the 34th and 48th parallels
of S, latitude ; extending from north to south upwards of eight
hundred geographical miles, with an average breadth of upwards
of one hundred miles, and containing an extent of surface
equal to that of the British Islands. The coast line, following
the various indentations of the land, extends considerably
upwards of three thousand miles, and probably comprises a
greater number of eligible harbours, bays, and roadsteads,
than is to be found along an equal extent of coast in any other


part of the world. In the winter season —from May to Sep-
tember inclusive—these bays are the resort of the Black or
Right Whale; and at a moderate distance from the land, the
Sperm Whale is found, occasionally in vast herds, in the sur-
rounding ocean. Indeed, it is a fact worthy of special notice, as
indicative of the superior eligibility of New Zealand as a whaling
station, that the whale caught on the New Zealand ground
yields a third more oil than an animal of the same size and
species caught in any other part of the world. lam indebted
for this fact to a whaling captain of great experience in the
South Sea fisheries, and of undoubted veracity.
It cannot be denied, however, that this branch of trade, so
peculiarly important to a maritime nation, as a grand nursery
for seamen, is fast passing out of the hands of Great Britain
and her colonies. Of the whalers at present on the coast
of New Zealand, about one hundred are American, thirty
British, and thirty French. The French vessels, most of which
belong to a company of naturalized Swiss merchants at Havre
de Grace, are beyond all comparison the finest and the best
equipped in the trade; their crews are also the most orderly
and the best conducted. They are consequently the most per-
severing and the most successful: the Swiss Company having
actually realized not less than thirty-five per cent on their
capital invested, according to the information I received from a
gentleman at the Bay of Islands, who had abundant means of
ascertaining the fact.
Everything that enlightened policy could dictate has, in the
meantime, been done by the French Government to extend and
to render popular this important branch of the national indus-
try. A bounty, amounting to about £4 per ton, is allowed in
France on all whale oil procured by French whalers ; and every
encouragement is judiciously held out to those citizens of the
United States, who are at all acquainted with the whale fishery
to settle in the kingdom. A considerable number of the French
whaling vessels have hitherto been commanded by naturalized
Americans; one of whom, so early as the year 1834, was made


a chevalier of the legion of honour by Louis Philippe, as a
reward for his eminent services in that capacity, and as an
inducement to his enterprising countrymen to become citizens
of France. Nay, the attentions of their truly paternal Govern-
ment follow the French whalers even to the distant Pacific;
where a frigate and two other French ships of war have recently
been cruising for their protection, as well as to conciliate the
natives of the different islands they visit. In short, Great
Britain has seldom had a more formidable rival on her own
element, and in her own peculiar walk, than she now has in the
Southern Pacific under the flag of the citizen king.
Whether the French have any ulterior views—l mean in
regard to the formation of a permanent settlement either in
New Zealand or in some of the other islands of the Pacific, —
I cannot tell: the general impression, however, both in New
South Wales and in New Zealand, is, that they have ; and that
impression seems by no means unwarranted from various
circumstances which it is unnecessary to particularize.
Wishing, from my heart, the peace and prosperity of the French
nation, and the extension of its commerce tenfold, I should
nevertheless, for the reason I have already stated, consider the
formation of a French colony in the South Seas a real calamity
to the Southern Hemisphere, as presenting a serious obstacle
to the progress and improvement of the human race.
Whalers of all nations will unquestionably exert a demoral-
izing influence on the uncivilized and heathen tribes with which
they come in contact; but lam sorry to be obliged to add, on
the authority of an intelligent countryman of my own in New
Zealand, whose means of information are very extensive, that
of the three nations engaged most extensively in the Southern
Fisheries—the British, the French, and the Americans—the
influence of our own sailors on the New Zealanders is the most
demoralizing: they are the most intemperate, the most dis-
orderly, and the most abandoned. And as the trade is gradu-
ally becoming less and less profitable than it has hitherto been
to the British and Colonial merchant, from this very circum-


1834
129,824
122,292
1835
175,130
125,100
1836
131,921
133,050
1837
182,567
215,120
1838
129,400
228,710
stance, the probability is that, if vigorous measures are not
speedily taken to prevent it, it will ere long be in a great
measure, if not wholly, engrossed by foreigners.
The French whalers are employed chiefly, though not exclu-
sively, in the pursuit of the black whale ; the British and
American whalers being partly engaged in the black and partly
in the sperm whale fishery. Of the extent to which both
branches of the trade are pursued by the Americans, some idea
may be formed from the following account of the number of
barrels of sperm and black whale oil which had arrived in the
United States, during the following years, copied from the
New York Express of January, 1839 :
Years. Barrels Sperm. Barrels Black.
In short, there is reason to fear that unless the requisite
preventive measures are speedily taken, this most important
branch of maritime industry will ere long be wrested entirely
out of the hands of Great Britain and her colonies by the
Americans and the French.
It appears to me, however, that if a British Colony were
established on right principles in New Zealand, it might not
only be made conducive in the highest degree to the protection
of the natives from the demoralizing influence of whalers of all
nations, but would lead to the restoration to Great Britain and
her colonies of their proper share in this branch of industry.
For if a few hundred families of the herring and whale fishing
population of the northern parts of England, of the north and
west of Scotland, and of the Orkney and Shetland Isles, were
to be settled as colonists in New Zealand, and British capital
employed, even to a very moderate amount, through a whaling
company in London, to afford them employment in the
Southern Fisheries, they would very soon get the whole of the


black whale fishery of the island into their hands, and be able
eventually to compete successfully with the Americans in the
sperm whale fishery also, by being always in the immediate
vicinity of the whaling ground. Of the population I allude to,
thousands have of late years been reduced to penury from the
failure of the Northern Fisheries. As colonists in New
Zealand, however, they would immediately find a splendid field
for their industry, and no fear of want.
As an illustration of the extent to which the black whale
fishery on the coasts of New Zealand is at present carried on
from the colony of New South Wales, I am enabled to state,
from information obtained incidentally on my voyage home,
that during the past year a single mercantile house in Sydney
imported into that colony, from New Zealand, not less than
seventy-one tons of whalebone, an article which generally sells
for £145 per ton in the London market. Whalebone is
procured exclusively from the black whale, of which it con-
stitutes a sort of fringe along the jaws, the animal having no
teeth, like the spermaceti whale. Now, as each whale affords
about five hundredweight of bone, there must have been not
fewer than 284 whales killed by the parties belonging to the
mercantile house I refer to, to yield the quantity of bone
procured by that one house. Still, however, the black whale
fishery on the coasts of New Zealand has been by no means a
gainful speculation generally for the New South Wales mer-
chants : the field of operation being not only very distant, and
the outfit proportionately expensive, but the merchant being
obliged to depend for the issue of his stores and the general
success of his speculation on whatever runaway sailors he can
pick up in the port of Sydney, as the European natives of
New South Wales have generally no disposition to go to sea.
In short, New Zealand and not New South Wales is the
proper place for the establishment of a colonial population to
engage vigorously in the whale fishery of the Southern Pacific;
and if a British colonial population of virtuous habits, and
predisposed and accustomed to that particular branch of


industry, were settled along the coasts of that island, they
would infallibly, and at no distant period, engross the whole
of the trade.
Besides, a virtuous European community of the kind I have
mentioned, settled on the coasts of New Zealand, with their
ministers and schoolmasters and missionaries to the heathen,
would infallibly exert a powerful moral influence on the
surrounding natives ; of whom many would speedily join them
in their perilous employment—manning their boats and
sharing their spoils. The New Zealanders are decidedly a
maritime people. They are fond of the sea, and make excel-
lent sailors; and they only require virtuous and industrious
Europeans to reside among them to render their services in
this way most advantageous to themselves and to the British
empire.*
If a few hundred families of the class I have mentioned
were settled in suitable localities along the coasts of New
Zealand—as for instance, at the Bay of Islands, the River
Thames, Port Nicholson, and Queen Charlotte’s Sound, in
Cook’s Straits, Dusky Bay, &c., having small patches of
ground for cultivation attached to their houses, they would
soon realize a degree of comfort and independence which they
could never hope to attain in the mother country. All the
bays and roadsteads of the island abound with excellent fish of
various kinds, and I have been informed by an intelligent
person, who knows the country well, that there is a bank
somewhere to the northward of the East Cape, on which the
natives procure the largest and finest cod in the world. Even
* I was much gratified at hearing the New Zealand coxswain of an
English boat, in which two of my fellow-passengers, per the Eoslyn
Castle, and myself, were rowed across the Bay of Islands, on a beautiful
moonlight night, by four of his countrymen, calling out to them in good
English, and scarcely with a foreign accent, “Pull away, my lads,”
“ Stand to it my boys. ” The New Zealanders, in reply, struck up their
native boat-song in a sort of recitative, of which the chorus, like that of
the Canadian boat song, is “ Tohi, Tohi,” or row, brothers, row.


the shell-fish of the island afford an agreeable article of food
to the New Zealanders. Cockles are very abundant, and of
excellent quality, and the muscles, which constitute a regular
New Zealand dish, are much better flavoured than ours ; the
shell is considerably broader and of more delicate texture.
I trust, therefore, it will appear evident to your Lordship
that if New Zealand is to be colonized at all, its peculiar
adaptation for the establishment of a whale fishery, or rather
for being the head quarters of the South Sea fisheries, ought
to be regarded as a subject of primary consideration; as the
prosecution of that branch of industry by a maritime population
emigrating from the mother country, would not only prove an
immediate and inexhaustible source of wealth to the colony,
but would afford the best means of counteracting the demo-
ralizing influence of the whalers of all nations that now visit
the coast, and of promoting in the highest degree the
civilization and Christianization of the natives.
The climate of New Zealand is decidedly one of the finest
in the world—like that of Italy and the South of France
towards the north, and like that of England and the south of
Scotland towards the south ; the winter, however, being milder
than that of Great Britain. I was particularly struck with the
glow of health exhibited on the cheeks of the children of
Europeans at the Bay of Islands, compared with the pale faces
of children of the same age at Sydney, in much the same
latitude. It was quite remarkable. At all events, the climate
of New Zealand is undeniably superior to that of New South
Wales and Van Dieman’s Land in one most important par-
ticular—viz., in being free from droughts and hot winds; its
insular character, its chain of lofty mountains running from
north to south along the whole extent of the islands, and its
distance from any large continent, ensuring it a constant and
copious supply of rain. Indeed this most favourable circum-
stance renders New Zealand decidedly more eligible for the
settlement of industrious families of the humbler classes,
intending to earn their subsistence by the cultivation of the


soil, than either of these two great pastoral colonies ; for there
has never yet been a crop lost in New Zealand from want of rain,
w hich, I am sorry to say, is not the case in New South Wales.
Whether New Zealand will ever come into extensive com-
petition with the Australian Colonies, as a pastoral country,
may admit of question. I have already mentioned that ten
bales of wool, of superior quality, had recently been forwarded
to Sydney, where it sold at a high price, from a missionary
estate in the northern division of the northern island. There
has also been a quantity of equally superior quality sent up to
Sydney lately from the island of Manna, in Cook’s Straits ;
and it cannot be denied that the abundance of water in New
Zealand, which is often rather scarce in New South Wales,
affords superior facilities for getting up the wool for the foreign
market. On the other hand, the dryness of the Australian
climate is unquestionably favourable both for the constitution
of the sheep and the growth and texture of the wool.
At all events, it is to the rearing of sheep and cattle, and
the growth of fine wool, that persons of moderate capital
emigrating to New Zealand must principally direct their atten-
tion. It would be absurd to act otherwise. To combine with
these pursuits the cultivation of the soil, or the production of
grain to a much greater extent than it is pursued in New
South Wales, would, doubtless, be advisable; but to neglect
those peculiar means of advancement which have raised the
Australian colonies to their present condition of unexampled
prosperity and importance, especially in a country in which a vast
extent of unoccupied pasture-land proclaims its peculiar adapta-
tion for the rearing of sheep and cattle, would be irrational in the
extreme. Besides, agricultural stock of all kinds could be
imported into New Zealand, both from New South Wales and
from Van Dieman’s Land, at a lesser expense than even into
South Australia ; the westerly winds that prevail in these
regions, for so large a portion of the year, rendering a voyage
to the eastward of much easier accomplishment than one to
the westward.


The northern parts of the northern island are certainly less
adapted for sheep and cattle than the open pastoral country in
the vicinity of Cook’s Straits. Towards the north the country
is more covered with timber and more moist; and the im-
provable land, instead of being coated over with good pasture,
in its natural state, as is the case generally in New South
Wales, is for the most part overgrown with fern. The fern,
however, never grows on bad land in New Zealand, and the
quality of the soil is generally indicated by the size and
strength of the fern ; inferior land producing only a stunted
and puny vegetation. When sown with English grasses, the
New Zealand fern-land produces excellent pasture. The
English clover in particular grows luxuriantly.
The localities in which an agricultural population could be
settled in the first instance with greatest facility, and with the
best prospect of success, are the banks of the River Thames on
the east coast, and those of the Hokianga, Kaiparra, and
Manukau rivers on the west. On these rivers, which are all
navigable for vessels of considerable burden, and especially for
steam-boats, there is a vast extent of alluvial land of the first
quality, which would produce in the greatest abundance all the
roots, fruits, vegetables, and grains of Europe, including wheat,
maize, and potatoes, tobacco, the olive, and the vine. The
potatoes of New Zealand are proverbially excellent, I mean in
New South Wales : they are cultivated most successfully by
the natives, without manure of any kind ; they come to matu-
rity in fourteen weeks, and two crops are obtained in the
year. Wheat yields at the rate of forty bushels per acre,
and I have seen maize grown by the natives with very indif-
ferent culture near the Bay of Islands, equal to any in New
South Wales. In short, all the necessaries of life, and many of
its luxuries, could be raised with very moderate industry by an
agricultural population in all the localities I have enumerated.
Of these localities the River Thames would certainly be the
fittest for the capital of a British colony, both for the extent of
eligible land in that part of the island, and for the superior


facilities which it presents for communication both with its east
and west coasts. A canal of not more than three quarters of a
mile in length, across a neck of low land between two naviga-
ble rivers flowing in opposite directions, would establish a water
communication in that part of the island from sea to sea ; the
natives of the east coast having formerly been in the habit of
ascending the Thames in their large war canoes, dragging them
across the neck or isthmus, and then launching them on the
Manukau River, which is navigable for sixty miles from the
west coast. That river, moreover, is, of all the three western
rivers I have mentioned, the most practicable at all times for
large vessels, and there is much superior land on its banks.
The Hokianga River is, in like manner, right across from the
Bay of Islands; the distance overland from Waimate, at the
head of the Kidi-kidi River, which empties itself into that bay,
being only twenty-five or thirty miles. About four miles from
Waimate is the Lake Maipere, twelve miles in length by eight
in breadth, having much arable land of superior quality on its
banks. The Hokianga is navigable for large vessels for eighty
miles from its mouth, and for boats for twenty or thirty miles
farther. The mouth of the Kaiparra River, which is somewhat
of a similar character, is about sixty miles to the southward;
but the head of it is about the same distance from the Bay of
Islands as the Hokianga. In short, the whole of this part of
New Zealand is admirably fitted by nature for the settlement
of a British colony, or rather for becoming the cradle of a great
agricultural, maritime, and commercial nation ; and if large
bodies of free immigrants, with their ministers and school-
masters, and missionaries to the heathen, were settled under a
regular government in each of the important localities I have
enumerated, I have no doubt that their influence on the natives
would be salutary in the highest degree, and that both New
Zealanders and Europeans would coalesce into one Christian
and virtuous people in a comparatively short period of time.
There are not a few instances already of Europeans forming
connections with native women, which have afterwards been


rendered reputable and permanent by marriage; and tbe off-
spring of sucb marriages will undoubtedly constitute a very fine
race of men. In a native village on tbe banks of tbe Kaua-
kaua River, I saw a daughter of tbe Chevalier Dillon, the
discoverer of tbe reliques of La Perouse, by a native female.
She was apparently about eleven or twelve years of age - r and in
point of form and features she bad a most interesting appearance.
She was barefooted and bareheaded, however, like the other
natives of the village, and her only garment was a New Zealand
mat.
On the banks of all the New Zealand Rivers I have enu-
merated, there are splendid forests of native timber, and there
is already a considerable trade carried on in the island, in the
cutting of that timber for exportation. At the time I was in
the Bay of Islands, in January and February last, there were
not fewer than four large vessels loading timber at Hokianga
—one for London, one for Launceston, in Van Dieman’s Land,
one for Adelaide, in South Australia, and for Port Phillip-
in New South Wales. It is singular indeed, that all these
three colonies should thus have to send for timber to New
Zealand, Such, however, is the fact.
Besides the pine, there are several species of hardwood in
New Zealand that are capable of being turned into account.
Of the pine there are five or six varieties that are used for
various purposes ; but the most valuable is the Koudi pine—
a species of wood resembling the timber of the Baltic, to which
it is preferred by competent judges, and admirably adapted,
from its strength and straightness, for spars for ships. From
the koudi pine, when growing, there exudes a gum, which may
be gathered in considerable quantities on the ground around
the tree. This gum has recently been sold in some quantity,
and at the rate of £lB per ton to the Americans, who manufac-
ture it into varnish, which I believe is sold in the United States
under the name of copal varnish.
Of the natural productions of New Zealand, the most remark-
able is th e pTiormium tenax, or New Zealand flax. This valuable


plant resembles in appearance the common flag. It affects
moist situations, but is by no means fastidious as to the quality
of the soil in other respects. Whether it would improve by
cultivation I do not know, but it is found in sufficient quantity
in its wild state to afford constant and remunerating employ-
ment to a large European population. At present it is
prepared exclusively by the native women, who merely scrape
off the exterior parts of the leaf with muscle shells, and then
form the filaments which remain, and which constitute the flax
of commerce, into bundles. When intending to use it them-
selves for the manufacture of their native mats they twist it
into yarn, with their fingers, and then steep the bundles or
hanks of yarn for some time in running water to render it soft
and pliant. They have no knowledge of the loom, but they
display considerable ingenuity in the manufacture of their
mats, which are all knit, or woven like net-work, with the
hand, without implements of any kind.* The natives, how-
ever, generally prefer English blankets to their own mats ;
chiefly, I believe, because they are foreign, and imply that they
have cost the wearer something besides mere manual labour,
but partly also because they find them warmer in winter. They
have an exceedingly mean appearance, however, when com-
pared with the native mat, which often suggests the idea of an
* I examined the work-basket of a native woman, a slave from the
southern regions of the island, whom I saw at work on a mat for her
master near the Wai Tangi or Cataract River, It contained a consider-
able variety of various coloured yarns, and was not unlike the repertory
of an English lady, when engaged in working a vase-stand or other
article of party-coloured worsted manufacture. The Wai Tangi, or
* ‘ noisy water, ” empties itself into the Bay of Islands. It has obtained
its most appropriate native name from a large waterfall at the head of
the navigation—the finest for a water-mill I have ever seen in the
Southern Hemisphere. I have no doubt it will be used for that purpose
ere long, and as the Bay of Islands is the common reservoir of a number
of navigable streams, a grist-mill in that locality might grind corn for a
very considerable extent of agricultural country, easily accessible by
■crater.


ancient Greek or Roman. The borders of the native mats,
which are often really elegant, are chiefly manufactured by the
natives of the East Cape and its vicinity; and it is worthy of
remark that the arabesque tracery they sometimes exhibit is
exactly the same as the celebrated traveller, Baron Humboldt,
found on the walls of the Temple of the Sun, at Mitla, in
Mexico, and as is still observable on the ancient Etruscan
vases, that are occasionally dug up in the environs of Rome.
The New Zealand flax is manufactured in Sydney into
whaling gear, for which I believe it is peculiarly well adapted.
It makes excellent standing rigging for vessels, and has
recently been manufactured into canvas for ships’ sails. It
could be produced in New Zealand to any extent.
It is evident, therefore, that that island will eventually be
the Baltic of the Southern Hemisphere, supplying two of the
great desiderata of commerce—timber and flax—and affording
support and employment to a numerous and industrious
European population. Iron ore of superior quality abounds
in the island, and coal is said to have been found at the
surface in Cook’s Straits. There are indications of copper in
the mountains of the interior ; and on White’s Island, on the
east coast, which is still under volcanic agency, sulphur can be
procured in great quantity. Limestone abounds in the
interior, and excellent marble.
In one word, whether we regard the situation, the soil, the
climate, or the natural productions and inhabitants of the
country, I am confident, my Lord, there never has been a more
favourable locality for the settlement of a British colony than
the New Zealand group of islands at this moment affords.
It may be supposed, indeed, that in a country of which the
natives have so long been represented in Europe as ferocious
cannibals, Europeans would run considerable risk in attempting
to form a permanent settlement. But the circumstance of
there being at present a very considerable European population
living in perfect security in various parts of the island, is a
sufficient answer to such an objection. Cannibalism has


entirely disappeared in tlie neighbourhood of all the European
settlements; and, in their native wars, the New Zealanders
uniformly respect the Europeans who are settled among them,
unless the latter, which indeed is seldom the case, take part
with one or other of the hostile tribes.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord, &c., &c.


LETTER IV.
ON THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH A BRITISH COLONY IN NEW
ZEALAND OUGHT TO BE ESTABLISHED AND CONDUCTED.
London, June, 1839.
My Lord,
In recommending the establishment of a British Colony in
New Zealand, I beg to assure yonr Lordship that I have had
no intercourse or connection of any kind with the parties
concerned in introducing a bill into the Imperial Parliament
for the accomplishment of that object during the past year.
Whatever may have been the motives or the character of
certain of these parties (and I understand both were sufficiently
decried at the time), I am in no way responsible for either;
my first and principal object in these letters being the pro-
tection of the interesting but unfortunate natives of New
Zealand, their rescue from that system of wholesale plunder
and progressive extermination, to which they are at present
exposed, and their ultimate elevation to the rank and character
of Christian and civilized men.
If the system of non-interference, on the part of European
Governments, with the natives of New Zealand, were likely
to secure the attainments of these important objects, and to
promote the general advancement of that most interesting race
of aborigines, I should be the first to decry all such inter-
ference, and to advocate the propriety of leaving them entirely
alone. But I trust, my Lord, it will be abundantly evident to
your Lordship and the public, from the preceding details, that
the continuance of that system will only render the New


Zealanders aft easy prey to tlie shoals of unprincipled
European adventurers, who are ever and anon landing on the
island from the Australian Penal Colonies, or from the whalers
and trading vessels that occasionally visit their coasts; and
that every year longer that the system in question is allowed
to subsist, the number of these adventurers will only be the
more increased, and the case of the New Zealanders the more
hopeless. Under the system at present in operation it is
actually the interest of such adventurers to demoralize the
New Zealanders, and to engage them in exterminating wars
with each other, by selling them rum, gunpowder, and firearms,
that they may the more easily obtain possession of their
valuable land.
It will also be evident to your Lordship and the public, from
the preceding details, that the case of the New Zealanders
cannot be entrusted, with any degree of safety to that inter-
esting people, even to missionaries; and more especially to the
agents of the Church Missionary Society. Even if these
missionaries were inclined, they have no longer the power to
protect the natives from the aggressions of unprincipled
Europeans; but their own flagrant example, as purchasers of
land from the natives, has deprived them of all moral power
for the protection of the New Zealanders, and shewn but too
plainly that they had but little inclination to exert such a
power, if they ever possessed it.
The grounds on which the Bill for the Colonization of New Zea-
land was successfully opposed in the last session of Parliament
were: That the establishment of a British colony in that island
would necessarily be effected on infidel and not on Christian
principles ; that the rights of the natives would consequently
be sacrificed and themselves speedily exterminated ; and that
these natives, being a sovereign and independent people,
advancing rapidly in civilization and Christianization, the
British Government had no right to interfere with them in the
manner proposed. In direct opposition, however, to such ideas,
l am confident, my Lord, that a British colony could, with the


utmost facility, be both established and conducted in New
Zealand on Christian and philanthropic principles, and that
such a colony would not only afford the requisite protection to
the natives, and the requisite security for the maintenance of
their rights, but would form a most desirable point cTappui and
centre of action for missionary labour among the Aborigines,
In regard to the alleged independence of the New Zealanders,
and their paramount sovereignty in their own island, the fact
undoubtedly is, that these islands are at present divided into
innumerable independent and sovereign chieftainships, in each
of which the whole of the land belongs in common to the whole
freemen of the tribe—as is uniformly the case also among the In-
dians of North America; but it is also the melancholy fact that,
through the rapid extension of British commerce and coloniza-
tion in the Southern Hemisphere, during the last twenty years,
these independent and sovereign chieftainships are now almost
universally undergoing a rapid process of annihilation, while
their territories are virtually seized and appropriated on the
most impudent pretences by lawless adventurers from the British
Penal Colonies, and from every whaler or trading vessel that
touches on their coasts. It is, therefore, for Her Majesty’s
Government to determine whether so preposterous a system of
downright plunder and oppression is to be allowed to subsist
under the sanction of Great Britain, and in the immediate
neighbourhood of a series of British colonies, or to be put an
end to at once by the assumption of the sovereignty of the
islands, on the part of Her Majesty, and the establishment of a
British Colony on their shores.
It is quite unnecessary, I apprehend, my Lord, to consult
Puffendorff or Grotius as to the right of Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment to colonize New Zealand, and to assume the sovereignty
of the island. The necessity of the case demands such a
measure on the part of the British Government; humanity
calls loudly for it; every independent chief in New Zealand
will most assuredly hail it as a blessing to himself and his
country ; and however insignificant it may appear, among the


occurrences of the moment, posterity will undoubtedly regard
its accomplishment as one of the most important events of Her
Majesty’s reign.
It may not be improper, however, to discuss the question of
right in the first instance, as far at least as that question is
capable of discussion. It is acknowledged, therefore, as a
maxim or first principle of the law of nations, that the discovery
of any waste or uninhabited country by a civilized nation con-
fers on the nation making such discovery a right to colonize
that country in preference to all other civilized nations—a
right, in short, to take possession of its territory, and to
exercise sovereignty over it. Thus the small, but beautiful
island, called Norfolk Island, to the northward of New
Zealand, having been discovered by Captain Cook, and having
been found waste and uninhabited, Great Britain not only
acquired by that discovery a right to colonize the said island,
in preference to all other civilized nations, but the island itself
became thenceforth British property, a part and parcel of the
British Empire.
It is acknowledged also as a maxim or first principle of the
law of nations, that if the new country so discovered is inha-
bited, and under a Government of any kind, the mere discovery
of it by a civilized nation (while it still gives such a nation a
right to colonize it, if it is susceptible of colonization, in pre-
ference to all other civilized nations) confers on that nation no
right of sovereignty over it—no right of property to a single
inch of its territory. In the celebrated case of the Cherokee
nation against the State of Georgia, tried before the Supreme
Court of the United States in the year 1832, the late eminent
Chief Justice Marshall, in his admirable summing up of the
argument on both sides, laid down this equitable principle as
having been the principle on which the British Government
had uniformly acted towards the Indians in the colonization of
America, previous to the war of American independence; and
proved incontestably that as the American Governments had
merely inherited British rights by the event of that war, they


could have no rig-lit of property whatever upon the territory of
a free and independent Indian nation.
In fact this equitable principle appears to have regulated the
transactions of the more respectable civilized nations with semi-
barbarous tribes from the remotest times. Whether we believe
the story, handed down to us from antiquity, of the bullock’s
hide cut into a thong of great length for the purpose of measur-
ing off the piece of land which had been previously purchased
by Queen Dido, from the natives of Northern Africa, for the
erection of the city of Carthage, or not, the very fact that such
a story was told and credited by the ancients, sufficiently
apprises us of the principles on which the merchant-princes of
Tyre and Sidon were known to regulate their intercourse with
uncivilized men ; for instead of seizing it by force of arms, and
thereby exciting a war, that would in all probability have laid
waste the country and ruined their own commerce, the Phoeni-
cians evidently purchased from the native chief of the district,
at a certain fixed price, the piece of land they had selected in
his territory as the site of their trading factory of Carthage.
To apply these principles to the case of the proposed coloni-
zation of New Zealand by the British Government, it cannot
be denied that that island was originally discovered —not
by the British, but by the Butch. In the year 1642, Abel
Jansen Tasman, a Dutch navigator, who had been commissioned
by His Excellency, Anthony Van Dieman, Governor-General
of the Dutch East Indies, to ascertain the extent and character
of the newly discovered continent of New Holland, sailed for
that purpose from Batavia, in command of the yacht Heems-
kirk and the pinnace Zeehaen, and discovered the island of
Van Dieman’s Land, which he considered the southern extre-
mity of that continent, and also the island of New Zealand.
On Van Dieman’s Land, Tasman effected a landing in various
places, and had some intercourse with the natives. On New
Zealand, however, he never landed, having merely seen that
island from his ship’s deck.
By this discovery the Dutch unquestionably acquired a right


to colonize both of these countries in preference to all other
nations ; but having made no use of that right for the long
period of 145 years, and the British Government having in
the meantime followed up the discoveries of Tasman by
discovering and surveying the whole eastern coast of New
Holland and the islands of New Zealand, that Government
undoubtedly succeeded to the right to colonize in both cases,
which the Dutch had originally possessed, but had thus
virtually renounced. Van Dieman’s Land, the discovery of
Tasman, was therefore included as a portion of the colony of
New South Wales, on the east coast of New Holland, and was
taken possession of accordingly by the British Government, in
virtue of the subsequent discoveries of Captain Cook, in the
year 1787. If, therefore, the Dutch title was held to have
merged or been extinguished in reference to Van Dieman’s
Land, on which Tasman had actually landed, a fortiori it must
have been held to have merged also or been extinguished in
reference to New Zealand, an island which that navigator had
merely seen, and on which Captain Cook, who surveyed and
described it minutely a hundred and thirty years thereafter,
was the first European who had ever landed. The Koyal
Commission of 1787, appointing Captain Phillip to be Captain-
General and Governor-in-Chief in and over the territory of
New South Wales and its dependencies, accordingly included
all the discoveries of Captain Cook in the Southern Pacific ;
the said territory and its dependencies being described in that
commission as extending “from Cape York (the extremity of
the coast to the northward), in the latitude of 11° 37' south ;
to the South Cape (the southern extremity of the coast), in
the latitude of 40° 30' south ; and inland to the westward as
far as 135° of east longitude, comprehending all the islands
adjacent to the Pacific Ocean , within the latitudes of the above-
mentioned Capes."
If it should be urged, however, that this description could
not be supposed to include islands so far to the eastward of
New Holland as New Zealand, I beg to reply, my Lord, that


it was not only supposed to do so, but that it really did include
sucb islands; tbe island, called Norfolk Island, situated to
the northward of New Zealand, on the same meridian, being
actually colonized by Captain Phillip, in virtue of his commis-
sion above quoted, as a part of the territory of New South
Wales and its dependencies. Nay, shortly after the com-
mencement of the present century, the British Government had
it seriously under their consideration to appoint a Lieutenant-
Governor of New Zealand, as a subordinate penal settlement
and dependency of New South Wales, on a representation,
pointing out the propriety of such an appointment, by
Lieutenant-Colonel Foveaux, of the New South Wales corps.
Happily, indeed, for New Zealand, that recommendation was
not acted on ; but so lately as the close of the government of
the late Major-General Macquarie, in the year 1820, that
island was still regarded, not theoretically but practically, as a
dependency of New South Wales, and within the limits of the
government of that colony ; for when the Rev. Mr. Butler
was about to proceed to New Zealand, as Superintendent of
the Church Mission in that island, he was actually created a
Justice of Peace for the territory of New South Wales and its
dependencies, by Governor Macquarie, and authorised to exer-
cise his functions in that capacity in New Zealand.
At all events, it must be obvious to your Lordship and the
public, that the British Government have not allowed their
right to colonize New Zealand, in preference to all other
civilized nations, acquired by the discoveries of Cook in the
years 1770 and 1775, to fall into abeyance and become extin-
guished, like that of the Dutch, acquired in the year 1642, by
the original discovery of Tasman. And as it is solely the
expenditure of eight millions of British money during the last
fifty years in the colonies of New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land, or rather the extraordinary facilities for
extending colonization in the Southern Hemisphere which that
expenditure has created, that renders the colonization of New
Zealand at all practicable at the present moment, it would


clearly be an act of the grossest injustice to Great Britain—
independently altogether of the right she acquired to colonize
that island through the discoveries of Captain Cook—for any
other civilized nation to attempt to appropriate the fruits of
that enormous expenditure, by forming a settlement on its
coast.
But the right to colonize, my Lord, most certainly gives
Her Majesty no right whatever to occupy a single inch of the
territory of New Zealand, except on such terms as its native
inhabitants shall accede to : in other words, it merely gives
Her Majesty the right of pre-emption from the natives. That
important right, however, neither Her Majesty nor any of her
royal predecessors has yet renounced in any way ; and as it is
a right clearly available, not merely against all European
foreigners, but against all Her Majesty’s own subjects, it
follows unquestionably that whoever has purchased land from
the natives in New Zealand, has done so at his own risk—has
done so in defiance of Her Majesty’s right of pre-emption ;
nay, has done so in the face of his late Majesty King
George lll.’s virtual protest against all such purchases in his
commission to his first Captain-General of New South Wales.
A few years ago, when a few adventurers from Van Dieman’s
Land crossed over to the south coast of New Holland, and
discovered a splendid country, which is now rapidly settling, in
the neighbourhood of Port Phillip, they negociated -for the
purchase of vast tracts of land for a mere trifle from the black
natives. The deeds were drawn up in due form, the natives
having appended their respective marks with all the customary
formalities of English law; and certain lawyers in Van
Dieman’s Land, who, it was alleged, were concerned in the
speculation, pronounced them valid. But the Imperial
Government, insisting on his late Majesty’s right of pre-
emption, or, in other words, of treating exclusively with the
natives for their land, very properly disallowed the whole
transaction, and the native deeds were consequently held null
and void.


Now I conceive, my Lord, that the case of all purchases of
land from the natives of New Zealand is a case precisely
similar; and the interests of humanity, as well as of Her
Majesty’s Government generally, demand that Her Majesty
shall not suffer the Royal prerogative to be invaded by indi-
vidual and unwarranted speculation in that island, any more
than it was allowed to be invaded in a similar manner on the
south coast of New Holland. By maintaining the Royal
prerogative in the case of New Zealand, as it was maintained
at Port Phillip, Her Majesty will reserve to herself the
salutary and important right of revising every alleged purchase
of land in that island—will retain the power of confirming
honest men in their possessions, and of obliging persons of a
different description to restore to the natives, or to the
Government on their behalf, the land they have acquired
dishonestly—and will thus establish a precedent of most bene-
ficial operation for the aborigines of every uncivilized country
in the South Seas having relations with British subjects in all
time coming.
In regard to the assumption of the sovereignty of New
Zealand, on the part of Her Majesty, considered as distinct
from the right to colonize the island on the terms I have
mentioned, I am aware of no other principle on which such a
measure could be justified than that of sheer necessity ; a
principle which, your Lordship is aware, however, is superior
to law, or rather which creates a law for itself. It is abso-
lutely necessary, on the one hand, that a regular and energetic
Government should be established forthwith in that island ;
but the native chiefs are utterly incapable, on the other, of
forming such a government of themselves —being altogether
destitute of the intelligence, virtue, and energy of character
that would be indispensably requisite to sustain a republic, and
too jealous of each other to allow any one of their number to
exercise authority as lord paramount over the rest. But if the
sovereignty of the island were at once assumed by Her
Majesty, and exercised, as it would undoubtedly be, for the


protection of tlie natives from European aggression, for the
preservation of peace between their different tribes, and for
the promotion of their intellectual and moral advancement,
there is no room to doubt, from all I have heard of the New
Zealanders in all parts of the island for the last sixteen years,
that such an event would be universally hailed by the natives
and most cheerfully acquiesced in. The New Zealanders are
uniformly desirous that Europeans should settle among them ;
and so untutored are they in regard to the ideas of civilized
men on the points of national independence and sovereignty,
that they have often represented it as a singular instance
of bad taste, as well as of partiality, on the part of the British
Government, that the Sovereign of Great Britain should have
sent a Governor for so inferior a race as the black natives of
New South Wales, and none for them.
I beg, therefore, most respectfxdly to suggest that Her
Majesty should be advised forthwith to assume the sovereignty
of New Zealand, for the general purposes of colonization from
the mother country, as well as for the protection and preserva-
tion of its aboriginal inhabitants; such colonization to be
effected on the principles on which the colony of South Austra-
lia has recently been established, but with a special reference
to the superior intellectual condition and general prospects of
the Aboriginal race. If an Act of the Imperial Parliament
could be obtained for such a purpose, it would doubtless be
highly desirable; bxit it appears to me that under the original
Act of Parliament authorising the King in Council to form a
Colony on the east coast of New Holland, including within its
jurisdiction the adjacent islands of the Pacific Ocean, Her
Majesty is fully authorized to take immediate steps, if she shall
think fit, for the colonization of New Zealand, without the sanc-
tion of a new Act of Parliament at all.
Supposing, therefore, that it should be determined on the
part of Her Majesty’s Government to colonize New Zealand,
or to speak more properly, to throw open that island for coloni-
zation, I would earnestly recommend that the following general


principles be acknowledged and established as the fundamental
principles of the undertaking ;
1. —That the land in all the islands constituting the New
Zealand group—including Chatham Island, the Auckland
Islands, Norfolk Island, and Lord Howe’s Island—belongs to
the Aborigines of these islands respectively ; and that no part
of that land shall be settled by European colonists without the
express consent of the natives, and without having been pre-
viously purchased from the natives at what they shall consider
a fair and adequate price.
2.—That all private purchases of land from the natives,
whether past or future, shall be utterly disallowed, as an in-
fringement of Her Maj esty’s undoubted right of pre-emption ;
the Government, or Commissioners acting on their behalf, to be
the sole purchasers from the natives, and a Board of Protectors
of the Aborigines to ascertain beforehand, and to certify to that
effect in every particular case, that in all such purchases the
interests and feelings and wishes of the natives have been duly
consulted.
3.—That the land so purchased from the natives shall be
sold by the said Commissioners at not less than a certain fixed
price per acre, and that the proceeds of such sales shall be
appropriated in the following manner, viz.:—
Ist. Towards the payment of the original price of the land
as purchased from the natives.
2nd. Towards the payment of the salaries of the Board of
Protectors of the Aborigines ; that the Board may be alike
independent of the European colonists and of the local Govern-
ment.
3rd. Towards the support of schools and other kindred insti-
tutions for promoting the intellectual and moral advancement
of the natives.
4th. Towards the encouragement and support of voluntary
emigration from Great Britain and Ireland.
That a vast extent of eligible land of the first quality could
in this manner be purchased from the natives of New Zealand,


in all parts of the island, at a merely nominal price, is undenia-
ble. The islands of the New Zealand group are but thinly
inhabited; and as the natives are not a pastoral people, and
as there is no game on the islands to employ them in hunting,
a comparatively small portion of land is adequate to all the
wants of a New Zealand tribe or family. On the other hand,
it is by no means desirable that in their present circumstances
the natives should receive a high price for their land from the
colonizing Government; for that price would in all likelihood
be squandered away very speedily in procuring for them some
trifling or momentary gratification. It would be incomparably
better for the natives to have a certain portion of the proceeds
of the lands so purchased from them and resold to European
colonists, appropriated for the establishment of some permanent
provision for the furtherance of their intellectual and moral
advancement.
It is in reference chiefly to these probable results of the sale
of their land, in the event of its being sold exclusively to the
Government, and not to the mere difference of the price they
would receive for it, that it becomes a matter of the highest
importance, not only to the New Zealanders, but to the British
nation generally, that Her Majesty’s right of pre-emption from
the natives should be maintained inviolate. If the New Zea-
landers, for example, are willing to sell a hundred thousand
acres of their land at a penny an acre, let them do so by all
means; the land may in all probability be worth no more to
them, and the fair price of a thing, surely, is what it is worth
to the seller. But it is a very different question altogether,
whether they shall be allowed to sell their land at that price
to the Queen of England exclusively, or be at liberty to sell it,
if they please, to Mr, Fairbairn, the Christian, from Parramatta,
or Mr. Polack, the Jew, from Sydney.* For even supposing,
* Mr. Polack has four or five estates in New Zealand. I walked over
one of them, near the Wai Tangi, or Cataract River ; but I am sorry I
do not at present recollect how few muskets and how little gunpowder
he had given for it. There was a New Zealand encampment on the land


in the latter case, that the stipulated price of the land should
be all well and truly paid, without cozening or cheating of any
kind, by Mr. Fairbairn or Mr. Polack —and such a supposition,
my Lord, can only be made by that charity which hopeth all
things—the natives will in all likelihood be told to go about
their business as soon as the deeds are signed, and be left
thenceforth to live and die as mere beggars, if they please,
among the whalers and other dissolute Europeans in the sea-
ports of their own island ; while the land they have sold will be
suffered to lie entirely waste until it acquires a comparatively
high value from its situation, from the influx of Europeans, or
from some other adventitious circumstance ; and when it has
acquired such value, the price at which it will eventually be
sold in small portions, or the yearly rental it will yield when
let to European cultivators, will only serve to elevate the family
of the Fairbairns, of Mount Fairbairn, or the Polacks, of
Polack Hall, to the rank and dignity of an illiterate, narrow-
minded, purse-proud, heartless colonial aristocracy—one of the
most intolerable nuisances on the face of the earth. But if
sold to Her Majesty the Queen, and resold to European
capitalists at a pound an acre, in the way I have proposed, a
portion of that price will be appropriated towards the mainte-
nance of a body of men whose peculiar duty it will be to look
after the interests of the natives, and to protect them from
European aggression ; and another portion of it will be appro-
priated towards the support of schools and other kindred insti-
tutions, for the furtherance of their intellectual and moral
at the time, at which an amusing incident occurred during my stay.
My fellow-voyager, M. Lacoste, introducing himself, with the usual
frankness of his nation, to a tidy New Zealand woman, who was sitting
in front of her hut, with a little naked savage of from two to three years
of age in her arms, for the purpose of shewing some mark of kindness
to the child, the latter became exceedingly alarmed at the approach of
the white man : first screaming violently, and then seizing a large
withered branch from the side of the hut, and striking with all its
might at the Frenchman, to the great amusement of all the New
Zealand women of the encampment, and especially of its own mother.


advancement; while the rest of it will he devoted towards the
conveyance of a large body of European emigrants to New
Zealand, to settle with their ministers and schoolmasters in
the midst of the natives, to set them the example of European
arts and industry, and to allure them by acts of brotherly kind-
ness to the reception and practice of the Christian religion.
It is surely not difficult, my Lord, to determine which of these
systems is the best, or to recognise the deep interest which
every British subject, of right principles, ought to feel in main-
taining Her Majesty’s right of pre-emption in New Zealand,
against all persons whatsoever.
It is extremely gratifying to observe that the generous and
philanthropic policy I have thus advocated, in regard to the
Aborigines of New Zealand, has found supporters, in the
highest and most influential quarters, in regard to another
most interesting race of Aborigines, in the United States of
America. The General Government of the United States, as
your Lordship is well aware, allows no private individual, nor
even a Sovereign State, to acquire land from the Indians in
any way ; the right of acquiring such land being vested by the
Constitution in the Supreme Government exclusively. The
land so acquired, whether by purchase, or exchange, or by the
extinction of native titles in any other way, is sold thereafter by
the General Government at a certain fixed price—about five
shillings per acre—and the proceeds of such sales are thrown
into the Public Treasury of the United States. In his Report
to the President, however, of November 25, 1832, the American
Secretary at War strongly recommends that in future the
revenue (amounting recently to four millions sterling per
annum) arising from such sales, should be appropriated ex-
clusively towards the general improvement of the Aborigines.
“ It cannot be doubted,” observes the philanthropic Secretary,
in the Report referred to, “ that a course, so consistent with
the dictates of justice, and so honourable to the national cha-
racter, would be approved by public sentiment. Should we
hereafter discard all pecuniary advantage in our purchases from


the Indians, and confine ourselves to the great objects of their
removal and establishment, and take care that the proceeds of
the cessions are applied to their benefit, and in the most salutary
manner, we should go far towards discharging the great moral
debt which has come down to us as an inheritance from the
earliest periods of our history, and which has been unfortunately
increased during successive generations by circumstances
beyond our control. This policy would not be less wise than
just. The time has passed away, if it ever existed, when a
revenue derived from such a source was necessary to the
Government. The remnant of our aboriginal race may well
look for the full value, and that usefully applied, of the rem-
nant of those immense possessions which have passed from them
to us, and left no susbtantial evidences of permanent advantage
to them.”
The circumstances of our own Government, however, in
regard to the colonization of New Zealand, are altogether
different from those of the General Government of the United
States, in regard to the settlement of the waste lands of the
American Union. In both cases the claims of the Aborigines
are doubtless the same ; but in the case of New Zealand, a
revenue to be derived from the sale of land, over and above
what may be indispensably requisite to meet the claims of the
natives, is absolutely necessary for the promotion of an exten-
sive emigration from Great Britain and Ireland; but such a
revenue may be raised, my Lord, and the great national object
of effecting an extensive emigration to New Zealand accom-
plished, with the utmost facility, simply by raising the mini-
mum price of land in that island to four times the American
rate, or a pound an acre.
The land purchased from the natives by the Government
could easily be sold either to European capitalists or to emi-
grant colonists, at a pound per acre. It would be well worth
that amount to those who could turn it to a proper account;
and provided a considerable extent of land were sold annually,
would infallibly be the case, in the event of the islands


being thrown open for colonization, such a price would afford
abundant resources for all the objects I have enumerated. The
price of land even at present in the neighbourhood of the Bay
of Islands, notwithstanding the uncertainty necessarily attend-
ing the native titles, is from eight to ten shillings per acre ;
and for building allotments near the anchorage ground in that
Bay, as much as a pound sterling per foot of frontage has
already been paid for land having an extent of sixty feet back.
In short, the rates established for South Australia, viz., twelve
shillings for the first twelvemonths, and £1 per acre thereafter,
could be established with perfect safety to all parties as the
minimum price of Crown land in New Zealand.
Supposing, therefore, that such a plan should be carried into
effect, and that considerable bodies of European colonists should
be settled at the Bay of Islands, the River Thames, the Hoki-
anga, Kaiparra, and Munakau Rivers, and at Port Nicholson
in Cook’s Straits ; and supposing that the same duties on all
imports and exports should be levied in these settlements as in
New South Wales, I am confident that the revenue derived
from such a source during the first three years of the existence
of the colony, would be fully adequate to all the expenses of
its civil government; for although there might be a deficiency
during the first year, there would in all likelihood be a surplus
revenue during the third, A large portion of that revenue, I
am sorry to say, would in all probability be derived from duties
on the importation and sale of ardent spirits. If indeed the
importation and manufacture of ardent spirits could be altoge-
ther prohibited in New Zealand, it would doubtless prove an
unspeakable blessing, both to the natives and to the colonists;
but as this would obviously be utterly impracticable in a mari-
time country frequented by vessels of all nations, and having a
coast line of upwards of two thousand miles, with innumerable
harbours, it would be the policy of the Government to subject
the importation of ardent spirits to a comparatively high duty,
and to place the sale of them under proper regulations. For
this purpose an efficient police would be requisite in the princi-


pal maritime ports of the island—at the Bay of Islands espe-
cially—from the very first.
In the event of the colonization of New Zealand, I conceive
my Lord, there would be no necessity for a body of military to
protect the colonists. If many hundred Europeans can live at
present in perfect safety among the New Zealanders in all parts
of the island, even when pursuing a species of traffic that
reduces the unfortunate natives to absolute beggary in their
own land, it must be evident that as many thousand Europeans
would stand in still less need of military protection, especially
when living together in concentrated communities, and all their
intercourse with the natives conducted on the principles of im-
partial justice and enlightened Christianity, The protection of
one or two ships of war, to be employed surveying the coast,
and in establishing a friendly intercourse with the native tribes
at a distance from the principal settlement, would be all the
protection which the colonists would require from the mother
country, A colonial police, with a corps of native constables,
attired in a gay uniform and receiving rations and moderate
pay from the Government, would be quite sufficient for the
maintenance of the civil power in the island.
As New Zealand will always be the head quarters of the
South Sea Fisheries, and as the supply of provisions to the
whalers frequenting the Bay of Islands will, in the first instance
at least, form a considerable item in the general trade of the
island, it would obviously be good policy, on the pai't of the
Government, to encourage the resort of these vessels to the
principal seaports of the island, by establishing a low rate of
port charges ; and thereby prevent their resorting for sup-
plies to places or islands where there is no European Govern-
ment established, and where their influence on the natives is in
general exceedingly demoralizing. The exorbitantly high port
charges of Sydney repel the South Sea Whalers from New
South Wales, and induce them to look for their supplies in
places where there is either little or nothing to pay under that
head.


America, almost exclusively whalers
.. 5S
British,
.. 23
French,
Brem en, ,
1
Colonial, from Sydney,
.. 22
„ from Hobart Town,
2
New Zealand, ......
4
Coasters, ...
... 2
Total, .. —
.. 132
Of the commercial intercourse already subsisting between
New Zealand and New South Wales, some idea may be formed
from the fact, that during the year 1838, there were thirty-nine
arrivals of vessels from New Zealand in the port of Sydney,
and the same number of departures for that island. The com-
mercial intercourse of the island with Van Dieman’s Land is
probably as great, though confined chiefly to its Southern ports ;
and there have recently also been vessels at Hokianga for
timber from Port Phillip and South Australia, The following
list of arrivals in the Bay of Islands during the year 1838,
will give no unfavourable idea of the commercial importance of
that harbour, as the general rendezvous of the numerous
whalers of the Southern Pacific :
From the preceding list, which exhibits only the arrivals in
a single port, although at present the principal one in New
Zealand, for the past year, it must be evident to the commercial
reader that in a country enjoying such advantages of situation,
and possessing such extensive intercourse with the civilized
world as that list implies, there could be no difficulty appre-
hended as to funds, in establishing and supporting a Govern-
ment in the island on European principles. At all events there
would obviously be no necessity for applying for a grant from
the British Treasury for the establishment of a colony in so
favourable a locality ; for if this was found unnecessary in
South Australia, it would certainly a fortiori be equally so in


New Zealand. The latter is a commercial country already,
frequented for its valuable timber, its flax, and its provisions
for whalers; and its numerous native population are daily
acquiring a taste for British manufactures. These they obtain
at present at an exorbitant price in exchange for potatoes, pork,
flax, and maize ; but if they could dispose of these native pro-
ductions at their fair value in a public market, the demand for
such goods, and consequently the public revenue arising from
their importation, would be indefinitely increased.
Supposing, therefore, that the principles of colonization
above mentioned were established in the case of New Zealand,
either by Act of Parliament or by Royal Ordinance, and Com-
missioners appointed, as in the case of South Australia, to carry
these principles into effect, a Joint Stock Company could
immediately be formed in London, with the most favourable
prospects of success, for the prosecution of the Black Whale
Fishery along the coasts of New Zealand ; for the fishermen to
be employed in the Fishery, the carpenters to build their boats
and small coasting-vessels, and the rope-spinners to manufac-
ture their whaling-gear from the native flax, could all be
carried out to the Colony, with their wives and children, their
ministers and schoolmasters, free of cost to the Company, and
at the expense of the Land Revenue. Such a community
would obviously be strong enough to protect its individual
members from all attacks from without, on whatever part of
the coast it might be settled : it would constitute, moreover, a
valuable market for the agricultural and dairy produce of the
other Colonists; and, by preserving the moral restraints of
the mother country, it would exert a salutary influence on the
surrounding natives, many of whom would gladly join the
Europeans in their different occupations, and be at length
amalgamated with them in the same Christian community.
It is evident, at all events, that such persons would prove
formidable competitors with the Americans and the French in
the Fisheries of New Zealand.
Independently altogether of agricultural emigrants, or


rather, in addition to such emigrants, the cutting and col-
lecting of spars and other timber for exportation, and the
gathering and preparing of the native flax for the home
market, as well as for Colonial manufacture, would likewise
afford immediate permanent and profitable employment to a
considerable European population, which could also be carried
out free of cost, in addition to agricultural emigrants properly
so called. There would thus be a considerable variety of
employment for the industrious portion of the Colonial popu-
lation—a state of things which is always advantageous to
society, as it enables its different constituent parts to afford
each other mutual support.
Much of the beneficial influence to be hoped for from
European colonization in New Zealand, as far as the natives
are concerned, would depend on the number and concentration
of the colonists, and on the moral and educational machinery
with which they should be attended from their first landing on
the island. The settlement of a few straggling European
adventurers among the uncivilized aborigines of any country is
always unfavourable to the moral welfare of both parties. It
would, therefore, be of importance to the New Zealanders to
prevent such dispersion, and to induce the Europeans settling
in the island to concentrate themselves in suitable localities.
In a pastoral country like New South Wales, this would
doubtless be both absurd and impracticable; but in a maritime
and agricultural country, like the northern parts of New
Zealand, it would be comparatively easy. Besides, the
Government Commissioners, and Board of Protectors, would
have it fully in their power to prevent any European colonist
from acquiring property in land wherever his settlement might
be deemed likely to prove unfavourable to the natives.
As the climate and soil of the northern parts of New
Zealand are similar to those of the South of Europe, it would
be extremely desirable, in the first instance at least, to
encourage the emigration and settlement in the island of
agricultural emigrants from Germany, Switzerland, and


France ; to introduce those branches of culture that are
peculiarly suited to such a climate, but with what the natives
of the British islands are unacquainted—such as the culture
of the vine, the fig-tree, the olive, the mulberry, and the
tobacco plant, &c.; with the making of wine, the preparation
of dried fruits, the rearing of silkworms, and the manufacture
of tobacco. These branches of agriculture and manufacture,
the mere English farmer is slow to learn. He will never learn
them from books ; and they can never be expected to be intro-
duced into a new country colonized from England, unless by
an agricultural population imported expressly for the purpose,
and accustomed to them in their native land. Besides, the
actual condition of the native population of New Zealand
renders it peculiarly desirable that there should be introduced
into the island, as speedily as possible, branches of agricultural
labour or manufacture suitable for women and children;
which, it is well known, the branches I have just enumerated
peculiarly are.
In short, while the state of things which subsists at present
in New Zealand, —where every European adventurer is at
perfect liberty to treat the natives as he pleases, and to do
whatever he deems right or profitable for himself, and where
the natives are consequently oppressed, and trodden down, and
exterminated in every direction—affords a complete exem-
plification of the uniform character and results of British
colonization in all times past; lam confident that the
colonization of New Zealand, on the principles and in the
manner I have stated, would prove an incalculable blessing to
the natives, and would not only afford a sufficient guarantee
for their protection and preservation, but would greatly hasten
their adoption of the manners and religion of Christian Euro-
peans, and their final amalgamation with the other subjects of
the British crown, —a consummation, my Lord, which even in
remote anticipation, I am sure your Lordship will regard as
incomparably more gratifying to a philanthropic mind than all
the dreams of poetry or the visions of romance.


Colonization in New Zealand, to be of any real benefit to
the natives, must be engaged in vigorously, and pursued to a
great extent; and it is gratifying to reflect that there is no
conceivable amount of British capital which might not be
expended in effecting that object, so as to afford a handsome
return to the capitalist, and to be productive of much real
benefit to all others concerned. At all events, lam confident
there is no country in which all the necessaries of life can be
procured with greater facility by industrious free emigrants on
their arrival, or in which moderate labour would meet with a
more certain or plentiful return. There are thousands and
tens of thousands of the half-starved semi-maritime population
of the north and west of Scotland in particular, who, if suffered
to remain in their native country, will only be a dead weight
to the community, neither adding to its strength nor increasing
its resources; but who, if transplanted into the more genial
soil and climate of New Zealand, would not only arrive in due
time at comfort and independence themselves, but would secure
for Great Britain and her colonies, what they are otherwise so
likely to be deprived of, the riches and the empire of the
Southern Seas.
In regard to the politico-ecclesiastical system which it would
be proper to establish in New Zealand, in the event of the
colonization of that island, your Lordship is sufficiently aware
that the time has gone by in which the British Government
could even attempt to set up an exclusive ecclesiastical estab-
lishment in any new colony of the Empire. If the Government
are henceforth to support religion at all in new Colonies, by
grants of money from the Public Treasury, these grants must
be given indiscriminately to all religious denominations. No
other principle will any longer be tolerated by the people.
This principle, my Lord, has recently been publicly recognized,
and acted on extensively by the Government, in the Australian
Penal Colonies, in which your Lordship is doubtless aware,
there is now either no established church at all, or all churches
are established and supported alike.


That such a system must at once put an end to all those
heart-burnings and jealousies which the existence of an exclu-
sive establishment in the Colonies is sure to give rise to, is
evident and undeniable ; but that it will promote in a high
degree the moral welfare and religious advancement of the
Colonies, is a very different question, in regard to which I
would merely put your Lordship and the public in possession
of the following facts, from which the right inferences may be
deduced with comparative facility.
In the first place, therefore, the system in question has
already established in the Australian Colonies a powerful
Popish Hierarchy ; such, indeed, as could never have existed
in these Colonies, at least during the present generation, but
for the support of Government. Viewing the Romish religion
merely in a political light, as being an acknowledged and
monstrous incubus upon the intellectual and moral energies of
man, such a result of a political regulation, sincerely intended,
as I firmly believe, by the British Government, for the public
welfare, cannot surely be regarded without painful feelings by
any rightly-constituted mind.
In the second place, the system in question has also estab-
lished in the Australian Colonies that species of Protestant
Episcopacy of which the peculiar principles are delineated in
the Oxford Tracts ; which holds, as the first and most
important tenets of Christianity, those doctrines of the dark
ages, baptismal regeneration, apostolical succession, and the
indefeasible right of the Church to lord it over the under-
standings and consciences of men ; that species of Protestant
Episcopacy, in short, which Messrs. Sheill and O’Connell
regard with so much reason and so much complacency as the
symptoms of an eventful and speedy return to Romanism.
Whether the Colonial Episcopalian laity would have either
tolerated or supported such a species of Episcopacy, if the
State had only left them to find religious instructors for them-
selves, I leave your Lordship and the public to determine.
In the third place, the system in question has in a great


measure neutralized tlie efficiency of the Colonial Presbyterian
Church, as one of the chief bulwarks of Protestantism in the
Southern Hemisphere, by throwing open its doors for the
admission of ministers who, after having run the gauntlet for
church-preferment over all Scotland, and been beaten in every
parish, betake themselves as a last resource to the Antipodes,
for the Government salaries that are now so easily to be had
there.
Finally, the system in question has not only afforded the
Colonial Government a pretext for interfering in ecclesiastical
matters, in the way of petty and vexatious regulation and
legislation—a species of interference which is uniformly
disastrous to the Christian Church—but has given rise to an
unseemly canvassing for mere names, to swell their Govern-
ment Lists of adherents, among the ministers of different
religious denominations ; it being too frequently the case that
after the name is given the individual is forgotten.
Nay, it is already the avowed opinion of some of the ablest
financiers of New South Wales, that the system of supporting
the clergy of all denominations from the Public Treasury of
that Colony cannot possibly subsist long; and that the
salaries allowed, under the General Church Act of 1836, must
either be greatly reduced, to enable the country to bear them
at all, or entirely withdrawn; and this consummation, it is
generally supposed, moreover, will be greatly accelerated by
the establishment and success of the South Australian Colony;
in which the Government have, with only one insignificant
exception, which I am given to understand is not likely to be
permanent, left all religious denominations to shift for them-
selves.
With such examples so close at hand, I conceive, my Lord,
it would not only be impolitic in the highest degree, but even
hazardous in the extreme, to establish the politico-ecclesiastical
system of the Australian Penal Colonies in New Zealand, in
the event of the colonization of that island. Let the Govern-
ment only leave the truth in matters of religion—whatever it


may be, and wherever it may exist—to find its own level; as
it is no longer practicable to support tbe truth beyond seas
without also supporting innumerable forms of error. It may,
doubtless, be a good maxim in English law, that it is better
that ten guilty men should escape than that one innocent
man should suffer; but such a maxim is surely altogether
inapplicable to the case of religious establishments; for I
maintain that, in the event of the colonization of New Zealand,
on the principles I have enumerated, the innocent man—the
man who would propagate the truth—would run no risk of
suffering from merely being denied support from the public
treasury. I certainly do not mean to assert that, in the event
of that island being colonized and no Government provision
made for the support of the ordinances of religion, the people
would support of their own accord so many ministers of
religion, in proportion to the population, as are soon likely to
be found in New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land, under
the new politico-ecclesiastical system of these colonies ; but I
do mean to assert, that if these ministers were chosen and
supported exclusively by the people, one-half the number
would do at least double the duty.
The Bay of Islands, to which I have so repeatedly alluded as
the present head-quarters or principal rendezvous of the South
Sea whalers in the Southern Pacific, is a splendid harbour,
although by no means to be compared with Port Jackson. At
its entrance the cliffs and detached rocks, to the right and left,
exhibit the black columnar appearance that characterizes a
basaltic formation ; and the land immediately around it rises
abruptly into irregular hills of considerable height, exhibiting
a reddish clayey soil, and a scanty vegetation. Either for
grazing or for agriculture, the land adjoining the Bay of
Islands is decidedly of inferior quality ; but the various naviga-
ble streams or inlets, of which it constitutes the common reser-
voir, conduct to large tracts of valuable land at no great dis-
tance, and will eventually afford a considerable extent of inland
navigation. I was particularly struck, on ascending the Kaua-


kaua River, one of these navigable inlets, at observing various
native canoes, some with an English blanket, and others with
a native mat for a sail, pushing towards the Bay, deeply laden
with potatoes. On my return I found the owners of the canoes
busily engaged in bargaining for their cargoes with Europeans
residing in the neighbourhood. One would have an English
blanket in exchange for his produce ; another would have an
iron pot, and a third a quantity of tobacco ; while one native
dealer, to whom I could not help giving credit for a very sinis-
ter look, would take nothing for his load but gunpowder.
About twenty years ago the shores of the Bay of Islands
were inhabited by a numerous and comparatively powerful
native population. That population, I am sorry to say, has
already almost entirely disappeared; leaving only the names of
the places where their Pahs or fortified villages were formerly
constructed on the head-lands of the Bay. The land for a con-
siderable distance around the Bay has thus become the property
of Englishmen residing in the neighbourhood; and the pur-
chases they have effected have doubtless tended, in no small
degree, as I have already observed in the case of the chieftain
Riva, to hasten the extermination of the natives. The largest
proprietors are the Church Missionary Society, who occupy the
greater portion of the southern and western sides of the Bay,
and who have large establishments at Paihia, Tippunah, and
Waimate, on the Kidikidi River. Of these the station at Tip-
punah, on the west side of the Bay, was some time since the
most considerable ; but the Society have latterly had serious
thoughts of abandoning it altogether in consequence of the
depopulation of the neighbourhood. The second class of pro-
prietors in the vicinity of the Bay of Islands are the Mission-
aries, considered as private individuals ; the remaining
proprietors being a few reputable Englishmen, who have built
comfortable houses and established themselves permanently in
the island, together with a company of “ publicans ” and other
“ workers of iniquity,” in the rising village of Kororadika.
In the prospect, therefore, of the colonization of New Zealand,


ou suet principles as those I have taken the liberty to suggest
to your Lordship and the public, it becomes a question of im-
portance, What is to be done with these parties, and with all
the other Europeans who have acquired land in that island, by
alleged purchase from the natives ? Are their titles to be held
good in all cases, and are the British Government to become a
party to the iniquitous bargains they have notoriously concluded
in many instances, and to the wholesale injustice and oppression
they have avowedly perpetrated on the defenceless natives?
For my own part, knowing that there are reputable men in
New Zealand, who have acquired the lands they occupy by fair
and honourable means, and who have greatly improved these
lands by the erection of valuable buildings, while there are
others whose regularly drawn deeds in the English and New
Zealand languages, give them no title in equity to the lands
they lay claim to, I would respectfully recommend that, in the
event of the colonization of New Zealand, and the assertion of
Her Majesty’s right of pre-emption in all cases whether past or
future, a Board should be appointed, like the Court of Claims
in New South Wales, with full powers to decide definitively, in
all cases of land claimed on the ground of purchase from the
natives; and that that Board should be instructed to lay it
down as a general principle that no such deeds as I have
mentioned should be regarded as a valid title to land, but that
each case should be decided upon on its own individual merits,
and according as it should appear that the natives had or
had not been fairly treated, and that an adequate consideration
had or had not been given, the holder of the native deed should
either receive a deed of grant from the Crown for such part of
the land he claimed as he should be found fairly entitled to, or
should merely have the right of pre-emption within a certain
period at the Government minimum price. By this means the
rights of honest men would be secured, while the Government
would have ample means of doing justice to those natives who
have been wrongfully despoiled of their lands by unprincipled
Europeans.


If a British subject has a right to purchase the whole terri-
tory of a semi-barbarous chief, residing beyond the limits of
the British Empire, for a paltry consideration, he has a right
to purchase his sovereignty also, and to establish an independent
government of his own. And, incredible as it may seem, my
Lord, this has actually been attempted within the last two
years in New Zealand. When the Rev. Mr. Kendall, the first
superintendent of the New Zealand Mission, was residing at
the Bay of Islands, the native chiefs in the district of Hokianga
made him a present of a large tract of land in that district, on
condition that he would take up his residence among them. Mr.
Kendall, having gone to England sometime thereafter, trans-
ferred his title to the said property to the Baron de Thierry,
an English adventurer with a Continental title; the payment
having been made in certain articles of British merchandise.
Mr. Kendall afterwards left New Zealand and was settled for
some time as an English chaplain at Valparaiso ; from whence
he subsequently returned to New South Wales, where he
settled as a farmer at Kiama, on the east-coast to the south-
ward, and was at last drowned in a small coasting vessel when
bound with a load of cedar from his farm to Sydney. It was
not till the year 1837, that the Baron de Thierry reached New
Zealand; having touched on his way thither at Sydney, where
he engaged various mechanics and labourers to proceed with
him to his estate in that island. In the meantime he had
procured a number of blank forms, with a lithographed heading,
which, from the fabric of the paper and the form of the letters,
appeared to have been of Parisian manufacture, to be thrown
off to serve for manifestoes or other public documents in the
island. The heading was singular enough : being, “ Charles,
by the grace of God, Sovei’eign Chief of New Zealand.” Such,
my Lord, was the princely style assumed by this adventurer;
and it appears, from various circumstances, that having probably
no prospect of succeeding in such an attempt at Downing
Street, he had been at some pains to get his title as a Sovereign
Chief acknowledged by the French Government. The Baron


is still at Hokianga; but as the native chiefs have refused to
acknowledge his title to the land he claims, on account of Mr.
Kendall’s failure to fulfil the original condition of his grant,
and as his workmen have left him for more profitable employ-
ment, I am sorry to add that his sovereign chieftainship has
turned out but a sorry affair after all. At all events, it is evi-
dent from this case, that if a few foreigners were acquiring native
titles to land and jurisdiction in New Zealand—and I know my-
self of one case of the kind, that of an American shipmaster,
naturalized in France, who had purchased a whole island in the
Bay of Islands—and were placing themselves under the protec-
tion of any foreign power having numerous whalers in the South
Seas, and ships of war to protect them, it might be difficult, if
not impracticable, for Great Britain, in a few years hence, to
form a colony on that island at all—a state of things which
would not only be deeply injurious to British interests, and
ruinous to the New Zealanders, but calamitous in the highest
degree to the cause of civilization and genuine Christianity in
the Southern Hemisphere. It is evident, therefore, that what-
ever Her Majesty’s Government can do for New Zealand—and
I am confident, my Lord, it can do all that is necessary in the
case, and without putting the country to one farthing of
expense—ought to be done quickly. That island is too
splendid a prize to be lost sight of by other maritime and
commercial nations, if Great Britain should neglect to pursue
the course to which her own interest and her bounden duty
alike unquestionably prompt her, by establishing a British
Colony on its shores.
Such, my Lord, was the general impression produced upon
my own mind by my short visit to New Zealand in the months
of January and February last. While that impression was
strong and vivid, I committed my ideas on the subj ect to writing,
a few days after we had lost sight of the island, while our ves-
sel was pursuing her homeward course across the Pacific; and
with only a few unimportant alterations, the preceding pages


have been printed as they were then written. In writing these
pages I was, therefore, entirely unconnected with either of the
parties who, I knew, had been at issue, in England, on the New
Zealand question; I had no private interest to serve in the
matter; I had no motive to induce me to write but a sincere
desire to subserve the cause of humanity, and to promote the
interests and extension of the British Empire. On touching
at Pernambuco in the course of my voyage home, I was fortu-
nate enough to obtain a copy of your Lordship’s report on the
affairs of Canada, which had then just arrived from England
in the Brazils ; and on my arrival in London, I was induced,
from my perusal of that admirable report, and from the fact of
your Lordship’s having subsequently become the Governor of
a Company established for the colonization of New Zealand, to
address these letters to your Lordship. With the same entire
freedom, therefore, from all party prejudice and personal con-
siderations, with which, I am confident, the preceding pages
were written, I shall now make a few concluding remarks on the
peculiar position and general prospects of that Company in
regard to its principal object, the colonization of New Zealand,
If I understand the subject aright, therefore, the New Zea-
land Association of 1837 was formed for the colonization of
that island, on the principles already established by H. M. Gov-
ernment for the settlement of South Australia. With this view
a Bill for the colonization of New Zealand was submitted to Par-
liament during the past year, but was rejected by a majority of
the House of Commons; chiefly, I believe, through the oppo-
sition of the Church and Wesleyan Missionary Societies and
the consequent misapprehension of the public on the subject.
In these circumstances the New Zealand Land Company has
been formed to effect the original object of the Association of
1837, without the sanction of an Act of Parliament at all, and
entirely on the principle of a Joint Stock Speculation, For
this purpose the Company have acquired titles to certain large
tracts of land in various parts of the island ; the said land
having been previously held by private individuals, on deeds of


sale from the natives, but since disposed of by these individuals
to the Company ; and the Company propose to resell this land
to intending emigrants or capitalists at the rate of one pound
per acre, and to allow the purchasers three-fourths of their
purchase-money in the conveyance of industrious emigrants of
the humbler classes of society to New Zealand ; the remainder
of the purchase-money being appropriated for the payment of
the cost price of the land, and the maintenance of the general
establishment of the Company.
In regard, therefore, to the tenure on which the Company
hold their land, they stand precisely in the same situation as
any European adventurer—such as Mr. Fairbairn, the Christian,
or Mr. Polack, the Jew—who buys land from the natives for
the merest trifle, and perhaps over-reaches them in the payment.
The Company do not even know whether the lands they have
bought have been honestly come by—whether the natives have
been fairly dealt with in the purchase of them or not. They
do not even profess to guarantee the titles they promise to give
to the purchasers of their land. These titles will doubtless be
as good as the Company’s own title; but the less, I apprehend,
that is said about the validity of the Company’s title, the
better. Now I conceive, my Lord, it is impossible that the
public can have the requisite degree of confidence in an under-
taking which rests on so uncertain a foundation ; nay, it is
anything but desirable that they should.
But even supposing that the Company could guarantee the
titles they propose to give to the purchasers of their land, what
possible inducement, I ask, my Lord, can any capitalist have
to purchase- the Company’s land at all ? Instead of purchasing
that land at a pound an acre, the capitalist or intending
emigrant can go to New Zealand himself and purchase a tract
from the natives, quite as good as the Company’s, and perhaps
adjoining their boundary line, at probably not more than five
farthings an acre, payable in British goods moreover, on which
the capitalist will realize a profit of at least fifty per cent.
But if the Company should inform the capitalist, or intending


emigrant, that three-fourths of the purchase-money of the land
they dispose of are paid back to the purchaser in the convey-
ance of valuable labour to the colony, the capitalist can reply,
that for one-fourth that amount he can import the same quan-
tity of labour from the colonies of New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land. In short, I conceive there can be no pos-
sible inducement at present for any capitalist or intending
emigrant to purchase the Company’s land.
But whether the Company should succeed in disposing of a
large portion of their land or not, the mere existence of such a
Company will produce an immediate and powerful effect in New
Zealand and the Australian colonies, whenever the fact comes
to be generally known, and will exert a reflex and superlatively
evil influence on the unfortunate New Zealanders. The fact,
which the existence and operations of the Company will suffi-
ciently proclaim, of its being practicable to purchase land in
that island, perhaps even at a penny an acre to-day, and to sell
it at a pound to-morrow, will immediately excite the cupidity
of a whole host of speculators and adventurers in these regions;
and the scramble for land in New Zealand, which is at present
active and unprincipled enough, will consequently be increased
tenfold, and be generally characterized by a total disregard of
all moral principle, and of the rights of humanity. So far from
discountenancing such procedure, the existence and acts of the
Company will only give it character and respectability ; as the
titles to all the land which the Company have purchased in the
island are merely the titles of individuals who, in all probability,
have been despoiling the natives in precisely the same nanner.
The march of injustice and oppression, of demoralization and
extinction, on the part of the Europeans towards the unfortu-
nate natives, will thus be prodigiously accelerated, and the
consummation which has been already realized in Yan Dieman’s
Land, will perhaps ere long be realized also in New Zealand—
I mean the complete extermination of the Aboriginal race.
We are accustomed to talk, my Lord, with virtuous indignation
and abhorrence, of the brutal atrocities of Cortez and Pizarro,


and of the gaol-gang of Spanish ruffians that followed these
bandit chiefs in Mexico and Peru; but we forget that even in
the nineteenth century we have ourselves, as a civilized and
colonizing nation, been acting over again the same bloody
tragedy on a different field. Why, my Lord, it has only taken
the same period of time—about thirty short years—to extermi-
nate the Aborigines of Van Dieman’s Land, under the mild
sway of Britain, that it took to exterminate the Aborigines of
Hispaniola, under the iron rod of Ferdinand and Isabella.
Within the last twenty years there were four different nations
of Aborigines, each speaking a language of its own, in the
island of Yan Dieman’s Land; but for several years past there
has not been a single native on that island!
Now, my Lord, the very individuals who have been perpe-
trating these atrocities upon the aborigines of New South
Wales and Van Dieman’s Land for the last twenty years, are
now swarming in New Zealand; and the formation of the
New Zealand Land Company, conjoined with the sanction
which the British Government is at present indirectly giving
to all sorts of aggression upon the unfortunate natives of that
island, will only increase their number, and their nefarious
operations, tenfold. It is vain to talk either of the Company
or of the Missionaries being able, from their influence of any
kind, to prevent such proceedings. The private adventurers
will point to the Company’s and the Missionaries’ estates in
New Zealand; and when they ask, Why they should not have
as good a right to plunder the natives as others ? I confess, my
Lord, I am utterly unable to divine what answer either the
Company or the Missionaries can give them.
Your Lordship will not suppose that these observations
could possibly have been dictated by any desire to prevent the
colonization of New Zealand; on the contrary, I regard the
extensive colonization of that island—on right principles, such
as Her Majesty’s Government could at once establish and
carry out, without expense to the country, and with the
happiest effect—as affording the only hope for the preservation


and general advancement of the native race. Neither will
your Lordship suppose that the observations I allude to could
have been dictated by a spirit of hostility towards the New
Zealand Land Company; on the contrary, lam most anxious
for the success of that Company—l mean for the attainment
of its general objects—and I have merely endeavoured, as an
honest man, to point out to your Lordship and the public the
precise position and the real prospects of the Company, to
prevent eventual disappointment and probable ruin on the part
of its friends and supporters,—a consummation which, I con-
ceive, would be equally fatal to the aboriginal race.
I had written thus far when I observed from the public
journals of the 26th June, that Her Majesty’s Government
had it actually in contemplation to colonize New Zealand, or
rather, to throw open that island for colonization under the
sanction and protection of the British Government, In such
circumstances, my Lord, the interest and duty of the New
Zealand Land Company are plain and obvious; and I would,,
therefore, beg most respectfully, through your Lordship, to
point out to the friends and supporters of that Company the
course which, as honest and honourable men, they ought, in
these circumstances, decidedly to pursue.
Let the Company, therefore, lend their influence and support
towards the maintenance of Her Majesty’s undoubted right of
pre-emption, in all cases, both past and future. The estab-
lishment of this principle will be of incalculable advantage to
the New Zealanders ; and not only to the New Zealanders,
but to all persons whatsoever, in this country, who are about
to embark in any way in the New Zealand colonization
scheme.
For this purpose, let the Company make a voluntary and
entire surrender of their native titles to Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment ; —to be adjudicated upon individually by a temporary
Board, like the Court of Claims in New South Wales, to be
appointed for the purpose by the Government, on the under-
standing and condition that the Company shall have the right


of pre-emption from the Government, at the minimum price of
crown land to be established in the island, deducting the full
amount the Company may have already paid for their lands,
either to the natives, or to individual Europeans. The moral
influence of such an example would be salutary in the highest
degree, in New Zealand, as far as the actual European popula-
tion of the island are concerned, and would strengthen the
hands of the Government exceedingly, at the outset of the
Colony, in carrying out the simple but most important prin-
ciple of Her Majesty’s right of pre-emption in all cases as
regards the aborigines.
Downright honesty of this kind, my Lord, will decidedly be
the best policy also, which the New Zealand Land Company
can pursue, in reference to the really important objects they
profess to have in view in the colonization of that island. Let
the important principle I have laid down be only recognized—
and let a Government, simple in its machinery, just in its
dealings, and energetic in its character, be established in New
Zealand—and I am confident, my Lord, that the field for
enterprize, in every department in that country, will be found
as extensive and as inviting as the most ardent supporters of
colonization could desire ; while the career of the future
Colony will, in all probability, be unexampled in the history of
the world. Unquestionable as are the facilities for coloniza-
tion in South Australia, as well as in New South Wales, they
are not to be compared with those which New Zealand at this
moment affords. In one word, whatever may be the destinies
of the Australian Colonies, I am confident that, if colonized
on right principles, New Zealand will one day be the Great
Britain of the Southern Hemisphere.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient
And very humble servant,
John Dunmore Lang.


APPENDIX FOR 1873.
The Imperial Government had been most unwillingly badgered
into the idea of interfering in any way in the case of New Zea-
land, after the rejection by the House of Commons of the New
Zealand Land Company’s Bill for the Colonization of that
country, in the year 1838 ; for both Lord John Russell and bis
successor in the Colonial Office—Lord Normanby, the father
of the present Governor of Queensland —were, like the majority
in the House of Commons, dead against the measure. Yielding,
however, to the pressure from without, they bad resolved at
length to send out a British Consul, forsooth, to New Zealand ;
and Captain Hobson, R. N., who had himself visited and
reported on the Island, as Captain of H. M. S. Rattlesnake,
was nominated for the appointment.
My pamphlet was published on the 7th or Bth of July, 1839,
and till that period the idea of New Zealand being within the
Commission granted to Captain Phillip, the first Governor of
New South Wales, had never been heard of, as I ascertained at
the time, in the Colonial Office. Nay, so entirely unacquainted
with the real state of the case were the Home authorities of
that day, that a letter was actually addressed by Lord Nor-
manby to the Attorney and the Solicitor-General of England,
of date 30th May, 1839, soliciting these Law authorities to
inform him “ whether it would be lawful for Her Majesty
to annex to the Territory of New South Wales any Territory
in New Zealand, of which the sovereignty might be acquired
by the British Crown ; and whether the Legislative Authority
of the Governor and Council of New South Wales could then
be exercised over British subjects inhabiting that Territory.”


Captain Hobson, wbo was then waiting for his instructions in
Downing Street, obtained a copy of my pamphlet as soon as
it had issued from the press ; and I ascertained immediately
thereafter, from naval gentlemen connected with Somerset
House, that he highly approved of it, and that he considered
the course it recommended, by annexing New Zealand at once
to the British Crown, as the only one that ought to have been
adopted in the case.
The Government Letter of Instructions to Captain Hobson
is dated 14th August,' 1839, and is signed by Lord Normanby.
It is quite evident from that letter that his Lordship had not
only read my pamphlet, which had then been published about
five weeks, but had resolved on pursuing the very course it
recommended, by treating New Zealand, from the first, as a
Dependency of New South Wales, under the Commission
granted to Governor Phillip, in the year 1787, which was thus
acknowledged to be still in force: for the very same reasons
are assigned in that letter for the interference of H. M. Govern-
ment in New Zealand, as I had suggested in my pamphlet
for the immediate annexation of that whole group of islands
to Great Britain, and precisely the same course as I had re-
commended was virtually pursued. For although Captain
Hobson was authorised in his Letter of Instructions, first to
acquire the Sovereignty of the islands for Her Majesty by
concessions from the natives, and then to establish a Govern-
ment over them, a Government was actually established and
laws passed for New Zealand by the Legislature of New South
Wales from the very first. And can any person suppose that
anything of the kind could have been done by the mere autho-
rity of a Secretary of State, if New Zealand had not been
included in the original Commission of 1787, as a virtual
Dependency of New South Wales? In that case the proceed-
ing of the New South Wales Legislature was regular and
appropriate, whereas it would otherwise have been a piece of
monstrous usurpation.
Immediately after receiving his instructions, Captain Hob-


son proceeded to Sydney in H. M. S. Druid; and after having
a small body of Government officials organised by Sir George
Gipps—the local Governor—to accompany him, be proceeded
to the Bay of Islands in New Zealand, where be landed on the
29tb January, 1840.
“ Captain Hobson bad now,” observes an intelligent historian
of New Zealand, “ a duty which has fallen to the lot of few
British Governors—the declaration of Her Majesty’s sovereignty
over the country be was recommended first to acquire and then
to rule. This task weighed on bis broken spirit during the
dreary solitude of the voyage to the Antipodes ; and when be
contrasted the multitudes of armed warriors in the neighbour-
hood of Kororarika with bis own defenceless position, be saw
the declaration could not be made without the almost unanimous
permission of the people. But bow to obtain this without
exciting their suspicions was a delicate and dangerous task.” *
In* short, the task imposed by H. M. Government upon
Captain Hobson, besides being altogether unnecessary, was a
downright farce—a notable absurdity : for how could even
one in ten, either of the natives or of their chiefs in both
islands, thirty years ago, be supposed to understand even the
terms of any treaty pretended to be made for the cession of the
sovereignty of their islands to Her Majesty? Even if the
natives and chiefs around the Bay of Islands might be supposed
intellectually equal to such a transaction, how could those of
the Middle Island be supposed to be competent to cede the
sovereignty of that island to Her Majesty? If they were r
surely, a fortiori , they were competent to have sold twenty
millions of acres of their land, as they were alleged to have
done, for a few pounds, to the late Mr. Wentworth, and a few of
the other genuine patriots of New South Wales. Captain Hob-
son was well aware of the difficulties of his position, and of the
urgent necessity for immediate and decisive action. And, there-
* “The Story of New Zealand—Past and Present, Savage and Civil-
ized.” By Arthur S. Thomspn, M.D., Surgeon-Major, 58 Regt. London,
1859. Vol. 11.


fore, as we learn from another of the historians of New Zealand,
“ Before the negociations” (for the cession of the sovereignty
to Her Majesty) “ were brought to a conclusion, intelligence
reached Captain Hobson that the settlers sent out by the New
Zealand Company had organized a system of Government under
the authority of the Port Nicholson Chiefs ; and, deeming the
proceeding to be of a treasonable character, he at once”
(February, 1840), “ and without waiting for the completion of
the cession, proclaimed the queen’s sovereignty over both
islands.” * In short, the Queen’s sovereignty was proclaimed
over both islands without any direct authority from Downing
Street, and solely in virtue of the Commission granted to Cap-
tain Phillip in 1787, creating New Zealand a Dependency of
New South Wales. Captain Hobson doubtless wrote Lord
Normanby immediately after he had issued the Proclamation,
pointing out the absolute necessity for his doing so; and the
reply to this communication was the issue of the Charter under
the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, on the 16th of Novem-
ber, 1840, thereby terminating the dependency of New Zealand
on New South Wales, and creating it an independent Colony .f
The only ground for this proceeding, on the part of Captain
Hobson, was his own strong view of the extreme urgency of
the case; and the only moral support he had from any quarter
on the occasion was that which he derived from my pamphlet,
urging the propriety and the necessity of the course he had
now adopted.
“ For a few months,” adds Mr. Swainson, immediately after
this announcement, “ they”—that is, the islands of New Zea-
* “ New Zealand and its Colonization. ” By William Swainson, Attor-
ney-General for New Zealand. London, 1859. Page 83.
4 Captain Hobson’s proclamation was not issued a moment too soon ;
for in the month of August, 1840, the French emigrant ship Le Comte
de Paris, escorted by the French frigate L'Aube, arrived at Akaroa, on
the Middle Island, with the view of forming a French Colony in that
island; landing fifty-seven emigrants for the purpose, who thus found
themselves French settlers in a British Colony,


land—“ were annexed as a Dependency to New South Wales ; *
but on the 16th of November following, by a Charter under the
Great Seal of the United Kingdom, the Islands of New Zealand
were erected into a separate and independent Colony.”
In the meantime, the Governor and Legislature of New South
Wales, having at once taken up New Zealand as a Dependency
of that Colony, were rendering noble service, and such as could
scarcely have at that time been rendered on the spot, to the
future Colony. On the 9th of June, 1840, a Bill, which was
subsequently passed, entitled “The New South Wales Laws’
Extension to New Zealand Bill,” was read a second time in the
Legislative Council. The main object of this Bill was, in ac-
cordance with the strong recommendation I had given in my
pamphlet, to maintain the right of pre-emption, both past and
future, on behalf of the Crown over all lands in the islands.
Commissioners were appointed under this Act to superintend
the sales of all Crown Lands in New Zealand—to restrict all
alleged purchases from the natives to four square miles in each
case, and not to sanction even these unless there should be
evidence of a fan* consideration having been given to the natives
for the land.
As soon as it was noised abroad in New South Wales that
there was a movement in England for the colonization of New
Zealand, the rage for speculation, which was then rampant in
that Colony, and could not be restrained even by the surges of
the Pacific, extended itself to that group of islands ; and nu-
merous long-headed Australian colonists, either in their own
persons or by approved agents, entered into treaties with the
native chiefs for the purchase of immense tracts of land in their
islands, in order to steal a march upon Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment. It was in anticipation of something of this kind, which
indeed had already commenced at the period of my visit in 1839 r
that I had been induced to urge upon Government the propriety
of taking immediate possession of the whole group, and of as-
* They were so already, and from the first.


serting the right of pre-emption, on the part of the Crown, to
all land held by the Aborigines. For there is no other way
in which the natives of uncivilized countries can be protected
from the artifice and cupidity of Europeans, or in which justice
can be done even to European colonists against one another.
In proof of this it is only necessary to state that, at the period
of Captain Hobson’s arrival at the Bay of Islands, as many as
forty-five millions of acres of land were actually claimed by
various parties on the ground of alleged purchases from the
natives.
The contemplated legislation by the Sydney Government had
raised a prodigious ferment among the alleged purchasers of
princely estates in New Zealand. Mr. Busby, of the Bay of Is-
lands, whose salary of £5OO a year, payable from the Treasury
of New South Wales, as British Resident in New Zealand, under
the mere order of the Secretary of State, had, for seven years
previous, been always a great grievance to the inhabitants of
that Colony, was one of the first claimants for redress under
the new law, on the ground of his having made large purchases
of land from the natives as an alleged sovereign and independent
people. But the Government stood firm on the occasion, leav-
ing Mr, Busby for his remedy to the future Executive of New
Zealand.
The famous case, however—the cause celehre of the early
history of New Zealand—was a claim of the late W. C. Went-
worth, Esq., whom the colonists of New South Wales have
recently been canonizing or deifying as a patriot of the first
water, on the arrival of his remains from England; and who had,
for many years after this period, been one of the Representatives
of the City of Sydney, and subsequently President of the Legis-
lative Council or Upper House of the Local Parliament, Not
satisfied, it seems, with being one of the largest speculators in
land and stock in New South Wales, that gentleman had fixed
his eye on a principality in New Zealand; and had duly pur-
chased, as he alleged, from the mere handful of natives who
then inhabited the Middle Island, the whole, or nearly the


whole, of that island—a tract of country comprising twenty
millions of acres ! The bargain, or rather treaty, for the ces-
sion of this territory had been duly concluded between the high
contracting parties—Mr, Wentworth, and a few kindred spirits,
on the one part, and those sovereign and independent chiefs,
E Toki, E Waru, E Piti, Rauparaha, Ka Witi, &c., on the
other : the deed was drawn up in due form in the English and
New Zealand languages; and the parchment was signed, sealed,
and delivered, in the presence of approved witnesses, by their
High Mightinesses, the States of the Middle Island; to whom
Mr. Wentworth had faithfully paid the stipulated number of
English blankets (of the coarsest description), of Birmingham
muskets (made to sell), and of kegs of gunpowder, besides a
variety of other unsaleable articles from some warehouse in
Sydney. Mr. Wentworth argued his claim in person before
the Council at great length and with great ability; enlarging
upon the rights of sovereign and independent nations, and
especially of the chiefs aforesaid, with whom he had had the
distinguished honour of making the aforesaid treaty ; proudly
displaying his parchment with the signs manual and seals of
the sovereign and independent chiefs aforesaid; and concluding
by asking nothing from the generosity or charity , but demand-
ing everything from the justice, of England,
Sir George Gipps deserves the greatest credit for the ability
with which he exposed and set aside this peculiarly barefaced
and impudent claim—setting forth at great length the practice
of all European nations since the discovery of America, as well
as of the United States of that country, in regard to the pur-
chase and sale of the lands of the Aborigines ; showing that
the right of pre-emption was uniformly asserted by the colon-
ising power; pointing out the injury and ruin that would inevit-
ably result from a different practice; pleading the principle
which his own immediate predecessor —Sir Richard Bourke—
had established, and the Imperial Government had recognised,
in the case of Port Phillip ; and concluding by literally over-
whelming Mr. Wentworth and his notorious attempt to appro-


priate, for his own private benefit, the country which might
otherwise become the happy home of myriads of his fellow
countrymen from the United Kingdom, with a torrent of sar-
casm which it is no marvel that that gentleman was never able
either to forgive or to forget.
The following is an Extract from the speech of Sir George
Gipps in the Legislative Council of New South Wales, on
Thursday, 9th July, 1840, on the second reading of the Bill for
appointing Commissioners to inquire into the claims to grants
of land in New Zealand. It surely deserves to be inserted in
the archives of New Zealand, as an illustration of the manner
in which that country and its inhabitants were so happily deli-
vered from the degradation and thraldom to which they would
otherwise have been subjected under the pseudo-patriots of New
South Wales. Sir George Gipps was unquestionably deserving
of the highest honour on the occasion.
“I have not heard one reasonable and disinterested person object to
the main purpose of this Bill. Of all the witnesses examined before the
Committee of the House of Lords in 1838, no one was so wild as to say
that all purchases from the natives of New Zealand were to be acknow-
ledged ; no one pretended, because the Narraganset Indians sold Con-
necticut, as we have been told they did, for a certain number of old
coats and pairs of breeches, or because they sold Rhode Island (as I find
they did) for a pair of spectacles, that therefore Her Majesty is bound
to acknowledge as valid, purchases of a similar nature in New Zealand.
The witnesses whom I have alluded to all considered the New Zealanders
as minors or as wards of Chancery, incapable of managing their own
affairs, and therefore entitled to the same protection as the law of Eng-
land affords to persons under similar or analogous circumstances. To
set aside a bargain on the ground of fraud, or of the incapacity of one of
the parties to understand the nature of it, or his legal inability to exe-
cute it, is a proceeding certainly not unknown to the law of England ;
nor is it in any way contrary to the spirit of equity ; the injustice would
be in confirming any such bargain ; there would indeed be no excuse for
Her Majesty’s advisers, if, by the exercise of her prerogative, she were
to confirm lands to persons who pretend to have purchased them at the
rate of four hundred acres for a penny ; for that is, as near as I can
calculate it, the price paid, by Mr. Wentworth and his associates, for
their twenty millions of acres in the Middle Island.
‘ ‘ A great deal was said by this gentleman, in the course of his address
to the Council, of corruption and jobbery, as well as of the love which


men in office have for patronage. But, gentlemen, talk of corruption !
talk of jobbery! why if all the corruption which has defiled England
since the expulsion of the Stuarts were gathered into one heap, it would
not make such a sum as this ; if all the jobs which have been done since
the days of Sir Eobert Walpole, were collected into one job, they would
not make so big a job as the one which Mr. Wentworth asks me to lend
a hand in perpetrating;—the job, that is to say, of making to him a
grant of twenty millions of acres, at the rate of one hundred acres for a
farthing ! The Land Company of New South Wales has been said to be
a job : one million of acres at eighteen pence an acre has been thought
to be a pretty good job ; but it absolutely vanishes into nothing by the
side of Mr. Wentworth’s job.
“In the course of this gentleman’s argument, he quoted largely from
Vattel and the Law of Nations, to prove the right of independent people
to sell their lands ; and he piteously complained of the grievous injus-
tice which we should do to the New Zealanders, if we were to deny them
the same right; and the Council may recollect that when I reminded
him that he was here to maintain his own rights, and not those of the
New Zealanders, he replied, not inaptly, that, as his was a derivative
right, it was necessary for him to show that it had previously existed in
the persons from whom he derived it; •it was, in fact, necessary for him
to show that the right existed in the nine savages, who were lately in
Sydney, to sell the Middle Island, in order to show his own right to
purchase it from them at the rate of four hundred acres for a penny !!
“Lastly, gentlemen, it has been said, that the principles on which
this Bill is founded are derived from the times of Cortez and Pizarro ;
times, when not only the right of uncivilized nations, but the rights also
of humanity, were disregarded. To this I answer, that whatever may
be the changes (and thank Heaven they are many) which the progress of
religion and enlightenment have produced amongst us, they are all in
favour of the savage, and not against him. It would be indeed the very
height of hypocrisy in Her Majesty’s Government to abstain, for reli-
gion’s sake, from despoiling these poor savages of their lands, and yet to
allow them to be despoiled by individuals being subjects of Her Majesty.
It is in the spirit of that enlightenment which characterises the present
age, that the British Government is now about to interfere in the affairs
of New Zealand. That it interferes against its will, and only under the
force of circumstances, is evident from Lord Normanby’s despatch ; the
objects for which we go to New Zealand are clearly set forth in it, and
amongst the foremost is the noble one of rescuing a most interesting
race of men from that fate which contact with the nations of Christen-
dom has hitherto invariably and unhappily brought upon the uncivilized
tribes of the earth.
“One of the gentlemen who appeared before you did not scruple to
avow at this table, and before this Council, that he can imagine no
motive Her Majesty’s Ministers can have in desiring the acquisition of


New Zealand, but the increase of their own patronage. The same
gentleman is very probably also unable to imagine any other reason for
the exercise of Her Majesty’s prerogative than the oppression of her sub-
jects. These, gentlemen, may be Mr. Wentworth’s opinions : I will not
insult you by supposing that they are yours. You, I hope, still believe
that there is such a thing as public virtue ; and that integrity is not
utterly banished from the bosoms of men in office. To your hands,
therefore, I commit this Bill. You will, lam sure, deal with it accord-
ing to your consciences, and with that independence which you ought to
exercise ; having a due regard for the honour of the Crown and interests
of the subject ; whilst for myself, in respect to this occupation of New
Zealand by Her Majesty, I may, I trust, be permitted to exclaim, as
did the standard-bearer of the Tenth Legion, when Caesar first took
possession of Great Britain— * Et ego certe officium meum, Reipublicce,
atque Imperatari prcestitero fearless alike of what people may say or
think of me, I will perform my duty to the Queen and the public. ”
Such, then, are the services I have been enabled to render
in connection with the colonization of New Zealand. It would,
doubtless, have been well for that Colony had my recommenda-
tions been more fully carried out. I am happy, however, to
have had the honour of contributing at least one foundation
stone towards the noble superstructure.
J. G. O’Connor, Printer, &c., 105 York-street, Sydney,


BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
(Poems : Sacred and Secular ;
WRITTEN CHIEFLY AT SEA, WITHIN THE LAST HALF CENTURY.
Price, 3s. 6d.
The Coming Event; or, Freedom and Inde=
pendence for the Seven United (Provinces
of Australia.
Price, 3s. 6d.
The Little While of the Saviour’s Absence; and
the (Prospect of His Speedy (Return.
Price, Is.


