

hex j
Borrow;,




i
1
'
0 C T 0 B 1
?. A J ,
|
1838.
y> ’ • r^vV.' - *- " J ' ’ V >-
. . ;;R\'.
W^jSfig - •’■
'^aRl
.
.V jS&
-
—
' , - Yy
..
'
S-> - : '•■'
,> '. ,.>V . A -
i
— /
I./-;';
_
; v y; „ V, Jy. :yV^*-,. /
: v V^«-
. ■ 1
y ''tV-S - . .; ■ -.v.
- LONDON:
f; *.y-* ;’ "■ - -
. . . ;S
•
: :.
r
■€
JOflN
MURRAY, ALOfMAl
ILE STREET.
t N »kAl
' :;#S
■ -yig!
1
- ' ■ t, L* * * 4 % >3
Wm. Clowes anu Hons, l‘virtt«fs, Stamfovd SU?et
■ y...
'* . -S :. Af
’■ ■ SS
■ e »« * t.
■iwmiii inr- m—i i c»c- - 3Kwj^^^»2<=aHan9>nHsn>anHCca33nnßnaß9gaaMaMßaßiirww 3
V'Y
THE
QUARTERLY
REVIEW.
nj-ai x rrr~
3oH3@3¥; ,
■
PUBLISHED IN
ti* l ii«mh<iii '■■■ »t-»jiibi •ninnu im.....i i i.«— '■r.wwrr-*™™.® *“*'
8
: O' -
.- • .
• T' % .




tn, •/
■ '• cIX
■ ■ \
< V .*
'v s . s I I”“*1*M I *“ I I A; \


S',:-
, ■ . - V.*.;


(17), which had already been printed by Sir Henry Ellis (18) ;
or of the long letter of Randolph to Leicester, descriptive 7sf
Mary’s marriage to Darnley (19), which had already beejrflrinted
by Robertson (20) ?
If Mr. Wright is ignorant of all this—(and the recurrence of
the cabalistic-looking letters MS. Cotton: Galba— or Cali-0
gula b. ix,, or some such learned hieroglyphic, after all the letters
we have mentioned, leads us to believe he is so) —then assuredly
it is difficult to find terms which, without giving pain (and this
we should be sorry to do), may denote the culpable carelessness
and superficiality, with which he has run over the period he pro-
fesses to illustrate. If he is not, the alternative is still more
embarrassing.
Art. VII.—I. Reports from the Select Committee on Transport-
ation. July, 1837, and August, 1838.
2. New Smith Wales, its State and Prospects. By James Mac
Arthur, Esq. 1837. Bvo.
3. History of Australasia. By R. Montgomery Martin, Esq.
1836'. 12mo.
4. New South Wales Calendar and Directory. 1836. Bvo.
5. Felonry of New South Wales. By James Mudie, Esq.
1837. Bvo,
WITHIN the memory of thousands of people now living, the
lonely coasts of Australia were scarcely visited but by the
winds and waves. There lay, on the map of the world, a huge circle
of ( wide watered shores,’ inscribed with the general name of New
Holland ; but what was their climate or their soil—or what man-
ner of men were their in-dwellers —these were matters of which,
for many a year after the close of the American war, there was
little or nothing accurately known. The fleets of the sovereign
company, bearing northward through the Indian Ocean, left that
vast land three thousand miles upon their right, unexplored and
uncared for; and even the captains who gave the convoy of his
majesty’s flag, in the war of 1793, to the traders with Batavia and
China, never dreamed that, at the antipodes of their country, yet
scarce ten days’ sail from their habitual track, there would exist,
in their own time, a little English world, with flourishing cities,
and cultivated fields, and fantastic villas, harbours alive with the
ships of every nation, and jostling crowds, and angry politics, and
warring journals—all the savagery of a horde of buccaneers, and
all the jealousies, vices, and vexations of the most civilized society.
Such is the colony which now bears the name of New Soutli
Wales,
Nor


Nor is it a less, though a different wonder, that the territory
which this strange plantation has begun to people, though com-
prising, fas Du Freycinet has computed, upwards of three millions
of square acres, or somewhat more than one-eighteenth of all the
land in the world—is yet but an island; whereof, indeed, the
7 constitution and position were so puzzling to Blumenbach, that he
conjectured it to be a comet, which, happening to come within
the sphere of the earth’s attraction, had lighted upon its surface!
The first settlement on this tract was a penal one. An expe-
dition, conveying about seven hundred and fifty convicts, was sent
out under the command of Captain Philip of the King’s navy, an
experienced sailor, who selected the shore of Port Jackson for
the debarkation of his party, and, on the 26th of January, 1788,
hoisted the British ensign on the beach of Sydney Cove, The
growth of the infant settlement was retarded by famine, and other
difficulties, which were manfully combated by Governor Philip;
and during his administration, which lasted four or five years, and
that of his successor. Captain Hunter, R.N., which continued till
] 800, the colony made some progress, and was reinforced by
arrivals of settlers. The next governor was Captain King, also
of the royal navy, who appears to have been a spirited, but
somewhat arbitrary and indiscreet officer. A circumstance
which occurred in his time is recorded, as curiously illustrating
the genius of the new community. He had preferred certain
charges against a colonist, in a despatch addressed to the Secre-
tary of State; the contents of which, having been allowed to trans-
pire, had unluckily become the subject of conversation at Sydney
before the sailing of the packet. When the box in which the
papers had been placed, arrived at the colonial-office in Downing-
itreet, they had utterly vanished from it, and all that appeared in
their stead was a bundle of newspapers. The governor, or his
people, must have been a little careless here.—There are other
stories told of him in Ross’s Hobart Town Almanack, which
show some vigour and some humour ;
£ One day, at Paramatta, he was waited on by two prisoners sueing
for pardons. One presented a petition signed by all the first men in
Sydney, while that of the other was signed by only one. “ How comes
it, ’ said the governor, “that you have only one name to your petition,
while this man has so many?” “ I have lived,” answered the man,
with only one master all my time, sir, and I did not know anybody.”
The governor immediately gave the latter a pardon; but to the former
he said, as he already knew so many rich friends he did not need one.
At another time, a country settler waited on him, requesting the loan of
a man to assist him in shingling his house. “ Come to me,” said the
governor, “ in six weeks’ time, when the harvest is over, and I will find
a man for you.” Accordingly, at the end of that time, the settler, who
does


does not appear to have been a man of much personal industry, again
presented himself. “Go into that room,” said the governor, “ and you
will see him.” After a few minutes the man returned, saying he could
not find him, though he had looked all about the room, even under the
table and behind the sofa. “ Not find him ! ” said Captain King, “ how
is that? Come with me, I will soon find him for you.’’ Then, leading
him a second time into the room, he made him look into a large mirror
that was over the mantel-piece; “ That is the man to shingle your
house,” said he: “ take him with you, quick! and see that he does it.” 5
We may pass over the short and luckless government of another
sailor. Captain Bligh, who succeeded in 1806, and was suspended
from his functions in 1808. From this latter period, for a couple
of years, the colony was administered by a succession of tempo-
rary commandants; and then we arrive at the commencement of
1810, when the government was assumed by Lieutenant-Colonel,
afterwards General, Macquarrie.
By this time the foundations of that prosperity which, as a pas-
toral region, this colony has now obtained, had been laid by the
judicious experiment and enterprise of the late Mr. Mac Arthur.
He had been struck with the aptitude of the indigenous herbage
for the pasturage of fine-woolled sheep; and he applied his
capital and his talents to the establishment of extensive sheep-
walks. The first exportation of wool had been in 1807* when
2401b5. of this commodity were shipped, the produce wholly of
his own flock, In 1837, only thirty years afterwards, the effect
of his example and instruction had been such, that the number of
pounds of wool exported by him and others from this colony,
and from Van Diemen’s Land, where the precedent was actively
followed, amounted to about seven millions of pounds, or upwards
of three thousand tons.
But although, during the administration of General Macquarrie,
which lasted for almost twelve years, the rural industry of New
South Wales was thriving under Mr, Mac Arthur and some other
settlers of capital and character, the policy of the governor on
another most important matter, the management of the convict
population, was such as to counteract much of the benefit which
emigration and investment would otherwise have wrought for the
colony. The principle of his government Was, that the colony
existed for the benefit rather of the convicts than of the free emi-
grants ; and the interests of the convicts were therefore the great
object of his solicitude. Lie favoured them in all practicable
ways, not only by granting them early emancipation, but by en-
deavouring, as they acquired property, to introduce them into the
society of the clergy, officers, and other respectable inhabitants.
Nay, he went so far as to appoint several of them justices of the
peace. Thus the salutary check of shame was weakened; the
emancipated


emancipated convicts, emboldened to consider themselves on a
level with the free settlers, organized a party of their own: and
at this day they attempt to divide, with their more respectable
neighbours, the influences of the state, both social and political.
The effect of all this movement upon morals and upon security
has been eminently mischievous.
During the four years for which Sir Thomas Brisbane, an es-
timable and scientific man, administered the government, the
convict party continued to advance in numbers and pretensions.
General, now Sir Ralph Darling, who succeeded at the end of
1825, exerted himself to restore the ascendancy of good character;
but the emancipists, as they are strangely called, were too strong
for him. Slight indiscretions on his part were magnified by them
into serious offences, and every possible effort was employed to
prejudice and degrade him, both by the transported radicals of
New South Wales and their unconvicted confederates in England. *■
He returned home after six years, now the usual term of colonial
administration, successfully vindicated his own character before
a Committee of the House of Commons, and obtained the knight-
hood of the Guelphic Order. The Whig ministers then ap-
pointed in his stead General, now Sir Richard, Bourke. At his
outset. Sir Richard appears to have acted too much in the spirit of
his patrons, for he has been principally eulogised by the guilty
and the lawless, with whom a really good government is seldom
popular; but experience and reflection seem to have done some-
thing toward the correction of his views. His successor is Sir
G. Gipps, an officer of engineers, of whose government nothing is
yet known to us.
Under all these variations, however, of policy and of admi-
nistration, the plenty and fertility of the land have been rapidly
augmenting the numbers and wealth of the colonists ; and several
populous towns have already sprung up. The most considerable
is Sydney, the metropolis. Here are long, wide, English-looking
streets, —barracks, an hospital, a market-place, churches and
chapels of various denominations, wharfs, mills, and steam-
engines, auction-rooms, a theatre, —and inns, hotels, and other
like places of public entertainment to the amount of more than
two hundred. So valuable has the space in Sydney now become,
that building-land, in a good situation, has been sold at the rate
of 20,000/. an acre. At the distance of fifteen miles to the north-
west is another thriving town, called, from the aboriginal name of
the creek it stands upon, Paramatta. Indeed, the aboriginal
nomenclature has been liberally adopted in various parts of New
South Wales; but we cannot venture on ascribing its reception
to the music which a reverend and very sensible, though we think
somewhat


somewhat partial, describer of the colony, has discovered in the
native words; so insensible are our English ears to the euphony
which glads him in the names of Woolomooloo, Woogarora, Buck-
obble, Tongabbee, Mittagong, Murroo—to say nothing of Cook-
bundoon and Wingycarribee, or of the Bungaribbee, the Warra-
gumby, and the Wollondilly.
But in the midst of this outlandish vocabulary the substance of
things is externally British :
‘ The colony contains two colleges, an agricultural and horticultural
society, a religious tract society, a society for promoting Christian
knowledge, a society for promoting colonial produce, a subscription
library, five banks, two assurance companies, a benevolent asylum, a
bible society, associations for suppressing cattle-stealing, a museum, a
botanical school, an emigrant’s friend’s society, a mechanics’ school of
arts, several masonic lodges, a church missionary society, a Wesleyan
ditto, an observatory, orphan schools, a school of industry, a steam con-
veyance company, a dispensary, and various other institutions, —besides
a theatre, with balls, concerts, races, and other public amusements;
altogether presenting a state of things perfectly unexampled in the form-
ation ot an infant community, and exhibiting the phenomenon of a
colony that has not yet existed fifty years with most of the distinguish-
ing features hitherto belonging only to ancient and civilized states.’ —
Mudie , 330.
In the infancy of a colonial establishment the primary objects
of interest are physical ones; the climate, the soil, the country’s
surface, its animal, vegetable, and mineral resources. Of these,
in various articles respecting New Holland, we have treated
from time to time. But the colony has now reached a stage in
which a new class of interests succeed, and in which the questions
that engross the minds of the colonists are no longer the materials
for food, shelter, and raiment, but the relations of society and the
securities, privileges, and prospects, of a rapidly-increasing people.
Such, therefore, are the subjects to which we now address our-
selves, and which we shall illustrate by references to the publica-
tions enumerated at the head of this paper, beginning with the
work of Mr. Mac Arthur, who brings sound judgment, calm
temper, and accurate knowledge, to bear upon these important
topics.
The appendix to the transportation report of 1837 contains
the census of the inhabitants for the respective years 1828 and
1833, distinguishing their religious creeds; and the appendix to
Mr. MacArthur’s work contains a similar census taken in Septem-
ber, 1836. These documents, of which we subjoin a short ab-
stract, afford some measure of the increase of the population;
though of course such an estimate of progression must be far
vol. lxii. no. cxxiv. 2 i from


480 New South Wales.
from precise, in a country where a considerable part of the inc
is produced by so variable a causS as emigration ; —
Year.
Male.
Female.
General
Total.
Religion.
Free.
Convict.
Free, jConvict.
Pro-
testants.
Catho-
lics.
Of other
Creeds.
1828
1833
1836
13,456
22,793
30,285
14,155
21,845
25,254
7,474 I 1,513
13,453 j 2,698
18,980 j 2,577
36,598
60,794
77,096
25,248
43,072
54,621
11,236
17,279
21,898
114
443
577
The accounts of exports and imports come down no fu
than the year 1835. They show a great progressive imp
increase
The accounts of exports and imports come down no further
than the year 1835. They show a great progressive improve-
ment, and, as might be expected from a new country in a course
of development, a large increase in the proportion of its exports
to its imports. The total of exports for 1829 was 1(31,716Z.; in
1835 it was 630,881?. The revenue has kept pace of course. In
1829 the ‘ways and means’ were about 100,000?.; in 1837 they
had reached, in all, 384,000?.; to meet a charge of only 241,000?.!
In this colony, slang designations are much in fashion. Thus
the settlers from England are called sterling, and the children
born of European parents in the colony are styled currency / a
distinction invented by a facetious paymaster, whose mind ran
much upon the difference between a pound in English money,
and a pound in the current, but less valuable, coin of the colony.
* Again, a convict Avho has served out his period of punishment is
called an expiree ; while he, whose term has been abridged by a
pardon, rejoices in the anomalous appellation of an emancipist.
Society, in all its classes, is affected by the vast proportion which
the convicts and their associates bear to the whole population.
The lower ranks are corrupted, and the higher annoyed, by the
juxta-position; so that everything either savours of the mischief,
or suffers from it. Strange as it may be thought, the acquisition
of money, at least among the lower classes, appears to depend less
upon a good, than upon a vicious, character and connexion. If a
respectable emigrant were to set up an inn at Sydney, an eman-
cipist, starting a rival house on the opposite side of the street,
w °uld get all but f the genteeler custom,’ which is of little profit.
What is valuable is f the tap-custom,’ that of fellows who spend
from 20?. to 50?. at a sitting. ‘ One of these men will go into a
public-house with 50?. in his possession, and he will not leave it
till he has spent every farthing ’ (First Transportation Report,
1524). And Dr. Lang confirms this evidence, by stating that an
emancipist woi’kman has spent, without leaving the public-house,
100?., the whole earning of many months, during which he has
perhaps been conducting himself decently (ib. 4009). We


We subjoin a specific piece of biography, furnished by Mr.
Mudie, and confirmed by Dr. Lang, who says it is by no means
a solitary instance of the acquisition of vast wealth at the expense
of extravagant customers. The man described, who was trans-
ported in his boyhood for seven years, is supposed to have accu-
mulated not less than 45,000/. per annum :
*He was always remarkably sober ; so much so, that when they were
building the gaol at Paramatta, (in fact, he has told me this himself,)
though they were allowed spirits occasionally, he did not drink his
spirits, but he sold whatever he got; and he made a point, during the
whole time he was a prisoner, of keeping every shilling that he could
make; then, after he became free, he commenced keeping a public-
house, and he got a horse and gig that he used to hire out. One day
his horse and gig were wahted to drive a woman to Paramatta; he had
no person to send to drive this woman, and therefore he went himself;
she had been a convict, but had become free, and possessed property to
the amount of some hundred pounds; they commenced an acquaintance,
and he got married to her. He then removed into a much larger house,
and the convicts at that time (a vast number of them) had small grants
near Windsor, at what is called the Hawkesbury; these men would
come down to Sydney with a load of wheat and different produce; there
was no regular market then, and there were certain individuals that
bought this property or produce of these farmers, and they generally
paid in what they call property, that is, different things that were re-
quired to be consumed; some would pay half in money and half in pro-
perty ; this man’s house was more frequented by these sort of people
than any other in the colony. A great portion of these men would get
drunk and remain at his house a day or two (he did not tell me this
part of it, I heard it from others, and know it to be correct) ; he would
say, “ Are you aware how much your bill is ? ” “ No.” “ Perhaps 40/.
or 50/.” “ Why, how is that? ” “ You were so drunk you do not re-
collect what you have been doing; you told me to give a gallon of rum
to Peg Such-a-one, a convict woman, and another to such a person.”
“ T cannot pay it.” “ Never mind, I must trust you till you come
again; in the mean time you must sign this.” He used to keep warrants
of attorney ready filled up in his drawer, and these ignorant people used
to sign warrants of attorney; and he went on this way till he thought
there was a risk in the value of the property they possessed, and then
they were sold off. The consequence was, that he carried this on for a
number of years, until he got possession of a very great portion of the
whole cultivated part of the colony at that time. I have known a man
drink his farm, of 100 acres of land, away (it can be proved beyond any
question) in one night; that man has hired the same farm back from
this man, and he has made some of them pay 1/., and some 30,y. an
acre yearly rent, and they have lived on it. I am convinced this man
had a mortgage on the principal part of the colony by becoming a money-
lender, and he bought stock, and sheep, and horned cattle. — Q. Men
living solitary a part of the year, and living in public-houses the other
2 i 2 part


part of the year, were likely to spend a deal of money? A. Yes; they
would say, we will have a spree.’ —First Transp. Report , 1540, 1-8.
It appears from a report of the first police magistrate, printed
in 1835, that in Sydney, covering an area of more than 2000
acres, there was at that time a population of probably 20,000
souls. Of these a great proportion were convicts of both sexes,
having violent passions, which they did not control, and could not
lawfully gratify. There were in 1835 no fewer than 219 licensed
public-houses; and the number of places where spirits were
sold without licence was too large to be even guessed. The
vices of convict society appear to have been extensively imbibed
by the lower classes of the colonists. f Latterly,’ says Colonel
Breton to the committee, f owing to the emigrant ships ’ (which
have carried out cargoes of female settlers of indifferent cha-
racter) f Sydney has been inundated with loose women. The
chief bane is drink.’—(First Transp. Report, 2395, &c.) We
learn that in 1835, when the population was about 70,000, the
quantity of spirits imported, to say nothing of wine and beer, was
501,282 gallons, being about seven gallons of spirits per head
for every man, woman, and child, beside what was distilled in the
colony.
The modes of life among the highest classes are said by Colonel
Breton to be much the same as in England. Among those,
however, who pretend to what is called a place in the highest
class, there are many whose distinction consists merely in their
being old settlers, and having acquired a good property without
the drawback of crime; and of this merit, though little more
than negative, they are described to be obtrusively and ludicrously
proud. Mr. Mudie gives an instance
‘of a lady whose husband kept a day-school in England. Ido not say
it,’ continues he, ‘as anything derogatory to the man; he went out
there with his wife and family, in fact, pennyless. By industry they
acquired considerable wealth; and, when they first got a few cows, the
lady used to go into the farm-yard and milk the cows, and the daughters
did the same; hut after arriving at considerable wealth, it was reported
that one of the daughters was to be married to a gentleman, a surgeon, a
highly respectable man. A friend of mine who told me the anecdote
(I am perfectly sure it was correct) was congratulating this lady on the
approaching marriage of her daughter, and she said, “ I can assure you
that I do not feel at all complimented by your congratulating me on my
daughter’s being about to be married to such an one as a surgeon; I
have endeavoured to bring my family up with different ideas, to give
them a proper notion of their rank and consequence in society here, for
I consider my family and a few others quite the same as if you were to
speak of the ancient nobility in England, the Dukes of Bedford, and
Devonshire, and Norfolk, and so on.” In consequence of that and a
few


few other anecdotes, they go by the name of the ancient nobility of
Botany Bay, Q. Would you say they are haughty in their manners?
A. Yes; no question of it. At the same time, the females display
great ignorance in their conversation; still they dress fine, and show
off all the airs of fine ladies. Latterly, they have got into the habit
of announcing the ancients’ marriages as “ marriages in high life.” I
can show you the papers: —“It is whispered that a marriage in high
life is soon to take place.” ’ — First Transp. Rep ., 1664—1670.
The luxuries of a community thus circumstanced cannot, for the
most part, be of a very elevated or intellectual description. Good
tables are kept, and showy carriages and horses ; but the arts are
little in request, and the theatre, which is much attended by eman-
cipists and their associates, is conducted in a manner by no means
calculated to refine or improve the people. A taste for music, how-
ever, is general, and the concerts are respectably attended, par-
ticularly on the evenings when they are patronised by the governor.
(First Transp. Report, 1(321 to 1624.) A library has been built
by subscription, on ground given by the governor for the purpose.
There is a mechanics’ institute, with occasional lectures; and
there are in Sydney about half-a-dozen booksellers’ shops, in
which, however, the books for sale are of an inferior class:—
‘ I have attended,’ says Mr. Mudie, ‘ what they call book-sales my-
self, and I have always found that books really valuable have sold tor
much less than they could have cost in England, and I remember on
one occasion there was a regular noise in the room when the Newgate
Calendar was put up, and every person said, “ Ah, I shall have that;”
I forget what it brought, but it brought something enormous, and I
recommended the bookseller to send home and get a few editions out.
Then they are fond of the history of highwaymen, or anything of that
kind.’ —First Transp. Rep ., 1635.
One species of literature appears to be in great demand, —that
of the periodical press. The freedom from stamp and advertise-
ment-duty promotes the circulation of newspapers of all kinds;
and most of them, being addressed to a very low class of readers,
pander to their bad passions and ignorant prejudices, and encou-
rage them to think lightly of crime; several of the editors have
been, perhaps are, emancipists. With all our attachment to
the liberty of the press, we have some doubts of its unlimited fit-
ness for a colony of convicts. A rational man, while he sincerely
advocates the popular principle of general enlightenment, may
fairly be allowed to question the prudence of striking sparks in
a powder-magazine.
The changes of system in the management of the convicts have
been not less frequent than the novelty of the experiment gave
reason to expect; a sketch, therefore, of this Australasian ‘ fe-
lonry,’ which was quite accurate half-a-dozen years ago, will by
th.s


this time have become ‘an old almanack.’ The latest authentic
account, we believe, is to be found in the evidence given before
the Transportation Committees of the last two sessions; and of
that evidence, as it relates to the state of the convicts, the fol-
lowing is the result;—
On the arrival of a vessel, a board of three colonial officers de-
termine the classification and distribution of the convicts, either
as labourers in the employ of government, or as assigned servants
among the settlers who have applied for them. Field-labourers
are allotted with reference to the applicant’s quantity of land ;
but domestic servants and mechanics are assigned without respect
to landed qualification. The demand having now for several
years exceeded the supply, complaints of favoritism are of course
not infrequent. The convicts have an allowance, fixed by law, of
food and clothing; what they may obtain beyond this is at the
pleasure of the masters, whose ordinary indulgences to their
servants are tobacco, tea, sugar, and milk. Too many, however,
of their masters, are themselves but convicts who have fulfilled, or
obtained remission of, their sentences. In such circumstances the
servant’s reformation is hardly to be expected, and indeed there
are cases where assigned servants have been actually employed
by their masters as assistants in stealing cattle, and as accomplices
in other crimes. The field-labourers are described by almost
all the witnesses as prone to insubordination, insolence, petty
theft, and, above all, drunkenness. These imputations apply with
double force to the shepherds and neat-herds, from the nature of
their employment, which leaves them in a state of very imperfect
restraint. The neat-herds are the worst of all. Mr. Mac Arthur’s
evidence informs us that they are generally mounted for the con-
venience of following the cattle : yet, for months together, some-
times even for whole years, the cattle are uncollected. These
mounted stock-keepers, meanwhile, are galloping about the
country, and assemble in great numbers at the huts of squat-
ters, who collect their female acquaintance and supply the
whole party with spirits. The domestic servants are of course
more immediately under the inspection of their employers;
but here too a great laxity appears to prevail. The women,
with a few exceptions, are so ill-conducted, that the more
respectable settlers are unwilling to receive them at all. Their
numbers being small in comparison to the male convicts,
they are assailed by so many temptations, that reform seems
hopeless. Their conduct is marked not only by idleness, drunk-
enness, and unchastity, but too often also by untameable fe-
rocity; and the only mode of getting rid of them is to return
them to the female factory at Paramatta, which, after all, is
scarcely


scarcely a place of punishment. A Captain Walrond, who had
two of these women in his service, had occasion to find fault with
one of them for neglecting to clean the verandah, and threatened
to return her to the factory; upon which the other said, f lf you
return her, you must return me—we shall not part.’ An alter-
cation ensued: the women became outrageous, attacked him, and
got him down ; he cried for assistance, but was not rescued; and
in a few days afterwards he died of the injuries they had inflicted.
They were tried for the murder, and sentenced to death.—(First
Transp. Rep. 1430.)
The skilled mechanics, such as blacksmiths, tanners, joiners,
and the like, are of exceeding value, and obtain proportionate in-
dulgence from their employers. So little penal is their condition,
that, in order to induce them to exert themselves, their masters
will sometimes form with them a partnership in the gains to' be
acquired by their labour.
The assigned convicts are subject to a peculiar code, admi-
nistered by magistrates, and comprising many offences not punish-
able in free persons; among these are disobedience, neglect of
work, insolence, and, in general, any f disorderly or dishonest con-
duct.’ Among the punishments for males is the lash, which is a
very unequal infliction upon culprits of different constitutions, and
by executioners of more or less rigour. Although, from the oc-
casional severity of this chastisement, and the indefinite character
of the offences themselves, the convict is very much at the mercy
of the magistrates, and consequently, to a certain extent, of his
master, who, if he be of a brutal temper, may make the state of
his assigned servants a condition of almost unmixed misery,—yet,
with a few exceptions, the result is rather an excess of laxity than
of harshness; so strongly does interest impel the employer to
conciliate the services of the employed, especially since the in-
crease in the demand for labour. The convict, too, has a remedy
before a bench of magistrates against his master; if he succeed,
he obtains his removal from the defendant’s service—but if he
fails, he may be punished for his unjust complaint. The assigned
servants of all classes amount to about four-fifths of the convict
population, '
The remaining convicts, about one-fifth of the whole, are under
the immediate supervision of the government, being either em-
ployed in the public works of the colony, or consigned to some
place of confinement. Educated persons are not assigned as
private servants; and some difficulty has arisen in finding suitable
employment for them in the service of the public. Until lately
they were placed in the government offices as clerks, but it was
found that they obtained an inconvenient knowledge of the colo-
nial


nial affairs, and the practice has been discontinued; they are now
sent to Port Macquarrie, a settlement upwards of one hundred
miles north of Sydney, and occupied in light works. Another
and inferior class of convicts are employed by government in the
police, a duty which free emigrants of sufficient respectability are
not easily found to discharge ; but this system produces of neces-
sity a very bad police, in that community in which, of all others,
a good one is the most required. The large majority, however,
of all the convicts in the hands of the government, are persons
who have been returned by their employers *as unfit for private
service—which, from the scarcity of labour, seldom happens but
in the cases of irreclaimable profligates;—or persons who, having
committed some new crime since their arrival, are sentenced to
undergo an additional punishment by working in gangs upon
the roads, in or out of chains, according to the shade of their
offences. The chain-gangs are men on whom minor punishments
have been inflicted in vain. They work under a civil superin-
tendent, with a military guard to prevent escape. The strictness
of the arrangements makes it much easier to preserve discipline
in these gangs, notwithstanding their reprobate character, than in
those which work unfettered. The unfettered road-parties arc
very unproductive as labourers ; while of disorder and demoraliza-
tion they are a fruitful source. They are spread over a wide
surface of country, with overseers who have themselves been con-
victs, and in whose sole charge they are sometimes left for many
days. 1 hey are often in league with the convict-servants of the
neighbouring settlers for the general plunder of property, which
they filch, and consume in every species of debauchery. The
mechanic convicts in these parties have also considerable facilities
for making money by working at their trades for the surrounding
inhabitants; the overseers conniving at their absences in con-
sideration of a share of the earnings. The work performed by a
road-party, when bona fide employed, though they take good care
that it shall be trifling in its quantity, is irksome enough in its
nature—particularly, we should think, the breaking of stones
under a hot sun—yet not a few are found by whom this allocation
is thought preferable to private service, probably for the sake of
the profligate society which the road-party affords; and others,
who dislike their masters, commit some offence which will send
them to a road-party, in hopes of a better service at the expira-
tion of that punishment. The road-work, however, is so dis-
agreeable, and, from having long been the doom of convicts, so
discreditable, that no free labourers of decent character could at
present be found to undertake it. Meanwhile, the private evil is
endured for the public convenience ", the governor. Sir R. Bourke,
observing,


observing, that great as are the complaints among the colonists of
the crimes committed by the road-parties, th 6 demand for good
roads is greater yet.
In this, which might seem the lowest deep of infamy and pu-
nishment, a lower deep still has been opened, by transportation
to the penal settlements of the colony, of which there now are
two, Norfolk Island and Moreton Bay. Here are no assign-
ments to private settlers; all the convicts are in the employ of
the government, with severer work and few or no indulgences;
and, that nothing may be wanting to complete the dreariness of
the prisoners’ condition, these penal colonies are Avholly without
women. The desperate and dangerous character of such a
society is well illustrated by that part of Major Wright’s evidence
before the committee of the present year, in which he narrates an
attempt made by the convicts to capture Norfolk Island about
ten years ago, when he was its commandant. Considering it
his duty to make himself personally acquainted with everything
which went on within his jurisdiction, he occupied several weeks
in attending the works from morning to night, and ascertaining,
by measurement of the time and observation of the labour, ‘ what
every man could accomplish without tyranny, 1 so as to obtain a
just scale of punishment for idleness. During the first month,
says he.
‘ There was no end of the artifices which they had recourse to, to
avoid labour and impose on meand at the end of the month I told
them, that what I had done had been done by design, for the purpose
of making myself conscientiously acquainted with what they could do,
and what they ought to do; and that from that time thenceforward I
would make them do it, and that I should make the strictest justice my
rule, even to the quibbles of the law' in their favour; because all on
which a convict lives are the quibbles of the law in his favour.’
Such vigilance being exceedingly distasteful to the convicts, a
man named Clinch, one day, as the Major was returning from
this disagreeable duty, waylaid him in the road, and endeavoured
to murder him with a club. The blow not taking effect, the
ruffian fled into the bush 5 and the failure of the attempt so dis-
heartened some of his accomplices, that they came forward and
gave information to the Major of a conspiracy then in progress, to
take the island, murder the troops, and escape in the next ship
that should bring a cargo of prisoners from Sydney. Two of
these conspirators had been ringleaders in a previous mutiny, and
pardoned. One of these two explained to the Major the particu-
lars of the design, and the circumstances which they had regarded
as peculiarly favourable for their attempt. They had expected
that when the Major, who was to have been assassinated, should
be


be missing; at night, the officer next in command of the garrison
would disperse the greater part of the soldiers over the island in
search of him—
‘ and as the palisades of the stockades were known to he rotten, and
were in the act of being repaired at that time, they intended to rush on
the remainder of the troops which were left in the stockade, in the dead
of the night, and overpower them. They then intended, Avhen they had
possession of the island, to dress themselves ’ [and among them there
were some who had been soldiers] ‘in the uniform of the men of the
57th, who were on the island, and pull off in a boat to the brig when she
came; that they would be received without suspicion on board; they
would then take possession of the brig, and make to sea in her.’
The soldiers expected from Sydney were a party of the 39th
regiment, just arrived from England, and total strangers to the
37th, Here was a combination of favourable circumstances, not
likely to recur, acutely discerned, and skilfully calculated on;
but it failed, from the infidelity of the conspirators to one another.
‘ They betrayed it,’ says the Major, *to get anything they could
by it. They do so perpetually; it is a universal remark. If they
could be true to each other, they would do wonders; but they
are the most treacherous beings on the face of the earth.’ (Second
Transp. Rep. 1677 to 1701.)
The female convicts in New South Wales are divided into three
classes. The first consists of those who are waiting to be assigned,
or who, after assignment, have been returned by their masters as
unfit for the duties required of them. The labour performed
by the women of this class is slight; and from among them,
those male convicts, whose masters permit them to marry, obtain
their wives. When a master has granted this permission, and
entered into a contract with government for supporting the woman
and her offspring, the man goes to the factory and gets an order
from the matron for a wife. Mr. Mudie, who was "for fourteen
years a resident in New South Wales, and had at different times
from seventy to one hundred and twenty convicts, being asked
by the committee to state full particulars upon this subject, speaks
as follows:
4 There are a certain number of the women that are not allowed to
marry; hut, with respect to those who are not under punishment, Mrs.
Gordon (I have been there and seen the ceremony) says, “ Well, turn
out the women of such a class.” They are turned out, and they all
stand up as you would place so many soldiers, or so many cattle, in
fact, in a fair; they are all ranked up. It is recpiisite for me to state
that the same sort of ceremony and the same mode occur with a free
man; for there are free men that go to the factory to select a wife.
The convict goes up and looks at the women, and if he sees a lady that
takes his fancy he makes a motion to her, and she steps on one side;
some


New South Wales . 489
some of them will not, but stand still, and have no wish to he married,
but that is very rare. Then they have, of course, some conversation
together, and if the lady is not agreeable, or if the convict does not
fancy her from her conversation, she steps back, and the same ceremony
goes on with two or three more. I have known an instance of convicts
going and having the pick of one hundred or two hundred without
finding one to please them ; the lowest fellows you can fancy have said
it would not do ; they could not get one to suit. But if he finds one
to please him, they get married, and on returning to his master’s estate
he knocks up a hut for himself and his wife, and they live together
when he is not at work; the master allows generally what is called half
a ration for the wife, in addition to the man’s ration.
‘ Q. What security is there that the man or woman is not married
in England ?— A. There is a list generally comes out with them, and it
mentions whether they are married or not; but these lists are by no
means correct, and they carry on that system to such an extent, that it
has been known that convict men and convict women have actually
written letters in New South Wales and sent them to some acquaint-
ance in England to put into the post-office, in order to have the English
postmark; writing to say, “ Dear Jack,” or “ Dear Tom, I am very
sorry to tell you that your wife died on such a day,” giving a full
account of the death, and what has become of the children. It has
been proved that these letters have been sent from the colony to England,
and have been sent back to enable them to get married.’ —First Tramp.
Rep. 645, 6, 7.
The second class consists chiefly of women who are returned to
the factory pregnant. This occurs to a very large proportion of
the assigned females; insomuch that the factory is said to be a lying-
in hospital for unmarried convicts. We may add, that it is a
foundling hospital too; for the government generally supports
the children, and sends them to the orphan-schools.
The third class, who are women convicted of offences in the
colony, are employed at the factory in spinning wool, and sometimes
in breaking stones. The labour, however, is so slight, that many
of them prefer the factory to an assigned service. Associating
there in large numbers, they rely on each other for support in
their freaks of insubordination. A few years ago, according to
the testimony of Mr. Martin, who was then at Paramatta, the
female prisoners, having been deprived, for their refractoriness, of
their usual allowance of tea and sugar, struck work ; and, after
spending two days in sulking, gave notice to the matron that, un-
less the tea and sugar were restored, they would leave the factory.
She laughed at their threat; but, on the third morning, two hun-
dred of these heroines surprised a body of workmen employed in
the factory, and, seizing their hammers and sledges, burst open
the huge doors of the prison, and rushed in arms into the town,
where they attacked the shops. The alarm became general. The
troops


troops were ordered out, the light company of his Majesty’s 57th
regiment in advance. The ladies beat a retreat to the surrounding
hills : the bugles of the military sounded a charge. After various
manoeuvres on the part of the soldiers to prevent the fair foe from
taking refuge in the bush, the drums and bugles announced a
parley; the affair was voted on both sides to be a drawn battle,
and a treaty was concluded, by which it was stipulated that the
Amazons should march back into the walls of the factory with all
the honours of war—that the past should be covered by an
amnesty —and the future brightened by a dole of tea and sugar.
We come in the next place to the cases of remission and expi-
ration. The most usual remission is that which a ticket of leave
affords. This is a permission to the convict to work for his own
benefit, on certain conditions, of which the chief are, that he reside
within the district which it prescribes, and that he produce him-
self and his ticket before the magistrates at appointed periods.
The ticket can be granted only after the fulfilment of a certain
proportion of the sentenced period of transportation, and is re-
sumable at the pleasure of the government. The advantages of it
are greatly abridged by the Act of 2 and 3 Wm. IV. c. 42, which,
forbidding the holder to acquire property or sue in courts of
justice, discourages him from industry and accumulation. At the
expiration of the sentence, or upon the grant of a pardon, the
convict acquires the same civil rights as a free settler.
With such an infusion of depraved inhabitants of both sexes,
suffering punishment or emerging from it, the society of New
South Wales presents a strange combination of the features of
civilized and of lawless liie. It has happened, as might have
been expected from such circumstances as these, that crime has
progressively increased from 1810 to 1835, and is still, we fear,
unchecked in its rate of progression. On the summary punish-
ments before magistrates in petty sessions, which are almost all
of them convict cases, and which, in the last year of this period
were nearly 22,000, in a population containing about 30,000 con-
victs, we will found no argument at present; because among these
convictions are included many for offences not cognizable in
England, such as drunkenness, insolence, and neglect of work,
which it would occupy too much time to distinguish and reason
upon. We, therefore, speak only of the greater offences, those
which are tried in the superior court and at the quarter-sessions : of
winch more than five-sixths appear to be felonies. (App. to First
Transp. Report, p. 256.) The proportion then, which the offences
tried in these superior courts have been found to bear to the
entire population, from 1810 to 1835, is thus summed up from
official documents by Mr. Mac Arthur:—


‘ In the first eight years of that period, the proportion of convictions
by the criminal court, relatively to the whole population of the colony,
appears to have been about one in 315 persons. During the next three
years it amounted to about one in every 360. In the five years, from
1821 to 1825, to about one in 183 ; and from 1831 to 1835, the five
years concluding the period, it had increased to one in 119 persons.
In 1835 (the population being about 10,000) the number of convicts
was near 28,000.’ —Mac Arthur , p. 35.
In such a state of society, it required all the effrontery of mo-
dern Radicalism to set up a claim for a representative government.
Yet such a claim is actually advanced and pressed by the f felonry ’
of Australia, and warmly supported by their political friends on
this side of the water. At present, the constitution of that
country comprehends, under the governor, an executive and a
legislative council: the executive council consisting of the go-
vernor, the colonial secretary, the lieutenant-governor, the bishop,
and the colonial treasurer; the legislative council comprising,
in addition to all these members except the last, the chief-justice,
the attorney-general, the chief officer of customs, the auditor-
general, and seven private gentlemen appointed by the crown for
life.
It will be obvious to all rational thinkers, that a great change,
a great purification, the work of many years, must be carried
into full effect, before the theory of popular representation can
be safely adopted in a colony, so large a proportion of whose
inhabitants are convicted thieves and their associates. The pro-
bability however is, that, if the possession of office be continued
for a year or two more to the cabinet which now administers (we
cannot truly say governs) the dominions of her Britannic Majesty,
this, like almost every other revolutionary demand, will be yielded
to the rough-riding will of the masters of the ministers—and the
security of property, and of religion, and even of life itself, will
be made, in Australia, as it has been made in Canada, and in
Ireland, the price of a score of votes in the English House of
Commons. Nay, the Australian sacrifice has already begun:
already the jury-law established there by the Whig administra-
tion has put a firebrand into the grasp of the felonry, and spread
dismay among the possessors of property or good name. We
entreat the attention of our countrymen to what we now lay before
them upon this topic.
The statute 9 Geo. IV, c. 83, made crimes and misdemeanors,
in New South Wales, cognizable by a judge with a jury of seven
commissioned officers of the army or navy; but that statute
having empowered the Crown to allow the trial, by an ordinary
jury, of such offences as should be specified by an Order in
Council,


Council, the Whig ministers have authorised a liberal ordinance,
the effect of which has been—first, to allow an ordinary jury in
every case of crime or misdemeanor in which that mode of trial
shall be desired by the defendant; —and, secondly, to render
admissible upon such jury every convict who, having obtained a
pardon or served out his term of punishment, is possessed of the
small amount of land or chattels required as a qualification; in
other words, to make the convicts the judges of their own con-
federates.
* A synopsis of the jury panels in the Supreme Court, from
November, 1833, to February, 1836, shows that, of 1289 persons
who served during that period, there were, of this class, no fewer
than 322, being just one in every four (Appendix to First Trans-
portation Report, p. 304). In June, 1836, when the colonial go-
vernment had become alarmed at the consequences of their own
indiscretion, and had directed all possible precaution to be em-
ployed in the making up of the jury-lists. Governor Bourke relates
that 116 emancipists were found in a list of only between 700 and
800 persons (Appendix, p. 296). Thus, when all had been done
to weed them out, the emancipists remained in a proportion of
one to six or seven of all the jurors; so that, on an average, every
rogue brought to trial would have a chance to find a couple of his
comrades among his jury. The governor thinks this immaterial,
provided the verdicts be satisfactory. We shall presently give
our reasons for venturing to be of a different opinion; but first
let us look at the facts.
Sir F. Forbes, the chief judge, reports that, with one or two
exceptions, he has f been satisfied with the verdictsbut as this
gentleman was the patron of the Radical faction in the colony,
his opinion on this agitated point is of very little more value than
the testimony of the Morning Chronicle to the virtue of the Whig
Election Committees. The next judge, Mr. Dowling, declines to
go so far: remembers some few unsatisfactory verdicts even in the
small number of about 100 cases tried by him; thinks the system
f will not bear a very disadvantageous comparison with that of the
mother country.’ The third judge, Mr. Burton, who had tried
111 criminal issues, (in most of which, as he truly observes, the
evidence is short and clear, and leaves no plausible excuse for a
false verdict,) gives however several instances which let in some
strong light upon the working of the law. For example, he tells
us of an acquittal, before himself, of which a highly respectable
gentleman on the jury afterwards disclosed the following parti-
culars. On entering the room in which they were to consider
their verdict, one of the jurymen laid himself on the table with
his arms folded, saying, f Well, my mind is made up.’ Another
followed.


followed, and lay down on the floor, saying, f My mind is made
up.’ For about twenty minutes, several discussed indifferent
topics; and when they were invited by their foreman to enter on
the business in hand, they answered, as before, that their minds
were made up. One said he knew the prisoner’s father—one his
mother—and a third had known the prisoner himself from a
child. The narrator and two other persons being persuaded of
the prisoner’s guilt, the jury remained locked up all night, during
which there was much foul and disgusting language; and in the
morning, rather than continue in such an association, the three
jurors who were adverse to the acquittal gave way. Of the nine
who prevailed, three were known to be convicts, and appeared to
lead the other six, whose conversation proved them to be persons
similar in their habits to the three actually recorded felons.
Another instance of the same kind is reported by the same judge
more briefly. He mentions a third case, f related,’ says he, f by a
respectable inhabitant of Sydney, on whose veracity I rely—
* He was sitting under the jury-box in the Supreme Court upon an
occasion when a prisoner was on his trial for cattle-stealing, who was
defended by one of the practitioners of the court, when, during the pro-
gress of the trial, a juryman leaned over my informant towards the prac-
titioner, and called him by his name. The latter looked up, and the
juryman said, “ It’s all right, we’ll acquit him.” When the prisoner was
called on for his defence, the practitioner advised him to say nothing, and
call no witnesses; and he was acquitted.’ — MacArthur, Appendix, 94,95.
Judge Burton adds, that he could adduce other facts, within
his own knowledge. Mr. MacArthur mentions several more (State
and Prospects, 125, 126). The Sydney Herald, May 9> 1836,
has the following intelligence; —
« Cattle stealing. —A man, named Lewis Solomon, recently convicted
of this offence, was actually one of the jury at the last sessions, upon a
trial for cattle-stealing, (he himself being, at the time, out on bail on a
charge of horse-stealing,) and stood out for an acquittal in the face of
the clearest evidence.’
Mr. Mudie gives the following account of the proceedings of a
jury impannelled to try a convict, who was charged with the
murder of his wife in the colony ;
‘ The foreman was a magistrate; and a few others of the jury were
men of respectability. The rest were emancipists. The judge, in his
summing up, had considered the case so clear, that he almost told the
jury that they must find the prisoner guilty. But when the foreman
asked the jurors for their opinions, one of them, an emancipated felon,
immediately exclaimed, with horrid oaths, that “ he would not find the
prisoner guilty; in his mind, the woman desarvcd what she had got! ”
Pulling off one of his shoes, and repeating “ he’d be d-r-d if he’d find him
guilty;” he declared his resolution to subsist upon his shoe-leather, if
the rest of the jury had a mind to test their consciences by the process
of


of starvation. The jury returned more than once into court, to appeal
to the judge under the circumstances in which they found themselves
placed. The judge, unfortunately, could render them no assistance.
Reason and remonstrance with the ruffian juror were of course vain,
how perseveringly soever they were tried. The case ended in the
acquittal of the prisoner, an acquittal so wrong and culpable in the
estimation of the judge, that he ordered the prisoner to be taken back to
Bathurst, whence he had been brought, and to be there delivered to a
bench of magistrates, to be dealt with in a summary way, not, of course,
°, n the charge of murder, but on some other charge, to be framed from
the circumstances accompanying the commission of the crime.’ — Mudic,
228, 229.
We are not informed before which of the three judges this
acquittal took place; but we should have supposed it would lead
him to any conclusion rather than ‘that the verdict was satisfactory.’
The attorney and solicitor-general, in a letter to the governor,
dated Bth of April, 1836, contributed their testimonials to the
f satisfactory ’ character of the verdicts; but they appear to have
seen early cause for changing their opinion: since we find in the
Sydney Herald that, on the 12th of May then next following, one
of these very law-officers, after a jury had been called to try a
case of cattle-stealing, told the court, that in the absence of the
better class of jurors he would not go on with the prosecution.
The names that had been called were almost all publicans, —•
[that is, generally, emancipated convicts,] —and in the absence of
the merchants —[that is, the respectable tradesmen] —he would
not risk the administration of justice in their hands.’ (First Trans-
portation Report, 3386, 7,8.)
But there can be no doubt that verdicts such as we have been
analysing—verdicts delivered before the regular judges of the
colony—would, on the whole, perverse as they were, be very
much more ‘satisfactory’ than those delivered before the magis-
trates at quarter-sessions, for whose opinions and directions the
jury would of course have less respect. The extent to which
justice is relaxed at the quarter-sessions will appear from this
anecdote, related to the Transportation Committee. On an
occasion where the jury, in a most infamous case, had recom-
mended the prisoner to mercy, Mr. Mudie represented to the
chairman of the quarter-sessions the impropriety of any remission,
saying, ‘ I know five or six of these men to be publicans, and I
have heard them tell me that they could not afford to bring in a
verdict of guilty, because they would lose all their custom.’ And
the chairman made this remark, ‘ If we do not attend in some
degree to the recommendation which these fellows give, they will
acquit the next man, whatever his guilt may be, and therefore we
must attend to their recommendation.’ Another


Another case is mentioned by Mr. Mudie, where the jury, at
the quarter-sessions, acquitted a man who, in the opinion of the
whole court, was guilty. The foreman, a respectable emigrant,
came to Mr. Mudie, and said, ‘ I wish you would speak to the
chairman, for here is one of our jurymen who says he took an
oath this morning, before he came into court, that he would not
' find any man guilty.’ This fellow was an emancipist. Mr. Mudie,
who was a magistrate, spoke to tlie clerk, and he, without saying
anything to the man, substituted another person in the next jury
that was called. (First Transp. Rep., 1859 to 1865.)
We have not room for any more of the specific examples of
false verdict which are contained in the works before us. The
cases we have extracted are amply sufficient to show that the fruits
of the system, as appealed to by the governor in its favour, are
anything rather than recommendations of it. But we go a great
deal further. We contend that, if the verdicts actually given
during the three years of which we know the results, had been
much less objectionable than they are proved to have been, the
jury-law of New South Wales would still be a solecism in legis-
lation. For the trial by jury is not a mere mechanical contrivance
for delivering the gaols; it is an institution affecting the whole
composition, character, security, and comfort of a nation. There
are many other ways in which safeguard may be had against
oppression and injustice; and such safeguard, we believe, did
actually exist in New South Wales antecedently to the last vagary
of the governor, establishing the present jury-law. The peculiar
recommendations of the trial by jury are, the confidence in the
laws which is felt by the people when they are themselves par-
takers in the administration of them, and the operation of the
system in bringing free and reputable men together, —to form their
views of life and its business, of truth and its semblances, of
human nature and its infirmities, —and to correct and improve
their individual judgments by communication and consultation
with one another. Is it possible that confidence can exist, or
iudgment be improved, in a tribunal of twelve men, of whom,
upon an average, a couple are sure to be persons themselves but
just emerged from the penal condition of criminals ?
In fact, though the proportion of convicts to free settlers, on
list of persons qualified by property to be jurors, is only about
two in twelve, the proportion actually empannelled is vastly
greater; because the respectable inhabitants avoid, in every pos-
sible way, the annoyance of serving on juries with those people.
This, again, still further aggravates the general distrust enter-
tained of the tribunal; and"accordingly, Mr. Justice Burton, in
an official communication, declares that he witnesses, in every
vol. lxii. no. cxxiv. 2 k session.


session, the want of confidence and respect for the colonial j uries,
which is exhibited by the civil inhabitants, evinced particularly
by their unwillingness to appear and serve; and, in his opinion,
* this arises from the circumstance that very low and disreputable
persons are qualified and liable to serve on juries according to
colonial law, and that the juries actually empannelled are fre-
quently formed of such persons.’—(First Transp. Rep., App.,
300.) And even when respectable men appear and are ready to
serve, the prisoner and his lawyers take care to strike them off.
The works before us give many instances of such tactics. An
emancipated felon, says Mr. Mudie, was arraigned before the
supreme court. Several jurors, successively called, f were per-
fectly to his mind ; for they were brethren of the felonry.’ (This
is a word which Mr. Mudie values himself, and we think, very
fairly, upon having coined, after the model of peasantry, yeomanry,
gentry, &c.) At length, a gentleman was called whom the pri-
soner challenged; a magistrate, a man of property, of high re-
spectability, and of an appearance and demeanour corresponding
with his good qualities. The prisoner was asked why he chal-
lenged such a juror. His answer was, that he did not know
exactly; the gentleman was quite unknown to him; —but, in fact,
he didn’t like his appearance.—(Mudie, 229.) In another case,
Mr. Justice Burton says,—
* I observed gentlemen of such character and respectability thus pe-
remptorily rejected on the part of a prisoner, that I took theliberty of
asking some of them afterwards if the prisoner were known to them,
and was answered that he was not. The conclusion in my own mind
was, that they were challenged on account of their respectability. In
another case before me, every person of apparent respectability who was
called was peremptorily challenged on the part of the prisoner, which
the crown officer observing, challenged all the others, and the case re-
mained over for default of jurors ! In both cases the accused had pro-
fessional assistance.’ —First Transp. Rep., App., p. 301.
Of those who are left on the juries by the prisoners, a large
proportion are publicans.
‘ These,’ says Mr. Justice Burton, * are chiefly persons who have
been transported to this colony, or are married to convicts; many of
them are notorious drunkards, obscene persons, fighters, gamblers, re-
ceivers of stolen goods, receivers and harbourers of thieves and of the
most depraved of both sexes. They exist upon the vices of the lower
orders, and, inasmuch as there are no licensed pawnbrokers in Sydney,
they are, in fact, the pawnbrokers; but not, as frequently occurs in
other countries, upon occasion of some temporary pressure on the poor,
for some necessary of life, but for intoxicating liquor.’ —First Transp.
Rep., App., p. 301.
To the houses of these persons,
‘ prosecutors,


‘ prosecutors, and parties accused and on bail, and their witnesses, bond
and free, resort for the purpose of drinking during the time they are in
attendance on the court; and a reasonable fear is thus excited for the
purity of the administration of justice, which I have had occasion as a
judge to see realized .’ — Ibid,, p. 301.
The consequence of such a constitution of affairs, says the same
judge, is, that a great mass of false testimony is continually brought
into court, to contradict or discredit the witnesses against the pri-
soner ; testimony f which an honest man may believe, and a dis-
honest man lay hold of to raise a doubt upon. There can be no
confidence in such cases, but in a jury themselves above suspicion.’
How much it is matter of course with some colonial lawyers to
provide their clients with such evidence, appears from a story re-
lated to the committee by the Rev. Mr, Lang:—
‘ A respectable free emigrant had a tailor’s bill presented to him for a
suit of clothes, although he had never got clothes from the tailor. He
received a summons for the bill to the court of requests ; he represented
the case to a colonial attorney, and requested him to manage the matter
for him, which the attorney said he would do. The gentleman who had
been summoned, of course, did not give himself any further concern
about the matter, but appeared in court when the cause was called on.
The tailor proved that he had furnished the defendant with the suit of
clothes, and of course that the debt was a just one; but, to the utter
astonishment of the defendant himself, the lawyer had got a witness to
swear that he saw him pay the tailor the bill.’ — First Transp. Rep., 4026.
‘ But, perhaps,’ says Mr. Mac Arthur, ‘ of all the evil influences of the
system, the most pernicious is the general debasement it produces in the
tone of society, and its effects more especially upon the minds of the
young people born in the colony. Let the case be supposed, of an in-
experienced youth, called upon for the first time to act as a juror, and
introduced in that capacity into scenes such as those described by Mr.
Justice Burton; and which (with no less shame than regret be it
spoken) are reported upon good authority to have been of repeated oc-
currence in juries assembled in a British colony—the inevitable conse-
quence must either be the breaking down of all right principle and of
every just sentiment; or contempt and disgust for an institution which,
if constituted upon right principles, would be regarded with veneration,
and would become one of the best schools for acquiring habits of busi-
ness, and practical experience in the discharge of the most important
social duties.’ — Mac Arthur, p. 106.
After a long and obstinate adherence to this pernicious jury -
law, the liberal governor himself became at length convinced of
its impolicy; and, in proposing to the legislative council,in 1836,
* a short renewal’ of it, with reference to the changes which were
likely to be consequent on the expiration of the British statute,
9 Geo. IV. ch. 83, commonly called the New South Wales Act,
he expressed his hope that the jury system would eventually be
2 k 2 placed


placed f on its ancient English foundationin other words, that
convicts would again become ineligible in New South Wales, as
they were in England before the jury-law, 6 Geo. IV., c. 50.
The two great questions of the legislative constitution, and of
the jury franchise, stood for the consideration of parliament in
the session of 1837« Our readers will not be surprised to learn
that the government, instead of introducing the promised bill for
the settlement of these agitated and agitating questions, contented
themselves with a bill for continuing the old law to another year.
In the session which has just elapsed, the subject, of course, had
become so much the more urgent. The same government took
the same remedy, and continued the old law for another session
still. The civil rights, therefore, and the political constitution, of
this rapidly progressive community, remain, under the reforming
ministry, at the close of 1838, exactly at the point where that
ministry left them at the close of 1837, and at the close of 1836.
The effect of European colonization upon the native black
tribes has been, as in most other new countries, an injurious one.
They are unable to resist the temptation of spirits, with which the
white men supply them profusely; they are averse from labour,
and seldom continue in any agricultural service. They are, however,
excellent marksmen, and are sometimes employed as constables in
aid of the police, on account of the acuteness of sight and of scent
with which they trace and hunt down fugitives. An instance of
this keenness is said by Mr. Martin to have occurred during his
stay in New South Wales, under the following extraordinary cir-
cumstances :
‘ A settler on the great western road was missing from his small
farm. His convict overseer gave out that he had gone off privately to
England and left the property in his care. This was thought extraordi-
nary, as the settler was not in difficulties, and was a steady, prudent
man ; the affair, however, was almost forgotten, when, one Saturday
night, another settler was returning with his horse and cart from market.
On arriving at a part of the fence on the road side, near the farm of his
absent neighbour, he thought he saw him sitting on the fence; imme-
diately the farmer pulled up his mare, hailed his friend, and, receiving
no answer, got out of the cart, and went towards the fence. His neigh-
bour (as he plainly appeared to be) quitted the fence, and crossed the
field towards a pond in the direction of his home, which it was supposed
he had deserted. The farmer thought it strange, remounted his cart,
and proceeded home. The next morning he went to his neighbour’s
cottage, expecting to see him, but saw only the overseer, who laughed
at the story, and said that his master was by that time near the shores of
England. The circumstance was so inexplicable that the farmer went
to the nearest justice of the peace (I think it was the Penrith bench),
related the preceding circumstances, and added that he feared foul play
had taken place. A native black, who was (and, I believe, still is) at-
tached


tached to the station as a constable, was sent with some of the mounted
police, and accompanied the farmer to the rails where the latter thought
he saw, the evening before, his deceased friend. The spot was pointed
out to the black, without showing him the direction which the lost person
apparently took after quitting the fence. On close inspection, a part of the
upper rail was observed to be discoloured j it was scraped with a knife by
the black, who next smelt at it and tasted it. Immediately after, he crossed
the fence, and took a straight direction for the pond near the cottage ; on
its surface was a scum, which he took up in a leaf, and, after tasting and
smelling, he declared it to be “ white man’s fat.” Several times, some-
what after the manner of a bloodhound, he coursed round the lake; at
last he darted into the neighbouring thicket, and halted at a place con-
taining some loose and decayed brushwood. On removing this, he
thrust down the ramrod of his musket into the earth, smelt at it, and
then desired the spectators to dig there. Instantly spades were brought
from the cottage, and the body of the settler was found, with his skull
fractured, and presenting every indication of having been some time im-
mersed in water. The overseer, who was in possession of the property of
the deceased, and who had invented the story of his departure for Eng-
land, was committed to gaol, and tried for murder. The foregoing cir-
cumstantial evidence formed the main proofs. He was found guilty,
sentenced to death, and proceeded to the scaffold protesting his inno-
cence. Here, however, his hardihood forsook him ; he acknowledged
the murder of his late master; that he came behind him when he was
crossing the identical rail on which the farmer fancied he saw the de-
ceased, and, with one blow on the head, killed him dragged the body
to the pond, and threw it in ; but, after some days, took it out again, and
buried it where it was found. The sagacity of the native black was re-
markable ; but the unaccountable manner in which the murder was dis-
covered is one of the inscrutable dispensations of providence. 31cii liu }
p. 130.
The numbers of the natives, in the territory actually occupied
by the colonists, is estimated by Mr. Martin to be below 5000;
and even this slender population is wasting away.
Mr. Mudie, in his evidence before the committee, speaks
strongly of the deterioration, both in health and morals, which the
intercourse with the white men has produced among the abori-
gines. ‘ln all the districts,’ he says, ‘ that become inhabited by
the Europeans, the blacks always die at a much earlier age than
those that live in the bush, from the different mode of living and
from the spirits they get.’ Possessing no article of legitimate
commerce, they purchase spirits by bartering or lending their
wives. When the convicts first became acquainted with them,
a great many children of the half-caste were produced. The
convicts, who were the fathers, persuaded the black men that the
child’s colour was owing to the mother s haying eaten too much
white bread. But when they became acquainted with the truth,
they


they profited by it for procuring rum and tobacco; and to the
arrangement, when put upon this basis, they were, as Mr, Mudie
expresses it, f quite agreeable.’ Disease and child-murder are
the frequent consequences; and contribute, with famine and in-
ternal war, to diminish the numbers of these miserable tribes.
In Van Diemen’s Land there is not a native left. The last
remnant of the aboriginal people there, who had been in constant
hostility with the settlers, were sent to a small island in Bass’s
Straits, called Gun-Carriage Island, where government have
maintained and made some attempts to civilize them. More
than half their number, however, have already died, says Mr.
Barnes, the surgeon, in his evidence before the committee of the
present year, f not from any positive disease, but from a disease
which we know in medicine under the name of home-sickness, a
disease which is very common to some Europeans, particularly
the Swiss soldiers and peasantry : it comes on entirely from a
desire to return to their country.’ —(Second Tramp. Rep. 422.)
Our readers will agree with us, that a state of society, such as
New South M ales is thus found to exhibit, is not one which
it would be desirable, even if practicable, to perpetuate. The
transportation system, as now executed, while it injures the
free colonists, and saps the well-being and very life of the
black population, is productive, we suspect, of very little re-
formation to the convicts, and of no substantial relief even to
the mother country. That it has done some service in bringing
the colony up to its present prosperity, we are ready to be-
lieve ; but we incline to think that its advantages are now
exhausted, and that, for the future, if not wholly discontinued,
it must at least be materially modified. In the early stages
of colonisation, when the labour required is of the rudest kind,
and while yet no inducements exist to tempt free labourers from
their own country, considerable numbers of convicts may be,
as they have been, very usefully employed in advancing roads, and
bridges, and public buildings, and bringing the new settlement
into a state for receiving a healthier population. But when that
first stage is past, and the colonists require, not simply hard work,
buttrustworthy qualities, and skill, either mental or manual, —con-
victs, in the unreclaimed state in which they are now exported, are
no longer a desirable class of servants. Trust is out of the ques-
tion ; and as to skill, since it cannot, like ordinary bodily work, be
elicited by compulsion, the master, to induce the exercise of it by
his convicts, must make them think it worth their while to be
useful to him, which raises the cost to the price of free labour.
Such considerations have led to a very general opinion among
the well-informed Australians, that free labour, on the whole.
answers


answers better to the settler than the labour of assigned convicts;
and the only practical qualification of that opinion seems to be, that
the supply of convicts, if discontinued, ought not to be cut off
abruptly. The prevalence of these sentiments, and the influx of
free labourers (which is now daily increasing, partly through the
character which the colony has acquired for prosperity, and partly
by the application of the proceeds of crown lands to the convey-
ance of emigrants thither), are gradually, and not slowly, dimi-
nishing the disposition of the settlers to hamper themselves with
assigned convicts, except for the rude works of the road and the
field ; and more and more of the prisoners, especially the most
unmanageable and unprofitable, will be left upon the hands of
the government, at a great increase of public cost. The expense
of the system to the mother country is likely, therefore, to aug-
ment, in the same proportion in which its usefulness to the set-
tlement is diminishing.
No doubt, there are other and very important considerations to
be pondered, involving, indeed, no less a matter than the whole
subject of secondary punishment. And we will readily acknow-
ledge,—nay, we would anxiously inculcate, in these days of cheese-
paring economy and rush-light reform, —that expense ought not
to weigh against any measure which should really have the effect,
first of diminishing crime by the dread of punishment, and
secondly of relieving this country from the revisitation of dangerous
criminals, without the extremity of capital execution, and with the
reasonable chance of eventual reformation. But we doubt very
much whether transportation, on its present scale, and with its
present circumstances, be the best mode either of diminishing
crime or of reclaiming criminals. The situation, however morally
degraded, of a convict servant in New South Wales, will yet, if
he has incurred no additional punishment for some new offence
since his arrival, be found, physically, very little different from,
but rather superior to, that of a farming labourer in England:
above all, the convict is in plentiful possession of the external
necessaries of life, with the addition of divers comforts and indul-
gences, when he conducts himself with common decency. When
his friends at home, of whatever calling or character, hear how he
fares, their regret for his banishment is very much relieved
from horror, and the reflection is apt to present itself to their
minds, that, but for the disgrace, the man’s crime has been a
gain to him. Whether, by putting an end to the system of assign-
ment to private masters, and retaining all the convicts under
severe control in government gangs, the state of the offender
might be rendered more irksome, and its prospect therefore more
alarming, is another question. In that case, beside the aggravation
of


of expense, you would lose the arguments, such as they are, which
at present you derive from the utility of the convict to the colonial
settler, and from the healing effect of new associations upon a
mind not utterly irreclaimable; and then comes the question,
why, if the man is merely to be provided with hard labour in
prison by the government, he may not just as well be tasked with
it in a prison at home as in a prison at the Antipodes. The
clear result of the evidence is, that the assignment system as now
arranged works no dread in those who hear of it on this side of
the ocean; and so far therefore as the aim is to diminish crime
by example, the failure is a total one. And how far the other
object, the reformation of offenders, has been achieved, we have
but too ample means of judging, in the accounts which all the
writers of books, and all the witnesses examined before the com-
mittee, have furnished, of the frightful depravation engendered
everywhere by the hordes of hardened criminals, the glut of
ardent spirits, and the gross disproportion of the sexes.
We concur then with the committee in their general con-
clusion, that the time is come when the practice of transporta-
tion to the Australian colonies can no longer be continued on
its present scale, or in its present shape, with any advantage
to those settlements, to the mother country, or to the persons
whom her laws have condemned; and if, as we are led to hope,
those colonies may still be made to bear a part in the reformation
of offenders, it must be in connexion with other and more whole-
some institutions. In a word, it is our belief that transportation, to
be a useful ingredient in our code, must no longer be inflicted as a
punishment, but rather permitted and promoted as a refuge. The
reports of the parliamentary committee on secondary punishments,
dated September, 1831, and June, 1832; the reports of the
French commissioners, Messrs, de Beaumont and de Tocqueville,
Paris, 1833; the paper prepared by Mr, Heath, which is printed
in the Appendix to the First Transportation Report, p. 258;
and the miscellaneous information of many other competent
judges of the subject, have satisfied us, as far as satisfaction is
attainable on a subject on which experience is yet but imper-
fect, that the basis of punishment, for those grave offences which
in modern time have been visited with transportation, should be
the imprisonment of the offender at home with hard labour, wholly
apart from his vicious companions, on the plan pursued in the
Eastern Penitentiary at Philadelphia—which appears in the
highest attainable degree to combine the advantages and exclude
the defects of all the plans elsewhere essayed.
‘ The principle there adopted is that of the complete isolation of the
prisoners, each from the other, so that no one of them ever sees
another,


another, or has any means of knowing who besides himself is in the
prison. Their solitude is prevented from being absolute, only by its
being relieved by the visits of the officers of the prison and the
chaplain and other clergymen, who have admittance to their cells.
Employment is given to them, the profits of which go to defray the
expenses of the establishment. They are allowed no communication
with friends out of doors. Labour is not in this case, strictly speaking,
part of the punishment, but rather an alleviation of it, which alone
makes it endurable for long periods; so much so, that any very
unruly behaviour is punished by depriving the offender of his work/
—First Transp. Rep. App. 273.
‘ The warden states his conviction that no great benefit will result to
any prisoner whose sentence does not extend to two years or more. He
entertains no apprehension of the health of the prisoners suffering from
sentences however long, experience having shown that they continue to
enjoy good health; besides that such a period is necessary to give a
fair chance of eradicating old habits, breaking off old acquaintances, and
giving a taste for employment, and some degree of skill in working. In
England, where this system is proposed as the punishment for those
offences next after capital ones, the lowest degree of it should be such as
to inspire considerably more dread than any imprisonment with which
the public has long been familiar. On the other hand, five or six years of
solitary confinement may be expected to produce the fullest effect in the
way of reformation which can ever be expected; and a longer term, at
least if inflicted for first offences, might perhaps, in this country, be apt
to convert horror at the punishment into compassion for the criminal.
Perhaps, then, from two to six years might be taken as the limits of the
terms of confinement, and four years as the average.’ — Ibid., 276.
Now suppose a certain number of convicts to have fulfilled the
term of their imprisonment. Those of them who have any chance
of being re-admitted into any decent employment or fellowship
at home will be very few; the rest will be wholly without any
honest means of maintenance. If all these last were turned loose,
as is now the case with convicts who have been sentenced to short
terms of imprisonment, this country would be infested with very
many more offenders, of the worst class, than at present; because,
the present practice being to transport them to the number of
about 4000 in each year, it is found that the difficulty of a home-
ward passage, and the attractions of an Australian residence,
reduce to a very small amount the numbers who actually reappear
in England, If then we suppose a long imprisonment here to
be substituted for immediate transportation, we shall be bound
to make some provision against the evil which English society
will suffer from the greater reflux of prisoners set at large. It
is not to be inferred, however, that, because 4000 are annually
transported, 4000 will be annually sentenced to, and released
from, the proposed imprisonments; because, if we are right in
the


the opinion that imprisonment will be more effectual than trans-
portation has been in deterring from crime, the number of original
offenders will be decreased to the extent of that difference. Be
their number, however, what it may, the prisoners enlarged will
be of two classes: those with whom punishment has failed, and
those with whom it has, at least to appearance, succeeded; and
one great question for experiment is, the proportion which these
two classes will bear to each other. Whatever be the number
of the unreformed offenders, to that extent, no doubt, the mother
country will have to bear the nuisance which is now endured by
the penal colonies, so long as those offenders shall remain at large
after the expiration of their imprisonment: but if the legislature
shall make due provision for the re-apprehension of such incura-
bles on the first repetition of any felony great or small, society
will speedily be re-delivered from them; and though, happily, the
humanity of modern time no longer allows the old method of final
riddance by capital execution, the respectable part of the com-
munity have a right to require that an offender who has come out
unreclaimed from a long term of such alterative imprisonment as
we have been recommending, and has again made war upon his
fellow-men, should now be definitively cut off from the further
opportunity of crime, by being permanently placed in some penal
receptacle. Such receptacles may probably be fixed, with much
less expense, and with much better security against oppression
or neglect, in secluded spots of the British islands, than on the
distant soil of an infant colony. But we will not anticipate that
the number of hopeless offenders will be sufficient to form a
source of any great embarrassment or outlay.
‘ It may fairly be hoped,’ Mr. Heath observes, c that, after some years
of solitary meditation, in which labour has been felt to be a solace and
recreation, aided by religious instruction, which will derive a peculiar
force by coming from the only human being with whom the prisoners
can have any unrestrained intercourse, a great number will be found
anxious for honest means of livelihood.’ —First Transp. Rep., App .> 274.
We believe so : and it is to this class of persons that we think
the settlements now called penal will afford a refuge and an op-
portunity of reformation. At home, the facility of procuring the
labour of respectable persons will always make it difficult for a
convict, even with the best testimonials from his penitentiary, to
obtain a creditable livelihood. But in a colony like New South
Wales, when the dregs of the gaols shall no longer be poured
out upon its coasts, the comparative scarcity of labour, and the
milder form of public opinion upon the subject of expiated crime,
will give almost a certainty of work and wages, and of a respect-
able establishment, to men who have undergone their chastisement,
c redeemed


redeemed their character at home, and obtained a conveyance to
Australia at the expiration of their term, or perhaps, under espe-
cially favourable circumstances, even earlier. And if in that new
sphere'of action some be found to relapse, the local authorities
can but deal with them (as relapsing convicts would be dealt with
at home,) by consigning them to a lasting confinement in some of
those auxiliary settlements to which at present the perpetrators
of crimes in Australia are condemned, and in which, as in all the
prisons of the mother country, we would have the Philadelphian
system as far as possible observed. The conveyance of the re-
formed convicts from home to New South Wales should, on the
system we now advocate, be made matter of indulgence, depend-
ing upon conduct and character. Nor must the expense be thrown
ultimately either upon the mother country or upon the colony;
because, if convicts were enabled to emigrate for their own profit
at the public charge, they might be placed in a better situation
than men who have never offended; it must, therefore, be made
a condition of their conveyance that the passage-money advanced
for them by the government shall be repaid from their labour
in the colony, by stopping a reasonable proportion of their earn-
ings until the advance be liquidated. With ordinary emigrants
this arrangement is not easily enforced, because there is no privity
between the master who employs the labourers and the local go-
vernment which has to get its payment out of their earnings ;
but with a body of convicts, whose labour would be under control,
the same difficulty would not exist—especially a body of selected
and tractable convicts like those who, on this plan, would be the
only class exported by the government.
Art. VIII. —Life and Administration of Edward First Earl of
Clarendon; with Original Correspondence and Authentic
Papers never before published. By T. H. Lister, Esq. 3 vols.
Lond. 1838.
WE readily agree in Mr, Lister’s preliminary proposition, that
a biography of Lord Clarendon was wanting to our modern
literature, although we are by no means satisfied with his attempt
to supply the deficiency. We cannot but express our disappoint-
ment that he should have added so little to our personal know-
ledge of Lord Clarendon, our dissatisfaction with the general tone
of the work, and our strong dissent from many of its details—while
we concede to Mr. Lister the merit of a clear and unaffected style
—some diligence in exploring at least the surface of the original
authorities—•


authorities honest and not unphilosophical views of general
questions—and a kind of impotent candour that strains after an
impartiality which his mind has not vigour to attain. Indeed
• —Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor —would be a very
just motto for Mr. Lister’s work, of which the most prominent
and serious defect is the absence of any fixed principle, a want of
moral courage, and a timid and shuffling anxiety to conciliate
opinions which are in their essence irreconcileable.
No writer and few statesmen have been subjected to more
numerous, more virulent, and more insidious attacks than Lord
Clarendon. All the enemies of the monarchical constitution of
England have been, and still are, his. The rigid fanaticism of
the presbyter, the unctuous bigotry of the Jesuit, and the frau-
dulent candour of the sceptic, suspend, for a moment, their mortal
feuds, in a common enmity to Church and State, and to the
Noble Historian whose immortal work—whether as a body of
facts or as a code of principles—is the strongest bulwark of both
that literature has ever erected.
Unable to stem the strong current of its facts, to refute the
great principles it develops, or to resist the majestic flow of its
eloquence and wisdom, they endeavour to disparage its authority;
for, after all, disparagement, and not confutation, is the most that
they venture to attempt, by individual charges of partiality and in-
accuracy.
A work of such extent and variety—narrating such events—
involving such vehement passions and such important interests,
written by one who had a large share in those transactions, and
who does not pretend to have been exempt from those passions
and interests, however he may have subsequently subdued or miti-
gated them—such a work, we say, would be more than human, if
it did not afford occasional instances by which such charges might
be plausibly supported. The instances are, however, wonderfully
few; no work has ever been exposed to so severe an ordeal with
so little substantial damage ; and it is very observable that, how-
ever this or that writer may indulge his spleen or his prejudice,
in carping at some minor details, they all are forced to accept,
and to rely on. Lord Clarendon, as the great and indisputable
authority for the broader and more important features of their
respective narratives. Take from his bitterest critics, what,
in spite of all their censures, they are forced to borrow implicitly
from Clarendon, and you will leave them—nothing. We cannot call
to mind, and we do not believe that there exists, a single page of any
of those antagonist works which, while it disputes some insulated
tact or opinion, is not in all main particulars founded on the evi-
dence of Clarendon. His work is like one of those grand pictures
of




i n. -Milman s lidition of Gibbon,
f ' iV. Spanish Bull-feasts and Bull-fights,
V. Brenton’s Life of Earl St. Vincent.
VI. Raumers Contributions to Modern History—Wright's
Queen T 7 H?'*beth and her Times. &■
VII. State of Society in IS ew South Wales.
. Vm. Lister’s Life oh Clarcndoij.,
.
f *■ ■■ * ■ •
fW- J ; ' ■ 'V;
■ •>- .1.:, —■———i. ■ —■■ ■—r ■
The Reviews No. C XS‘\
.. .. ’ '.V * ; December.
|P_J —— ■
The Quarterly Rrysw, Nos. tllX. a»/
- an Index to the V 6 preceding volumes,
■ ; , ±4
: I ; -;** T ,




