





ADDRESS
TO THE COLONISTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
FROM
SOCIETY FOB PROMOTING THE OBSERVANCE OF
THE LORD’S DAY.
Twenty-third Thousand ]
SYDNEY:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
BY W. WELSH, 152, GEORGE STREET.
MDCCCLVIL


THE NEW SOUTH WALES SOCIETY.
TOR PROMOTING THE OBSERVANCE OF THE LORD’S DAT.
Established August 25th, 1856.
President,
The Lord Bishop of Sydney.
Treasurer,
G. K. Ingelow, Esq.
Secretaries,
The Rev. R. L. Kino.
The Eev. Dr. M. Mackay.
Committee,
Messrs. G. F. Allen, M.L.C.,
„ Wm. Barker,
„ T. C. Breillat,
„ John Caldwell,
Captain Dumaresq,
Messrs. Chas. Cowper, M.L.A.,
„ S. D. Gordon, M.L.A.,
„ E. Mitchell,
„ J. Mackay,
„ Dr. Moon,
With all Ministers of Religion who are Members of the Society.
Five a quorum.
RULES.
I. —That the objects of the Society shall be, Ist. To diffuse infor-
mation by means of suitable Publications. 2nd. To hold public meet-
ings, and institute Branch Societies in different parts of the Colony.
3rd. To memorialise Public Bodies. 4th. To use all moral means to
suppress and prevent Sabbath Desecration. sth. Generally to awaken
in the public mind a deeper sense of the obligations and privileges of
the Lord’s Day.
11. That each Subscriber of Ten Shillings annually shall be a mem-
ber of the Society ; and that each benefactor of £5. shall be a life
member.
111. —That the affairs of the Society shall be managed by a Com-
mittee consisting of a President, Treasurer, one or more Secretaries,
twelve laymen, and all ministers of religion being members of the
Society ; of whom any five shall form a quorum.
IY. —That an Annual Meeting of the Society shall be held, when the
proceedings of the past year shall be reported, the accounts, duly audited
by two members of the Committee, shall be presented ; and the Com-
mittee chosen for the ensuing year.
V. —That the following gentlemen (above named,) shall be the Com-
mittee for the ensuing year.


ADDRESS.
Fellow Colonists,
As the representatives of a Society formed in this
City for promoting a better observance of the Lord’s Day
throughout the Colony we address you on this very important
subject. Much neglect and desecration of that holy day exist
among us ; and these evils, under various forms, have been toun
to be increasing. . .
The very numerous and respectable meeting at which this
Society was formed gave pleasing testimony that there are many
within this city and its suburbs who hold the sacred day in
reverence, and lament its desecration. . Protestants of almost
every communion among us have cordially united in oiming
the Society, and in earnestly seeking to diminish, and, if pos-
sible, to extinguish the evils of Sabbath desecration, that the
Lord’s Day may be observed with the reverence due to it.
Fellow Colonists, both you, and we who now address you,
have our descent, and derive our privileges from Lands where
the Word, the Day, and the other Institutions of God, have long
been honoured, and extensively blest. And we consider that
both you and we have a probationary lot assigned to us m this
new Land ; to prove, whether by following the good examples
set before us, we shall be instrumental in raising this country
to a rank of Christian character and true prosperity. W e would
seek to impress upon our own hearts and yours the high re-
sponsibilities to the God of our Fathers under which we are
placed. , , , ,
In whatever part of the Earth man’s lot may be placed, lie
will be met by many temptations to sin. And we testily to
you, Fellow Colonists, that in this colony there are to every one
many and peculiar temptations to the sin of profaning the Ho y
Sabbath.
The holy keeping of the Lord’s Day is an essential part ot
true religion. Indeed without it there can be no true religion.
The desecration of the Sabbath has wrought manifold evils m
many nations bearing the Christian name. Having regaidto
these things, we would affectionately beseech you to consider the
supreme authority of God’s holy commandment.


Both as ministers of religion, and as members of Christ’s
visible Church, we trust we may truly say it is in love to your
souls we take upon us thus to address you ; and most earnestly
would we intreat you to attend with due reverence to the words
themselves of the Fourth Commandment. We would pray, that
as God’s own finger did write them of old on the tables of stone,
His Holy Spirit may write them on the fleshly tables of your
hearts. They most expressly declare to us God’s holy will,
setting before us what God would have us to do ; how we are
to Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. And wher-
ever man may be found, whether in the crowded city, or in the
lonely wilderness, this holy commandment follows him, and is
addressed to him personally ; and it ever continues to be binding
upon him.
This commandment we consider to be an essential part of the
Moral Law, the whole of which, like God Himself, is unchange-
able in its nature. “ The Sabbath was made for man.” Be-
cause of his infirmites through sin, man is constrained “ six days
to labour, and to do all his work.” “In the sweat of thy face
shalt thou eat bread until thou return to the ground.” And as
the frail body cannot sustain lengthened periods of ceaseless
toil, so neither can the soul live spiritually without stated
periods of solemn leisure for thought, for prayer, for instruction,
for contemplation of God, of Jesus Christ, and of life everlasting.
And God who is merciful and gracious has thus set apart the
seventh day for man’s benefit; and to every immortal soul it is
indeed an inestimable gift. Its neglect or rejection is deeply dis-
honouring to God, and to the adorable Saviour. It is now in
Gospel times peculiarly the Lord’s Day, commemorative of the
Saviour’s finished work on the earth, the greatest of the works
of God, and to us as sinners the most precious. Jesus Christ is
Lord of the Sabbath. Every true Christian has ever experienced
the Lord’s Day to be a blessing indeed ; —a blessed returning
season of comfort and of delightful access to God through Jesus
Christ.
But those who profane the Lord’s Day say practically, “We
will not have this man to reign over us.” They openly set
before others also an evil example, inviting them to do what they
themselves are guilty of doing. The profaner of the Lord’s
Day too often, alas ! causes his own sin to become a family and
a social sin, when as a master, a husband, a parent, a friend, by


precept as by example, he causes that to be done which God has
so expressly forbidden. “ Brethren, these things ought not so
to be and for all these things God will reckon with men in
righteousness.
Assuredly the souls of men have need of one whole day of the
week to be specially set apart to the seeking of that living
bread which came down from heaven. The blessed Saviour
invites us to seek it, and promises to bestow it. Shall we obey
that gracious invitation ; or shall we yield ourselves victims to
the god of this world ? May it become, and may it ever con-
tinue to be, the ruling principle in your souls, —“ As for me and
my house, we will serve the Lorld.”
And if such be your purpose, then, the more you see this sin,
and the evils of Sabbath desecration, prevailing around you, the
more watchful ought you to be, lest you become partakers in
other men’s sins, and thus confirm them in their evil ways. The
good example of individuals has ever been attended with much
blessing from God. To such example, and to such blessing upon
!t, we look for improvement in Sabbath observance more than
to any enactments of men regarding it. Such example will
oever fail of its fruit, nor of its reward. God will honour it,
because He is gracious. “ Them that honour me I will honour ;
a nd they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.”
ihere is much happiness sensibly experienced in the holy
'coping of the Lord’s Day ; and there is much in it that is
morally healthful, to the individual, to the family, and to the
household. There is a blessed peacefulness in it, invigorating both
lo body and mind. "Whether is the body more invigorated, the
more strengthened, by the orderly arrangement of the
amily and household on the morning of the Lord’s Day—by the
orderly progress of the family to the house of God, —by the
edifying exercise of the mind while there, —by the quiet return
ome to share in the sober and rational enjoyment of the family’s
cheerful and affectionate converse, and by the seasonable closing
? t le day with the solemn worship of God ; or, in the noisy
. u,, ry of an excited rushing to join in the pleasure-excursion,—
111 t e fatigue and exhaustion of the Sabbath-profaning amuse-
f? 4 ’ ; an d in the late and jaded return to the disordered home from
ich sinful indulgences have banished comfort ? Take speci-
l ° m GaCh CIaSS families ’ ancl which of them will be seen
urnmg on the following morning to their usual pursuits with the


greater comfort, the livelier readiness, or the more cheerful
mind ?
How hurtful to themselves and to others are those rash judg-
ments which thoughtless persons pronounce on the proper employ-
ments of the Lord’s Day, when they call them gloomy, and
wearisome, or dull and lifeless ! It is those who have wilfully
rendered themselves strangers to those sacred duties who so
speak. When those duties are entered into in the spirit which
their nature demands, and which the diligent use of them is cal-
culated to strengthen, they are experienced to be altogether the
opposite of dull, or wearisome, or cheerless. God is wiser than
men. And with respect to this commandment, and all others
which He has given, the declaration of His own Word will he
experienced to be true indeed, that, “ In keeping of them there
is great reward.”
We appeal to yourselves whether there be not profit and hap-
piness both to body and mind in the holy keeping of the Lord’s
Day ? We appeal to your recollection of the days of your youth.
Does not the memory of many a one among you love to dwell on
the orderly going up of the people to the Sanctuaries, where they
devoutly worshipped the God of their Fathers ? And do you
not love to dwell on the peaceful return of the worshippers to
their quiet homes ? And when you meditate on those days that
are past, do not many among you feel disposed to exclaim con-
cerning the Lands of your Fathers, and concerning their people,
“ Happy art thou, 0 Israel, who is like unto thee, 0 people saved
of the Lord !”
Upon each one of us, then, it depends, under God, what shall
be the future character of the people of this Land. Without the
holy keeping of the Lord’s Day it will become a land of im-
morality, of ungodliness, of multiplied crimes and miseries ; and
God will forsake it.
Fellow Colonists, among whom would you yourselves desire
that your children after you should dwell ? Would you desire
they should have their lot among profaners of the Lord’s Day ?
Would this be to their benefit, even in the life that now is ?
Would it promote their happiness or their good ? Keep your-
selves, then, and see that you keep them, out of the paths of the
destroyer.
We do sincerely grieve that to many of you the Sanctuary is
not accessible on the Lord’s Day. But strive to make your


wilderness dwelling your Bethel. On the Lord’s Day especially,
a PP ] y yom selves to searching the Scriptures. And do you who
are paients see ihat you carefully teach them to your beloved
childien. Let the Lords Day be hallowed around you. Your
eyes will behold with comfort and joy, the more that this is care-
fully done, the more will peace, and blessedness, and prosperity,
spiing up and abound. We rejoice to think that some of you do
this already. May they be blessed in their doing ; and may the
number of such be greatly increased.
In the cities and towns of our Colony, we observe with much
gnef the multiplied ways by which the people are. tempted to
piofane the Day of the Lord, in their pursuit of sinful amusements
an _ pleasures. .We strongly deprecate the increased temp-
ations to sin which are thus placed before them. But we sorrow
aso over the many testimonies and reports which reach us from
several parts the interior, that there also, too generally, the
o y Sabbath is to a great extent, made a day of traffic and
business, and even of unholy recreations ; and that the inland
cairymg of goods, and the transporting of produce to sea-ports,
are seen to be largely pursued. These evils are to be greatly
ueplored. Even the beasts of the field are regarded by Him with
aU have t 0 He authoritatively includes “ thy
e ’ in His holy commandment. We have the strongest as-
urance that owners, employers, and masters, would find their
wn profit m ordering that all travelling on the Lord’s Day should
ase , and that there should be “a hoiv resting” on that day
along all the roads of the colony. ' 8 *
Fellow Colonists, we avow our solemn conviction that God’s
ressing can never rest on the gain that is made, or is supposed
0 be made, by profaning the Day of the Lord,
thm G a^S ,° l to learn, and some of us have mourned to see,
mav ° n * IC the Colony, while the chief occupation
P lZ C «f, the Ford’s Day, other secondary occupations are
to bo 1 rl. week_da 7 earnestness. Assuredly this ought not
mav \ S °i'i i 6 T j ncei a a n ties attending that laborious occupation
their n 611 a .“? nish those eil ff a fe red in 1* that their success is not at
the k - m '! n( l ( lir3g. Ihe gold and the silver are Llis who rules in
it is 7 S , ° f Providence > and is also Lord of the Sabbath. And
can ni- U ° r we acknow ledge God in all our ways, that we
ceceive it 01 U P OII our labours, and may hope to


We would earnestly beseech each one into whose hands this
address may come, to “ Remember the Sabbath-day, to keep it
holy.” Such of you as have access to the House of God, “ For-
sake not the assembling of yourselves together, as” alas, “ the
manner of some is.” Content not yourselves with a formal ap-
pearance there, and then going to seek your own pleasure where
you well know that God is dishonoured, and His authority despised.
There is much power for good or for evil in individual example.
It is a talent which God has committed to you, and which He
will require at your hands. “ Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.
And to such of you as have your lot in the wilderness of this
colony, while we regret the privations which many of you en-
dure, to you also would we say,—“ Remember the Sabbath-day,
to keep it holy.” Assemble your families even there on the Lord’s
Day. And would it not be a blessing that, when possible, two
or more families should meet together on that day ; that united
prayer should be made, the Word, and sound expositions of portions
of it read ; -that your children should be trained from their ear-
liest years to the habit of resorting to the worship of God, and to
“ the place where prayer is wont to be made and should be
accustomed to the hearing of God’s Word, especially on that day;
and that the sense of its sacredness should grow up with them from
their childhood and youth.
Fellow Colonists, our prayer to God on your behalf is “that yo
do no evil.” May God pour down His Holy Spirit upon us : and
may He abundantly bless all those in this Land, and make them
mutual blessings, who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.




