

could hardly be expected so soon. He had little doubt that when more stations had
been formed, and the aims and objects of the Association were more clearly under-
stood, the whole would in time become centres, as it were, of traffic, and a great
impetus would be given to commerce and the march of civilisation.
The President, in proposing a vote of thanks to the readers of the papers, said
he would not he tempted by the political hints that had been thrown out to enter
into the question whether or not Mr. Gladstone was going to violate his promise that
the treaty with Portugal should be submitted to the House of Commons, nor whether
the Hutch merchants had received information as to the contents of the treaty,
which were not known in this country. He had no doubt that in process of time it
would be be found that Her Majesty’s Government would do all that they had
promised to do, and submit their treaty to the consideration of Parliament; and he
was bound to say that if they had shown too great consideration for the interests of
Portugal, it could not be for want of ample notice, in Parliament and out, of the
opinion of the mercantile community in this country. With those considerations,
however, the Geographical Society had nothing to do. Their interests were
geographical, and the progress of geography led to commerce, which, when con-
ducted as it was in these days, generally led to the advantage and improvement of a
country. It may not have been so in the past, when the most active commerce in
those districts was in human beings; but things were altered now, and with little
exception commerce was now the handmaid of progress.
New Guinea: a Summary of our Present Knowledge with regard
to the Island. By Coutts Trotter.
Map, p. 244.
An abstract of a paper on New Guinea, read at the last meeting of the
British Association by the present writer, appeared in the ‘ Proceedings ’
for November last; but the increasing importance of the subject, besides
the impossibility of obtaining the desired information in a collected
form, may warrant a more detailed sketch of the progress of discovery
in that island, with a few notes on the character and habits of the
people, on the resources of the country, and its political relations.
Area. First Discoverers. —New Guinea, the largest island in the
world after Australia, with an area of some 306,000 square miles,* i. e. as
large as France and Great Britain together, was probably discovered,
or at all events first sighted, in 1511, by Antonio de Abreu, for he pene-
trated eastwards as far as the Aru Islands, and sailed thence north to
the Moluccas. In 1526 Don Jorge de Meneses, on his way from Goa to
Temate, whither he was proceeding as Portuguese governor, being
driven out of his course, anchored at a spot which he calls Isla Yersija,
“ lying under the Equinoctial,” and which is perhaps to be identified
with Warsia, a place on the north coast, in about 131° 45' E, and
0° 50' S.; but it may possibly have been the Papuan island of Waigiu.
* According to a careful re-computation in Perthes’ Geographical Establishment at
Gotha, the area is 234,708 square miles (geographical). ‘ Geographische Mittheilungen,’
1881, p. 48.—[Ed.]


The Spaniards, however, contest the honour of the discovery, for two
_years after this, Alvaro de Saavedra, returning eastwards from the Archi-
pelago, sighted the coast of “Papua” for some hundred leagues,, and
“ cast anchor in a great gulf near certain islands,” which he named
Islas de Oro, presumably on the north coast. Again, in 1536, the
survivors of Grijalva’s company, after their mutiny and shipwreck, and
subsequent rescue from slavery by the illustrious Antonio Galvano, give
a short but circumstantial account of “ the Papuas.”
The vagueness, however, not only of these, but of all the early visitors
to New Guinea, is unsatisfactory. Many records no doubt are lost, while
many were intentionally falsified, at the time, either to divert a rival
from a new discovery, or to place it on the right side of the Papal
meridian. The coasts were probably surveyed to a greater extent than
is commonly supposed by the early Spanish and Portuguese navigators.*
Among the more important of the former was Ortiz de Eetes, in 1545,
who laid down a number of places along the north coast, and probably
first gave the name of New Guinea, from the resemblance of the natives
to those of the African coast; at all events, the name was known in
1567, when Mendana describes the Solomon Islands as being “near
New Guinea.” By the end of the century, or, in short, by the time
when Torres passed from the eastward through the straits which now
' BeaFhis name, the outlines of the coast, or at all events the general form
of the island, was for the most part roughly known. No doubt the
approach to the north coast, east of Cape Finisterre, was barred both
by ignorance of the fact that New Britain was an island, and by the
intricacies of the Louisiade Archipelago. Thus none of the explorers
before Dampier’s time, coming from the eastward, were able to close
the land further east than about the 146th meridian.
Again, although the passage of Torres, in 1606, had shown the
severance of New Guinea from Australia (which indeed is indicated,
mysteriously enough, on maps of an earlier datej - ) the discovery was
not generally known for many a day after. In the instructions given
to Tasman, in 1644, he is ordered, after passing Port Ture or False
Capo in S. lat. B°, and continuing cast to 9°, to examine a great cove
—apparently the north side of Torres Straits—for a passage to the South
Seas; and thence to coast the shores of the unknown South Land as far
as 17° S., i. e. to the point previously reached in the Gulf of Carpentaria,
,a locality which even sixty years later seems to have been generally
thought a part of New Guinea, though Keyts, in 1678, “believes New
Guinea to be separated from New Holland in about 10° S. lat.” But
* Some curious evidence to this effect will be found in the map of D’Ablancourt,
published at Amsterdam by Mortier 1700, and reproduced and discussed by Dr. Hamy
in the * Bulletin de la Soc. de Geographic de Paris,’ for November 1877.
t See maps of Asia and of the Pacific, dated 1589, in Ortelius’s ‘ Theatrum Orbis
Terrarum,’ and Hondius’s mappemonde to illustrate the voyages of Drake and Cavendish,
Bakluvt Soc. Trans, vol. xvi.


even in 1768, Bougainville, who, having reached Orangerie Bay, at the
south-east extremity of New Guinea, from the eastward, was unable to
continue his voyage, writes that “Nothing indeed was more probable
than the existence of such a passage ” as a strait to the westward!
Torres’s report of his voyage, addressed to the King of Spain, re-
mained unknown till discovered at Manila, on our capture of the place, in
1762,* and the straits, then named after Torres by Dalrymple, were never
thoroughly explored until Cook passed through them in 1770. But in
fact, for sailing vessels, the passage through such a labyrinth of reefs,
with a monsoon, concentrated by the high lands on either side, blowing
violently for six months in either direction, could never have been of
much practical use. Even Flinders, writing early in this century, speaks
of it as a thing unheard of, and probably impossible, that a ship should
pass through from the west; and though these conditions have now, of
course, been entirely changed by steam, even steamers can sometimes
hardly face the united power in the straits of wind and tide.
Early Explorers. —The chief explorers of the west and south-west
coasts during the seventeenth century were the Dutch. The journal
of the Duyfken, Willem Jansz, a classic name in Pacific discovery,
is unfortunately very imperfect. His instructions, written in 1602,
curiously enough speak of New Guinea as an island. Starting from
Ceram in 1606, the commander noted several points on the south coast,
and passing the Aru Islands, proceeded to the south-east, whence,
taking the mass of islands in Torres Straits for continuous land, he
returned by the north coasts of Australia, supposing this to be still
the coast of New Guinea. It is interesting to speculate what would
have happened had he encountered Torres, who at this very time,
unconscious of the full bearings of his discovery, was sailing through
the Straits from the eastward ! The voyages of their successors during
the century were confined to superficial explorations on the south-west
coast, their object being always and merely the development of trade.
In 1624 they made treaties with the chiefs in the Aru and Ke Islands.
In 1636 Gerrit Pool, crossing like his predecessors from Banda to the
opposite coast, found the Ceram traders, who had come for massoi bark
(already a chief article of export) jealous of his presence. They, as
usual, and probably to discourage him from proceeding, represented
the natives of “Onin” as very fierce and dangerous; and after sailing
down the coast eastward for some days he was killed on attempting to
land. The chief item of export at this time was slaves, and by 1654
the demand for these, owing to the extension of cultivation in the
Dutch Islands, becoming more active, an agreement was made by
Braconnier with the king and chiefs of Onin to have 200 or 300 slaves,
* His accurate surveys of points on the south and east coasts lay buried at Simancas
till 1878 when, after the appearance of Captain Moresby’s work, they were published
in the ‘ Boletm de la Sociedad Geografica de Madrid,’ iv. 1878.


and a considerable quantity of massoi, ready for them every year. In
exchange the Papuans took clothes, hatchets, swords, &c., the price of a
slave in these goods being 25 to 30 reals, and when paid in advance
these unsophisticated heathen would sometimes return the goods if
unable to produce what they had promised.
Yinck, in 1663, describes all the tribes along this coast as at war
with each other, and selling their prisoners for slaves; a state of matters
which, added to the malpractices of the Ceramese and other traders, was
sufficient to account for the hostile reception which the strangers often,
though not universally met with. Yinck was well and hospitably treated.
He, like others, made first for “ Onin,” which is described as a village
also known as Ruma-batti, on the south side and at the entrance of the
deep bay since known as McCluer inlet, which he afterwards explored,
but without finding the tailed men said to inhabit the coasts. A more
important voyage was that of Keyts, who in 1678 examined more closely
than heretofore the neighbourhood of the island of Adi and the bays
and river mouths on the coast opposite. Towards 1690 we find the
trade considerably harassed by the “ Papuan ” piratical expeditions
which, starting from Mysol and from places on the mainland, swept the
seas from the Aru Islands to the Tenimbers and Amboyna**
By the beginning of the eighteenth century the south coast as far
west as the entrance to Galewo Straits was known. Later, in 1746, we
find again a jealousy of the Ceram traders, and the natives of Onin beg the
Dutch traders to deal directly with them. Next year, however, the skipper
Wagenaer was killed by the natives, not, as they asserted, without
provocation, and in 1784 the Dutch Government having heard that
spices were being imported by Bughis and other unlicensed dealers from
Wony (Onin) to Goram and thence to Bali and Manila, gave orders to
extirpate this “ nest of smugglers.” The king of Tidoro, however, declined
to act, and the Dutch were not in a position to force him; while their
local authorities represent the operation to be beyond their own resources,
and assert that smuggling can only be kept down by regular cruisers.
In 1796 the Dutch surrendered Banda to the English; and owing
to this, and to their political embarrassments in Europe, little more was
done by them before the peace of 1815.
Turning now to the north coast, the discoveries during the seven-
teenth century were few. Lemaire and Schouten in 1616, arriving from
the east after their adventurous voyage round the Horn, coming round
the north of New Ireland, sighted one of the volcanoes of the group
which now bears the name of Schouten, and afterwards anchored in a
bay on the mainland in about 145° E., where they found the natives
friendly. Their course then lay westward, by the great islands of
* Nearly a century later Forrest speaks of the Papuans of Salawatti and New Guinea
as assembling and making war on “ Ceram, Amboyna, Gilolo, Amblon, and as far as
Xulla Bussy,”


Geelvink Bay to the cape at the north west extremity of New Guinea.
Tasman, thirty years later, followed much the same course.
The important voyage of Weyland in 1705, resulting in the survey of
the north coasts as far as Geelvink Bay, was due to the fears excited hy
the arrival there, after his discoveries to the eastward in 1700, of Dampier.
This great explorer, second only perhaps to Cook among English
navigators, had just sailed round and named New Britain, showing it to
he an island—an important factor in New Guinea geography —and had
communicated at several points, in somewhat rough fashion certainly,
with the natives. Weyland reported the north coast to he devoid of
spice-hearing trees, and the people wild and ill-suited to deal with.
Fruitful as are the annals of Pacific discovery in the eighteenth century,
further contributions in New Guinea are few. Captain Cook’s valuable
survey of Torres Straits was followed, in ignorance of any previous
attempts, hy the voyage of Captains Bampton and Alt of the (English)
East India Company’s service, who visited and described for the first
time several of the islands with which these straits are studded, especially
those on the New Guinea coasts, which they examined up to the head of
the Gulf of Papua, in the hope of finding a passage to the northward.
Their difficulties may he measured by the fact that their passage of the
straits occupied 72 days. They suffered greatly from want of water, and
Captain Bampton’s apparatus for distillation, extemporised out of a
cooking vessel and a teapot, a speaking-trumpet and a gun-barrel, shows
him to have been a man of ready invention. These commanders annexed
Darnley and the neighbouring islands, with the adjacent coast of New
Guinea, to Great Britain.* The traveller, however, from whom of all
others in this eighteenth century we learn the most is Forrest, who
visited New Guinea in 1774 in search of sjuce-bearing lands to the east
of the Dutch possessions, and, chiefly to escape the interference of the
Dutch, sailed in a little 10-ton vessel, the Tartar Galley. He landed at
Doreh Bay on the north coast in long, about 134° 10', a place which, from
its long and narrow but sheltered harbour, has since been the usual
halting place of passing vessels, and the headquarters of explorers. It
has, besides other advantages, a strip of open and cultivated country, with
numerous hill streams, sloping gently up to the forest, which is composed
of great trees, but devoid of underwood, so that travelling is easy. Like
later writers, he describes the mountain and coast people as on bad terms,
but trading regularly in their respective produce. By dint of search,
and the promise of a reward, ho discovered the nutmeg tree (of the
long species, M. faiua ) in the adjacent island of Manaswari, a place of
interest to Englishmen, for it was occupied by an expedition from India
towards the end of last century. He was much impressed with the
importance of sago as a means of subsistence, and speaks of the value it
* And yet Darnley Island, along with Tuan, Saibai, Talbot, and Murray, were
annexed, as if for the first time, to Queensland in 1877.
200
NEW GUINEA.


would have been to the early explorers. Torres, however, mentions a
biscuit they call sagu, which will last for twenty years.” At Eawak in
the island of Waigiu, Forrest laid in 2000 cakes of sago of 1 lb. or
ll lb. each, baked hard, which kept well. His intercourse with the people
during a residence of several weeks was always pleasant, owing to his
wise and conciliatory conduct. They too welcomed his visits, and he
notes that they made pottery, though ignorant of the wheel, and that the
women sang to him much better than the Malays. The reports ho
collected by hearsay of the parts aboixt Geelvink Bay have been super-
seded by later information. He states that the people of Ternate and
Tidore were forbidden by the Hutch to trade with New Guinea, a
privilege they only granted to the “ discreet ” Chinese, who carried
Dutch colours; but the Ceramese were trading with the south coasts at
this time.
Dumont D'Urville. Forrest’s observations were corroborated and
supplemented in 1827 by Dumont D’Urville, who notices, as others
have done, the extraordinary height of the trees in the forest, and also
that they are of two different degrees of height, the mimosas and
pterocarpus towering above the rest like a second forest. A yearly
tribute, he says, was being sent to Tidore. This accomplished explorer,
though unable to land at Humboldt Bay 7 , foresaw the great importance
of its position, an opinion borne out by all subsequent voyagers.
Decent Dutch Exploration. —About this time the Dutch, after a long
interval, began to show renewed interest in New Guinea. In 1826 Lieut.
Kolff in the Dourga, in 1828-30 Lieuts. Steenboom and Modera in the
Triton, and in 1845 Lieut. Langenberg Kool in the Siren, examined more
systematically 7 than heretofore the paid of the south coast opposite Ceram,
in about 132° E. long., the seat of their earliest intercourse with New
Guinea, and as far as the other side of Prince Frederick Henry Island in
about 139°. The various inlets and islands of the great bay which lies at
the back of the island of Adi, visited by Keyts in 1678, were pretty
thoroughly explored, one object being the establishment of a permanent
post; and a stockade, inclosing a few huts, was erected at the foot of the
Lamantsieri Mountain, near Triton Bay, but finally abandoned in 1835.
Their principal discovery, however, was the strait dividing Prince
Frederick Henry Island from the mainland, its two entrances having up
to this time been supposed to be the mouths of rivers. The strait proved
to be from two geographical miles to one-sixth of a mile in width, with a
depth of 4 to 10 fathoms, and affording but little shelter for vessels.
Several streams enter the strait on either side, but the banks are
shallow, muddy, overflowed at high water, and almost impossible of
access. The great difficulty indeed of approaching the coast here, and
in fact from 135° 30' eastward, is that it is so shallow that vessels can
seldom approach within four miles of the shore, and sometimes have to
anchor out of sight of land. No mountains are visible here, and the


coast region is a flat, mangrove-covered, half-drowned country, probably
a vast delta of streams which flow from the inland mountains, and it
maintains the same character as far as Torres Straits, and indeed to the
head of the Gulf of Papua. West of 135° 30' high hills begin to be
visible, gradually rising in height and approaching nearer to the coast,
and apparently terminating in a bluff at Cape Buru. The more distant
mountains are rounded or flat-topped, with occasional peaks, the lower
coast range bolder and more precipitous, especially at the headlands ;
beaches are rare, except in the numerous little bays, and the shore is
dotted with islands which take the character of the land opposite to
them—high or low ; in the former case the limestone rock is eaten away
by the waves, leaving a mushroom-shaped summit. The scenery among
the channels which divide these islands, backed by the high cliffs and
distant mountains of the mainland, is described as exceedingly beautiful.
The inhabitants of the mainland, where it is too steep for cultivation,
often betake themselves, for this purpose, to the lower islands. The
formations in the interior are said to be Jurassic limestones and dolomites.
The Utanata river also brings down pebbles of a grey and apparently
ancient sandstone; and bog iron ore and a light porous volcanic slag are
found in Princess Marianne Straits. Some information on the social
and political condition of the natives was obtained by these expeditions,
through not very efficient interpreters; but some of the chiefs on these
coasts have visited Ceram, speak Malay, and have Malay blood in their
veins. There is a brisk trade with Ceram and the neighbouring islands,
and many of the people are Mahommedans. They have various titles and
dignities, but all of foreign origin, and bestowed in different ways. The
higher chiefs usually hold from the Sultan of Tidore, but others are
elected among themselves, or have been invested with a title and a
robe of honour—their only garment —by the Ceramese traders.
It seems needless to record by name the various Dutch and other
expeditions which from this time (1835) onward have visited the south-
west and north-west coasts of New Guinea. Their notes, like those of
their last-named predecessors, on the natural history of the region, are as
extensive as the very superficial contact with the country permitted, but
this naturally limits their value for purposes of general deduction, and
as regards pure geography it must be admitted, without impugning the
skill or energy of their commanders, that except as regards the neigh-
bourhood of Geelvink Bay, they have not added greatly to the knowledge
acquired from the reports of their predecessors. Their narratives have
been collected and published by Mr. Eobide van der Aa, and their
interest is enhanced by the valuable notes and comments of that accom-
plished geographer. The precipitous south-west coast is broken by the
remarkable inlet known as Telok Berau or McCluer Gulf. Its southern
shores are hilly, but the northern low and swampy, producing great
quantities of sago, the mountains inland from thence being inhabited by


a savage race who are the terror of the coast-dwellers. This swampy-
character, and shallow seas, continue to mark the coast for some distance
to the northward of the inlet.
The west and north coasts of the great western peninsula resemble
in character those of the south-west coasts, except that in the straits
opposite Salawatti the shores, like those of that island, are swampy.
The mountains, however, rise at a short distance inland along the north
coast, and the high land on the north of Salawatti is doubtless a con-
tinuation of these. On the northern coast, nearly as far as Geelvink
Bay, the shores are precipitous, and there is no anchoring ground owing
to the depth of the water. The ranges of hills, rising one behind the
other to the height of some 3000 feet, and reaching far inland, are
usually wooded, but with bare tracts, due in part to earthquakes and
forest fires, and extend the whole distance, apparently joining the Arfak
Mountains. This hill region is inhabited by tribes of various character,
some nomad, and supplying their few needs from without by the sale of
bird-skins and slaves, or by plunder; others, like the Amberbaki, indus-
trious cultivators.
The west shores of Geelvink Bay are also rocky, but at the head
of the bay, and on the east side, especially towards the north, they are
level and swampy, and inland only a few isolated bills are seen. Here
the great delta of the Amberno river comes in, with its shores over-
grown with casuarinas and nipa palm, and evident far out to sea by the
mud and masses of floating timber. Beyond this eastwards, the land
again rises gradually; scattered hills, then continuous wooded ranges
appear with occasional bare patches of limestone rock, and frequently
showing a ferruginous red colour, which gives to the district its
Malayan name of Tana Mera. The coasts are steep, and, like the inha-
bitants, difficult of access ; and though good anchoring ground may be
found, no harbours are known except within the sheltered reaches of
Humboldt Bay.* Eastward from this, the coast generally maintains
the same precipitous character, with a fringing reef and very deep
water close in shore, and occasional headlands, the mountains reaching
at Huon Gulf a height of 9000, and at Finisterre probably 11,000 to
12,000 feet. Opposite New Britain, however, for about forty miles, a
strip of cultivated land extends along the shore, the hills beyond rising
in fertile and cultivated plateaux or terraces. Near Cape della Torre,
as also in Huon Gulf, and again at about the 148th meridian, are the
mouths of considerable rivers.
Torres Straits, Gulf of Papua , and South-East Coast. —To return to
Torres Straits, the work of Captain Cook and less systematic observa-
tions of Captains Bampton and Alt, Bligh, and others, were materially
supplemented in 1842 by the labours of Captain Blackwood, in the
Fly, as described in Mr. Jukes’s valuable narrative, which contains
* Mr. W. Fowell, however, says there are several such bays on this coast.


a detailed account of the more important islands in the straits, those
nearest to the Australian coast being shown to be a continuation of the
high lands of Cape York, others of coral, and further east of igneous
rocks superposed on stratified sandstones and conglomerates, pointing to
repeated volcanic action. The western side of the Gulf of Papua was
also explored for 140 miles, including the mouth of the Fly river, one of
whose channels they ascended for several miles, the writer arguing
from the general conformation, so far as it was known, of the mountain
system of Now Guinea, that the whole of the coast in question must be
the delta of a great river; and he is fascinated with the idea of thus
easily penetrating to the heart of the country, a feat reserved for
Signor D’Albertis thirty years later.
From the head of the gulf to Cape Possession the coast-line was
surveyed by Lieutenant Yule, in the Bramble, while Captain Owen
Stanley, in the Battlesnalce, worked up to this point from the Louisiade
Archipelago, without, however, having examined or ascertained the
precise eastern limit of the mainland.
Meanwhile the proximity to Australia, the establishment in Torres
Straits of the pearl-shell fisheries, which are now so valuable, and later
on the settlement in the islands and on the opposite shore of English
missionaries, led to an increased knowledge of this part of the coast, to
which an important and timely addition was made in 1873 by the survey
of Captain Moresby in the Basilisk. His stirring and agreeable narrative
did much to awaken the general interest now felt in the subject, while
conveying an indirect reproach for our previous neglect and indifference.
More fortunate than his distinguished French predecessors, he was able
to lay down the exact configuration and limits of the eastern extremity
of the mainland and the neighbouring islands, so acutely guessed at by
Dumont d’Urville, and after rounding the south-east capes, not only
to lay down with some precision the landward limits of the D’Entrecas-
teaux Islands and the straits which separate them (only seen from the
north by D’Entrecasteaux), Hmt materially to correct the existing charts
of the opposite (northern) coast of New Guinea for some 480 miles, or
nearly 700 of actual coast-line.
From near the head of the Gulf of Papua eastwards the south coast
has no longer the level, half-drowned character which distinguishes it all
the way east from long. 135° 30’, but is marked by ranges of rounded hills
of an Australian character, sparsely timbered with eucalyptus aud
acacia, and is skirted almost continuously from Eedscar Head to its
extremity, at a distance of five to six miles, by a reef, an outlier of the
Great Australian Barrier, within which are excellent harbours and
anchorages.
Interior. —From what has been already said, it will be seen that our
knowledge even of the coasts of New Guinea is as yet far from complete.
But our acquaintance with the interior is still more imperfect, and


though doubtless something may be inferred from what has been seen
by travellers in the eastern and western peninsulas, the great central
mass of the island is still, if we except Signor D’Albertis’ voyage up
the Fly river, absolutely unknown.
Eastern Peninsula. —The eastern peninsula has been penetrated for
some little distance in different directions from the south coast by the
English missionaries Messrs, McFarlane, Lawes, Chalmers, and others;
and Captain Armit, who recently went there as the correspondent of the
Melbourne Argus, .penetrated further than any previous traveller, though,
he did not reach the mountains of the central (Owen Stanley) range,
which measures 13,200 feet.
The comparatively bare Australian-looking coast range is backed by
a succession of higher ranges with precipitous ravines and occasional
open valleys, sometimes a few miles in width, full of rich deep soil;
the whole watered by fine streams, and clothed with dense tropical
forest interspersed with open grassy patches. In these intermediate
ranges the rocks in some parts are volcanic, in others a volcanic breccia
is found resting on metamorphic strata, consisting of talcose and plum-
baginous schists and slates, with veins of quartz. The valleys, and in
many places the hill-sides, are cleared and carefully fenced and culti-
vated. Very fine sugar-cane, cotton, and tobacco are found everywhere,
and yams and taro (among other food-sources) are extensively grown,
and stored; an oak grows there, and pigs fatten on the acorns. The
natives are reported as singularly amiable, honest, and pleasant to deal
with; their first impressions of Europeans, which were taken from the
missionaries, having happily been confirmed by the general conduct
of subsequent travellers, prospectors for gold and others. Without the
aid they have willingly given as carriers, exploration would, in fact, have
hardly been possible. The different tribes seem, however, as a rule, to
be at war with each other, and the prevalence of the dohho (houses built
high up in the trees) and stockaded villages testify to a general insecurity.
At least two types of population are reported here; one, perhaps
corresponding to the race with Polynesian affinities who occupy the
neighbouring coast, is fair, and taller and more intelligent than the
other, with aquiline noses and high foreheads; in the other race the
forehead is lower, the nose flat, and the hair, it is said, inclined to be
“ woolly ” ; i.e. probably the “ mop ”is less elaborate. Others are
described as intermediate in appearance, but the observations made are
insufficient to argue upon.
Fig Fiver. —Of the many river mouths which appear to drain the vast
level region which begins on the west side of the Gulf of Papua, more than
one may probably, under favourable circumstances, lead into the heart
of the country ; the coast-region may, in fact, be a network of streams.
Ascending the Fly river, Signor D’Albertis reports that after leaving
the coast, he passed first through a plain and apparently often flooded


region with patches of forest, but otherwise treeless, and having rather
an Australian than a tropical appearance, overgrown with great reeds
and grasses, with isolated hills rising from the plain, which correspond,
we may conjecture, in position and character, to the islands of Torres
Straits in that they also, at no remote geological period, were islands
surrounded by the sea which then covered the surrounding plains.
They would thus remain as nuclei of Australian vegetation, though the
Indo-Malayan flora has now nearly exclusive possession of the level
country. Further inland, i.e. within 200 miles (as the crow flies) from the
sea, the tropical forest (which, curiously enough, is found also in many
of the Straits islands) again prevails. Some fifty miles further inland,
the country, as far as could be seen through the dense jungle, became
undulating, with conical hills, the stream, which now contained pebbles
of quartz, of basalt, and other igneous rocks, became shallow and more
rapid, and the traveller was forced to return while the high mountains
were still apparently some 50 miles off.
The unfortunate character, from whatever cause, of his relations
with the natives, greatly restricted his observations, both of the country
and of the people. The latter, whom he met with throughout at
irregular intervals, he believed to consist of migratory tribes; at all
events the}' seemed to have combined with some unanimity to oppose
his return passage. Still, though the result is in some ways dis-
appointing, the length of stream surveyed through an entirely new
district, along with the birds, plants, skulls, and other objects brought
home, give considerable importance to the journey. The only other
journeys into the interior worth recording are the expeditions made
both by Signor D’Albertis himself, by another Italian naturalist, Dr.
Beccari, and by Yon Eosenberg and others into the Arfak Mountains of
the north-west peninsula, and Dr. A. B. Meyer’s journeys from Geelvink
Bay across the isthmus.
• Interior of North Peninsula —Leaving Andai, a coast village situated
in a small plain to the south of Doreh, the traveller ascends the first
wooded range, to a plateau some 1500 feet high, beyond which, inland,
extends a mass of steep and lofty mountains, covered with forest to the
height of several thousand feet. In the lower parts the great trees have
little or no undergrowth, but higher up is a dense growth of ferns,
lycopodiums, &c., favoured by the damp mists and copious rain, which
falls there even in the comparatively dry season of the south-east
monsoon, and many plants of temperate or sub-alpine origin, as oaks,
rhododendron, vaccinium, epilobium, and various Umbelliferee.
These mountains were supposed to be the peculiar home of several
species of birds of paradise, which, however, have recently been found
■also in the mountains of the south-east peninsula, and no doubt these
and an extensive alpine flora will be found at similar or greater
■elevations throughout the whole length of the island. Looking west-


ward from these heights the country appears like a wooded plain
dotted with hills, while to the south-west and south are lofty moun-
tains also forest-clad. But it must be remembered that these excursions,
interesting as they are, did not cover a distance of much more than
20 miles, and that the peninsula measures some 200 by 130.
Signor Beccari, in a journey inland from the north coast a good deal
further west, struck the river Wa Samson, there over twenty yards wide
and four yards deep, which is said to rise in the Arfak* Mountains, and
debouches to the east of Sorong. Other considerable rivers are, the
Krabra, on the south coast, up which Captain Redlich sailed about 36
miles, and which was navigable for boats to an unknown distance beyond,
and the Karufa, which debouches opposite to Adi Island, and whose
course has been traced up a mangrove-covered valley for 30 miles into
a more hilly country. All attempts to ascend the Mai Kassa, Katau,
Aird, and the other rivers east of the Gulf of Papua, have been checked
by barriers of fallen timber.
The only traveller who has actually crossed New Guinea is
Dr. A. B. Meyer. In the course of his exploration of Geelvink Bay he
landed at Eubi at the head of the bay, where he found a specially friendly
and innocent people, and ascended the hills, which consisted of granite
and ancient sandstone rocks, to the height of 2260 feet, where he found
a plateau terminating on the other side in precipices and ravines which
barred further progress. Beyond, extended parallel ranges of mountains
with very narrow ridges. The population was very scanty. In the
distance the sea was visible to the south, and towards the south-east,
behind a mountain 4000 feet high, lay, he was told, a lake named Jamoor,
the only one mentioned by any traveller, if we except the lagoons in the
south-east. It lies near the south coast, with reedy banks thickly inhabited
by a savage people, who have boats on the lake, and carry on trade with
the south coast. Their attire must be singularly scanty, for it was com-
mented on satirically by Dr. Meyer’s not over-dressed companions!
Returning to the sea, he sailed to the mouth of the Wapari river, and
arranged to ascend it on his way across the isthmus to McCluer Gulf,
but finding that it was not navigable he proceeded on foot, with con-
siderable difficulty, owing to the objection of the natives to carry
burdens. The road lay over a very steep wooded hill 1250 feet high,
and after crossing this and another he struck the Jakati river, and
descended it next day to the sea, passing several villages and the mouths
of other streams which flow into the head of the inlet. Many people
joined him as he passed, but always left him after going a few miles,
being at war with the neighbouring tribe. The south coast of the inlet,
where he passed the night, seemed uninhabited, the sago palm growing
* It is remarkable that Captain Armit mentions a tribe named Arfak at the other
extremity of New Guinea.
No. IY. —April 1884.] Q


everywhere in profusion. His return voyage was rendered difficult by
the trees thrown down across the stream by a severe earthquake which
occurred during the night.
Earthquakes and Volcanoes. —Terrific earthquakes have been experienced
both in the north and west, but it is not yet known whether volcanoes
occur on the mainland of New Guinea. They have been reported in the
Arfak Mountains, and again east of the Amberno delta, and Mr. Powell
found a mass of pumice at a considerable elevation on the coast opposite
New Britain, which is the seat of tremendous volcanic activity. Dampier
“ saw smokes ” here, at the cape he named “ King William.” In the
neighbouring small islands, however, volcanic action appears to have
diminished. Yulcan Island, by the light of whose fires Dampier in
1700 first steered through the straits to the southward, is described by
D’Entrecasteaux in 1793 as merely “ couronne de fumee,” and by
Dumont D’Urville, in 1827, as “ completement eteint.”
Geological Formation. —ln the north-west of New Guinea and
the adjacent islands, the raised coral beaches, and the alternation of
recent coralline limestones with ancient rocks stratified and volcanic,
seem to argue recent upheaval. Along the north coast, too, there
is no barrier reef, only fringing reefs shelving suddenly into very
deep water. Of the geological features of the island generally little
more can be said. The great submarine bank on the south coast,
the peculiar conformation of the Aru Islands, from which Mr. A. E.
Wallace ingeniously showed their former connection with the main-
land, as well as an examination of Torres Straits and the land on
either side, all indicate a recent southward extension and connection with
Australia. The date of the separation may, from the identity of certain
lower miocene shells at Hall Sound, on the east of the Gulf of Papua, with
others of the same series found in Victoria and South Australia, be inferred
to be not earlier than that period. In this connection too it may be men-
tioned that of the Amphibia of New Guinea, those which are not of wide
distribution are exclusively Australian. As regards the other rocks of the
eastern peninsula, it may be interesting, especially with reference to the
recent search there for gold, which has as yet been found only in very
small quantities,* to note that the pebbles and small fragments brought
down from the interior, consisting of mica slate, quartz, sandstones, green-
stone, and jasperoid rocks, show the formations there to be undistinguish-
able from the Silurian and Devonian series of the gold-fields of New
South Wales. Eocks of similar age, with granite and gneiss, are also
found in the interior of the north-west.
Clay ironstone has been observed at Humboldt Bay, on the
Jakati river at the head of McCluer inlet, and at Lakahia Island ;
and a tertiary coal (lignite) at Lakahia Island and in Galewo Strait; a
black magnetic iron-sand with traces of gold is found in the streams of
* Specimens of quartz examined yielded hardly more than 1 dwt. to the ton.


the south-east, and plumbago is also reported on this coast, and in the
interior.
Islands of Geelvinlc Bay. —The great islands of Geelvink Bay have been
visited, but by no means thoroughly explored, by Yon Rosenberg, Meyer,
and Beccari. Jappen ('sometimes erroneously called Jcbi from a place
on its south coast) is the largest, being about 90 miles long. It has a
central range with peaks some 2500 feet high, and is well wooded. Its
southern coast is difficult of access, owing to reefs. The next lar-gest,
probably divided into two by a narrow channel accessible only for
small boats, is sometimes called Schouten (a name which ought for
clearness to be confined to the small group known as Schouten Islands
8 degrees further east), but more properly Mysore, or Korido. Its coasts
consist of coral limestone, and the mountains in the interior of older
formations, containing slaty and quartzose rocks. It is fertile, with
abundance of tropical forest and water. Here, as in Jappen, and on the
east coast of Geelvink Bay opposite, the people are wild and of very
uncertain temper, and in the last two localities are said to be cannibals.
On both islands the hill and coast people are at war, and the latter
protect their gardens by sharp bamboo stakes hidden in the ground.
Mefor is 1000 to 1500 feet high and densely wooded,- but not very
populous. A wide-spread tradition on the mainland derives the popula-
tion there from this island, and the Mefor language or its dialects
prevail, according to the missionaries, over a considerable part of
Western New Guinea. It is not improbable that the islands of this
bay, being a natural halting place for emigrants from the north and
west, were a centre of population. Dr. Beccari indeed goes so far as
to find ixx the Mefor physique and customs traces—interesting, but
somewhat slight for argument—of an Indian or Caucasian origin.
Population. —Ethnological speculation would be out of place here, and
perhaps adequate material for it is not yet forthcoming. It is usually
stated that two types of man exist in New Guinea ; the one, the Mela-
nesian or so-called Papuan (which prevails with considerable modifi-
cations throughout the region extending from Flores on the west of New
Guinea, as far east as New Caledonia and Fiji), occupying the bulk of
the country; the other, a fairer and milder race, having decided affinities
with the Polynesian, found on the south coast of the eastern peninsula.
Members of the former division, however, differ widely in appearance
in different parts of the island. Not only have they in some instances
undergone great admixture, as e. g. on parts of the north coast, where
the type has been refined and elevated by mingling with a superior and
possibly Asiatic immigrant strain, but elsewhere (and not always in the
more primitive interior, but at parts of the coast, as at Sorong in the
north-west, and on the east side of Geelvink Bay), very degraded types
are found. The fairer race equally shows signs of great admixture and
deviation from the Polynesian type, though they entertain towards their


darker neighbours the same sense of superiority, not unmixed with fear,,
which characterises the genuine Polynesian. An amusing instance of
this was seen in the contempt which they showed for some native
teachers brought by the missionaries from one of the Melanesian
islands, while welcoming others of Polynesian origin.
The Papuan is usually said to be a timid sailor, in contradistinction
to the Polynesian, but the people on the north-west coast, as at Doreh and
the neighbouring islands, are bold and capable seamen—another proof
perhaps, of intermixture of race. Some peculiar customs may be men-
tioned which not only prevail among the Dyaks of Borneo, but may be
traced at least as far as the north-east corner of India. Such are, a
belief in certain malignant spirits of the clouds, the rocks by the sea,
and the forest, akin to those of the mountain and forest worshipped by the
Mishniis; * and the practice of taking and preserving the heads of enemies,
in vogue among the Dyaks and among the Kukis of North-east India. (It
may be observed that the Papuans also preserve the skull, and ofteuer the
jawbone of a relative.) Again, the great house, many hundred feet long,
and containing several families, is found in New Guinea, as in Borneo,
and among the Mishmis and Nagas of Assam; the last-named having also r
like the Papuans, separate houses for bachelors, and, unlike them, others
for maidens. The Malay practice of building on piles is also common
throughout New Guinea, even high up on the mountain sides. In the
south-east stockaded villages are built on the steep spurs of hills, sur-
mounted by a dohho, which serves both as a watch-tower and as a
refuge from enemies, human and spiritual. Houses are also sometimes,
as at Astrolabe Bay, built on the ground, with very low walls, and
projecting eaves reaching nearly to the ground, and a bench outside on
which the meal and subsequent siesta are taken. This form of houses
and the dohho also, occur in the Melanesian islands to the eastward.
In some places houses have been found somewhat different in con-
struction from those surrounding them, as at Humboldt Bay, where they
are larger, higher, and of octagonal form, and ornamented outside with
life-size figures of birds, fishes, and beasts. These have been, perhaps
hastily, assumed to be temples, a view hardly consistent with what is
known of the Papuan religion. Little has been found in them except
musical instruments, as drums and flutes, and wreaths of scented grass.
They may be akin to the marea, or council- and guest-house of the
Pacific, but also they may be used, as are certain houses in New Ireland,
for the reception of the karwars or ancestral images, which are appa-
rently the only object of Papuan adoration or worship, and that only
for a limited period after the death of the individual represented by the
karwar. The religion of the people in the south-east peninsula is still
more rudimentary, which is curious as bearing on their supposed-affinity
* We need not, however, go as far as Dr. Beccari, to whom the name of Munoin, the
powerful spirit of the Papuan forest, suggests the Indian lawgiver Maim!


with the Polynesians, for the chief distinction between the Polynesian
and the Melanesian religions is that the former have attained a certain
conception of powerful deities, embracing the necessity for a priesthood
quite different from the Melanesian sorcerer. By both races the spirits
of the dead are greatly feared, and the houses which they haunt, and
beneath or near which they are buried, are deserted from time to time,
as by women before childbirth, &c. Possibly the effluvium from the
buried corpse produces the feeling of sickness supposed to be caused by
the spirit’s presence, and which subsides when the sufferer leaves the
spot.
As regards the character of the people, the Papuan certainly has a
bad name, but very large allowances must be made for reports spread
by Malay traders in order to frighten away rivals, as well as for savage
habits induced by ill-treatment and kidnapping for slaves. Although
in many places wild, suspicious, and excitable, yet when treated with
tact and patience, very friendly relations have been established with
them. A remarkable instance of this was Mr. Miklukho Maklay’s
interesting narrative of his lengthened residence at Astrolabe Bay \ and
it is borne out by the experience of Captain Moresby and his ship’s
company, and also of Captain Armit’s expedition.
The English mission schools, though only established a very few
years, are attended by hundreds of children, whose brightness and
intelligence is very remarkable, exceeding that of the adults. The
people at the other end of the island are probably a ruder race, and,
with the exception of the coast districts under the influence of the
semi-civilisation of the Malays, at a lower stage of culture, and perhaps
with less capacity for it. The Dutch missionaries about Geelvink Bay
complain naively that their proteges are sadly lacking in ambition and
discontent—those twin virtues which lie at the root of modern civilisa-
tion. Still, their labours have at least produced some conceptions of
• order, and increased material prosperity. The level of civilisation
varies considerably, but the average Papuan, if a savage, is a savage
of a high order. Although still in the “ stone age,” the artistic faculty
is strongly marked, and perhaps more so among the western tribes than
among the milder eastern. This is shown conspicuously in the carved
ornamentation of their canoes, houses, implements, and weapons, and
these tastes are further seen in the habit of adorning themselves with
(among other things) flowers and leaves. Crotons and dracaenas, coleus,
begonias, and the scarlet hibiscus are thus used, and at Humboldt Bay
an anise-scented clausena. They are also alive to the advantages of
trade. The tribes on the western coasts have for centuries traded with
Malays, Bughis, Chinese, and others, exchanging the products of the
country, such as massoi bark, nutmegs, bird of paradise and other bird-
skins, pearl- and tortoise-shell, tripang, and slaves, for cotton cloths,
iron and copper wares, knives, beads, mirrors, indigo, and arrack.


They have also a good deal of inland trade among themselves. Thus
the Wandessi, a tribe on Geelvink Bay, take massoi hark across to McCluer
Inlet in exchange for sago, and the massoi is then sold to traders from
Ceram. The savage hill tribes about McCluer Inlet in like manner
come down to purchase sago, bringing nutmegs, which are then disposed
of to foreign traders. Assuming apparently that intertribal war is the
normal condition of man, they adopt ingenious devices to mitigate its
inconveniences. For example, each of the above-mentioned hill tribes
has its allotted trading station on the coast, but even thus collisions
are not always avoided.
The people of the south-east peninsula make long voyages to the
west of the Gulf of Papua for sago, in strange craft composed of several
canoes lashed together, with a house at each end. There is also hero
an active trade between the hill and coast villages, the former bringing
down vegetables and tobacco, and receiving fish, shell ornaments, &c.,
in exchange. A village or a district often has its speciality, e. g. for
pottery, or for canoes, or shell or other ornaments. Salt, too, is greatly
in demand, especially in the interior, sea water being sometimes carried
up in hollowed bamboos, or it is obtained by burning the roots of trees
which have grown in the salt water.
Among the natural resources of the country, besides minerals and
the produce of the sea, such as pearl- and tortoise-shell, and tripang, are
various kinds of timber, gums, barks, spices, and fibres, with such
staples as the sago, sugar, and coco-nut. The people in most parts
are skilled agriculturists, growing, generally with the help of artificial
irrigation, all the usual plants of tropical Pacific culture, most of which
—with probably the traditions of scientific agriculture —seem to be of
Asiatic origin. Any one may clear and cultivate a piece of land within
the territory of his tribe, but they have a strong sense of proprietorship,
even of the fruit trees in the forest, and of the fish in their own streams,
or on their own tract of coast.
Political and Social Condition . —Looking to the probable and not
distant future, it would seem that the confidence of these people might
best be gained, and the resources of the country developed to an
indefinite extent by avoiding for the present any attempt to purchase or
settle on tracts of land, which would almost certainly lead to complica-
tions ; and by establishing depots to which the people might be induced
to bring their produce for trade, under proper regulations. Their own
organisation, social and political, is quite rudimentary, as may bo
inferred from the small power possessed by the chiefs. Kingly
authority, and graduated or hereditary rank, are Polynesian, and not
Papuan conceptions. Important matters are settled by the assembly,
and otherwise every man, beyond conforming to certain established
customs, is a law to himself. As bearing on the question of annexation,
it is at least satisfactory to feel that there are no national suscepti-


bilities which a foreign occupation could offend, and no political insti-
tutions which it need overthrow.
The Dutch Claims. —A good deal of misconception prevails as to the
claims over New Guinea asserted in former times by certain Malay
sultans, and recently by the Dutch. The earlier claims date from the
spread of Islam in the Archipelago, and were put forward by the sultans
of Batchian and Gebe, and latterly Tidore, whose first Mahommedan
sultan conquered Gebe and succeeded to his rights, late in the four-
teenth century. And with a single exception to bo mentioned after-
wards, any action which the Dutch have taken has been solely in the
capacity of suzerain of the Sultan of Tidore. The claims of these little
islands, mere specks on the map, over such a territory as New Guinea,
seem at first sight—though perhaps it does not become an inhabitant
of Great Britain to make such invidious comparisons—rather absurd;
but they admit of a simple explanation. Our geography books talk of
“ Papua or New Guinea,” but the Papua or Tana Papua of these Malays
merely meant the islands in their immediate neighbourhood inhabited
by the dark frizzly-haired race, and had probably little or no reference
to the great continental island beyond. The sovereignty in question is
more especially defined as the “ Baja Ampul,” i. e. the four (Papuan)
kingships, to wit, the islands of Waigiu, Salawatti, Mysol, and Waigama,
a district on Mysol Island.
A brother of the Sultan of Batchian held Mysol about 1610, and
he too claimed supremacy over the Baja Ampat, but in his claim the term
“ Papua ” was substituted for Salawatti. The Tidore claims on New
Guinea indeed rest, perhaps, on nothing more substantial than an
alleged supremacy over the Eajah of Salawatti, who in his turn claims
a suzerainty over the island of Mefor, which has some settlements on
the mainland near Salawatti ! For the last two centuries, however, these
claims have been acknowledged by the payment of a tribute of sago,
massoi bark, bird-skins, and slaves, sometimes sent voluntarily, some-
times levied forcibly by the semi-piratical Tidore fleets, and by the
acceptance of investiture at the sultan’s hands by some of the principal
chiefs around the western extremity of New Guinea.
The Dutch seem to have first supported, and finally assumed as their
own, the claims of their old rival and ally the Sultan of Tidore, in
accordance with the system long practised by them in their dealings
with the native rulers in the Archipelago: their only direct act of
annexation in New Guinea, sanctioned or ordered by the Home Govern-
ment, was in August 1828, when Commissary van Delden, by proclama-
tion, fixed the limits of Dutch territory on the south coast at 141° E-
long., the line running thence westward round the coast to the Cape of
Good Hope in 132° 45', reservation being made of the rights of Tidore
to the four districts (distrilcteri) Mansarai, Karongdifer, Amberpura, and
Amberpon. These same districts, it may be mentioned, were confirmed


to the Sultan of Tidore, as constituting his possessions on New Guinea,
during our temporary occupation of the Moluccas in 1814. This at first
sight seems conclusive as to the rights of Tidore over part of the main-
land of New Guinea, but on examining the maps it appears that the said
“ districts ” are not on the mainland but on adjacent islands. The Dutch
proclamation contains besides a curious informality. It takes possession
of the “ coast of New Guinea,” between the two points above specified,
“ and of the lands lying within,” but it does not say how far inland the
annexation is to extend; it could hardly, from the formation of the
land, be intended to join the two points named by a straight line.
Curiously enough, in Van dor Goes’s report of the Dutch commission
which visited New Guinea in 1858, the proclamation is alluded to in a
slightly satirical tone, and the writer declares he could not find a copy
of it in the archives of Amboyna!
For the line now popularly considered to be the Dutch frontier line,
and which traverses New Guinea on the 141st meridian, the only
foundation appears to be a mere rescript ( hesluit ) of the Governor-
General of the Dutch East Indies in 1848, Van Rochussen, who defines,
proprio motu, the rights of the Sultan of Tidore as extending along the
north coast to 140° 47' E., and an enterprising map-maker must then
have stepped in and completed the arrangement, by drawing a lino from
that point to meet the limit laid down in 1828 on the south coast, for it
cannot be supposed that so scientific a frontier was drawn by so
unscientific a potentate as the Sultan of Tidore. It is not very clear on
what grounds our Government, in defining the jurisdiction of the High
Commissioner of the Western Pacific over British subjects in islands not
held by any civilised power, fixed its western limit at 143° E.; at all
events it is clear that no valid act of annexation was performed by
Van Rochussen in 1848, nor probably was any such act intended. It
is true the rights of Holland are declared (by this local authority) to
extend to this point on the north coast, in her capacity as suzerain of
Tidore; but her right to interfere directly in the administration is
expressly stated to derive its validity solely from the connection with
Tidore; and even the lesser rajahs along the coast, with whom the
Dutch have made agreements, consider these to exist only in virtue
of the same relationship. Now, first, there is abundant evidence that
to the east of Geelvink Bay the natives either repudiate the rights of
Tidore, or are ignorant of his existence; and secondly, his rights, which
never extended far inland, could hardly be the basis for the annex-
ation of an inland territory 400 miles across; besides which, the
definition of his rights above quoted deals expressly and exclusively with
the coasts, from the point mentioned on the north coast westward, and
round to that named on the south.
A small coaling depot exists at Doreh, and poles supporting the
Netherlands arms have been erected along the coast, but the only serious


act of occupation was the erection of “ Fort Du Bus ” at Triton Bay ;
this, however, was abandoned in 1835, i. e. fifty years ago, and could
hardly therefore be held to constitute possession at the present day.
Dr. A. B. Meyer, in 1873, before starting on his journey, applied for
protection while in New Guinea to the Resident of Ternate. He,
however, replied that he could give him none ; that there were no Dutch
officials anywhere on New Guinea, and that even the missionaries were
independent of the Dutch Government, and not protected by it; and he
added that Dr. Meyer would have the right of life and death both over
the natives and over his own attendants. It seems probable that the
slight show of possession hitherto kept up by Holland may, except
perhaps as regards the western peninsula, be read as signifying no
definite annexation, but merely a provisional claim in case of her
becoming able, which she probably at one time contemplated, to under-
take the development of this vast region; or it may simply represent
the survival of a state of matters now past or passing away, —a caution
to all unlicensed traders to the New Guinea coast, and a barrier against
intrusion from the east into her Moluccan preserves.
Various points in East New Guinea have at times been annexed by
British commanders, and all that region seems now, from the force of
circumstances, tacitly assumed to be English territory. This is not the
place to discuss whether such a tenure is quite satisfactory; it seems,
however, pretty evident that New Guinea must eventually take its place
as a member of a great Anglo-Australian political system, for whatever
nations may contribute their quota to its development, the vast pre-
ponderance both of men and capital engaged will be English. It is
hardly necessary then to allude to the grave inconvenience and per-
manent injury to the harmonious political development of the said
system, which would be caused by the presence of hostile or incongruous
elements in one of its component parts. A vast increase of military
expenditure would be one of the least of the drawbacks; there might
also be the neighbourhood of a foreign convict settlement; the entire
question of the protection .of the natives, too, would pass from our
control; while the valuable pearl and tortoise-shell fisheries on the coasts
would become a source of much inconvenience if not kept under one
jurisdiction. And it may be remembered that the rapidly increasing
trade of Australia with Europe and India through Torres Straits, and
with China by Captain Moresby’s route, are both commanded by New
Guinea. Australia, however, though she has expressed herself un-
mistakably as to bad neighbours, and may be trusted to give effect to
her wishes, does not shrink from good ones, and would be last to deal
graspingly with a gallant little nation like the Dutch, whose energies
in proportion to her resources are so admirable, and from whose adminis-
tration of a tropical dependency even Englishmen, with all their
experience, may take some valuable hints.


Since this paper was in type, the Society has had the pleasure of
listening to Mr. Markham’s luminous essay on the explorers of New
Guinea, treated mainly from an historical and biographical stand-point,
which, the present writer hopes, will lend some additional human interest
to the comparatively dry details now submitted.
Recent Explorations in South-Eastern New Guinea.
By the Eev. W. G. Lawes.
Map, p. 244 (Inset Map).
I have the pleasure of forwarding to you with this two tracings of maps
describing recent journeys of my colleague, the Eev. J. Chalmers. The
first was that to the Gulf, and was made in one of the large native
trading vessels. The district west of Maclatchie Point is but little
known, and before Mr. Chalmers’s visit had never been visited by a
white man. The natives of Port Moresby make periodical visits to it
for sago and canoes. Many and marvellous were the stories of this
cannibal territory, its horrors and its wonders. All, however, gave the
people, cannibals though they are, a good name for kindness and
hospitality.
Until this year no opportunity has offered for visiting them. Mr.
Chalmers, who has travelled more than any one else in New Guinea,
and seen more of its tribes, was particularly anxious to add this district
to those he already knew.
A largo fleet of trading canoes left Port Moresby and neighbourhood
for the west last October, and in one of these Mr. Chalmers took his
passage. He landed at Maclatchie Point, and from there made a number
of journeys and voyages to the west. He found the people generous
and hospitable. They are certainly cannibals, but only as concerns
their enemies. Sorcery and superstition have their home amongst these
tribes. One dubu, or sacred house visited, is described by Mr. Chalmers
as the finest he has ever seen. Two large posts, 80 feet high, support
the large peaked portico which is 30 feet wide, while the whole
building is 160 feet in length, and tapers down in height from the
front. A large number of skulls of men, crocodiles, cassowaries, and
pigs ornament it. The human skulls are those of their victims who
have been killed and eaten by them. They speak of this as the greatest
luxury, and think those are fools who despise it.
The whole district from Orokolo to Panaroa is one great swamp, the
villages all surrounded by the muddy water. Canoes are a necessity in
making morning calls ; bridges of logs or trunks of trees form the streets,
and the roads are more easily traversed barefoot than in boots. The
houses are really well-built, and in front of many of them are small
gardens, raised ten feet from the ground. In making them, a well-built
