

New
Zealand’s
Possessions
in the
South
Seas.
By
JAMES ALLEN, M.H.R.
The Christchurch
Press Co. Ltd.,
Printers,
Christchurch, N.Z.




NEW ZEALAND’S
POSSESSIONS
IN THE
SOUTH SEAS
NOTES OF THE PARLIAMENTARY CRUISE,
1903.
By JAMES ALLEN, M.H.R.
(Reprinted from “THE PRESS,” Christchurch,)
CHRISTCHURCH, N.Z.:
Printed by The Christchurch Press Company Limited, Cashel Street.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
Z>i
HE notes and impressions recorded in this pamphlet were
the outcome of a visit in April, May, and June, 1903.
o The trip had been arranged by the Government of New
Zealand to allow members of the Legislature an oppor-
tunity of visiting the Cook and other islands which had been re-
cently annexed to New Zealand, and judging for themselves as to
the value and needs of the annexations.
The Government steamer proving too small, the Union Steam
Ship Company generously lent the s.s. “ Mapourika,” with Captain
Geo. Crawshaw in command. Several M.L.C.’s and M.H.E.’s joined
the boat at Wellington on the 16th April, and, after a run of 564
miles, Auckland was reached, and here the remainder of the legis-
lators came on board. In all, ten M.L.C.’s and twenty-three M.H.R.’s,
including the Minister for Customs (the member of the Executive re-
sponsible for the administration of the islands), as also Dr. Mason
(Chief Health Officer of New Zealand), and Prof. Kirk (Government
Biologist), some secretaries and photographers, sailed from Auckland
at 8 a.m. on Sunday, the 19th April.
The visit extended to—
Rarotonga, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 1,640
miles from Auckland;
Mangaia, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 112
miles from Rarotonga ;


Mauke, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 116 miles
from Mangaia;
Atiu, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 43 miles
from Mauke;
Aitutaki, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 122
miles from Atiu;
Papeete, capital of the French isle of Tahiti, and distant 610
miles from Aitutaki;
Penrhyn, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 720
miles from Papeete ;
Manihiki, recently annexed to New Zealand, and distant 198
miles from Penrhyn;
Pago Pago, capital of Tutuila (Samoa), belonging to the United
States, America, and distant 632 miles from Manihiki;
Apia, capital of Upolu (Samoa), belonging to Germany, and
distant 82 miles from Pago Pago ;
Niue, or Savage Island, recently annexed to New Zealand, and
distant 340 miles from Apia;
Yavau, in the Tongan group, a monarchy under British pro-
tectorate, and distant 257 miles from Niue;
Nukualofa, capital of Tongatabu, one of the Tongan group, and
distant 180 miles from Yavau ;
Suva, capital of Fiji, a British Crown Colony, and distant 420
miles from Nukualofa;
Levuka, the old capital of Fiji, a British Crown Colony, and
distant 60 miles from Suva ;
Kermadecs, or Sunday Island, belonging to New Zealand, and
distant 720 miles from Levuka ;
Auckland, distant 605 miles from Kermadecs ;
Wellington, distant 564 miles from Auckland.
About 8,000 miles of ocean were traversed in the seven weeks
from the 16th April, the date of leaving Wellington, till our arrival
back there again on the 4th June.
JAMES ALLEN.
Dunediv, 15th June, 1903.


I. — HISTORY OF THE TRIP.—DESCRIPTION
OF OUR NEW POSSESSIONS.
By Proclamation dated the 10th of June, 1901, the Gov-
ernor appointed the following day, the 11th of June, the date
on and after which an Order-in-Council of the 13th May previous
should come into effect. In other words, from the 11th of June,
1901, the Cook and other islands formed part of the colony
of New Zealand. It can serve no good purpose to discuss at
this time the wisdom of the policy adopted ; for any one visit-
ing the islands, as we have in the s.s. Mapourika, would never
suggest that there was any hope of Great Britain or even the
Commonwealth taking over the responsibility. It may safely
be said that previous to the annexation to New Zealand,
Britain s hold over every one of them was sufficient to prevent
any other Power hoisting a foreign flag even if deemed desirable.
However, the annexation is accomplished. These islands
are a part of New Zealand; ours is the responsibility, and we
must do the best we can with and for them.
Two years have now very nearly passed away since the
annexation to New Zealand. The Cook and Other Islands
Government Act was passed in 1901, and an amending Act
ia 1902. Mr Percy Smith was, by letter dated 29th July,
1901, under the signature of his Excellency the Governor, ap-
pointed to proceed to Niue Island to generally in initiat-
ing and organising the new system of Government, with due
regard to local customs and laws,” and Colonel Gudgeon was,
by warrant, enclosed in a letter dated 29th January, 1902, ap-
pointed Resident Commissioner under the above-mentioned
Act, the appointment to take effect from the 11th June, 1901.
Reports from Mr Percy Smith and from Colonel Gudgeon had
been presented to the House of Representatives, and some cor-
respondence and despatches dealing with the islands. These
reports had/ amongst other matters, disclosed “that ait no


very distant date the present native population will either die
out or become so much reduced in numbers, that it will be
necessary to replace them with a foreign population”; that
“nothing less than stern authority can overcome the natural
careless indolence of the Polynesian in his own home”; that
European settlement was hampered by the land question; that
the administration of justice was unsatisfactory; that the past
year had been a bad one, the orange crop poor, and “in Raro-
tonga of indifferent quality, owing to the insect pests imported
in old oases from New Zealand and other places.” It was
evident, too, that things were not satisfactory at Niue. An
“ins'ane jealousy of the adjacent islands” existed, which led the
Resident Commissioner to advise “that the Government agent
at Niue should be appointed Chief Magistrate of the island,
with power to hear all appeals of any nature whatsoever.”
With respect to Niue, Mr Percy Smith had reported that
the King Tongia, when sent for by Colonel Gudgeon, “was ill
advised enough not to attend.” Mr Smith also forwarded,
under letter dated 2nd November, 1901, five laws passed by the
Niue Island Council, which at that time consisted of the Patuiki
or King, one elected representative from each of the eleven
villages, besides those members of the Patuiki's old Council
who had not been elected by the people. The two most im-
portant of the laws passed by the Island Council were the Niue
Council Act, 1901, which provided for an elected, instead of a
nominated, Council, and the Revenue of Niue Act, 1901, which
purported to impose a 10 per cent, ad valorem duty on imports,
except such as are free according to the New Zealand tariff.
This law was to come into force on a date to be published by
the Government Resident Agent, and Mr Smith, in a letter
dated 6th December, 1901, writes: —“Seeing the necessity of
obtaining some revenue to carry on the Government, I decided
to take the responsibility of collecting the 10 per cent, on and
after the sth December, 1901.” Then, to sum this matter
up, the Premier, on the 22nd March, 1902, writes to the Resi-
dent Commissioner, Colonel Gudgeon, as follows : —‘A ou will
understand that the election of the Council for Niue, and the
subsequent laws passed, are ultra vires, the Act of the last


session for the Government of the Cook and other islands mak-
ing special provision for the appointment of a Council by the
Governor, upon your recommendation.”
What is written above sets forth fairly the condition of the
Cook Islands, and the confusion at Niue when the New Zealand
Parliament was in session in 1902. Strange to say, from the
time of the taking over the islands in June, 1901, notwithstand-
ing the reports forwarded and the evident difficulties of start-
ing the administration of the new possessions in a satisfactory
way, no member of the Ministry, not even the gentleman ap-
pointed specially to deal with them, bad seen fit to pay the
islands a visit. Consequently, when members, in the debate
which took place, desirous of gaining information, addressed
themselves to the Minister in charge, it was found that his
knowledge was just about on an equality with that of the rank
and file. Then came a suggestion from the Acting-Premier,
Sir Joseph Ward, that members had better see the islands and
judge for themselves. So originated the visit of members of
Parliament in company with the Minister, the Hon. C. H.
Mills; and it may safely be said, as one result of the trip, that
it is well nigh impossible for anyone to form a correct opinion
of these new parts of New Zealand without actually seeing
them. It is quite clear, too, that the islands should from time
to time be visited by his Excellency the Governor, the Minister,
and even members of Parliament who have not had the oppor-
tunity on this trip, and the expense of these visits must be put
down as one item in the cost of acquiring and administering
such new territories.
And where and what are these new parts of New Zealand P
Dots of islands set in the Pacific, from 1640 to 2236 miles dis-
tant from Auckland, setting aside Niue, none of them larger
than 20 miles in circumference. Three, Rarotonga, Mangaia,
and Atiu, reach to 20 miles, and Niue is said to be close on 40
miles in circumference, the others vary from one square mile
to seven. Interesting indeed are they to the geologist and
scientific speculator into the origin of coral reefs, for all owe
much to the coral polype for their existence, and some, like
Niue, everything, except the heave which lifted it, all coral


out of the ocean, and raised it in places 50 to 70 feet high above
sea level. Rarotonga presents a fine sample of a volcanic
island, with fringing coral reef, and pretty indeed was the
central portion of hills reaching up to 3000 feet in height, as
we steamed up to our anchorage. Closer inspection proved the
soil to he rich and available for the production of the fruits
common to nearly all these islands, and which will be men-
tioned later on, for about half a mile from the sea coast, right
round, or an area of about 5000 acres. Streams of fresh water
find their way to the sea from the hilly interior, and in this
respect Rarotonga compares favourably with any other island
in the group.
Mangaia, which is about the same size as Rarotonga, has
also a fringing coral reef, but it differs in that the half mile
all round, in from the sea coast, is not volcanic, but pure coral
raised out of the sea, in places 100 feet high. This “makatea,”
for such it is called, though it looks unlikely, will carry many
of the fruits, especially the citrus type, well, and in order to
avoid repetition it must be understood that wherever “maka-
toa,” or raised coral is mentioned, the land, especially where,
as in Niue, soil gradually collects in patches, is available for pro-
duction; although it may be, as we were told in Niue, that
the crowbar and dynamite were the only tools of husbandry
required. Beyond the “makatea” at Mangaia we reached rich
swampy land, bearing taro, probably the old lagoon before the
island started to rise out of the sea again, but now filled with
rich volcanic soil from the hills, which rise to 600 or 700 feet
in the interior. We did not see the eastern side, which is said
to be a desert of basalt rock, but judging from what we did see
there appeared to be more land available for planting than
Colonel Gudgeon’s report of 1902 led one to expect.
Atm resembles Mangaia, in that it also has a fringing reef
and “makatea,” and is about the same size; but the hills only
reach about 370 feet in height. We only landed for a few
minutes in the evening, and are, therefore, unable to speak
of the value of the land, but it is said to be very fertile.
A third instance of a fringing reef with “makatea” is found
at Mauke, but the island is only 60 feet high, and it was impos


sible, without closer inspection, to tell where the coral ended
and the volcanic rock began. Pretty well everywhere, how-
ever, was rich red soil, and it was evident that every acre Was
available for plantation, and would yield rich results; but our
delight was minimised by the knowledge that the island con-
tained only an area of 4% square miles.
Aitutaki is also a rich island of seven square miles area,
volcanic, rising to 350 feet, with a barrier reef in places two
miles from the shore enclosing a lagoon, which affords a capital
means of transit for people or produce, and a fishing ground
for sharks and the poorer quality of Beche de Mer. Judging
from a walk of about five miles, it may be said that the greater
part of the island is capable of a heavy yield. Niue, the largest
of the new possessions, consists entirely of raised coral, and
only here and there can patches of soil be seen, the bulk being
rocky or stony. Nevertheless', what has been said of the
“makatea,” applies, and very much can be raised from what
appears a very uninviting source.
The only two remaining islands visited, Penthyn, and
Manihiki, are pure atolls, all the volcanic rock having disap-
peared into the ocean, leaving coral reefs raised a few feet only
above high tide level, carrying practically nothing but cocoa-
nuts, and these so close together and the fruit so attacked by
rats and land crabs, that there is nothing like the production
of copra there should be. The reefs enclose lagoons in the
case of Penrhyn, 12 miles by seven, Manihiki somewhat smaller,
and in these is found the pearl shell, the diving for which forms
the chief occupation of the people. Apart from the pearl shell
industry there is nothing to attract either inhabitants or
traders, and one came away feeling that New Zealand had been
very generous indeed when she had taken on her shoulders the
responsibility of such places as these, situated as they are, over
2200 miles from our nearest port.


II.—RESOURCES OF THE ISLANDS.—THEIR
LAND AND PRODUCTS.—THE COPRA
AND FRUIT TRADE.
The value of the new territory and the responsibilities
attached to it, can, no doubt, best be realised by a visit such as
w© have taken, but to place the matter in as clear a light as
possible to those who have not had our opportunities, what fol-
lows is submitted as substantially correct.
The Cook group and the other islands annexed to New
Zealand are situated within boundary lines set forth in the
schedule to the Cook and Other Islands Government Act, 1901.
The area included within these boundary lines amounts to
about 670,000 square miles, of which the land amounts to
only 233 square miles, the remainder being ocean. The land
consists of some sixteen islands, varying from half a square
mile to 110 square miles, widely scattered within the boundary
lines. Of the total land area, we visited some 218 square miles,
and of this, roughly speaking, 56 square miles, or 36,000 acres,
are really rich volcanic soil, capable of producing any of the
tropical fruits, and abounding in growth of great luxuriance.
Here one may find the cocoanut, bread fruit, taro, yam, kumara,
banana, pine apple, orange, lemon, lime, mango, Papaw (called
by the sailors mammy apple). Here, too, will flourish the
sugarcane, coffee, pomegranate, grenadilla, candle nut, arrow-
root, Yanilla, and judging from what one saw at Messrs
Powell Brothers’ cultivation at Suva the india-rubber tree, the
cocoa bean, and all the spices known. Tea is grown by Captain
Robbie, of Levuka, on one of the Fiji islands, and no doubt
there is land suitable for its production in the Cook group if the
other question of sufficiently cheap labour were settled.
The cotton tree, which produces a silk cotton somewhat
resembling kapok, grows well, and cotton itself has been grown,
but this industry has practically now come to an end, owing
to the fall in price of cotton. Arrowroot is here and there cxd


tivated, and in places is growing like a weed, and the guava
can only be classified in the latter category.
In addition to the 36,000 acres of rich volcanic soil, there
is a total area of about 133 square miles, or 85,000 acres of
so-called makatea, or coral, and beach, this latter capable
of growing cocoanuts.
The makatea, or coral, will grow cocoanuts, bananas, citrus
fruits, especially limes, in profusion, but it is not capable of
cultivation by horse implements, as is the richer volcanic land
above referred to. And so, although the fruits mentioned and
others would grow upon it, there can be no systematic treat-
ment, owing to the difficulties of cultivation.
Adding the volcanic soil and the coral land together, we
find a total of 121,000 acres, which may be said to be capable
of producing, and of this about 36,000 acres can be Cultivated
in the manner we are accustomed to. The remainder could
only be treated by hand labour—Polynesian or other coloured
race, for it is difficult to conceive that a white man would work,
or if he did could do so at a profit upon the rough rocky coral
land, where no implements other than the crowbar and dyna-
mite could be used.
At present no cultivation with the plough and horse is
followed in the group, but we saw samples of such in Fiji, and
there is no doubt if the white man is to become the cultivator
in these lands he must adopt modern methods, and such are only
possible on the volcanic lands.
The question now arises, what is being derived from the
121,000 acres at the present time, how much is available for
export, what are the possibilities?
It is difficult to answer such queries, for at the outset one
is met with difficulties which require solution before the maxi-
mum output can be reached, such, for instance, as land tenure,
labour, shipping facilities, market, and the like, of which more
anon. Copra, the dried kernel of the cocoanut, is, and must
be, the chief production for many years to come, partly be-
cause, after clearing and planting, it requires but little labour,
and partly because it is not like fresh fruit, perishable, and can,
therefore, be shipped at any time, and is not injured by a pro


longed voyage. From the copra is extracted an oil, what
remains after the oil extraction is manufactured into oil cake
for feeding cattle. The oil is largely used in the manufacture
of soap, and as there is a plant in Sydney for this purpose, a
considerable quantity of Cook Island copra finds its way direct
to Sydney, and is in consequence fostering a direct trade with
Sydney wihich largely caters for the costuming of the Cook
Islanders. The present production of copra is about 2000 tons
per annum, of which apparently 850 tons find their way to New
Zealand, probably for re-export, whilst the balance goes mostly
to Sydney. Should the scheme for the establishing of a soap
plant in Fiji become an accomplished fact, it is likely enough
that even the quantity now going to New Zealand would
diminish, in which case our trade with the islands would receive
a severe shock. Were it possible to establish in New Zealand
soap manufactories, we might attract a large proportion of the
copra trade, but when one considers the arguments used for
the Fiji scheme, namely, central position, as regards copra trade
and cheap labour, it seems hopeless to expect the establishing of
the industry in New Zealand.
Undoubtedly the copra production, with intelligent guid-
ance, could be very largely increased; Colonel Gudgeon’s report
says up to 10,160 tons. This is no doubt an underestimate of
the possibilities, for assuming one-third of the area (121,000
acres) estimated previously as producing land, planted in cocoa-
nuts and bearing, there should be an output of something like
30,000 tons of copra, after deducting sufficient nuts for the use
of the natives themselves. The value of a ton of copra is ap-
proximately £10; the possible output under most favourable
conditions might be, therefore, anything from £IOO,OOO to
£300,000. In arriving at this larger estimate it has been as-
sumed one-third of the land would be carrying cocoanuts, one-
third fruits and food, and one-third under process of cultivation.
It has to be borne in mind, however, that in the Cook group it
takes from eight to ten years before a cocoanut produces its
crop. The first year’s expenses for clearing and planting reach
approximately £5 per acre; clearing, etc., the second year,
about £1 per acre; so that a considerable capital is needed to


start with. The difficulty is certainly lightened by the fact
that bananas, which into bearing in twelve months, help
to see the planter through the earlier stages of copra produc-
tion ; but as the fruit trade in general seems to be a fickle one,
it is not safe to assume that the banana will in future be of
much assistance.
Something will be said about fruit-production presently.
Meanwhile, to sum the copra business up, it is safe to say copra
is at present the largest production of the islands, and will
remain so in the future. It offers' the widest field for expansion,
it has an assured market, does not spoil, is easily shipped, and
is remunerative to the planter. But in New Zealand we have
practically no means at present of using this mainstay of island
production; some portion passes through New Zealand on the
way to Europe; another probably larger share goes to Sydney.
Nor does the future offer any hope of our supplanting Sydney,
i or fes+SPing Fiji in erecting works for the use of copra.
The copra trade will undoubtedly carry with it, to a large
extent, the export trade from the colonies to the islands, and
it would therefore seem that New Zealand has, if she wishes
to foster trade with her new possessions, either to encourage
the shipment of copra through her shores to Europe, or else
establish, on a secure footing, some other of the island produc-
tions.
It is not easy to see what we can do to accomplish the first,
and there are heavy difficulties in the way of the second. What
other island productions are there which are, or may be, items
of trade with New Zealand P One may eliminate straight away
yam, taro, and other native food plants, which are now grown
in excess of local requirements, for their only market is the
northern islands which cannot grow sufficient of these for their
own use.
From the point of view of the encouragement of New Zea-
land’s trade with her new possessions, island fruits, bananas,
pine-apples, oranges, lemons, limes, which are produced in
considerable quantities at the present, and other productions,
coffee, tea, cocoa, which are possibilities of the future, offer the
only hope for improvement. It is true pearl shell is produced


ah Penrhyn and elsewhere, that hats are manufactured at Mani-
hiki and Niue, and both are shipped largely to Auckland, but
one cannot expect any considerable increase in either of these
products. Coffee is grown with success, and no doubt with
care and cultivation would produce largely, but it cannot at
present, so our reports say, compete with cheaper and inferior
Costa Rica coffee. Tea is prohibited by the cost of labour;
cocoa would probably thrive if labour is not too dear, but we
shall know more about this presently, when Fijian and Samoan
experiments have tested the possibilities in cocoa production.
New Zealand offers a ready market for fruits if the islands can
compete with Fiji, Tonga, and Australia, but all these places
are within easier reach of New Zealand ; they are not widely
scattered like the Cook group. They are quite as rich, are
larger, and have more products to induce shipping, and thus
possess better opportunities than the Cook Islands.
To assist the comparison, it may be mentioned here, that
in the islands of the Cook group we visited, not only was there
not one single harbour for a ship to enter, but no safe anchor-
age was available, and by this is meant anchorage where a ship
could lie in case of a breeze from the sea, or could continue to
load except under favourable conditions. Strong was the con-
trast, indeed, between the landings we experienced, shooting
coral reefs in native canoes or from our own boat with its nose
on the reef, held there by natives and the steer oar, whilst we
had to jump into water sometimes up to our waists; and the
safety and convenience of the wharf at the French island of
Tahiti, the American Pago Pago; Vavau and Nukualofa in the
Tongan group, and Suva and Levuka in Fiji. Boat entrances
existed at Rarotonga, Aitutaki, and Penrhyn, and some attempt
has been made to blast a boat-way in the reef at Niue, but
it will need much more done to make it available except in fine
weather. Something may be, and ought to be, done by blast-
ing to make boat entrances to all the islands if possible, and
thus remove something of the difficulty of shipping, but nothing
can make any one of these islands on an equality with the other
places mentioned, and thus one advantage Tonga and Fiji pos-
sesses in the fruit trade conflict, though it may be lessened,
can never be removed.


III.—MORE ABOUT THE FRUIT TRADE. —THE
TENURE OF LAND.—THE LABOUR DIFFI-
CULTY. —THE DECREASE IN POPULATION.
—NEW ZEALAND’S RESPONSIBILITY. — A
POSSIBLE SOURCE OF LABOUR.
It is almost impossible to arrive at the amount of friut
or anything else exported from the islands, owing to imperfect
records or no records at all, but accepting Professor Kirk’s
estimate, made after pretty careful inquiry, some 40,000 to
50,000 packages of fresh fruit were exported last year, and
he thinks “these figures could be at once increased four-fold
could the natives be induced to perform a little more work
than is absolutely necessary to supply the wants of the
moment.” This, no doubt, is correct as regards bananas, which
fruit in twelve months, but oranges and lemons would require
a longer time. But what strikes the visitor is not
only the want of method in planting, but also
the entire want of care in pruning and cultivating, and the
unfortunate presence of blight in Rarotonga, imported, so the
Commissioner says in his report, by dirty fruit cases sent
from New Zealand. Surely we owe it to these islands to see
that every effort is made on our part to teach them how to
deal with fruit pests, and to protect them from the introduc-
tion of disease from our shores. Attached to the file of papers
we had on the Mapourika was one by T. W. Kirk, F.L.S., and
W. O. Boucher, entitled, “Cook Islands Horticulture,” and
in this were certain recommendations re leasing land to Euro-
peans, proper inspection of all imported and exported fruit,
Government plantations, improved landings, imposition of a
duty on imported fruits from outside New Zealand, all of
which deserve consideration, though the free trader and the
advocate of cheap fruit for our people will scarcely be in
accord with the latter recommendation. The fruit of all
kinds imported into New Zealand last year amounted to 057,583


packages, and of this it is estimated our own possessions sup-
plied only 40,000 to 50,000, so that, assuming the islands can
compete successfully with the outsider, there is a ready market
available.
Some of the drawbacks to this successful competition have
already been touched upon—difficult landing places, the
widely scattered position of the islands, drifting of trade and
consequent shipping to Sydney, the want of cultivation, not
sufficiently frequent means of transport, and so on, but there
are other difficulties, some probably comparatively easy to
rectify, others much more troublesome. Thus the native may
be trained or the planter where he exists educated to a more
careful selection and packing of fruit, and the shipping com-
panies may be induced to provide better accommodation for this
perishable article, but nothing will remove the 1640 miles of
ocean between Auckland and Rarotonga, which compares un-
favourably with 1100 to Tonga and 1140 to Suva, the other
competing countries.
But there are two great questions common to the Cook
islands and the other places we visited, which limit and control
the intelligent planting of fair sized areas by competent white
men, namely, the tenure of land and labour, which require
solution, and it may safely be said that our only hope to
succeed in the competition for the fruit trade, to a very large
extent depends on our solving these problems more effectively
than our competitors.
The settlement of these questions satisfactorily, though
dealt with here in special reference to fruit, also applies with
equal force in respect of increased production of copra, which
is, as said before, the mainstay of the islands, and must, so far
as one can at present see, always remain so.
The difficulty with respect to the land is this, that under
existing conditions with the land held as it is, it is extremely
difficult for a white man or even a competent native to obtain
a lease of a sufficient area and under such terms as would
justify the expenditure of his capital and energies. It is true
that in Rarotonga leases of fifty and 160 acres for sixty or
ninety-nine years at rentals of about 4s an acre have in recent


years been granted, and a visit to Mr Percy Brown’s lease,
which was just being cleared and planted with cocoanuts, to
Mr Davis’s, which was two years old, and Mr Connal’s, five
years old, proved how much might be done. Unfortunately,
we were unable to visit Manuoe and Te Au-o-Tu, the Hervey
Group, which have recently been leased to the Cook Islands
Trading Company; but we were informed that several thousand
of cocoanuts had been planted, and that within ten years there
would be a very large production of copra there. These are
favourable instances of more or less recent land occupation by
whites, partly due to the work of the lately-appointed Land
Court, consisting of Colonel Gudgeon and a native chief Pa
Ariki, and it may be that the work of this Court in the future
may remove the obstacles to further settlement of a like nature.
A study of the system of land tenure, imperfect though it
may be, leads one to the conclusion that sooner or later this
must be placed on a more satisfactory footing. At present
there are two main systems of land tenure—the minutely
subdivided and the so-called tribal; the former existing in
Mangaia, Aitutaki, Penrhyn, Niue, and the latter at Raro-
tonga, Mauke, and Atiu.
By minutely subdivided is meant that the land is, as the
name implies, subdivided, each man having his portion in his
own right; the boundaries are known, and it only needs survey
to be in a position to give a Crown grant to the native holder.
So far as European settlement is concerned, this is the more
difficult system, for individual holders have no fair sized areas
to let in one block. They are generally suspicious, and neither
work the land themselves nor will they lease.
The title “tribal” appears to be misleading, for although
the Ariki, or head of the territorial family, holds land in
trust, as it wore, and cannot dispose of it, but must pass it
on to the Ariki after him; still, there are individual owners
apart from the Ariki. The system at Rarotonga, will illustrate
that obtaining at the other islands, and briefly it is as fol-
lows. The Ariki holds land handed down to him by his pre-
decessor in office, which he cannot dispose of except by way
of lease, and which he must leave to his successor. These may


be termed Ariki lands. In addition to this he may hold as
a Mataiapo does, either in his own Arikiship or in some other;
land on his own account, which he may subdivide amongst his
children and blood relations, or even adopted ones.
Then the Mataiapo holds land in his own right, and he
allocates certain portions to his blood relations or Kiatos,
which they then possess securely in their own right. What
remains to the Mataiapo he may lease, and he at his death
passes on his own holding to the Mataiapo who succeeds him.
The Komonos are neither chiefs nor members of the
Mataiapos’ family, but they attach themselves to chiefs, and
can transfer their allegiance. They, however, hold land in
smaller areas than the Kiatos, and though they transfer their
allegiance, the land still remains their own. The individual
holdings up to this point are secure, and the owners cannot be
dispossessed by Ariki or Mataiapo.
We now come to two classes of holders to whom the title
tribal more accurately applies, namely, the Rangatiras, who
rank next to the Komonos, and yet are younger branches of the
Arikis family, who have occupation of land as descendants of
the Ariki, but who can be dispossessed by him at his will.
Indeed, the Ariki can create or degrade his Rangatira.
The “Unga” represent the lowest class of native, and they
live on the land of the Ariki as tenants at will. The Ungas
appear to be either remnants of tribes existing in the islands
at some earlier date, who were conquered by the present in-
habitants, or else waifs and strays who have found their way
to the islands, and for whom some provision had to be made.
In return for their occupation of land they have to render
service to the Ariki, or pay rent, a pig now and then, but as
far as one could gather, great leniency was shown them when
they made default; nor is it the practice for the Ariki to dis-
possess them arbitrarily to lease the land to others. So far
it is only where land has been held under this second system,
so-called tribal, that white men have been able to obtain lease-
holds, and then only with difficulty; and it is quite apparent
that unless the native can be taught to cultivate, or the Land
Court aid in the settlement of the land, some amendment in


time must take place with respect to land tenure. No one
would suggest any violent or rapid change, for many of the
natives, as at Niue and Atiu are suspicious, and especially so
in regard to their land and European occupation. Eater on
something more will have to he said about the native as a tiller
of the soil and a labourer. Here one cannot help quoting
from Stevenson’s address to the Samoan natives, who made
the road to Vailima and presented it to him, for his words
are apropos: —“But God has both sown and strawed for you
here in Samoa; He has given you a rich soil, a splendid sun,
copious rain; all is ready to your hand, half done, and I
repeat to you that thing which is sure : if you do not occupy
and use your country others will. It will not continue to be
yours or your children’s if you occupy it for nothing. You
and your children will in that case be cast into outer darkness,
where shall he weeping and gnashing of teeth; for that is
the law of God, which passeth not away. I, who speak to you,
have seen these things." One can only hope we in New Zea-
land may have some Heaven-sent inspiration to aid us in teach-
ing the native to make use of his land, but others have tried
and failed, and it may be that in time it will become
our duty to consider the land tenure in these islands,
to make adequate provision for every native, and
to see that the land in excess of native require-
ments is opened for production. What the method may be,
whether purchased by the Crown, or some system analogous to
Maori Councils, will be easier settled after we know from ex-
perience how the latter work. The second great obstacle to
white settlement is that ever present “labour question.” The
white man can live in comfort in nearly everyone of the islands,
and where he takes reasonable care of himself he thrives and
looks well ; perhaps he might himself cultivate with the horse
and plough, but, generally speaking, he must rely on dark
labour, partly on account of the climate making it difficult for
him at all seasons to work, but chiefly because cheaper labour
is necessary to compete with exporters of similar produce from
other places.


Naturally, one turns to the native inhabitants, only to
find, however, that no sustained effort can be expected from
them in their own islands. They are landowners, the food
they require almost drops into their mouths, with but little
effort on their part to produce it; they have no ambition, they
want little or no clothes, or any other thing so necessary to a
white man, or in a colder climate. The natives, too, are
decreasing in numbers, and if we are in future to rely upon
them for labour, we require to stop their decrease, and teach
them to work.
The causes for the decrease in population are not far
to seek. Perhaps the chief is the want of inducement to live.
In the old days they were a fighting race; their existence as
tribes depended on their being able, by the strong arm, to pro-
tect themselves. There was a good reason to produce their
kind, to bring them up healthy and strong, for fighting men
vere needed. this is now all gone, and nothing in the way
of ambition or struggle for food has replaced it. Add to this
contact with whites, with consequent diseases, liquor, Euro-
pean dress, dwellings with closed walls and iron roofs, instead
of huts open to the fresh air and cool rau roofs, and sufficient is
adduced to account for the decrease.
New Zealand’s responsibility with respect to this decrease
is great. It is true some say let them go and make the going
as easy as possible, but surely we, who pride ourselves upon
our advanced legislation and our humanitarianism, cannot rest
satisfied without an attempt to stop the decrease. Unfor-
tunately our experience with the Maori in our country does
not help us, for we have scarcely done our duty there, and
cer fairly have not stopped his progress towards extinction.
-Nor can we find any help from American, French, or German
settlements in the Pacific, and one turns with longing eyes to
Fiji to see if any solution can be found in their experiences,
only to be much disappointed. Fiji administrators in days
gone by had recognised that the one great thing to aim at was
to replace the old inducement to live for fighting purposes,
by work and ambition begotten of it, and they imposed, by
law, a certain amount of labour each year, and adopted the


so-called “food tax,” by which the native had to produce and
hand over to the Government a specified amount of food. But
this scheme, admirably conceived as it may have been, has not,
so far as one can judge, been successful, nor could one well
expect that labour compulsorily imposed would create an am-
bition which can only spring from the man’s inner self.
It is not easy to propose any means to create this ambi-
tion, but one ventures to suggest that the tribal system is no
longer suitable to native conditions. Justice is not always
obtainable from the chief; the individual men and women in
the tribe are like children in a family, they require to be
released from the leading strings, made to depend upon them-
selves, and thus some ambition to live and produce instilled
into them. That the native can and will work, under certain
conditions, is evident from the fact that, if taken from one
island to work in another, he tolerably faithfully carries out
his contract, and thus one finds Rarotongans in Tahiti, Niueans
in Pago Pago, Atiutaki men at sea as good sailors, and so on.
If New Zealand cannot stop the decrease in native popula-
tion, and cannot teach them to work, then profitable white
occupation will be dependent on labour imported from outside,
and of this experiment we have several instances in the Pacific.
Fiji is every year importing coolies, the bulk of whom
do not return to India. Their numbers now reach to some
20,000, and they are becoming the leaseholder and tiller of the
soil, and will ultimately replace the Fijian in his own country.
Solomon Islanders have also found employment in Fiji, and
make good labourers. The French in Tahiti are doing so
little cultivation that they can obtain what they require from
the Cook Islands, supplemented by Chinese market gardeners
and retail traders, the Germans in Samoa rely on the Solomon
Islanders and the Chinese, and on inquiry in American Tutuila
what was intended there, it was found that they already had
some Niueans and other Islanders, but that in case of develop-
ment they had cast their eyes upon their own Philippine
Islands for the necessary supply of labour.
No doubt we in New Zealand would never countenance
Chinese labour, and, on the assumption that the white is to


become the planter, and that he cannot find the necessary
labour in the islands themselves, one is compelled to seek else-
where.
The Commonwealth has decided to have only white labour
in Queensland, and in a short time the. Kanakas employed in
sugar planting there will have to be returned to their homes,
only, so far as one can judge from reports, to he ill-treated,
perhaps even killed, when they get there. There cannot be
raised against the Kanaka or Solomon Islander the same objec-
tion which bars the Chinese, and it is suggested that the
Kanaka may find a happier home, and become a useful producer
in our own Cook Islands. The only other possible source of
supply is the coolie, a British subject and civilised, and one who
has proved himself already a good labourer and useful settler.


IV.—HEALTH OOF THE NATIVES.—WHAT OUGHT
TO BE DONE.—THE EDUCATION QUESTION.
—GOVERNMENT OF THE ISLANDS. — NIUE
GRIEVANCES. — OUR BAD BARGAINS. —
POLICY FOR THE FUTURE.
Before leaving the subject of decrease in native popula-
tion, it is necessary to touch briefly on some of the other
causes previously mentioned.
Apparently there is no great desire at present amongst
the natives to obtain intoxicating liquor, though they have
learnt to manufacture an orange and a pineapple beer, both
of which are inebriating, hut it is quite possible the desire
may grow, and one unhesitatingly affirms that we ought to take
every precaution to protect them from their own or from im-
ported stuff. Strong indeed was the native himself on this
point, as we could well hear at interviews with them in Raro-
tonga, Niue, and elsewhere. European clothing and dwellings
are not suited to the conditions of life in the South Sea, and
so far as possible should be discouraged, but, unfortunately,
this will be difficult, for the islander likes to ape the white
man, and the trader naturally encourages him, for it means
business.
A greater responsibility rests on us, however, with respect
to health and sanitation. At present there is a medical officer
at Rarotonga, paid by the Government, and a medical mission-
ary at Niue, but so far as one could hear, the former had
not visited the outlying islands, or but fevv of them. Con-
sidering the insanitary condition of the villages, the great
mortality amongst children, the ravages made by epidemics, as,
for instance, in Fiji, where, some years ago, measles carried
off 40,000, it is urgently necessary that our own Health Depart-
ment should take in hand these island territories. This and
other things will require money, but there seems no reason to


doubt the Cook Islands could provide the necessary means, or
the greater part.
Fiji is an object lesson to us in this respect, for she has
not hesitated, in the interests of the health of her people,
especially the natives, to provide hospitals in outlying districts,
and a staff of some sixteen paid medical men, and the result
may be seen in the strong contrast between the loss in the
recent measles epidemic and the earlier one.
The two diseases .most striking to the eye were elephan-
tiasis and leprosy, though these probably affect only a small
percentage of the population, but they are both horrible, and
the position of the lepers isolated at Penrhyn, without any
medical attendance, appealed strongly to one’s sympathy.
There is a wide field, too, for the skill of the medical man in
the various cutaneous troubles, partly begotten from contact
with whites, and which probably make the largest percentage
of disease, and in our own interest, and that of the natives,
one reiterates that both health and sanitation ought at once
to be placed directly under the control of our Health Depart-
ment, and means found to permit it to deal satisfactorily with
these two questions.
Education may well be considered a most important
element, not only for general purposes, but especially in train-
ing the natives in habits of industry, so necessary for their
future existence. At present, apart from some small effort
on the part of Roman Catholics and Seventh Day Adventists,
all the education is in the hands of the Loudon Missionary
Society. At Rarotonga this Society has a central training
institution for native missionaries, who, as soon as fit, are
scattered through the villages in the several islands, to carry
on mission and educational work, but the latter cannot be said
to be satisfactorily done. In addition to this, the Rev. Mr
Lawrence and his excellent wife conduct a public school in
Rarotonga, and a pleasure it was to see the self-sacrificing work
given krf them. There exists also in Rarotonga a boarding-
school, at Tereora, for boys and girls, who are taught both in
English and native, but, unfortunately, the education here
given does not go far enough to equip the student as a teacher.


What is done is excellent, and the place was beautifully clean,
and everything orderly, hut it requires another stage, and then
these students might he well trusted to take in hand the educa-
tion of their fellow natives. This would add, also, to the
success of the school, for at present the boys and girls have
nothing to look forward to, whereas, if the responsible position
of teacher were a goal to look to, much more interest would be
given them in their work.
Another similar boarding-school, with thirty boys and
twelve girls, was found at Aitutake, in charge of two Misses
Royle, and here, though only in existence some ten mouths, we
noticed remarkable results. The children were clean, bright,
evidently intelligent, military like in their orderliness, already
understanding some English, and one came away comparing,
not unfavourably, this school with any other in one’s experi-
ence.
The work done by the London Missionary Society is, so
far as it goes, excellent, but it is a heavy strain both on effort
and money, and, accustomed as we are in New Zealand to
State control, the idea continually suggested itself that the
State should be doing the work here. Perhaps some arrange-
ment might be made with the Society to take over their
schools, at fair value, and the State take control. The only
question of difficulty seems to be that of religious teaching,
and it is very questionable whether it would be wise to take
away suddenly from the schools religious teaching which has
been so long a part of a native’s education, in a place where
there are no other means at present of imparting it. It may
be that a combined effort by the Government and the
London Missionary Society is the better course to follow mean-
while.
An attempt was made to provide for the administration of
and legislation in the various islands by the Cook and Other
Islands Government Act, 1901, and the amending Act of 1902.
A Resident Commissioner with considerable powers was pro-
vided, and it is only right to say that in Colonel Gudgeon the
colony has an excellent officer for the post.


The laws in force in the islands were to continue. The
federal Parliament existing in the Cook Islands was altered in
name to Federal Council, and gives power to make Federal
ordinances for the government and welfare of all the islands
and the inhabitants thereof. The Native Councils were to be
termed Island C ouncils,” with power to make local ordinances
for the government and welfare of the inhabitants within its
jurisdiction ; but both Federal and local ordinances have to
be submitted by the Resident Commissioner to the Governor
for his assent on behalf of his Majesty. It is not proposed
here to discuss the Island Councils; but one cannot pass over
the apparently chaotic condition of the provision made for
Federal Government. By section 7of our Act the Federal
Council was to be a continuation of the Federal Parliament
then existing. This institution had been provided by the Cook
Islands for themselves, and never contemplated the inclusion of
and other islands not then in the Cook Island Federa-
tion. Suddenly by our legislation we make this the govern-
ing body not only of the Cook Islands, but also of Niue and
other places not in the Cook Group, without making any pro-
vision whatever for their representation.
The Cook Islands Constitution Act, 1891, and its amending
Act, 1899, made provision for twelve members of the Federal
Parliament, viz., Rarotonga 3, Mangaia 3, Atiu, Mauke, Miti-
aro 3, Aitutaki 3, each electoral district to return a member,
and the election to be held in accordance with regulations here-
after to be issued by the British Resident and the chief of the
Federal Government. Queen Makea was made chief of the
Government, the Paliament existing in 1899 was made the
Parliament till the 31st December, 1902; after that to be
triennial, and the franchise was given to native-born adults.
In addition an Executive was provided and called the
“Government,” whose duty it was to look after the islands when
Parliament was not in session, and all “Arikis” of the Cook
Islands were made members of the Government. One has no
knowledge of any further amendment of the Cook Islands Con-
stitution Act, and the position therefore to-day is that by law,
twelve members from the islands named above, elected as pro


Then follow the names
, and these disclose that
Rarotonga, which by law should have
3 re
spresentatives, has
3
Mangaia do
do
do
3
do
do
2
Atui, Mauke, Mitiaro
do
do
3
do
do
2
Aitutaki do
do
do
3
do
do
2
Penrhyn do
do
do
0
do
do
1
Rakahanga do
do
do
0
do
do
1
Manihiki do
do
do
0
do
do
1
12
12
vided, ought to constitute the Federal Parliament, or Federal
Council as it is now termed, with an Executive of “Arikis” of
the Cook Islands ; no provision having been made for Niue and
some other places being represented either in Parliament or the
Government. Notwithstanding the fact that the law main-
tained the existing Parliament till 31st December, 1902, one
finds that on the 10th December, 1901, Colonel Gudgeon writes
to the Premier: —“I have the honour to inform you that the
Arikis met to-day, and under section 7 of the Cook and Other
Island Government Act, 1901, formed the Federal Council.’
And again, no provision is made for Niue, the largest and most
populous island of the whole lot.
If one is right, however, about the Constitution Act not
having been amended since 1899, then the Federal Council, as
formed, is “ultra vires.” But be this so or not the great blot
upon our legislation is the placing of the island of Niue and its
people, who are not, and never were, Cook Islanders, under the
executive control of Cook Island, Arikis and the legislation of
a Federal Council without any representation whatever. In-
deed, it is doubtful if representation were given to them
whether that would now satisfy, for they are a jealous people,
and think themselves as good or better than Cook Islanders,
and distance and infrequent communication add to the diffi-
culty.
It will he well to describe, at this stage, the meeting with
the natives at Niue, for this question of legislation and govern-
ment through Rarotonga and other matters of importance were


ventilated there; indeed, this gathering was the most signifi-
cant one during the whole of our tour.
Ten o’clock was the hour appointed; the place a kind of
grassy square in front of a ran roofed meeting house with
narrow verandah, which afforded the only shelter from the
blazing sun. To the right front was the new house, just
built by the natives for the King, so they said, hut, in reality,
as a residence for the Resident Agent. from two opposite
sides of the square the grassy road led through the village
with its native houses dotted here and there.
Along one of these, punctually at ten o’clock, King Tongia
made his approach; an old man arrayed in European costume,
tall hat, long coat, decorated with only a modicum of gold
braid, accompanied by a bodyguard of chiefs and some native
drums. Arrived at the square, preparations were made for
the royal seat, a mat was spread on the grass in front of the
verandah, covered with a strip of white calico, and on this a
common chair was placed, and here his Majesty seated himself.
Whilst these preparations were going on, one had time to
observe the people and their costume. Generally speaking,
it was a happy-looking, laughing crowd that had assembled,
only here and there was to be observed a dour face that made
one suspect its owner had a grievance. The costumes varied
from a simple Pareo or loin cloth which left to view the
generally fine shaped coppery coloured body and legs shining
with copious application of cocoanut oil, through all varieties
of singlet, trouser, jacket, up to regulation European long coat,
gaudy uniform and blue cocked hat, which reminded one
forcibly of the mystery of a Christmas cracker. Most of
the chiefs were in long coats, and these were of all sorts and
sizes, perhaps the proudest man being one who rejoiced in the
distinctive mark of “ticket collector” on his collar. It was a
long wait till the Minister arrived, but through it all the King
sat unperturbed, realising nothing of the comical side of the
picture, intent only on maintaining what he thought was the
dignity proper to his high office. At length the Minister
arrives, and business begins. The King rises only to say that


seated behind him are eleven chiefs, or repi’esentatives of the
eleven villages, who will speak.
Puriknra, a teacher deputed for the purpose, first addresses
the meeting, and he has been careful to put into writing what
he has to say :
“We told Lord Ranfurly we wished to be connected with
Great Britain, and when handed over to New Zealand we did
not understand it. We did not understand Governor Ran-
furly’s letter, and the agreement with this island. Now we
have been annexed to New Zealand, we wish to deal direct
with New Zealand, want direct communication, and not through
Rarotonga. We wish no liquor to be imported, and that law
should prevent intoxicating liquor, orange or pineapple beer,
being manufactured in the island. We wish that all British
subjects and white residents be prohibited from having liquor.
“We wish no land to be sold; that boundaries should be
settled, for at present natives do not know exactly who owns
the land; the duty on Niue natives’ luggage reduced or re-
moved ; the tobacco duty reduced, the duty on horses, which
are largely imported from Tonga, removed.
“We have built a house for the King, but we think Govern-
ment should grant to the carpenters, especially, something as
pay. We desire that a Niue man be appointed to look after the
Treasury, that trading licenses should not apply to natives.
“We want to know about the labour traffic. Do the cap-
tains of ships pay any fees for those who go away? Native
Niueans were leaving the islands in great numbers, and 4s was
stopped from each by the Government.”
The next to speak was Tongea Fulu, member of the Council
for Tamanutonga, and a magistrate, and he agreed with what
the previous speaker had said aibout land and liquor.
Tabagata, member of Council for Alofi, and chief of the
southern end of the settlement, wanted things done according
to European ideas, and not by old native custom.
Tagatura, the next speaker, said the island was handed
to Lord Ranfurly for Great Britain, the annexing to New
Zealand was done without consulting them in any way. He
objected to be ruled through Rarotonga. The arrangements


made with Mr Percy Smith for 10 per cent, duty, especially
on tobacco, was stopped all of a sudden. Natives wished to
be paid for their labour.
Uea, a teacher, speaking on behalf of the Mission, wished
iron and timber for church purposes to be free of duty.
Yili, a householder, objected to natives being paid in paper
money or traders’ I.O.TJ.’s; he wanted cash for everything.
This meeting has been described in order to set forth the
feeling of the Niue natives with respect to administration and
government through Rarotonga, and though other grievances
cropped up, it is not proposed to discuss them here, for they
are matters of detail, which it would take too long to explain.
Apparently the Niue people, when they were taken over,
did not understand they were being annexed to New Zealand,
Briefly, the history, so far as the papers at our disposal on the
Mapourika disclose, is as follows :
On the 21st April, 1900, Makea, and her husband Ngamaru,
Arikis of Rarotonga, Atiu, Mauke, and Mitiaro, wrote to
Colonel Gudgeon, asking that the islands mentioned should
form part of the British Empire, and this sentence occurs in
the letter:—“We wish his Lordship to understand that it is
to Great Britain we wish to be annexed, not to New Zealand.”
On the Bth September, 1900, however, the Arikis of the
above-mentioned islands wrote saying “they are willing to be-
come part and portion of that colony,” viz., New Zealand.
One can find no such request on the part of the Niue people,
and the only information available is contained in a despatch
from the Governor to the Right Hon. J. Chamberlain, Secretary
of State for the Colonies, dated 31st October, 1900, wherein
occurs the following:—“The chiefs of Niue, after a short
consultation with the members present from their respective
villages, one after the other spoke in favour of annexation,
each on concluding signing the deed of cession. All were
unanimous. They, however, distinctly pointed out their desire
that in no case should any control be exercised over them from
Tonga, and requesting a British Resident.” There are differ-
ences, too, in the deed of cession, which lead to the belief
that the annexation of Niue was not on all fours with that of


Rarotonga. Both are here quoted. “We, the hereditary
Arikis of Rarotonga, acting with the approval and consent of
the Mataiapos and Rangatiras of the island, do hereby cede to
her Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland
and Empress of India, the sovereignty of the said island,
subject only to the condition that it shall be annexed as part
and parcel of the British Empire.” “We, the King and chiefs
of the Island of Niue, do hereby consent to her Majesty Queen
Victoria taking possession of this island, and in proof thereof
have hereunto subscribed our names this 19th day of October,
1900.”
Whatever soreness now exists at Niue as to annexation can
be, however, done away with if this independent people are
removed from Rarotongan control, and one cannot help urging
that their requests should be granted, a Resident Commissioner
appointed, and Niue placed under direct control from New
Zealand.
The position of our own country of New Zealand to-day
may be likened to that of a man who has purchased shares in
a company, and, finding that he has secured them at 50 per
cent, or more above their value, seeks a convenient opportunity
to acquire some more at a low price to reduce the general
average value of his stock. We have assisted the Mother
Country by assuming the responsibility of these islands, and
this, our share in the great Imperial concern, we took at 50
per cent, or more above its value. The Mother Country ought
now to aid us to acquire another share, and on such conditions
as to reduce the average value of our stock. Tonga is the
only remaining independent monarchy in the Pacific. It is
already under such British protection that no foreign Power
can get a footing there ; it has the best harbour in the Pacific;
Britain possesses a coaling station and site for forts. Tonga
is nearer to New Zealand. One island there is worth all our
island possessions many times over. It is capable of great
development, and one cannot help feeling that if the British
Government would for a few years tighten its hold upon Tonga,
and prepare her for control through New Zealand, a share of
some value might be ours.


It is no doubt the destiny of the Commonwealth and New
Zealand to aid in the settlement of the South Pacific. There
need be no jealousy between us if we can only realise and con-
tinue to do so that we are part of a great Empire whose
future, so far as the South Pacific is concerned, is very largely
in our hands.
Christchurch Press Company Limited, Printers.




