

south
*> 10 CET **£■/$
| ♦ \ i AW ■
\ EMIGRANTS >
CH IDE TO AUSTRALIA .
I\\ ' ' /
FRED. E. JOHNSON,
LONDON:
JAMES CLARKE &CO 13 & 14*.FLEET STREET.
18 8 6.




NEW SOUTH WALES,
HOW TO GET THERE.
\\V-‘




NEW SOUTH WALES,
HOW TO GET THERE:
EMIGRANTS’ GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA,
VIA THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE,
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT.
FRED. E. JOHNSON,
A.P.S. GREAT BRITAIN, M.P.S. NEW SOUTH WALES,
Dispenser and Assistant to the Surgeon Superintendent of the Steamships
“ Belgravia” “ Gulf of Mexico,” “ Aberdeen ” and “ Belgic.”
“ Be not the first by whom the new is tried.
Nor yet the last to lay the old aside.”
3Lont«an t
JAMES CLARKE & CO., 13 & 14, FLEET STREET.
1886.




At the present time (April, 1886) the Agent-General for
New South Wales, in consequence of receipt of instructions from
the Government of the Colony, is not approving of any persons
for emigration except single young Women for domestic
service, for whom there is a great demapd in the Colony, but
no fresh applications will at present be entertained from single
men and married couples.




APOLOGY.
In my experience as assistant to the Surgeon Superintendent
of ships sailing with emigrants to Sydney, under the auspices
of the New South Wales Government, I have found the most
lamentable ignorance amongst the people respecting the
voyage, its probable duration, the varying climates to be
encountered, the necessary outfit of clothing for such, and
the discipline which health and morality demand for a crowd
of passengers upon the limited ground of a ship.
This, in my mind, seems to justify the publication of some
such pamphlet as the present, setting forth by no means fully,
but in a way easily followed and understood, the necessary
instructions for making this new start in life, and giving, in
as few words as possible, some idea of ship life, its pleasures
and its grievances, together with a short description of the
beautiful haven whither it leads us.
I have accompanied considerably over two thousand souls to
the land of promise, held out by the Agent-General, and can
assure my readers that I do not know of one case of dissatis-
faction upon arrival among all this motley crowd —motley,
indeed, being composed of English, Irish, and Scotch, with
a sprinkling of other nationalities, drawn from all phases of
society, and including reduced middle-class folk, skilled arti-
sans, labourers, and representatives of the peasantry of the
Green Isle and the Highlands.
I may add that the voyage in the ships now chartered by
the New South Wales Government might become one of un-
interrupted pleasure were the intending passengers thoroughly
versed in the little matters I have named, and did they board
the ship determined to show a spirit of forbearance to their
fellow emigrants, and of obedience to the regulations wisely
compiled by Her Majesty’s Commissioners and the Agent-


General, and to the various orders put forth from time to time
by the Surgeon Superintendent.
This little book originated on the passage of the s.s. Belgic
to Sydney, in the autumn of this year; and by the request of
the passengers, a thousand copies were printed by Messrs.
Batson and Company, of Sydney, and illustrated with four
views, taken from photographs of my own, of Teneriffe, Cape
Town, St. Helena, and the s.s. Belgic. I may say the result
received the approbation both of the subscribers and the officials
connected with the immigration scheme in Sydney, and has
emboldened me to have the work reprinted in England, hoping
thereby to throw a better light upon the means afforded to the
poorest amongst us of reaching the Greater Britain in the
Sunny South.
E. E. J.
December, 1885.


CONTENTS.
PABT I.
People who should and People who should not Emigrate 7
First Step—“ Eastward Ho!”—Regulations 11
Second Step—Pinal Preparations ... 17
Third Step—Journey to Plymouth 19
Fourth Step—Departure from Plymouth ... ... ... ... 21
Fifth Step—On Board our Ship 23
Sixth Step—Hints to Emigrants 24
PABT 11.
PABT 11.
CHAPTER
CHAPTER
Introduction ... 30
I.—Ship Lore, with a Few Physical Facts ... 30
ll.—The Bay of Biscay, Madeira, and the Canaries 35
111. —The Tropics, Cape de Yerde Islands, Ascension, and St.
Helena 38
IV. —Cape Colony and its Capital *... 43
Y. —The Southern Ocean—Amusements 45
Vl.—Advance Australia! ... ... 48
Vll.—Our Last Week at Sea 52
VIII.—New South Wales and Sydney 54
IX.—The Climate, and a few Social Statistics op New South
Wales 59
X. —The Industries and Wealth op New South Wales 63
Xl.—Pastoral Resources and Agricultural Prospects 67
Xll.—Counsel on Arrival 70
Xlll,—Fare Thee Well 76
Reports op the Steamships " Belgravia,” “ Aberdeen,” “ Odlf of
Mexico,” and “Belgic” 77


2
3 . .. <
) 2
3 4
5 60 8
D U
io i:
10 '
■0 1
>0
JL ”
40
(t
iWj^ON
' 6 of irscj yj
PORTUGAL
0/J3
London to
V~. P/ym th to
y TenerC' to
Cape T to J
r A N CBS
Plymouth
r eneriffe
£ /W/7
'ydney
0/shnce
.■
— Mites
296
... IRIS
... 44 5 6
6 5 5 4
12.7 2 4 Mi
~ PePirf^x-
df chink k J
<( s &
«S#a of f
| A Ok hots A
f /'
£»*■
\ f
>
4 fj
20
Aborts
/Madeira
Cana'
& s
J JMAkOCCt
ft rW¥'~'s
3Sj§
ICE*/ A
.
4 HA k A-*>1S
. Cairo!
rCK^nSs
A' ifs/A
\ ~* /
Cabul y-.
QX
dajay r^ltong
>
YelloXz
>£J?>
Kontj
h —-
Jeddo
<
Vii
ML
20
.0
Vend I s
R Cam
4,
rsirviA) \
QnkobaJ \
ccadive I s V~nJ
<T Comorhrl
'Maldive •*,*
V J
yBay of'y^lz
B*r>9 al \
Madras \
)Cey/on
dombo r\»
wv
j\l) ,w»
2_Phill»pine
#, «3
'Caroline
■
o
/?
0
20
5
Helena ! d B
/?.
A4x//sk/ \
IT'(
Zanzibar
> (T Amber
4 •
/ S ' N
N D ! A
"H
Bate
V\ v o C
\
X
fesi
w« S=2r-«
£ A N *
** <P* Torrt
Imershnf^r
v Sol
r3?W.; 'n
> V New Ht
Vi) —
omon I s
O N
0 Fij i I s
V V
20
40
v
\ (HA dXca:
CAR
X
HW CapeiC^'
\ r
£. ,
JST%£
r 'S 'J
40
r
/sr*j/i d'Acunha
cape rop&ljF*
tab<« H V
' , ° fl
V«4&*41 |T
PE COUtNy
Ehzabe
\s
‘h
Amsterdam
ts
Paul ! d
5l. uh p
§mm
NEW l\\
45 Ds
ys
*■<
xLky/j/
1 _J
D i
> 2
0 4
0 6
0 8
0 1(
0 15
0 4;
0 K
0


NEW SOUTH WALES
AND HOW TO GET THERE.
PEOPLE WHO SHOULD AND PEOPLE WHO SHOULD
NOT EMIGRATE TO NEW SOUTH WALES.
The resources of this colony are so great and so varied that
it would be extremely difficult to point out any class of labour
which would not ultimately find a market, and, as far as I can
see, it solely depends upon the man himself as to whether he
be a success or a failure. On the other hand, it would be
wrong to assert that any person of whatever calling might do
better in this country than at home ; yet it may fairly be
allowed that any man, not ashamed to work with his hands,
ready to make the best of his position and to adapt himself to
the requirements of the district wherein he pitched his tent,
would undoubtedly be successful, and, were he industrious,
sober, and thrifty, earn a competence for his old age.
It will be my endeavour, in as few words as possible, to set
forth a few of the callings most likely to make headway in New
South Wales at the present stage of its commercial life, and
to dissuade, if possible, a few of the “ ne’er-do-wells ” from
taking their questionable company and talents to this beauti-
ful land. Foremost, New South Wales ranks as a pastoral
country, and depends greatly upon its wool-growing and cattle-
raising for its-prosperity; therefore, we may take it for granted
that all forms of labour connected with this industry will be
for many years in great demand. Shepherds, boundary riders,
butchers, fence-makers, and the like, should and would find
no difficulty in obtaining immediate employment with fair
remuneration. Likewise, the trades dependent upon wool and
hides benefit in proportion, giving tanners, fell-mongers, and
workers in rough leather, a good field for their labour.
At present, most of the wool is exported ; but this is but the
beginning, and, ere long, factories, floated by the capitalists of
New South Wales, will turn out as good woollens, carpets,
and saddlery as any imported from Europe. For the present,
however, it would seem better for factory hands to remain at


home, though, as was said before, a handy man cannot fail to
get work of some kind.
As an agricultural country, New South Wales offers great
advantages, such as immense open virgin plains, with an
equable climate, excellent railway communication, and an
ever-increasing population. Farm labourers of every descrip-
tion, from stable boys to ploughmen, would never regret
making the voyage, the supply of such never having exceeded
the demand; they would, in a few years, be able to take up
land on their own account, and eventually become prosperous
farmers. An extremely useful class of emigrants for this
country is made up of married men with wives accustomed
to dairy work, who command, as a rule, good salaries —
£6O to £BO a year, with rations and house, being what is
offered. Useful farm lads would probably start at £3O or £4O
a year in the house of a settler or squatter.
A man with a small sum of money in hand might make
an honest livelihood, and mayhap a fortune, in taking up
land near a thriving town, and making a market garden or
orchard of it. Such produce is in great demand, and is now,
around Sydney at least, in the hands of Chinamen, who
certainly are deserving of all praise for supplying this public
need, which no Englishman seems to have thought it worth
his while to attend to. Gardeners do exceedingly well in the
colony, getting, up country, £1 a week at least, with board and
lodging; first-class men around large towns would, of course,
command much more.
A word here about taking up land, which may be done on
very favourable terms from the Government; our advice
is, work at least a year under a master, and look around you
well before investing your money in land.
Men at all acquainted with the growth of the vine, or the
manufacture of wine, are sure of a good berth, the best
Colonial wines ranking in quality equal to those of European
vintage.
The mining wealth of New South Wales is unparalleled, and
gives employment to all offering ; in fact, as with agricultural
labour, the demand is always in excess of the supply. Coal,
copper, iron, silver, and, in fact, every class of miner,
would better himself by emigration, shortening his hours of
labour, increasing his income, and improving his health by the
change.
Workers in iron, however, should, at present, be very wary
of seeking this comparatively new country, for, as yet, by far
the greater portion of the raw metal is exported and manu-
factured at home. In a few years we may have a Birmingham
and a Middlesborough in our midst, until then we cannot


hope to compete with their goods. Handy mechanics should,
however, find no difficulty in obtaining speedy and re-
munerative employment, and need not hesitate one moment in
selecting New South Wales for a home.
Railway workmen are, necessarily, much in request, the
whole scheme of railway communication being by no means
complete, but rapidly progressing year by year. Cube setters
and men accustomed to road-making may make sure of plenty
of work and pay. Carriage builders, we believe, may do very
well indeed.
Carpenters, country smiths, wheelwrights, and any descrip-
tion of agricultural mechanic may make a certainty of ultimate
success if they hut resist the allurements of the metropolis and
make their way up country.
Brickmakers, potters, and the like trades may assuredly rely
upon constant work, and far better pay than in England.
Joiners and cabinet makers have, to our knowledge, made from
£3 to £4 a week as soon as landed, and with but eight hours
a day to work. Up country, a man soon starts on his own
account, when all will depend upon himself, his work, and his
thrift.
Of railway employes I cannot say much, but believe a
promotion scheme from the lo wer ranks prevents men readily
getting such employment, unless by starting at the very bottom
of the ladder.
Grooms and coachmen seem to get very good billets without
difficulty; as also do those fine young fellows from the ranks of
the English, Irish, and Scotch constabulary, who are drafted
into the forces of New South Wales.
For female labour there really seems no limit to the demand,
and did all the spinsters of England elect to emigrate to
Sydney, one might reasonably suppose that they would all be
comfortably settled in the course of a week or two. This is,
perhaps, simply and best explained by mentioning the fact that
there are some hundred thousand more males in the colony
than females, so that, as fast as good servants are taken away
in marriage by their swains, fresh recruits are constantly in
request.
The Government wisely offer every facility and security to
single women going out to this new world, and I should not
hesitate a moment in entrusting my dearest friend to the
matrons appointed to take charge of the girls on their ships.
On their arrival in Sydney, they are safely housed in a home,
whence they depart, either to friends or to some comfortable
and well-paid situation.
Cooks, dairymaids, housemaids, nursery girls, and maids of
all work, together with dressmakers and milliners, will all do


well, and may look forward, if not to a rich husband, at least to
an independent livelihood.
School teachers should be very well up to get on in the
colonies, the standard of education required being much higher
than that at home ; but, given the girl has the necessary ability,
a better field than this could not be found. The same may be
said of governesses and other of the gentler occupations of
women.
Now a few words relative to the people who should not
emigrate to New South Wales. Clerks, book-keepers, shop
assistants, and the like, are not required, as there are always
plenty of these to be obtained, while the rates of wages are
not higher than in England. On the other hand, if young men
of good moral character and physique, it matters not of what
trade or profession, feel themselves able to rough it for a year
or two, and turn to really hard work, there is nothing to
prevent them in that time gaining such an amount of colonial
experience as will lead to ultimate success. Of course, this
necessitates going up country into the bush, far from the
haunts of men and the comforts of modern civilisation, and
any young man should thoroughly make up his mind to this
before leaving his counter or desk.
A great deal of unnecessary sympathy has been excited both
in Sydney and at home concerning the unemployed in the large
towns of the colony, but when one comes to analyse this
crowd, one finds it composed of lazy and drunken vagabonds,
who have been sent out by friends or relatives in the hope,
than which none is so vain, that a change of surroundings
would exercise a reforming influence on the character of the
“ne’er-do-wells.” During the summer months they go on
tramp through the country, refusing work when it is
offered them, returning in the winter to Sydney and other
cities, where they are found loafing about the streets during
the day and frequenting low haunts at night.
Be advised, and do not emigrate if you fear hard work, or
wish to loaf about a town rather than seek good employment
up country. Do not emigrate under false pretences; if you do
not know wheat from barley, and cannot handle a pitchfork,
do not come to New South Wales as a farm labourer; we do
not want you, nor do we unless you be self-reliant, temperate,
industrious, and thrifty; we cannot do with men who are for
ever turning over a new leaf, or who think to enrich them-
selves without labour. It is not to be done anywhere, much
less in New South Wales, where work is the only road to
wealth.


THE FIRST STEP.—EASTWARD HOI
So many and varied are the reasons for emigration, that it
would he useless trying to specify them; but let us consider
the cases :—Firstly : Of a married man, with a small family,
who may himself be doing fairly well in England, but who
sees no prospect of being able to put his children to any
lucrative employment in the present crowded state of every
calling in the old country, and whose eyes turn to other lands;
and at last, either through reading books and newspaper
reports, or from the glowing letters of friends, he decides upon
making one of England’s fairest children his home, and the
field of his future labour. Secondly : Of a married man with
no children, a most desirable and natural time of life to choose
a dwelling-place, and who, likewise, may not be succeeding so
well as he hears his friends are doing in the colonies. Thirdly:
Of a single man (most blessed state !) with the whole world
before him, whose inborn spirit of enterprise refuses to be pent
up in an insular prison, and who dreams of affluence in a new
country, where a man’s title to honour and respect is not
pride of family and estate, but honest worth and successful
work. Fourthly : Of a single woman who, escaping from the
drudgery of English domestic service, flies to a country where
girls and their work are thoroughly appreciated and adequately
remunerated.
In all these four instances we have individuals with minds
made up as to where they are going, and why they are going,
and it only remains for me to say how they may go, and what
they can do when they get there.
Appended are the regulations for emigration from the
United Kingdom, and intending emigrants must write to
T. Hughes Phillips, Esq,, Emigration Officer of the Agent-
General of New South Wales, 5 Westminster Chambers,
Yictoria-street, London, S.W., who will send, firstly, a
preliminary form, in which the applicant states his age,
occupation, place of birth, and whether or no he have any
friends in the colony.
If appearing eligible from this, another form will be sent,
together with the conditions and regulations upon which the
passages are granted as printed below.
NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT EMIGRATION.
Assisted Passages from Plymouth to Sydney.
The Agent-General for New South Wales is authorised by the Colonial
Government to grant passages to eligible applicants on the terms and conditions
stated in this circular.
Authorised Regulations.
1. All emigrants from the United Kingdom and other parts of Europe are


to be selected and approved by the Agent-General, in London, or by such
persons as he may appoint for the purpose.
2. Approval of such emigrants is limited to married persons not exceeding
40 years each, with or without children, and to unmarried adult males and
females not exceeding 35 years of age. The persons to be introduced are to be
of sound mental and bodily health, and of good moral character, to consist of
farmers, mechanics, any description of labourers suitable for country pursuits,
to be chosen with a special regard to the industrial requirements of the colony,
small working capitalists, and female domestic servants.
3. A proportion of the emigrants, not exceeding 10 per cent, of the whole,
may be natives of other European countries; but they, likewise, will be
required to answer to the physical, moral, and industrial descriptions pre-
scribed in these regulations.
4. All emigrants, after having received “ Embarkation Orders,” shall pre-
sent themselves on the date and at the port named therein, for the purpose of
giving facility to the arrangements for their embarkation.
5. Married couples, their children, and single men will be allowed to remain
on board five clear days after the ships drop anchor in Sydney Harbour.
6. Unmarried women, upon arrival, will be received into an Immigrants’
Home in Sydney, and allowed to remain therein, should they desire to do so,
for ten clear days, to enable them to obtain suitable employment.
7. Emigrants desiring to proceed to the country districts of the colony,
within five clear days of their arrival, will be allowed free travelling passes by
railway for that purpose.
8. Emigrants shall be subject to the Regulations under the Queen’s Order
in Council, dated 7th January, 1864, prescribing rules for preserving order,
promoting health, &c., on board passenger ships; also, to such further regula-
tions as the Agent-General may make and prescribe for their moral and
sanitary condition during the passage. In any case where a person beyond the
limited age is approved for a passage the sum of fifteen pounds must be paid.
9. Payment of the following Rates must he made to the Agent-General
before embarkation.
Married Couples, not exceeding 40 years each person ,£6 0 0 per couple.
Single Adult Males ,, 35 ,, ... ... £4 0 0 each.
Children of 3 and under 14 years of age .£1 0 0 ,,
Children under 3 years of age ... ... ... ... Free.
Single females, not exceeding 35 years, are taken at a reduced rate of <£2
each.
To meet the public convenience, persons resident in the colony who
may desire to introduce immigrants in accordance with these regulations shall
be entitled to nominate such immigrants, and to deposit on trust with the
Agent for Immigration, at the Immigration Ofiice, Hyde Park, Sydney, between
the hours of 10 a.m. and 2.30 p.m. on each lawful day, and in the country
districts with the Clerks of Petty Sessions during the usual ofiice hours, the
necessary sum or sums; such nominations will be subject, however, to the
approval of the Agent-General, and the rules of selection prescribed by these
regulations, as in cases where no such nominations have been made. The
Clerks of Petty Sessions, on receipt of any deposit under these regulations, will
immediately remit the amount to the Agent for Immigration at Sydney, with
a statement of the number and description of immigrants whom the depositor
wishes to introduce. The passage certificate must be forwarded by the depositor
to the nominee, who in every case must produce it within twelve months from
the date thereof to the Agent-General in London. Forms of application, as
well as all other information for the guidance of depositors, can be obtained
from the Clerks of Petty Sessions in the country districts, or in Sydney at the
office of the Agent for Immigration.
Ineligible Candidates to whom assisted passages cannot be granted are :
Persons who have not arranged with their Creditors—persons in the habitual
receipt of parish relief—widowers and widows with young children —parents
without all their children under seventeen —children under seventeen without
their parents—husbands without their wives—wives without their husbands—


single women who have had illegitimate children—families in which the
number of children under twelve exceeds the requirements.
10. In the event of any person or persons nominated in the colony for a
passage declining to emigrate, or not being able to comply with the conditions
required by these Regulations, or in case the amount deposited shall exceed
that required for the number of immigrants actually introduced, the amount
deposited, or the amount in excess, as the case may be, will be returned to the
depositor upon the receipt in the colony of the Agent-General’s report recom-
mending its repayment. But if any attempt at fraud or concealment be made
by the depositor or by nominee under the certificate, the deposit will be
forfeited.
Personal Outfit and Luggage.
Emigrants must provide their own outfit, which will be inspected before
embarkation, in accordance with the requirements of the Agent-General. Each
person must possess not less than the following : —For male adults: 2 complete
suits of strong external clothing, 6 shirts, 6 pairs stockings, 2 pairs new shoes,
and 2 flannel or guernsey shirts. For female adults: 6 chemises, 2 flannel
petticoats, 6 pairs stockings, 2 pairs strong shoes, and 2 strong gowns; one of
which should be of a warm material. For each child: 6 shirts or chemises,
3 flannel waistcoats, and 1 warm cloak or outside coat; 6 pairs stockings, 2 pairs
strong shoes, and 2 complete suits of external clothing. Each person must also
have 2 lbs. best yellow soap, 2 lbs. marine soap, and not less than 4 towels and
2 sheets, together with the necessary brushes and combs for cleanliness. New
bedding (except sheets) and mess utensils will be provided by the Agent-
General. Two or three coloured shirts for men, and an extra supply of flannel
for women and children, are very desirable.
The quantity of luggage for each person of 12 years of age and upwards
must not exceed 20 cubic feet, or half a ton in weight; children of 1 and under
12 years will be allowed half that quantity. All articles should be carefully
packed in one or more strong boxes, not exceeding 12 cubic feet each. Larger
packages, and extra luggage, if taken, must be paid for. Mattresses, beds, or
pillows of any description, firearms and offensive weapons, wines, spirits, beer,
gunpowder, percussion caps, lucifer matches, articles of food of a perishable
nature, or that require cooking, or anything of a dangerous or noxious character,
cannot be taken. Emigrants must look carefully after their luggage, both in
travelling to the port of embarkation, and after arrival there, as neither the
Agent-General, his officers, nor the Colonial Government, can be responsible in
any way for loss thereof, or damage thereto, on land or at sea. All packages
are examined at the Depot before being shipped. To guard as far as possible
against luggage being sent to the wrong destination, each packet should be
plainly addressed both to the Depot, at Plymouth, and to Sydney.
Information for Emigrants.
1. Applicants must not reckon on passages being granted, unless they
receive an “Approval Circular”; nor, if approved, should they leave their
employment, or make final preparations for departure until an “ Embarkation
Order,” containing final instructions, has been issued to them by the Agent-
General.
2. None but first-class steamers are engaged, and these are despatched
from Plymouth according to arrangement. The Depot at Plymouth is fitted
expressly for the reception of emigrants, who are lodged and fed there, free of
charge, from the date named in their “ Embarkation Orders ” until they
embark. Emigrants must travel to Plymouth at their own expense. The
Agent-General has, however, made arrangements whereby they can proceed
by various railways at reduced fares.
3. The Agent-General has also arranged with the London branches of
the Sydney banks to issue drafts, payable on demand in Sydney, in
exchange for money, to emigrants proceeding to New South Wales. These
drafts may be procured at the Depot, free of cost, from the Bank authorities,
before embarkation. Persons having money with them are strongly advised to
avail themselves of the opportunity thus offered, and so make themselves secure


against loss, to which they are liable in carrying money either on their persons
or in their baggage.
4. The ships are fitted with studied regard for the health and comfort of
the emigrants, and for the preservation of good order amongst them. Spacious
berths are available for married couples and their children under 12 years.
Single adults are provided with separate accommodation according to sex.
The unmarried females, for whom a great demand exists in New South Wales,
are placed under the care of a matron. An experienced surgeon accompanies
each ship.
5. The emigrants are victualled on board in messes of about eight adults
in number, and are provided with a more liberal dietary scale than that allowed
under the Act of Parliament. Children between 1 and 12 receive half rations
in addition to an allowance of jam or marmalade, preserved soup, egg, and milk.
A special dietary is provided for children above 4 months and under 1 year.
There is also an abundant supply of medical comforts, such as arrowroot, sago,
wine, stout, preserved soups, broths, &c., for use in cases of sickness. Emi-
grants receive fresh baked bread daily, made from a portion of their flour.
Mattresses, bolsters, blankets, and counterpanes, canvas bags to contain
clothing, &c., knives and forks, spoons, plates, drinking mugs, sugar-boxes, and
wash-bowls, are provided by the Agent-General.
6. The Agent-General desires it to be understood that he cannot undertake
to provide assisted passages for families with young children, except where the
number thereof is very limited.
7. On reaching the colony, the emigrants are at perfect liberty to choose
their own employment, and to make their own bargains for wages. Ladies and
other employers, of known respectability only, are permitted by the authorities
to attend at the Depot for the purpose of engaging female servants.
8. Land in New South Wales may be obtained on very favourable terms.
9. In order to ensure the safe delivery of letters or parcels addressed to
emigrants while at the Plymouth Depot, the name of the ship in which they
are to embark should in every case be stated thereon.
10. When once a passage has been provided, the amount paid by the
emigrant cannot be returned in the event of a refusal to proceed.
11. The Agent-General finds it necessary to caution emigrants arriving at
the railway stations, or shipping wharves, at Plymouth, against accepting
information or guidance from strangers, or persons not connected with the
Depdt.
For further information, application may be made personally, or by letter
prepaid, to “The Emigration Department, New South Wales Government
Offices, 5, Westminster Chambers, London, S.W.”
In the eighth article of the above authorised regulations
the attention of passengers is called to the “ Queen’s Order in
Council,” which will be found posted in all the compart-
ments of the ship. However, as it is important that these rules
should be strictly observed and enforced, we print them below.
ABSTRACT OF THE QUEEN’S ORDER IN COUNCIL
Of the 7th of January, 1864, for preserving order, promoting health, and
securing cleanliness and ventilation on board of “passenger ships” pro-
ceeding from the United Kingdom to any of Her Majesty’s possessions
abroad.
Prepared hy Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners, in pursuance of Glsf
section of the “ Passenger Act, 1855,” —18 Sf 19 Vic., cap. 119.
Meals and Bed-time.
1. Every passenger to rise not later than 7 a.m., unless otherwise permitted
by the surgeon ; or if no surgeon, by the master.
2. Breakfast from 8 to 9 a.m., dinner at 1 p.m., supper at 6 p.m.


3. The passengers to be in their beds at 10 p.m., except under permission of
the surgeon; or if no surgeon, of the master.
Fiees and Lights.
4. Fires to be lighted by the passengers’ cook, not later than 7 a.m., and
kept alight by him till 7 p.m.; then to be extinguished, unless otherwise
directed by the master, or required for the use of the sick.
5. The master to determine the order in which each passenger, or family of
passengers, shall be entitled to the use of the fire-place at the proper hours.
The cook to take care that this order is preserved.
6. On each passenger deck there are to be lit, at dusk, and kept burning till
daylight, three safety lamps, and such further number as shall allow one for
each of the hatchways used by passengers.
7. No naked light between decks or in the hold to be allowed at any time
or on any account.
Cleaning Beeths, &c.
8. The passengers, when dressed, to roll up their beds, to sweep the deck
(including the space under the bottom of the berths), and to throw the dirt
overboard. Breakfast not to commence till this is done. After breakfast the
deck to be dry holy-stoned or scraped.
9. The decks to be swept again, and the dirt thrown overboard, after each
meal.
10. The sweepers for the day to be taken in rotation from the males above
14, in the proportion of five for every one hundred passengers.
11. Duties of the sweepers to be, to clean the ladders, hospitals, round
houses, and water-closets, to keep the water-closet tanks supplied with water,
and to sweep the decks after every meal, and to dry holy-stone and scrape them
after breakfast.
12. But the occupant of each berth is to brush it out well. Single women,
in ships where a separate compartment is allotted to them, are to °keep their
own compartment clean and in a proper state.
13. Weather permitting, the beds to be well shaken and aired on deck, and
the bottom boards, if not fixtures, to be removed and dry-scrubbed, and taken
on deck at least twice a week.
14. Two days in the week to be appointed by the master as washing days,
but no clothes on any account to be washed or dried between decks.
15. The coppers and cooking vessels to be cleaned every day. and the
cisterns kept filled with water. J *
Ventilation.
16. The scuttles and stern ports, if any, to be kept open (weather per-
mitting) from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m., and the hatches at all hours.
Sunday.
17. On Sunday the passengers to be mustered at 10 a.m., when they will
be expected to appear in clean and decent apparel. The day to be observed as
religiously as circumstances will admit.
Miscellaneous.
IS. No spirits or gunpowder to be taken on board by any passenger. Any
that may be discovered to be taken into the custody of the master till the
expiration of the voyage.
19. No loose hay or straw to be allowed below.
20. No smoking to be allowed between decks.
21. All immoral or indecent acts or conduct, taking improper liberties or
using improper familiarity with the female passengers, using blasphemous
obscene, or indecent language, or language tending to a breach of the peace’
swearing, gambling, drunkenness, fighting, riotous, disorderly, quarrelsome or
insubordinate conduct, all deposits of filth or offensive acts of uncleanliness
in the between decks are strictly prohibited. Fire-arms, swords, and other


1. Name in full
... Samuel Jones.
2, Age at last birthday
... 30,
3. Occupation
... Farm labourer.
4. Former occupation
... Ditto.
If Married.
5. Wife’s name in full
... Elizabeth Jones.
6. Age
... 25.
7. Her former occupation (if any)
... Domestic servant.
offensive weapons, as soon as the passengers embark, to be placed in the custody
of the master.
22. No sailors to remain on the passenger deck among the passengers, except
on duty.
23. No passenger to go to the ship’s cookhouse without special permission
from the master, nor to remain in the forecastle among the sailors, on any
account.
Having written to the Agent-General, or one of his local
agents, the applicant, if appearing eligible, receives the above
regulations and instructions, together with a printed form to
be filled up with a strict regard to truth, and returned at once.
The following will give an idea of the requirements of this
declaration: —
In the case of children.
8. All their names and ages in full.
9. The signature of a duly qualified medical man, who has examined
each intending passenger, and who certifies them to be in sound
mental and bodily health.
10. The signature of two householders, testifying as to your respectability
and the truth of the above depositions.
11. The signature of a Justice of the Peace, on H.M. commission, or of a
clergyman, certifying to your moral character.
12. Finally, it is signed by the applicant.
This declaration must be accompanied by written certificates
as to his present or past employment, his indentures, in the
case of skilled workmen, or testimonials from former employers,
together with a certificate of birth : and, if married, the mar-
riage certificate, and the birth certificates of wife and of each
of the children (if any).
The application will then be considered by the Government,
and if entertained, the applicant will receive an approval cir-
cular, calling for the requisite deposit and contribution towards
the passage, and pointing out the manner and time of payment.
After the money is received, and so soon as the arrangements of the
Office permit, an Embarkation Order (which is not transferable) for admission
to the Depot will be sent to you, stating when and where you are to join the
ship, and you are not to quit your employment or make preparations for de-
parture until you receive such order.
The Money will he forfeited if you do not present yourself at the time
and place of embarkation mentioned in the order, or if any of the statements in
your application he found incorrect, or if the signatures to your certificates be not
genuine, or if deception of any kind he attempted or practised.
No positive assurance can at present be given that passages will be
obtained in any particular vessel; but, with a view of preventing as far as pos-
sible the separation of families or friends, applicants who have been approved


for passages, and desire to proceed together, may pay their money at the same
time, and state their wishes by letter. If, however, the money be not paid at
the same time, this object cannot be secured, unless the person who first paid
waits for a later ship.
Any Birth, Marriage, or other Certificates which you may have for-
warded with your application are herewith returned.
Persons are again warned, that though they may have been approved for
passages, they and the members of their respective families, whom it would be
contrary to the rules to separate, cannot be allowed to proceed, but must
return home at their own expense, in any of the following cases : viz. (1) if,
on arrival at the port of embarkation, they are found to have any infectious or
contagious disorder, or not to be in a fit state of health to proceed on the
voyage, or to have any bodily or mental defect likely to impair their useful-
ness ; (2) if they have not the full quantity of clothing required by the regu-
lations ; (3) if they have omitted to state in their Application Form any
material fact, or have furnished false statements or certificates as to age,
character, or calling; (4) if, being married people, they have left any of their
young children behind, or have brought with them more children than are
mentioned in their “Application Form” or expressly sanctioned; or (5) if
they have attempted to practise any evasion of the Eegulations, or deception
of any kind.
A proper “Contract Ticket,” as prescribed by the “Passenger Acts,”
signed on behalf of the Shipowner, will be handed to you as soon as you have
been finally approved at the Depot, from which time any responsibility of the
Colonial Government, or of the Agent-General, in respect of providing a
passage for you to New South Wales, will absolutely cease, and the Shipowner
will become liable to you, according to the terms of the Contract Ticket.
Having forwarded the amount due to the Government, a
receipt is returned, and at the earliest convenience the Govern-
ment grant a passage and send a letter naming the ship and
date of departure, which generally gives some fourteen to
twenty days for final preparations.
SECOND STEP.—FIN A L PEEP ABA TIONS.
This, the second step, is by far the most trying, for in the
fourteen or more days which it embraces, we have to hid our
friends good-bye, to break up our homes, and sell many of our
little household gods, which the association of years has
endeared to us. Could we transport our happy fireside, the
many friends who gather round it, and the hundred and one
things which make England dear to us, in spite of its bitter
cold, to the brighter climes of Australia, would it not be an
Eden indeed, and where should we find an Englishman,
though never so patriotic, able to withstand the temptation ?
To do this, however, is impossible, so we will set about, with
as good a heart as possible, to provide ourselves with the
necessaries named in the Government Eegulations, about
which we have a few words to say.


Personal Outfit and Luggage.
The first consideration is one or more substantial boxes,
preferably of wood, the sizes given below being most con-
venient, and which together are within the amount of luggage
allowed by the contract ticket.
It would greatly facilitate stowing of baggage, and prevent
many little annoyances, were all the passengers provided with
boxes uniform in size and make. One box should be 2 feet
6 inches in length by 1 foot 6 inches in width by 1 foot 6
inches in depth, made of inch wood, dovetailed or corner-
plated, to be labelled “ Wanted on the Voyage,” and to contain
those articles of clothing requisite for the various changes of
climate on the passage out.
Another box, 3 feet by 2 feet by 1 foot 6 inches, made like
first, labelled “ Not Wanted on the Voyage,” and to contain
those articles which the passenger does not intend to make
use of during the trip.
In the cases of married couples, two boxes of the first
measurements (costing from 10s. to 155.) may be required, of
course provided with locks and keys. Every package to be
legibly marked with name, ship, and destination, preferably
printed thereon.
We most strongly advise intending emigrants to have the
above-sized chests, rather than bring aboard trunks and boxes
of all imaginable shapes, and of every conceivable material,
which will assuredly get bruised and knocked about, if nothing
worse.
Any useful articles, such as .tools and household linen, might
be packed in strong rough cases, the lids being screiced on to
facilitate examination, and providing they do not exceed 3 feet
by 2 feet in measure, and that the wfhole amount of baggage
is within the 20 cubic feet allowed to each adult.
In the matter of outfit, the Government scale is ample for
male female adults, and we can only suggest that the
flannel shirts for men be those known as “ Australian” —that
is, with collars of the same material. Also, in the case of
children, flannel drawers, vests, and long stockings should be
insisted upon.
In addition to these, the following add to the comfort of the
voyage:—A brush and comb, tooth and nail brush, boot
brushes and blacking, and a small looking-glass. Also, for
married couples and single women, one or more comfortable
folding deck-chairs, which may be bought in London for about
half-a-crown. The soap may be bought at home —2 lbs. of
the best yellow, and 2 lbs. of marine soap, being the quantity


required by Government. Yellow soap costs about 9d. per
bar of 3 lbs., and the marine from 4d. to 6d. per pound.
These things being purchased, we are fully equipped for our
journey, and need trouble no further after they are packed.
Caution.— lt is not advisable to pack perishable articles of
food in any of the boxes, and if any extras are brought, such
as condensed milk and biscuits, they should be in a separate
tin box.
THIRD STEP,—JOURNEY TO PLYMOUTH.
All is now ready, and we only await sailing orders, which
the Agent-General forwards on payment of the passage money.
This embarkation order admits to the Depot at Plymouth, and
allows of our travelling at about 15 per cent, reduction on the
ordinary railway fares. It also allows of one hundredweight
of luggage to each adult, and half this quantity to each child
over three years for whom payment has been made.
Any excess luggage should be, to avoid expense, sent on
before by luggage train, fully addressed to the Emigrants’
Depot, Baltic Wharf, Plymouth, with the name of the ship
and destination. The general emigrant train leaves Waterloo
Station, London, at 9 o’clock in the morning, arriving in
Plymouth about 5 in the evening.
Passengers are advised to proceed at once with their
baggage to the Government Emigration Depot, which is about
a mile from the station, whence there are omnibuses which
convey them at a cheap rate.
The fare from London is fifteen shillings, the omnibus
charge being sixpence, baggage included.
Now a few words about this Government Emigration Depot,
which we have had occasion to mention several times. This
building is situated at the waterside, between the citadel and
the fishing dock; certainly a most healthy site, commanding
fine views of the bay and its shipping.
On arrival, the passenger produces his embarkation order,,
which admits him; and there he and his family are welcomed by
their host and hostess, Mr. and Mrs. Gant, who will direct
them to their several quarters. An old-fashioned, barrack-like
pile of rugged stone is the Depot, divided into married people’s,,
single men’s, and single women’s compartments, with lava-
tories, &c., to each, outside which is a spacious courtyard,
facing the harbour, where folk may promenade, smoko, chat.


and play until meal-time, when John (a person ever to be
remembered) will go round and arrange all the folk in messes
of eight or ten, appointing one as captain, who receives a card,
with which he may draw the proper quantity of provisions for
his party during the stay at Plymouth. From all reports of
those I have asked relative to the diet provided at the Depot, I
may say it is excellent in quality and quantity. At six in the
morning a bell is sounded throughout the building, when
every one must get up, and the hale and hearty assist to clean
up their quarters, after folding their beds and bedding in the
approved neat regulation style. On the second day the
surgeon-superintendent of the ship examines each passenger,
and, if found in good health, he is passed.
The matron of the single girls is in charge of her part of
the community during their sojourn at Plymouth, and is
present at their examination.
During the day all the luggage has to be opened and
examined, when any spirits, firearms, or anything likely to
endanger the ship’s safety, are forfeited. Guns, pistols,
revolvers, &c., are given to the captain of the ship, who
returns them on arrival in Sydney. It is far better not to
attempt to bring such things, and thus save the annoyance
of their confiscation ; again, it is unnecessary to bring any
bedding beyond two pairs of sheets, for the Government
provide all this for use during the voyage.
Each adult is provided with two canvas bags, the children
with one, upon which is printed the number of his berth, and,
if he be wise, he will add his name. Into one of these bags
he will seize this opportunity of putting those things which he
may require for the first fortnight at sea. The other bag is
intended for pannikins, platters, knives and forks, mess
clothes, &c., which are all supplied by the Government.
We should advise an adult male to put into his bag the
following articles 2 flannel shirts, 1 pair rough trousers,
1 pair boots or canvas shoes, 1 soft hat, 3 pairs socks,
I neckerchief. An Adult Female :—3 chemises, 3 pairs drawers,
3 pairs stockings, 1 warm petticoat, 1 pair of boots or shoes, a
warm ulster or jacket, a soft hat of any description, also a cheap
straw hat.
For Children —2 flannel shirts, boots, stockings, rough
clothes, and soft hat.
Of course, the above must be understood as apart from the
clothing they may have on, and is intended for a change.
On the evening before embarkation, captains of messes for
the ship are chosen, and the utensils for each passenger are
distributed.
During the time at Plymouth, which is usually three or four


days, passengers are not allowed out of the Depot, but may
have anything got for them that they may want.
On the morning of the expected arrival of the ship, the medi-
cal officer of the Board of Trade has every one passed before
him.
Clerks from the London Branches of the Colonial Banks
also attend on this day, and give drafts, payable on demand
in Sydney, in exchange for money. We strongly advise any
one having money with them to avail themselves of this
gratuitous means of ensuring the safety of their hard-earned
savings, since during each voyage losses occur from neglect of
so doing.
Constables for all the compartments are here chosen by the
Emigration Officer, who is, as a rule, directed in his choice by
the man’s former occupation, moral character, and physical
appearance, and wffio promises a gratuity, to be paid in Sydney,
of more or less value according to the duties, which will be
found plainly set forth in the reprint above of the Queen’s
Order in Council. Under the matron, sub-matrons are ap-
pointed for the management of the single women,
A schoolmaster, lamp-trimmer, water-closet constable, and
hospital assistant are also chosen, with a gratuity adequate to
the duties. Notice of the various appointments is usually
posted outside the surgery door in the Depot yard, and any man
having special qualification for any of these posts should apply
to the officer, enclosing testimonials if possible.
FOURTH STEP.—DEPARTURE FROM PLYMOUTH.
The novelty of the Depot and its new life having worn off,
we anxiously await the arrival of the ship in which we are
to be transported beyond the seas in order to colonise a beauti-
ful country and to made a desert glad. “ She is entering the
breakwater ” is telegraphed throughout our little community,
and all is excitement, for we know that as soon as the anchor
is down preparations for our embarkation will be made.
It is noon, on a lovely day, for by a merciful Providence we
are generally allowed to bid farewell to the land of our birth
when she is looking her best, or, at least, so think we, which is
much to the same purpose, who are leaving her, mayhap for ever
To our knowledge there is no place in England so especially
English as this Plymouth and its surroundings. Here we have
the ancient citadel, reminding us of feudal times, when all poor
folk crouched as it were for protection beneath its w T alls, and


'which, still later served as the first beacon which flashed a light
round England’s shores when threatened by the Spanish
chivalry; and there, too, is the Hoe, where our brave captains,
who nowadays are viewed somewhat in the median line be-
tween pirates and patriots, but who, nevertheless, in this
instance, gaily left their games and faced death for England’s
home and beauty. On the Hoe is re-erected that deathless
memorial to the great engineer, Smeaton—his lighthouse—
which warned mariners from fatal Eddystone for many a year
and through many a fearful storm, but still refused to be shaken,
until the very rocks in which the masonry was imbedded
showed themselves signs of decay, and made the new light-
house necessary, built on another group of rocks close at hand.
Some of the finest shipping in the world is seen passing in and
out of the breakwater, itself a mighty work, and this crowd of
masts reminds us that it is to the merchant service that
Britain owes now her supremacy at sea, and holds her own in
every market. Again, here, we see, certainly not the hearts of
oak of whilom days, but the stupendous agents of destruction
built to defend England’s shores, her shipping and her colonies.
Mount Edgcumbe, on one side of the harbour, recalls the plea-
sant well-wooded seats of the English nobility and gentry, and
along the coast we see mile after mile of fair cultivated fields,
like some huge garden, reminding us that almost every inch
of England is the same, and that she has to put forth all her
energies to foster her many sons ; in a word, for a moment, we
regret leaving the dear old place, and wish ourselves back again,
even to the squalid misery of our large towns, for who amongst
us will not, as of old, rather put up with the ills we have, than
risk the ills we wot not of.
This is, however, of no avail, the time has come, and we
must now make this our fourth step, Eastward Ho ! When
'the ship is at anchor the Emigration Officer proceeds aboard
with the Medical Officer of the Board of Trade, who inspects
-all the compartments, stores, and medicines before the ship’s
leaving. All is made ready for the reception of the guests, a
capacious steamer is sent off to the Depot, and if our number do
not exceed six hundred the Smeaton will take us all, bag and
baggage.^
The girls have the privilege of first stepping aboard, then the
married folk with their bairns, lastly, that all-to-be-envied class
without impedimenta, the single men. Having ourselves got
aboard, our bags and loose luggage are handed up, then we push
off, waving with our hats and handkerchiefs farewell to our some
time house and home, to the Depot master and his fair spouse,
and staff. A few minutes’ steaming brings us alongside our
ship, as we shall henceforth call her, and, whatever her name


may be, she is sure to inspire us with confidence, being
specially selected to give the greatest accommodation, together
with the utmost possible security.
FIFTH STEP.—ON BOARD OUR SHIP.
A gangway is soon thrown across, connecting the Smeaton —■
a toy boat—with the leviathian ship, and as we are passing off
we produce our contract tickets to the despatching officer, who
thus checks us off into the ark, one by one, and, like a certain
family of the time of the Deluge, we have perfect trust in its
being able to buoy us over the forty days’ flood which lies before
us. A word here as regards the way in which the vessel is
divided to ensure the most comfort to the passengers, and to
secure the easiest management to the surgeon-superintendent.
In all ships there are three primary divisions, as in the
Depot:—Single womens’, married people’s, and single men’s
compartments, each distinct from the others, with their own
constables, deck-room, wash-houses, and other conveniences.
The gentler sex without guardians are placed under the
care of an experienced matron, who lives among them, and is
assisted by sub-matrons, chosen from the girls themselves, in
the largest compartment, they being, with the married women
whose husbands are already in the colony, the largest class;
they are generally located in the after end of the ship, and
quite isolated by means of iron gates or wooden barriers from
the forward part —a little Amazonian kingdom with only weekly
visitations from the rougher sex who may have relatives in it.
The married people’s compartment is usually situated amid-
ships, and in the case of a large number of this class two
compartments are required. Each couple or family have a
separate and commodious berth or berths, to which privacy is
secured by means of a neat curtain. A locker is found at the
foot in which to stow utensils when not in use, and up the
centre and along the passage tables are placed, and also shelves
along the side, upon which the mess cans and provisions are
kept. Each mess has a table and set of utensils, for the
cleanliness and care of which the captain of the mess is re-
sponsible.
The single men fraternise, and make common cause in the
consumption of Government stores, in a large airy compartment
forward, having tables which, when not in use, may be raised
to the deck above. The berths of the single men and women
are made just large enough for one person.


On boarding the ship, we are directed and find onr way to
onr own quarters, the number of our berths corresponding with
that upon our bags. In the berth will be found bed and
bedding, which becomes, with the consent of the Health Officer,
the property of the passenger at the end of the journey.
The captains of messes will now probably be wanted on
deck, where they will receive a few tin dishes, &c., for mess
use, which are expected to be kept clean during the trip ; and,
if it be near dinner or tea-time, they will be directed to the
galley, where, on showing their mess-cards, which give the
number of statute adults in each mess, they will receive their
quantum of the good things going.
We will now T leave you, settling yourselves down between
decks, or having your first cup of tea afloat, and will get on
deck and see the last of old England’s shores.
In an incredibly short space of time the decks are cleared,
all property stowed away, the anchor is weighed, the last lands-
man is over the side, and the pilot takes us clear of the break-
water, when he also leaves us, and we part with the last con-
necting link, and are away.
We pass Eddystone, and see its bright light, if at night, and
then make towards Ushant, the light of which we may per-
chance sight.
But we are going ahead apace, and it behoves us to stay a
while, and endeavour to instil a few moral precepts and prac-
tical hints into the minds of the passengers, which will form
the subject of what I may term our last step, for now we have
nothing to do but make ourselves happy and comfortable until
we reach Sydney.
SIXTH STEP.—HINTS TO EMIGRANTS.
1. The married people, as I said before, are generally
located amidship, and their compartment is made as healthy
as possible by means of efficient ventilation, and it only remains
for them to keep it clean.
2. The beds and bedding will be found in the berths, and
should be marked at once for future identification. Every
morning, Upon rising, the bedding must be folded in a neat
manner.
3. The bedclothes and beds are sent up on deck, weather
permitting, twice a week, in order to air them, and give folk
an opportunity of scrubbing out their quarters.
4. It would now be well for each man to read carefully


through the abstract from the Queen’s Orders in Council, and
make up his mind to abide by the rules therein set down.
5. The constables should be the first men to get up in the.
morning. They should then call the people a little before
seven, and, except in cases of sickness, no one is allowed to lie
abed.
6. The children are then taken to the wash-house, washed
and dressed. The older ones now make their beds and cleanse
themselves.
, 7- When this is done it will be breakfast-time, which is at
eight o’clock. Every one is expected to be fully dressed, and
all the children clean before sitting down. The captains
of the messes fetch in the supply of food from the galley,
availing themselves of the assistance of the other members
of their several messes in rotation,
8. To give intending passengers some idea of the diet provided
aboard the Government emigrant ships, w r e print below a
sketch bill of fare and the scale of provisions, as supplied on
ships chartered from the Orient Steam Navigation Company,
and since these dietary scales are plainly posted in all the
compartments, there should he no difficulty in getting the right
quantity of food. The constables are expected to attend to
this, and to see every mess and every individual supplied by
the storekeeper with the full allowance.
New South Wales
Government
Emigrant Service.
SKETCH BILL
r jL OF FARE.
(8 to 9 a.m.)
Breakfast
SUNDAY ... Porridge \
MONDAY ... Beef and Rice
TUESDAY ... Porridge
WEDNESDAY ... Pish Stew >-
THURSDAY ... Porridge
FRIDAY ... Beef and Rice
SATURDAY ... Irish Stew. J
With an allowance of Bread, and.
One Pint of Coffee.
Dinner (1 p.m.)
SUNDAY ... Soup, Fresh Meat, Potatoes, and Pudding '
MONDAY ... Soup, Preserved Meat, Potatoes, and Cheese
TUESDAY ... Soup, Fresh Meat, Potatoes m ., 7 „ ,
WEDNESDAY... Soup, Salt Pork, Peas, or Calavances 1 With Bread or
THURSDAY ... Soup, Fresh Meat, Potatoes, and Pudding .
FRIDAY ... Soup, Salt Fish, Potatoes, and Cheese
SATURDAY ... Soup, Fresh Meat, Potatoes
Note—Children will have Fresh or Preserved Meat in lieu of Salt Pork,
and Ling Fish.
Tea or Supper (6 p.m.)
DAILY ... One Loaf of Bread, with Butter, and one Pint of Tea.
The order of this Bill may be varied, or equivalent substitutes provided^


ADULTS.
Quantities of Stokes to be available fob each Adult Emigrant weekly.
Fresh Meat ... ... 2*lbs. Cheese ... ... 3 ozs.
Preserved Meat ... 1 „ Tea ... ... If „
Salt Pork ... ... 8 ozs. Coffee ... ... 2 ~
Hour and Biscuit ... 7 lbs. Sugar ... ... 1 lb.
Suet ... ... 4 ozs. Molasses ... ... 8 ozs.
Butter ... ... 6 ~ Pickles ... ... £ pint.
Rice or Oatmeal ... 1 lb. Mustard ... ... foz.
Peas ... ... a pint. Pepper ... ... f,,
Fresh Potatoes ... 5f lbs. Salt ... ... 2 „
Onions ... ... 4 ozs. Lime Juice (Tropical) 6 ~
Carrots ... ... 4 ~ Water ... ... 21 quarts.
Raisins ... ... 8 ~
Substitutes,
8 ozs. Salt Beef or Pork, or Preserved ) , .
jyj ea t j or j 8 ozs. Fresh meat, or wee versa.
( 8 „ Salt Beef or Pork, or Pre-
-12 ~ Ling Fish ... ... „ } served Meat.or for 8
(. ozs. Fresh Meat.
1 lb. Biscuit ... ... „ 11b. Fresh Bread, or vice versa.
~,, i. i ~, t>- t> ( 1 „ Biscuit or Fresh Bread,
Ulb. Oatmeal, or 1 lb. Rice or Peas „ or vice versa.
fib. Calavances ... ... „ f,, Fresh Potatoes.
6 ozs. Molasses ... ... ~ 4 ozs. Sugar, or vice versa.
1 gill Vinegar ... ... ~ 1 gill Pickles, or vice versa.
CHILDREN,
Quantity of Stores to
Fresh Meat
BE AVAILABLE
fob each Child (1 to 12) weekly,
lib. Sugar ... ... 14 ozs.
Preserved Meat
Flour and Biscuit
Suet
12 ozs. Molasses ... ... 4 ~
3* lbs. Preserved Milk ... 7 pints.
3 ozs. Jam or Marmalade ... 4 ozs.
Butter
3 „ Mustard ... ... £ ~
Rice or Oatmeal
Fresh Potatoes...
Raisins
12 „ Salt ... ... 1 „
3|lbs. Pepper ... ... f ~
a ozs. Lime Juice (Tropics) ... 3 ~
f „ Water ... ... 21 quarts
Pickles
Coffee
Carrots
|pint. Condensed Eggs ... i oz.
1 oz. Soup (Fresh or Preserved),
4 ~ an allowance daily.
Substitutes.
4 ozs. Fresh Meat
for 4 ozs. Preserved Meat, or vice versa.
~ 8 ~ Fresh Bread, ~ „
~ 8 ~ „ „ or Biscuit, or vice versa.
„ 9 ~ Potatoes.
8 „ Biscuit ...
8 ~ Oatmeal or Rice
3 „ Calavances
3 „ Molasses ...
2 „ Marmalade
~ 2 „ Sugar, or vice versa.
„ 1 „ Butter, „ „
For each Infant (over 4 months) for the Voyage.
Condensed Milk ... ... 17 lbs. Condensed Egg ... 11 ozs,
Nursery Biscuits ... ... 9 „ Preserved Soup ... 12 lbs,
Oatmeal ... ... 6 ~ Rice ... ... 3 ~
Sago ... ... ... If ~ Sugar ... ... 7f „
Arrowroot ... ... If ~ Broth or Soup (made from
Flour ... ... ... 6 ~ Meat as ordered by Surgeon.)


9. Before breakfast the compartment is swept out by two
men, appointed each day by the surgeon, and after both
dinner and tea by two other men.
10. After breakfast, four or six men, appointed in rotation,
set to and holystone or scrub the decks below. Each man
is, however, expected to keep his own berth clean, and the
captain of each mess must see to the cleanliness of the seats
and tables.
11. If the weather be fine, all must go on deck after break-
fast, in order to give the cleaners an opportunity of getting the
place in order.
12. Between 10 and 11 a.m. the surgeon-superintendent
goes round the compartments, and sees that the work has
been well done. The constables must then be on duty to go
round with him, and receive any instructions as to the day’s
programme.
13. For the greater safety of the people the night is divided
into three watches, from 8 p.m. to 12 p.m., 12 p.m. to 4 a.m.,
and 4 a.m. to 7 a.m., two men being appointed for each watch,
who walk round the compartment from time to time, and
report every half-hour, or, sailor-fashion, every bell, to the
officer on duty whether or no “All’s well.”
14. In case of sickness the watchmen, of course, go for the
doctor, and assist if needed. This night duty is extremely
light when divided among so many men; and, taking into
consideration that it is entirely for the safety of himself and
his wife and family, no man, I am sure, will find fault with
so wise a regulation.
15. The constables are, of course, exempt from night duty,
but must be about until all have turned in, which should be
at 10 o’clock.
16. One or two days are specially set aside for washing
purposes ; and washing must not on any account be done
below, nor should any wet things be allowed to hang or dry
there.
17. Smoking is strictly prohibited between decks, as, also,
are such dirty habits as spitting, &c., &c.
18. A schoolmaster being appointed, of course he is anxious
to commence his duties as soon as the sea-sickness is over;
and parents should assist him in every possible way, both by
insisting upon their children attending to the lessons, and by
sending them clean and tidy. The Government put aboard a
goodly lot of handsome little prize books, which the surgeon
distributes to the scholars towards the end of the passage.
19. The surgeon-superintendent attends at the dispensary
between 9.30 and 11 a.m., when any one ill must report him-
self, or, if unable to rise, be reported by a constable. The


dispenser is there again at 3 p.m. and at 7 p.na., and any
urgent case is, of course, attended to as soon as reported.
20. Every one, especially mothers, are cautioned against
bringing any medicines aboard, since nothing is more annoying
to a medical man than to have a woman come to him with a
child ill, and to learn that she has herself been administering
some rubbishing patent or quack nostrum, of the composition
and properties of which she is quite ignorant.
21. It is needless to insist upon cleanliness as essential to
health, for every Englishman acknowledges the fact, and will, if
he has the opportunity, do his best to keep himself and those
under his care in good order and clean. Baths are provided
and should be taken every day, especially in the Tropics.
22. Among such a multitude it is quite possible, and very
probable, that we get some disagreeable, ever-grumbling indi-
viduals ; but let us avoid quarrels or high words above all
things. Let us bear and forbear, and strive to make
our neighbour comfortable, for in so doing we shall feel the
happier ourselves. We have found from experience that it is
not a good plan to make any particular or bosom friends aboard
ship, but to be on equally good and sociable terms with every
one, and our motto is—“ Love me little, but love me long.”
23. Single men should be out of bed every morning at six,
and should by seven have their compartment swept out and their
beds rolled up, thus giving them the opportunity of a walk
before breakfast. The watching and cleaning is managed in
the same way as among the married folk.
24. Single women are rarely any trouble, the matron looking
well after them. She is, as a rule, first up, and calls the sub-
matrons, who set the girls to do their proper cleaning, and see
it done.
25. The matron has given into her charge two large boxes
of material for work, which she cuts out, and distributes
among the girls according to their taste and ability. Some
may make dresses, others articles of body linen ; and again,
others do wool work; and so many Tam O’Shanter hats are
made, that before we get to the end of our journey a perfect
eruption of flame-coloured head-pieces occurs. After this work
has been inspected in Sydney, each girl is allowed to take that
portion which she has herself done.
26. After having been at sea some fourteen days or so, the
captain has all the boxes marked “wanted on the voyage”
brought on deck ; and we should then advise our friends to
get out some cooler apparel for the Tropics, but on no account
to put away their warmer flannel things, because the heat is
soon passed through, and the changes of temperature after-
ward are very rapid. Flannel is, indeed, the best material to


wear; keeps clean longer, prevents one being chilled by the
night air, and is, withal, the very acme of tropical garment.
A good stock of flannel underclothing should be kept in the
bags, for the use of the women and children.
The baggage is again brought up, weather permitting,
shortly after passing the Cape of Good Hope, when the tem-
perature itself will suggest, to the hardiest of us, warmer
clothing. Before reaching Sydney, we believe, most captains
will once more oblige in this particular, to enable us to put
away our travelling clothes, and to get out something in
which to make a show of respectability when we get into port.
27. Were it not for the return, every seventh day, of the
Sabbath, we should, when at sea, undoubtedly lapse into
semi-barbarism, and arrive in port unkempt and unclean. By
a merciful providence, however, Sunday appears, and we are
expected to dress neatly, which, by the way, does not mean
extravagantly, but in such a manner as to mark the day from
all others.
The surgeon-superintendent and commander make an inspec-
tion of all the compartments after breakfast, and, as a rule, the
ship’s crew is mustered and inspected.
28. Divine service according to the Church of England is
held on deck, or other convenient place, at least once every
Sunday, and all persons are advised to attend. Prayers and
hymn books found.
The Roman Catholics generally have prayers between decks
every evening, when, to their credit, every man is present, and
on Sunday they hold a service in the morning.
29. After leaving a port a muster is called, and the roll read
over.
30, Nothing more suggests itself to us, wherein we might
give any useful advice ; and it only remains now for each
passenger to read and understand what has been said upon
these little things, which, taken together, make up the sum
of our life aboard ship, and which render this life pleasant or
otherwise in exact ratio as our behaviour is or is not civil,
courteous, and kind to our shipmates.
31. Fortunately, most passengers need no restrictions other
than their own good sense of what is right and proper in
conduct towards their fellow-travellers; but in those happily
rare cases where such considerations are forgotten or not acted
upon, and where, in consequence, a passenger makes himself
wilfully obnoxious to his fellows, and persistently disregards
the regulations made for their common safety and comfort,
the law will most assuredly uphold the surgeon-superintendent
and captain in taking such steps as will effectually put an end
to such unpleasantness and prevent its recurrence.


PAET 11.
INTBOD UC TION.
Those of my readers who have made this voyage I would ask
to take up their atlas and follow me from Plymouth to Port
Jackson, and in this way recall those happy days when, with
no care for the morrow, we basked in a rich tropical sun with
a delicious feeling of perfect repose from the madding crowd.
We really should make the most of this six weeks’ holiday, for
it rarely occurs twice in an ordinary person’s lifetime.
To those in England about to make the trip, I would say
to them, do not be terrified by a picture of sea-sickness, for
that is soon over, but look forward to seeing those bright
climes where winter’s biting cold is never felt, and where
Nature is so bountiful as to do away with the necessity of
labour were it not for man’s ambition.
If this pamphlet gets into the hands of any aboard an
emigrant ship, I trust it may throw out such hints as will
make his crossing a pleasure to himself and to his friends,
and will constitute him, forsooth, a very walking cyclopaedia
upon matters emigrational and nautical.
Before embarking, it is advisable to devote a little attention
to ship lore, and the ways of men who go down to the sea in
ships, inasmuch as we do not care to be laughed at by Jack at
sea any more than he likes being teased when ashore ; nor
do we wish any Jonah, who may have already tasted the
pleasures of the life ori the ocean wave, to play off his jokes
upon us landlubbers ; we shall, therefore, explain a few ship
terms, and notice one or two physical facts in our opening
chapter.
CHAPTER I.
SHIP LOBE WITH A FEW PHYSICAL FACTS.
A ship is a fearful and wonderful thing, and in boarding one
we enter quite another W’orld, whose language*is not our own,
whose mode of reckoning time renders our watches super-
fluous, and where we must even put on new legs, and our


stomach adapt itself to a peculiar up-and-down motion. The
government of this new world is autocratic, with the captain
as its head, his officers the ministers, the crew constituting
the sinews which must war with the elements, and the
passengers bewildered sheep under their protection. In
a Government emigrant ship, a good shepherd is found in
the surgeon-superintendent, under whose sole charge the
emigrants are placed, and to whom they must look for guidance
and comfort.
Many of the terms commonly used by sailors may un-
doubtedly be traced back to the days of the Norse vikings,
thus showing how conservative this little world is. In going
to the stern of a ship one goes “aft,” and towards the bow,
“forward”; what is on our right looking forward is
“starboard,” and the left side “port,” anciently “ larboard.”
We do not go downstairs, but “ below,” nor do we get into
bed, but “ turn into our bunk,” and after breakfast we do not
go upstairs, but “on deck.” Windows are unknown, “sky-
lights ” and “ portholes ” being substituted. The words “pitch-
ing” and “ rolling ” we soon understand, at first to our great
discomfort.
As a rule, our steamers have a “ fore ” “main ” and “ mizen ”
mast, supported by “stays” and “ shrouds,” the latter like
ladders running aloft to the “yards,” upon which “ square ”
sails are stretched, the lowest being called “ courses,” the next
above “ topsails,” and above them “ top-gallant sails ” ; if any
are seen above these they are first “ royals,” and then “ skysails,”
prefixing, of course, the name of the mast upon which they
are. A sail stretched on the stays is a “ staysail,” but any on
the stays attached to the bowsprit is a “ jib.”
We may see sails spread fore and aft from a “gaff” above
and a “boom” below, and these are “trysails.” But a
passenger nowadays sees but little sailing, and no tacking, the
steamers travelling, as a rule, as quick as the wind, and be it
fair or foul they still plough their way onward.
The side whence the wind blows is the “ weather” side, the
other protected one the “ lee ” side, and along the sides of the
ship run gutters which are styled “ scuppers,” in which we find
ourselves more often than is pleasant.
The ship is steered from the bridge by the aid of steam, the
wheel being handled by one man, whose lightest touch is at
once responded to by the huge ship. In case of need, hand-
steering gear is placed aft, over the rudder itself, but requires
at least two men to control it.
On looking at the track chart, one cannot help thinking
that there are one or two points about it which might be
explained away, and this we will now endeavour to do. We


must first note and admit a few scientific facts. First, that
the earth which we inhabit is round, or nearly so, and that it
forms one of many planets which revolve, at various distances,
around the sun, comprising together what is known as the
solar system. The mean distance of the sun from us is about
ninety-five millions of miles. Secondly, that we revolve round
this luminary in an easterly direction once in twelve months
and a few odd hours. Thirdly, that we also turn on our own
axis once in nearly twenty-four hours ; the first of these revo-
lutions bringing summer and winter, and the second, alternation
of night and day.
But, one will say, the earth being spheroid, how is it possible
that it can be represented upon a flat surface like the chart
before us. This kind of map first originated with a Dutchman,
who took the name of Mercator, in 1556, and has since been in
general use by sailors.
The earth is divided equally into northern and southern
hemispheres by an imaginary line called the equator, which
passes round the world midway between the poles, the cir-
cumference being 25,000 miles. In the same manner, a line
perpendicular to the equator is drawn, and divides the globe
into western and eastern hemispheres. Parallel with the
equator are ninety circles, which are called degrees of latitude,
and places lying on the same line or degree of latitude have
the same length of day and night at the same time. The
equator is divided into 360 equal parts, called degrees of longi-
tude, which are here 69’06 miles in length, and these lines or
degrees are continued north and south until they meet at the
poles. The first degree in English charts passes through
Greenwich, so that all places are reckoned as so many degrees
E. or W. of this point. It follows, given that the earth be
round, that the degrees of longitude will diminish in distance
apart as we go northward or southward, until there is only a
point at the poles, there being neither E. nor W., but simply
N. and S., in those much sought after spots. Herein lies
the difficulty of Mercator’s projection, for there the lines are
made parallel, and, of necessity, the places must be more and
more distorted as we get further from the equator. To com-
pensate for this, the degrees of latitude are elongated on this
chart in exactly the same ratio as the longitudinal lines should
converge, thus keeping the proportions of the objects delineated,
but not the correct size. However, this is of little consequence,
so we heartily return thanks to the Dutch merchant above
mentioned.
At sea, time is told by “ bells,” which strike one for the first
half-hour of each and two for the hour, until eight bells
are reached, when the watch is changed. The day is divided


into watches, a set of men being on duty for each four hours,
but, in order to change the time of the men’s work, the four
to eight watch after noon is divided into two, and these are
called “ dog-watches,” because, says a wit, whose name I forget,
they are cur-tailed. The first watch is from Bto 12 (midnight),
the middle watch from 12 to 4, the morning watch from 4to 8,
and so on.
Time is so frequently a subject of embarrassment to the
traveller on his first voyage that no apology is needed for an
attempt to explain its knotty points. On leaving Plymouth
we go westward from Greenwich, thereby losing time, being
much distressed at having to put back our watches day by
day. Again, when we get south of the line, we run to the
eastward of Greenwich, thus allowing time to gain on our
watches; and after rounding the Cape we begin to gain
twenty or thirty minutes, according to our daily run East-
ward Ho !
Now when the sun is at its greatest height in any place, it
is then noon at that place ; and since Greenwich has been
chosen as the point whence all English mariners should take
their time, all places east or west of this meridian must have
noon either earlier or later; for since the earth revolves on
its axis, and moves round the sun in an easterly direction, or,
as it appears to us, the sun travels across our hemisphere from
east to west, it follows that places westward of Greenwich will
have to wait a little longer for the sun; while, on the other
hand, those eastward will get the sun earlier, and will count
it mid-day earlier and earlier the further east we go.
The longitude or meridian of Sydney is somewhere near 150
degrees east of Greenwich; and since we gain an hour for every
15 degrees, theyare ten hours ahead ofus. Now, it must be plainly
understood, that the actual moment of time is, of course, the
same all over the universe ; and in going eastward we do not
live a day longer, but our days have been shorter.
In the case of two men starting from Greenwich, say on
Friday, to circumnavigate the globe in opposite directions,
and meeting again in London, one will affirm he has lost a
day and will call it Thursday, and the other will have gained
upon time and will call it Saturday, and yet the moment is
the same.
The equator is divided into 360 degrees, Greenwich being
on the first meridian, and since the earth revolves on its own
axis once in twenty-four hours, the sun will be at its greatest
altitude four minutes sooner or later for each degree east or
west of this meridian.
Every degree is divided into 60 minutes, and each minute
into 60 seconds ° '


Again, we must admit that the earth is revolving round the
sun with its axis inclined to the plane of its orbit some 66° 32',
and that, therefore, those parts of the world situated 23° 28
north and south of the equator will receive the greatest
amount of sunshine. The circle comprised within these lines
is called the torrid zone, or, more familiarly, the tropics,
and is bounded on the north by the Tropic of Cancer, and
on the south by the Tropic of Capricorn. Now, since we
have to pass through this zone or band before we reach
Australia, it will be interesting to note a few of its effects.
In the first place, it is the origin of winds, the true iEolus,
who, contrary to the old legend, does not keep his winds
chained up, roaring in a dark mountain, and only capriciously
letting them out, now and then, to gratify the passions of
angry gods; but in truth, he is constantly engendering them
by a law of nature which no heathen gods may alter. Thus,
the sun heating the air near the tropics expands it, and by
its own inherent properties it rises, because lighter than that
superincumbent, into the upper regions of the earth, and the
cold air from the north and south poles rushes in to take its
place. The rotatory motion of the world, the position of the
land and water on its surface, and many other causes too
numerous to mention, occasion these winds, essentially north
and south, to become north-east and south-east trade winds.
A current of wind blowing at the rate of four or five miles
an hour is called a gentle breeze; at the rate of fifteen miles,
a brisk gale; from thirty to forty miles an hour, a high wind ;
and from eighty to a hundred miles a hurricane.
By these winds, tides, and currents, the ocean is kept in
perpetual motion, and is lashed at times into great fury and
violence, but this only affects the surface and does not extend
lower than 60 to 100 feet. Some authorities give the mean
depth of the sea as 1,000 feet, others half a-mile; but this
cannot well be guessed. However, we know that the ocean
bed is like the land, diversified by hills, mountains, and
valleys, and has a distinct creation of its own.
Again, the climate of any country is dependent, in the first
place, upon its distance from the equator; and although
modified by the physical features of the district itself, the
different lands lying upon the same degree of latitude have
great similarities in climate.
In looking at the map once more, you will be struck by
the immense difference between the land and water area, the
latter being nearly three times the greater. Another astonish-
ing thing is, that nearly all the land lies in the northern
hemisphere, leaving a vast tract of the pathless ocean to the
south, half of which we shall have to traverse.


So much, then, for matters scientific, which we have made
as simple as possible, and which we hope will lead to a better
understanding of the track chart.
CHAPTER 11.
THE BAY OF BISCAY , MADE IB A, AND THE CANABIES.
Our good ship is now fairly on her way to the Antipodes;
and without staying to give any further advice, a commodity
with which the market is overstocked (in our case we claim
exception, since it is not gratis), will endeavour to accompany
her across the somewhat dangerous Bay of Biscay.
Take warning, and have all your crockery and tin ware
secured before night.
As I have said, we leave Plymouth Sound, the finest harbour
in the English Channel, and see the last of the light flashing
from one end of the projecting breakwater (5,000 feet long),
making past Eddystone for Cape Ushant, a small island on the
extreme west of France, and then we enter that terror of Indian
and Mediterranean voyagers —the Bay o’ Biscay 0 !
Why should this stretch of water be so terrible and so
dreaded? This query, we believe, has never been satisfac-
torily settled, but a good and sufficient reason is found in that
the immense rollers from the Atlantic entering the bight and
meeting there produce the tremendous commotion so
dangerous to shipping; and this is augmented by the motion
imparted to the waves in their striking the two opposite
shores of France and Spain, thus making higher, shorter, and
worse seas than are elsewhere met with. But let us not be
disheartened, since, peradventure, it will be fine (as in the
case of the s.s. “ Belgic”), and we shall cross, feeling inclined
to pooh pooh all the tales we have heard; and even should it
be rough, it may be that the horrors of sea-sickness will bo
somewhat alleviated by this war of the elements ; and, again,
if we encounter rough weather, we are better able to bear
with it in later days of the voyage.
It is rarely we meet with a person who is not attacked more
or less by Father Neptune, who demands a tax from all new-
comers, and forces them to divulge the secrets of their fare-
well dinner to Mother Earth.
Wrinkle. —Get the weather side of him by taking some
good aperient,, say a couple of rhubarb pills or a black draught
the morning before leaving, and then, when you get aboard,


do not eat everything before you, as if you had only one day
to do justice to the fare provided, but be satisfied with a
simple diet. A remedy for sea-sickness (reliable in every
is yet to be found; but we ourselves find that, should the
above precautions fail, a glass of brandy between the attacks
is a capital thing. Men an I boys should certainly not give in
to this weakness, but leave it for women and children. A
determined front is said to frighten away an evil spirit, or
even a mad bull ; and certainly we may escape with very little
sickness if we only exert ourselves and look after our
neighbour, or our wife, instead of ourselves. When we have
recovered, and gained our k sea-legs, we shall probably be
two or three days out, • have passed the Bay, and
off the coast of Portugal, which will be too far off to be
seen. It is a rocky, iron-bound coast, offering little or no
protection to ships ; but, on the other hand, we have the
Western Isles, or Azores, which, we believe, afford good
anchorage. They belong to the Portuguese, the chief island
being St. Michael, where they grow oranges and every kind of
fruit upon what were once streams of lava and liquid fire.
Our first stoppage will depend upon the port at which it is
intended to coal, and this is generally either Funchal, in
Madeira, or Santa Cruz, in Teneriffe.
In the ship “ Belgravia,” we well remember the morning on
which we dropped anchor in the harbour of Funchal, and
how every one “ threw physic to the dogs,” and took to
bartering for fruit (of which abundance offers), baskets, chairs
and feathers of beautiful native manufacture, and marvellously
cheap.
Oh, love ! where art thou absent, and in what is thy gentle
influence unfelt ? Even for the discovery of one of the most
beautiful islands in the world, we are indebted to thee, for the
most probable account of the discovery of Madeira, which
should endear it to all constant lovers, is the tale of an
Englishman of good family, named Robert Macham, who,
fleeing from the wrath of his sweetheart’s (Anna D’ArfeG
friends, was driven far away to sea upon an uninhabited
island! Here they were left by the crew of the ship, and
here they lived and died, experiencing, we trust, a true Adam
and Eve sort of existence, for really this is our idea of an
Eden, this Madeira ! Go, ye scoffers and unbelievers, search
in the chronicle of the world’s doings in the year 1334, and,
if not convinced, visit the church of Machico, and see a
portion of the cross found on their graves when the island was
re-discovered by the Spaniards in 1417 ! Madeira, then, is of
volcanic origin, one extinct volcano being on San Antonia
(5,076 feet), and is a collection of mountains, the highest being


■upwards of 6,000 feet high. The climate is always considered
the finest in the world, and is the sanatorium of wealthy
American and English citizens.
The vine, from which most luscious wine is made, forms
the chief cultivation, the sugar-cane not paying very well
nowadays. We had the pleasure of a run ashore at
Funchal, the capital, which has a safe roadstead, and is most
picturesquely situated in an amphitheatre of hills ; the white
stone buildings, with latticed windows, contrasting beautifully
with the green vine and golden sugar-cane. A remarkable
natural fortress is here, called the Loo Rock; in fact, the
whole effect is a most enchanting picture. Ashore, too, it is
most interesting, there being some good shops, and the streets
are all paved with smooth stones, there being no wheeled
vehicles, sledges drawn by oxen or men forming the only
travelling convenience. Great fun to take a walk away up
the hills, still upon paved roads, and to hire a sledge down.
They run down hill at a fearful speed, like Canadian toboggan-
ing, the man in the rear simply guiding it by putting the rope
which encircles the sledge port or starboard, as the case may
be. Along the wayside one sees the geranium growing in
wild luxuriance, together with the myrtle, rose, and violet.
It has not been permitted us to see again this lovely spot,
but the memory of it will last a lifetime.
However, it may not be our good fortune to go there, and
we may only catch a glimpse of it at some thirty or forty
miles distance. In that case, after passing a dangerous group
of rocks, known as the Salvage, whereon a treasure is said to
be hidden, between Madeira and Teneriffe, we shall drop
anchor in one of the harbours of the Canarian Archipelago,
belonging to Spain.
This group of islands is most prolific of harbours, that of
Santa Cruz de Teneriffe being the most frequented, and the one
at which the ships “ Gulf of Mexico ” and “ Belgic” coaled and
provisioned.
The islands are all of volcanic origin; in fact, many craters
are yet burning, including the celebrated Peak of Teneriffe,
some 12,000 feet above the sea-level, snow-capped, and tower-
ing above the clouds. It has, however, to be very clear w T eather
to see the peak to advantage, it being generally hidden behind
a haze of clouds towards the centre of the island.
These islands have a most interesting history, having been,
previous to their conquest by the kings of Spain and Portugal
in 1402, inhabited by a pastoral people called Guanches, who
bravely defended their liberty and lives for years in the wdld
mountain passes of Teneriffe, called, for this reason, “hell ” by
the Spaniards. Truly they took a little hell with them


■wherever they went, being choice spirits, headed by such men
as Pizarro and Cortez in America, and Bethencourt among the
simple people of these islands. The Guanches are now quite
extinct, another monument to the treachery of civilisation ;
for this occurred so recently as the end of the sixteenth cen-
tury. The chief ports are Santa Cruz de Teneriffe, Las Palmas
in the Grand Canary, and Santa Cruz de la Palma. The Grand
Canary is called the Granary, from its producing two splendid,
harvests of wheat in the year. The town of Santa Cruz de
Teneriffe is not prepossessing, being itself hare, gloomy, and
frightfully hot. A curved pier or breakwater protects the
shipping, and the port is well provided with every ship’s store
and comfort. They have a cathedral, rather tumble-down,
wherein, when an Englishman visits, they boastfully point out
to him two flags taken at some time or other from the British.
The hospital, in which we left one of the crew’ of the ship,
“ Gulf of Mexico,” is a large and handsome building, having
courtyards which are very picturesquely laid out. Having
partaken to satiety of coal dust and other Teneriffian com-
modities, we hid adieu to Canaria, and hail for Cape Town.
CHAPTER 111.
TEE TROPICS, CAPE DE VERDE ISLANDS, ASCENSION,
AND ST. HELENA.
In our introductory chapter we mentioned and explained
what is known as the torrid zone, which extends some 23
degrees north and south of the equator, and which receives a
greater amount of heat from the sun during the year than any
other part of the world. Now this zone of heat, familiarly
the tropics, has to he passed through shortly after leaving
Teneriffe; therefore we must now r expect the changes of
climate to he very marked, and one by one we shall throw off
these lendings as did King Lear of old, until ultimately we
shall wish we might assume that natural garb, so sleek and so
sable, much affected by the inhabitants of these parts, but
which in our case lacks that necessary pigment to hide our
modesty; or, as Sydney Smith says, “ Where it would be a
comfort to takeoff one’s flesh and sit in one’s bones; ” in other
words, we must remind our friends not to forget to put out of
the boxes, when they are on deck, some suitable apparel for
such weather.
We must acknowledge that for a week or so the heat


between decks is almost unbearable, being from 90 to 94
degrees F. But this does not last long; and, again, it is
compensated by the lovely night, the heavens studded with
the stars of both hemispheres, when we see the last of Charles'
Wain, and hail the rising of the Southern Cross.
We are now probably steering close in shore, and, if our
eyesight be good, may get a glimpse of the very westernmost
point of Africa, Cape Verde, after which our course will be a
little easterly, until we round this promontory, and are fairly
on our way to the Cape. In passing Cape Yerde we leave ta
the westward a small archipelago known as the Cape Verde
Islands, which consists of ten or more volcanic mountains,
rising precipitously from the ocean and forming in one part a
magnificent harbour, Porto Grande, on the north-west of San
Vincente. Ships frequently put in here for coal, as we did in
the “ Belgravia,” and a most interesting place it proved to be.
A port capable of sheltering some 300 sail of ships, surrounded
on all sides by glorious mountains, certainly innocent of vege-
tation, but on that account the more rugged and grand they
appear, with their rocks and volcanic soils tinted all colours by
the sun. This roadstead is formed on the one hand by San
Antonio, and San Vincente on the other, protected by Bird
Island, a picturesque rock surmounted by a no less picturesque
lighthouse. San Vincente can supply us with meat and
vegetables, bananas, oranges, and other fruits; but what is of
more consequence, coal is here stored, and is put aboard
steamers expeditiously by the black fellows.
San lago is the chief island and seat of government, and
contains 85,000 inhabitants, under the Portuguese Government,
one of whose navigators, Antonio Nole, a Genoese, discovered
the group in the year 1450.
The Portuguese also have settlements on the mainland
coasts around Cape Verde. We pass on our left (or, being at
sea, to port) an interesting republic, Liberia, established in
1822 for the reception of freed negro slaves from America, and
which now is very prosperous, and contains some 720,000
people. Along here also are English, French, and Dutch
settlements, such as Sierra Leone, the so-called white man’s
grave ; Ashantee, where Wolseley taught a savage king how to
govern his people ; and the gold and ivory coasts. A great in-
dentation of the African coast occurs here, known as the Gulf
of Guinea, or the Bight of Biafra, which receives many impor-
tant rivers, such as the Cameroon and the Gaboon, running
from fertile mountain passes into the ocean, and along which
the French and Portuguese have stations. We are now close
upon the equator, and in a day or two we shall cross it, which
in the old sailing-ship days was a holiday time, as every one


knows who has read Marryat’s books, or indeed any sailor’s
yarns; when Neptune,with his fair spouse, w T ere represented
by some old salts, who insisted upon receiving their dues in
the shape of grog, and also upon the clean shaving of all land
lubbers, which operation was generally performed in a pork
tub with an iron scraper. These things are becoming, like
sailing-ships themselves, almost of the past, and the most
innocent countryman may now cross the line without a shock
or a shave ; in fact, we have heard it said that nowadays
steamers pass over it too quickly to give time for such enter-
tainment.
Should no accident occur, we shall not again see the land
until we reach Table Bay; but accidents must happen sometimes
in the best regulated ships, as in the case of the “ Aberdeen,”
when some bolts in the crank-shaft broke, three or four hun-
dred miles from St. Helena, which necessitated our putting
into this not often visited island. Before getting to St. Helena,
however, we pass the Island of Ascension, about which a little
information may be desirable, since any ship might be driven
to take refuge there for water, stores, or assistance of some
kind or other. It lies about 8 degrees south of the line, and is
a barren, sterile accumulation of volcanic remains, about 22
miles in circumference, which was discovered on Ascension
Day, in the year 1501, by a Portugese commander, Nova
Galego. Green Mountain, 2,820 feet high, is the chief feature
of the island, and upon it the only attempts which have been
made in the way of cultivation are to be found.
The climate is, notwithstanding its vicinity to the line of
greatest heat, so balmy, pleasant, and invigorating, that it is
much vaunted as a sanatorium for our soldiers and sailors on
the West African station.
There are only 200 people now living there, all under the
control of a naval officer from Cape Town; in fact, the island
is but used as a repository of naval stores, provisions, and
water. These stores are only supplied to the ships of the mer-
chant service, under circumstances of distress, when we under-
stand no charges of any kind are made by the Government.
A quantity of wild fowl, cats, and rats are found on the island,
together with fine turtles, which are here caught when they
come to deposit their eggs, which they do beneath the
sand, leaving the rest of the process of incubation to nature.
In the beginning of October, 1884, the “ Aberdeen ” dropped
anchor in James’Bay, before the city of Jamestown, where
we stayed five days, thus giving a few of the officers a valuable
opportunity of seeing something new. There being no black-
smiths, or anything so useful on the Island of St. Helena, the
ship was almost self-dependent in getting her repairs done, the


only assistance obtained being from H.M.S. “ Opal,” whose
commander courteously prolonged his stay in port until our
crank shaft had been taken out and a new one, which was on
board, put in.
Provisions of all kinds were abominably dear, fresh meat a
luxury; in fact, the island seems in such a state of retrogression
that a few years would appear to be its full course. The open-
ing of the Suez Canal, taking ships via that route to India and
Australia, has quite closed all channels of wealth to the
benighted St. Helenians, or yam stalks, as they are sometimes
called. However, here was a chance, and they seized it like
hungry paupers, enforcing dues, inspections, certificates, and
provisions, until we were heartily glad to bid good-bye to them,
and pray deliverance from such land sharks of other poor
vessels. Nor is this because the island is incapable of supporting
its people, but it is their incorrigible laziness, for their lovely
atmosphere, instead of bracing them up to cultivating and im-
proving the soil, inclines them to be contented with their own
'and their fathers’ lot, and with the flotsam and jetsam which kind
Neptune may send them. A land more capable of improvement,
a climate more salubrious to Europeans, and scenery more grand
and elevating to the mind, cannot be imagined, and behold
we have these wretched yam-stalks letting scurvy, cacti, and
villanous tobacco plants encroach upon land which should be
a succession of vineyard, cornfield, and orchard. Cinchona,
cotton, sugar, and indigo have been proved to grow well here,
yet nothing better than a few sheep runs, cattle being rare and
mean, can be found on the island, which has an area of 47
square miles, being 9 miles long by 6 miles broad, and lies
about 16 degrees south of the equator. Like Ascension, Galego
first found it on the day of St. Helena, 1501, and it was the
residence, for a few years, of an exiled Portuguese nobleman,
Eernandez Lopez, who assiduously cultivated its resources.
After this, the Dutch had settlements here, but were ousted
by the British East India Company in 1651, who themselves
were unceremoniously expelled by the Hollanders in 1672.
In the following year, Captain Munden effected a landing,
and again took over the island in the name of the Crown,
who, however, relinquished it to the East India Company
7mtil 1836, when it again came under the Imperial govern-
ment.
Its chief interest nowadays lies in the fact that on the 15th
of October, 1815, after Waterloo’s bitter lesson, Napoleon
Buonaparte was landed here, and kept a prisoner until his
death, on the sth of May, 1821.
We were fortunate enough to land here, and in place of look-
ing at precipitous cliffs, rising 1,000 to 2,000 feet sheer from the


water for five days, we had a walking excursion into the in-
terior, which repaid all our time lost and our patience.
We stepped on to the quay, and were accosted at once by a
precocious boy, a little off colour, pure white almost unknown,
who seemed to be intimately acquainted with Napoleon, and
to be on excellent terms with the Governor and the garrison.
A small silver piece repaid him for his mendacity, and so
pleased him that he passed with us over the moat bridge, and
through the arched gateway into Jamestown, when he ascended
the famous Jacob’s ladder with us, consisting of about 900
steps, and leading to Flagstaff Hill, and demonstrated a free
and easy way of getting down again by putting his legs over
one rail and his shoulder on the other, and away he went.
We did not try it, but looked around us, and beheld a long,
straggling town lying snugly in a valley, with a cathedral in
the foreground, and houses of stone in the English style, with
zigzag roads winding from all parts of the island down the
mountain sides to the city. A freshwater stream, its banks
covered with magnolias, fuchsias, and brambles, meandering
to father ocean in a lazy, sleepy sort of way, inviting one to lie
and dream, which assuredly we did, and our vision was of the
sometime terror of the civilised world, chained up, as it were,
by miles and miles of water, from his empire and the people
whom he had led to victory, by a nation of shop-keepers.
Longwood House, built for him, but in which he did not live
to dwell, of course had to be seen, and his tomb, which once
was surrounded by willows —but now there are none, having
been stripped by relic hunters —lies in a lovely valley, with
beautiful Norfolk Island pines all around, and a delightfully
cool spring, which he much liked to frequent when alive.
His body rests here no longer, it having been sent to Paris in
1840. The climate, as we said before, is beautiful, the heat
never exceeding that of our English summer, about 80 degrees
F., the sun being shaded from the land by dreamy mists, which
cling about the summits of the mountains, and bathe the
vegetation below.
Diana’s Peak is 2,704 feet above the sea level, and many
others approach it in height, a fort upon High Knoll being
nearly 2,000 feet high. Around the Governor’s residence is
quite a botanical garden, containing tropical and sub-tropical
plants, growing hardily side by side.
There are between 6,000 and 6,000 inhabitants, who get a
living, or rather vegetate in a precarious sort of way, and are
far from rich in this world’s goods, all the wealth of the island
seeming to rest with one or two firms of general merchants
with scriptural names. We shall now be soon out of the tropics,
and within a few days’ run of Cape Town, to which we will
turn in a fresh chapter.


CHAPTEK IV.
CAPE COLONY AND ITS CAPITAL.
After passing St. Helena we shall again feel the cold, and
will of our own accord wrap up, for now is the changeful time*
which children and invalids feel the most. Woollen drawers
and vests for old and young should be insisted upon. Cer-
tainly the cold is far from approaching that of an English
winter, yet after our tropical experience it will seem more
severe. A run of about three weeks from Plymouth in a good
ship should bring us to safe anchorage in Table Bay, before
Cape Town, the metropolis of South Africa.
The Cape of Good Hope, after which this important colony
is named, is a promontory on the south-west extremity of
Africa, and was discovered by Bartholomew Diaz in 1486, who
christened it Stormy Cape ; but this the King of Portugal
changed to its present name, inasmuch as he judged it, and
rightly, to be the long sought for route to the Indies. Vasco'
de Gama rounded the Cape to prove the correctness of this
surmise in 1497.
In 1652 the Dutch came and founded a colony, and it con-
tinued theirs until 1793, when the British Government took
possession, but in 1802 restored it to the colonists, only to be
again wrested from them in 1806, and in the hands of the
Britishers it has since been.
Their claim probably rests upon the fact that in 1620 two
English commanders landed and annexed the territory,
but nothing was done towards settling it. Nevertheless, after
the English Government have poured emigrants into it whole-
sale, attracted by the diamond fields and reports of yet undis-
covered wealth, for many years, the colony seems to us yet,
as in the last century, essentially Dutch. Hearing low Dutch,
interspersed with French Huguenot idioms, in the market, in
the shops, and in the forum, how can we call it English ?
The colony is of vast extent, reaching from ocean to ocean,
and having a very unsettled northern boundary, owing to the
native tribes and Boers across the rivers Orange and Yaal, who
are in chronic condition of petty warfare. The population is
considerably over 700,000, and the imports amount to over
seven millions sterling, the exports, ninetenths of which
consists of wool, valuing some four millions.
The climate is delicious, summer and winter, only varying
about 15 degrees, the greatest heat being 97 degrees F., and
the greatest cold 38 degrees, the mean temperature throughout
the year being 62 degrees F. A climate with so little fiuctua-


tion cannot but be a paradise for consumptive patients, and
since Constantly and Wynberg are so pretty, one wonders more
do not fly to such salubrity.
Wool and wine are the chief productions, but the colonists
breed excellent horses, cattle, and sheep, and grow wheat,
barley, oats, and maize.
The diamond fields have of late years been very exciting,
putting the Cape and its inhabitants into a perfect fever of for-
tune. This is a questionable blessing, since the money obtained
at Kimberley, or elsewhere, is so rarely spent in the colony, but
is taken away, thus impoverishing rather than enriching it.
Ostrich feathers also are a valuable article of export.
We lie at anchor in a large indentation of the Cape penin-
sula, called Table Bay, which has an entrance about four miles
in width, and we see before us the reason for its name, in a
mountain rising to the height of 3,550 feet, flat as a table on the
top, nor does it lack a table-cloth to complete the similitude, a
white cloud settling on the top, which is prettily raised when a
breeze springs up.
The huge table is flanked on the one hand by the Devil’s
Peak, which is a rugged, peaked mountain, almost as high as
the table itself, and separated from it by a gap ; on the other a
lion couchant guards the way, his head (2,180 feet high) being
united to the table by an abrupt declivity, while his rump is
far away, about 1,150 feet high, upon which is situated a signal
station.
The mountain is very steep, and can only be approached at a
few spots, and then by means of steps cut in the solid rock.
Up the sides of the mountain one sees clumps of pine trees
(Leucodendron Argenteum) , bearing leaves covered with a beau-
tiful silky hair, which on drying give the unique silver leaves so
much admired from these parts. Cape Town, the capital of
this important colony, has 35,000 inhabitants, and is the seat of
government. The town is straggling, having but few fine
buildings, the chief being the Parliament House and the Stan-
dard Bank, besides some good squares, botanical gardens, and
a system of tramways to the pretty suburbs.
There are a quantity of Malays here ; in fact, all the horse-
dealing fraternity are Mahommedans, as also the fruit dealers.
It is a very picturesque spot that Cape Town fruit market,
where one sees the Malay ladies, dressed in silks of all colours
and patterns, from the feet to the quaintly-arranged head-gear,
doing business in such a don’t-care-off-hand way. However,
when one can buy luscious grapes at Is. 6d. per basket of 20 to
30 lb., there is nothing to find fault with.
A breakwater is being built to protect the shipping, half of
which is now in use, as also some fine docks, completed at a


tremendous cost, and a patent slip, carrying ships up to 1,500
tons.
Having taken in our quantity of coal, we cast off the dirty
old hulks vrith their dirtier Caffre crew, and are again under
weigh, when, after passing Eobben Island, on which is a
lunatic asylum, we stand off the land, again bound Eastward
Ho!
CHAPTER Y.
THE SOUTHERN OCEAN—AMUSEMENTS.
We round the Cape with a good hope of one day reaching'
Australia, as did the Portuguese many years ago in seeking:
India, and enter upon a vast landless area of water, stretching
from South Africa to Bass’s Straits, to which the name of
Southern Ocean is given in preference to that of Indian Ocean,
this being somewhat of a misnomer, so far is it from that
country. It entirely rests with the commander of our ship as
to how far south we may go, some captains asserting that as
good and quick a passage may be made in running down the
easterly along the parallel of 39 degrees, as by going further
south. Of course, in running further south, there is not, so to
speak, so much longitude to make, therefore the journey is
shortened; yet, so boisterous are the winds and waves, it is
a doubtful saving. For the comfort of passengers the north
passage is by far the better, the cold less intense, the sea not
so high, and the wind almost, or quite, as favourable.
This ocean being so remarkably barren of islands, our ship
may go full speed ahead without fear of running any down, and
if above the “ roaring forties,” as these waters are named,
rolling might he added, we shall, about mid-way between the
two continents, sight a small desert island, yclept St. Paul, and
another, Amsterdam, lies a little north of it. These names
recall to us the ancient maritime power of the Dutch ; in fact,
is not our new home itself also styled New Holland ? Both
islands are uninhabited, as also are the Crozets and Kerguelen
Islands south of this. We are given to understand that a boat
belonging to the British Government cruises in these waters
and among the islands to assist disabled vessels, or shipwrecked
crews, who may be cast upon any of the uninviting oases of
this watery Sahara. For bracing one up, and giving one an
appetite, this is the pleasantest part of the passage, and if we
take plenty of exercise there will be no occasion to call upon


the doctor. The sea is always superbly grand, and with a fair
wind one watches with wonder the vast rollers towering up
above our stern, almost dreading lest they should break over us,
but no ! we ride above them and enjoy the scene and sensation.
Amusements. —We have hitherto said nothing about amuse-
ments aboard our ship, although before this period of the voyage
there has probably been much and varied entertainment. A
few suggestions as to the style of recreation adapted to a ship’s
limited accommodation will, we think, not be out of place.
It must be a very puritanical sort of crowd if we cannot find
a few good musicians in it wherewith to form a band; this
done, a perfect programme is only the work of an energetic
canvasser for an afternoon. The singers found, and their con-
sent given, we must take our little programme to the captain,
who will, doubtless, do his best to make the entertainment a
success by lighting up the deck, or, where there is a good
saloon, by lending it for the occasion. Of course, a chairman
is a necessity; the captain, surgeon, or some prominent mem-
ber amongst the passengers should be asked to uphold the
dignity of the chair. Besides these grand affairs, very nice
little parties may be made up on the deck by moon or starlight,
when such songs as “ A Life on the Ocean Wave ” are rendered
with much greater zest and effect.
The girls, also, get up some good open-air concerts, the
band, if there be one, being allowed into this, the “ maiden
grove,” on such occasions, when many sprightly lasses will be
tempted to dance ; and since this is a most excellent exercise,
the matron should encourage it.
In the ship “ Gulf of Mexico ” the girls got up a splendid series
■of tableaux vivants, or, as the matron styled them, waxworks,
a stage being rigged up on deck, so that, when the curtain rose,
n theatre-like effect was produced, for behold the Three Old
Maids of Lee, the Sleeping Beauty, with Florence Nightingale,
a Burmese Girl, Blue Beard, Mary Queen of Scots, and the
inevitable virgin, Queen Bess, with many other equally good
representaions, all reciting something appropriate to their
parts.
In the jolly little “ Aberdeen ” we had concerts, and, not the
least amusing, a spelling bee, creating roars of laughter ; also,
a Parliamentary election, where the Eadical and Conservative
factions were caricatured, the Eadical, of course, heading the
poll, inasmuch as the ship was full of folk from Hibernia, and
the Tories had but a weak candidate in myself. A newspaper,
appearing weekly, in manuscript, was also a source of great
fun, and its printing and publishing in Sydney a grand success.
Quoits are a good deck game, rings of rope and a wooden peg
answering all purposes ; dominoes, draughts, and chessmen are


put aboard by tbe Government, and allow of a quiet couple
enjoying themselves. The young men would find excellent
sport in tugs of war, and other athletic games, for when the
ship is quiet even leap-frog, high and long jumps, may be
indulged in, and we must say it is far better in action than any
doctor’s physic.
As a finale to the voyage, the prize-giving of the children is
made as entertaining as possible, and in the good ship “ Belgic”
specially so, for did not the youngsters have, in addition to their
awards, milk, buns, toffy and brandy-snap? Many a man for
the next half-century will recall this pleasant time, and tell his
children’s children how they were treated on a Government
emigrant ship.
V- 'l'
Vx* vfT <T- «T«
We have all read that quaint old poem, “ The Ancient
Mariner,” and must take warning from him not to harm any of
the beautiful ocean birds which accompany us, always on the
wing in our wake, ever skimming through the air, leisurely
flying before our bows, making a circuit of miles, and coming
up with us so easily that it is truly tantalizing.
Behold the albatross, with all the glory of tradition upon his
outspread wings ; for does he not bear the spirits of departed
mariners within him ? Again, there is the molly mawk (save
the spelling), another of the petrels, and distinguished from the
albatross by having brown wings, with a band of feathers of the
same colour across his back. Then comes the smaller species
of this numerous tribe of birds, the Cape hen, a dull black bird,
serving as a contrast and set-off to the beautiful markings of
the Cape pigeon, the smallest of our followers, which skims
around like some gay butterfly. These birds are somewhat
easily caught, but superstition preserves them ; and long may
it last, for they afford us endless pleasure and amusement in
following their wild flight, and it would certainly be no gratifi-
cation to shoot or snare them. May any criminal in this
respect receive, as he deserves, the curse and punishment of ye
Ancient Mariner.
A run of about fourteen days will bring us very near the
Australian continent, and we shall feel ourselves nearly at our
destination ; many will begin to pack up, and all will feel a
delightful anxiety about his coming fate in the Greater Britain
approaching. Being so near the land of our adoption, we will
pause, and attempt in another chapter a brief summary of its
most important divisions and other leading characteristics.


CHAPTEE YI.
ADVANCE AUSTRALIA !
A motto chosen by a country in whose coat of arms there is
no emblem of war, supported by a harmless denizen of its
wilds, and by a no less peaceful bird, in the place of the old-
world bird of prey ; whose advance is solely due to the pursuit
of the arts of peace, divided fairly between the plough and the
shears, the pick-axe and the compass.
This Terra Australis, this Greater Britain, has no history,
no ancestry, is but a century old, and yet it is now taking its
place amongst the first of nations. In possessing ourselves of
this fair land we have displaced no other people worthy the
name, have shed no blood, but have held out our hand to the
poor savage, who, unfortunately, is incapable of rising with us,
and dies a natural death before the advance of civilisation.
We have said Australia has no history, and if by that we
mean she has had no tyrants, no wars, no revolutions, we are
in the right, yet, in this short space of ninety-eight years,
great things have been done, which will live in their results
longer than the deeds of any of our warrior kings.
For many years Australia is synonymous with New South
Wales, who was the mother, and is now the premier colony,
surrounded on all sides by daughters as vigorous as herself.
The Portuguese here, as in many places elsewhere, seem
to have been the pioneer voyagers ; and so early as 1601 had
they sighted and named this land, but made no use of the dis-
covery. The Dutch, in the early part of the seventeenth,
century, had great interests in the East, and sent an expedi-
tion, under Carstens and Tasman, southward, who found this
land, and named it New Holland. The Dutch East India
Company, however, kept their discovery a profound secret,
which was their ruin, for on its visitation in 1770 by our
countryman, Captain Cook, who surveyed the greater part of
the coast, it was annexed to King George’s dominions
and* recommended by the circumnavigator as a desirable place
for an English colony.
In 1787 the Government sent out Commodore Philip to
found a colony on the spot where Captain Cook had landed,
named Botany Bay, and on January 20, 1788, the pilgrim
fathers of Australia, numbering 1,030 souls, disembarked, after
a long and tedious voyage. On the same day, the celebrated
Frenchman, La Perouse, entered Botany Heads, but was too
late, as that nation seems destined to be in the matter of


colonization. Thus came the English in peaceful possession
of a huge safety-valve for their surplus population. The
elements for this enterprise were strangely chosen, but,
judging the tree by its fruit, we have little cause to regret
any more than have the Romans of their ancestry, or our
aristocracy of the robber barons and pirate vikings of the
tenth century.
Australia is 2,600 miles long, from east to west, and 1,960
miles wide from the furthest points north and south, having
an area of 2,941,696 square miles, and a population con-
siderably over two millions. It is divided into five colonies,
namely, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South and
Western Australia, of which the first is the parent and premier
settlement. A chain of mountains runs along the south-east
and east coasts, about 100 miles in shore, named the Pyrenees in
the south, the Australian Alps in the south-east, and the Blue'
Mountains on the east coast, the height being about 1,500
feet, the highest known mountains, Kosciusco and Hotham,
being respectively 6,510 and 7,500 feet in height. Another
important range, the Darling, runs north and south in the
west. The river Murray is more than 1,000 miles long, rising
in the Alps, receiving several large rivers, and dividing
Victoria from New South Wales, finally running into the
Southern Ocean through Lake Victoria.
This continent possesses as much diversity of clime as does
Europe, the interior consisting of vast flat plains, at present
deficient in vegetation; but the settled districts have a
delicious climate, remarkably pleasant and salubrious, akin to
that of the shores of the Mediterranean. The great curse of
the country is periodical drought, lasting for a year or more,
followed by excessive rains. The conservation of water and
the digging of wells is in some way lessening this danger to
its flocks and herds.
When Australia was first visited by Europeans, the most
startling thing was the remarkable dissimilarity of its animal
and vegetable creation to that of the knowm world. The
pouched animals, of which the kangaroo is the most formid-
able specimen, were the greatest source of curiosity. By the
way, the British tar ashore asked the aboriginal black fellow
the name of this animal, who shouted in return “ Kangaroo,”
which, being translated, means “Go away! ” and thus the
poor brute got christened. Then there is the ornithorhynchus,
a quadruped with a duck’s bill; the emu, which, excepting the
ostrich, is the largest known bird; the laughing jackass, who
makes night hideous, but is the snake’s greatest enemy, and
the many brilliantly-plumaged but poor-songed birds of the
bush. Serpents abound also in many places, but few


fortunately are poisonous; it is better, however, not to
touch any of these creatures, who do not sting unless first
attacked.
There is but little forest in Australia, and that is fearfully
monotonous, the gaunt gum tree and the shadeless acacias
composing it. Most of the country unenclosed is covered with
a dense scrub, made up of what is called the tea tree and
mallee, which are evergreen. The bush flowers are marvels of
beauty, but of no perfume, such as the waratah and banksia,
the former being like a mass of flaming lilies. Then, again,
the golden mimosa, a most lovely plant, as abundant as the
furze on our English moors, and many climbing plants, such
as the kennedia, A small, wax-like flower, which one is
tempted to call a heath, covers the ground with its many-
coloured blossoms, pink, white, yellow, all colours of the
rainbow, in fact, and this is named epacris.
Governor Philip and his successors had a most difficult task
for the first twenty years, the colony being entirely dependent
upon supplies from home for the common necessaries of life, so
much so that its people were reduced to the verge of starva-
tion in 1790, through the loss of the storeship “ Guardian.”
Botany Bay, or Port Hacking, as it is now called, proved
totally unfit for settlement, and the Governor, after a very
short time, abandoned it, and made his way up Port Jackson,
as far as Sydney Cove, where he pitched his tents, and marked
the site of the future city. Captain Cook had certainly noted
the entrance to Sydney Harbour, and had named it Port
Jackson; but thinking it only fit for a boat harbour had
passed it by. It seems strange that a man so careful in his
surveys as he usually was, should have overlooked the finest
anchorage in the world ; and it could only have been through
his anxiety about his stores for the homeward voyage.
To return. The difficulties encountered and overcome by
the young colony seem marvellous, and the patience and per-
severance of the commander, under circumstances of riot,
rebellion, and famine, deserving our admiration and wonder.
A succession of governors, more or less popular, advanced
the interests of the colony until 1808, wffien Governor Bligh
made himself so obnoxious that he was deposed by the military
and sent home. This little rebellion was punished by cashier-
ing the officer at the head of it. Governor Macquarie became
highly popular, and did much to open out and improve the
settlement, making roads and bridges, and aiding exploration.
The colony owes much to the explorers, Short, Hume,
Mitchell, Leichardt, Kennedy, and others, who, one after the
other, went forth, in many cases to meet death, and in all
to encounter privations of all sorts, the result of whose labours


was the settlement of many new districts, and a better know-
ledge of the interior of Australia. In 1818 the narrow strip
of land then known to the colonists, lying between that most
beautiful range of mountains called Blue and the sea coast,
became too small for the increasing flocks of the squatters,
when Mr. Wentworth succeeded in crossing the mountains
;and opening out a vast tract of fertile plains.
A few words about the other colonies, which all owe their
■existence to New South Wales. Victoria, colonised from New
South Wales and Tasmania, separated in 1851, and, owing to
the discovery of gold, its career has been one of unparalleled
prosperity, and Melbourne, its capital, became one of the
flrst and handsomest cities of the colonies. The population
•of Victoria is 885,000.
South Australia was founded by private enterprise, receiving
a separate Government in 1836, and has a vast territory,
reaching from the Southern Ocean to the extreme north of
Australia, with a population of 290,000, its metropolis being the
pretty little city of Adelaide.
Queensland, separated from New South Wales in 1859, with
Brisbane as the seat of government. The climate is such as to
render it extremely improbable that it 'will ever become a
great English colony, and the difficulty of getting coolie labour
cripples the sugar and cotton industries, the only paying
ventures being sheep-farming and gold or coal mining.
Western Australia was first settled in 1829 on the banks of
the Swan Eiver, but has made little headway, having been
made a penal settlement at their own request, which has
brought it in somewhat bad.odour with its sisters. Its capital
is Perth, with Ports Freemantle and Albany. The country is
little known, but is believed to be rich in minerals, and is at
present only a Crown colony, with a very small portion of
self-government.
Tasmania was first settled in 1843 from Sydney, but
is now an independent colony, with Hobart as capital, and
a population of about 120,000. Its climate is very like that
of England, its soil exceedingly fertile, and is rich in minerals.
Eor some reason or other it is at present at a standstill, and
not a desirable place to emigrate to.
New Zealand also separated in 1846 from its parent, and
has at present managed to run into such fearful debt as to
handicap the colony for many years to come.
The colonies have recently annexed the eastern half of the
neighbouring island of Papua or New Guinea, and are jointly
being at the expense of exploring and opening out the country,
which is supposed to be rich in minerals. The climate, how-
ever, is execrable, and, without any gift of prophecy, we may


fairly say it will not be a Papuan who is, according to Macau-
lay, to sit upon the ruins of London Bridge and sketch those
of St. Paul’s.
Another colony, that of Fiji, is going ahead, but is unfit for
European labour, and must be for Fijians only to develop.
CHAPTEE VII.
OUB LAST WEEK AT SEA.
Having, while yet at sea, given you some idea of the vast-
ness of the Australian continent we will in this chapter pro-
ceed on our way to Sydney, and when we have reached that
lovely city, will then devote a little time to the colony of New
South Wales, its resources, and its capital.
Our gallant ship is now off Cape Leuwin, the westernmost
point of the island, and in Australian waters within a week of
our journey’s end. We shall most likely be too far south to
catch a glimpse of Western Australia at King George’s Sound,
where a thriving little colony, Albany, is situated. After
crossing the great Australian Bight, the antipodial Bay of
Biscay, for in general characteristics it is not unlike that terror
of the Atlantic, and the shores of which are uninviting and
barren, we sight land at Cape Nelson, in Victoria, and shortly
after at Cape Otway, where our arrival will be telegraphed to
Sydney. Then we cross the mouth of Port Philip, where we
shall probably see a lot of shipping, and certainly note some
lovely islands and rocks rising out of the water in Bass’ Straits.
Across this bay we have Wilson’s Promontory, whereon is a,
lighthouse and telegraph station. We then lose sight of
land until Cape Howe is reached, which is intersected by the
boundary line of Victoria and New South Wales, a huge cleft
in the dense scrub and forest plainly showing the line of
demarcation. Coasting a few miles from shore is now very
interesting, and will give us some idea of our new home,
which appears very different to the chalk cliffs of old Albion.
Ho not let the aspect of this land dishearten you : it certainly
looks cold, sandy, rugged, and bare, but within it contains
mines of wealth, not only on the surface, but buried deep in
its bosom. Some kind friend will point out Twofold Bay, a
pretty little harbour, with Eden nestling in its arms; then
Jervis Bay and Wollongong; finally, Botany Heads appear.
Oh ! Heaven be praised, we near the haven at last. There is
the South Head, crowned with a glorious electric light visible


forty miles at sea ; there is the fatal gap which the unfortunate
Dunbar mistook for the entrance of Port Jackson ; and, lo !
here we are waiting for the pilot between the two heads. The
jolly old pilot is aboard, and we are slowly entering those
narrow heads to find ourselves enclosed in a magnificent land-
locked stretch of water, sprinkled with islands, and beautified
by noble bays and headlands. We cast anchor off Watson’s
Bay, near which pleasure resort are the fortifications, and
await the medical officer. He comes, when, after receiving
the surgeon’s report, he either permits us to go up to our
anchorage in Neutral Bay, or most likely sends the ship to the
Quarantine Ground, where we lie a day or two, in order to
have all the things washed and purified ashore, where the
'Government provide every convenience. Unless we have some
infectious diseases aboard, letters and telegrams will be for-
warded to or from our friends, newspapers will come aboard,
and we shall feel once more in a civilised country.
The Quarantine Grounds lie close to Manly (so named on
account of the behaviour of the natives) on the North Head,
and are beautifully situated, having- beaches facing the ocean
and the harbour, and commanding glorious views of the Middle
Head and Harbour. The paddle boat “Brighton” or the
“ Fairlight ” pass frequently laden with passengers to and from
business or on pleasure, who greet us with shouts of welcome.
How glad are we now that we decided upon making “East-
ward Ho ! ” even were it only to see before we die the finest
harbour in the world under a clear blue Australian sky.
Having washed our apparel and purified our ship with sul-
phurous acid gas, we are allowed to proceed further up the
harbour towards the City Beautiful, which sits at the head of
this lovely sea lake as a crown. We have said this
harbour is the most beautiful in the world, but that is not
enough, it is a paradise on earth, which on gaining one will
never wish to leave. All along now, on either side, are
Tomantic rocks, bays, and creeks, with the lovely bush growing
to the water’s edge ; palatial residences and pretty villas, where
the Sydney merchant regales himself after a brisk day on
’Change, nestle among the rocks; and so deep is the water
that he may almost touch the masts of his vessels from his
parlour window. It winds in and out, does this fair stretch
of water, until at last, when we drop anchor in Neutral Bay,
we look around and fail to recognise the point at which we
entered. Apparently, we are in a lake like unto Killarney,
whence the domes and spires of the promised land are visible,
which hold forth hopes unfathomable, and we all await
Anxiously for our time to try our fortunes in this nineteenth
century Canaan.


Our pen shall forerun the steamer and proceed to the
Circular Quay, and gather what information it can about the
colony and its prospects. It is almost needless to say that the
information may be thoroughly relied upon, being obtained
from official and trustworthy sources.
CHAPTER VIII.
NEW SOUTH WALES AND SYDNEY.
In 1856, when first a responsible government was established
in Sydney, we find New South AYales well defined and sur-
rounded by offspring as prosperous almost as herself. Her
superficial area is 310,937 square miles —three times the size
of Great Britain, and larger than any one State, except Russia
in Europe. She has a coast line of about 800 miles, indented
with many fine harbours extending from Cape Howe to Point
Danger; is hounded on the south by River Murray, and the
Australian Alps, to Cape Howe, on the west by the 141 S.
meridian, as far as the 29th parallel of latitude, and on the
north by this line, the rivers Macintyre, Darling, and
Dumaresque, and the Macpherson range of mountains. Her
greatest length is 900 miles, and her greatest breadth 800'
miles.
In 1851 Hargreaves discovered gold near Bathurst, and a
perfect fever set in, to the great detriment of the other in-
dustries. Wealth, however, flowed into the colony, and in
1852 a bi-monthly steamship service w T as inaugurated by the
Peninsular and Oriental Company, on the declaration of Port
Jackson as a free port.
In 1868, Prince Alfred of Edinburgh visited the colonies,,
the pleasure being marred by his attempted assassination at
Clontarff.
Sir Hercules Robinson has been, perhaps, the most popular
Governor, he and his lady leaving for the Cape of Good Hope
in 1879. In the following year the great Exhibition was
opened and proved a wonderful success, the beautiful garden
palace in which it was held being, however, destroyed by fire
in 1882. .
Lord Augustus Loftus has been Governor from that time
until now, and under his administration the colony has made
such rapid strides that one may almost say that the Sydney
of to-day is of the last ten years, most of the older part of
the city being rebuilt. A popular member of the English


aristocracy, Lord Carington, is on his way to the colony (at
the time of going to print), to take up the reins of government.
Let us now stay and have a look round this beautiful city.
Hailing a small boat, or taking one of the steam-tenders from
our ship, we proceed from Neutral Bay, which is surrounded
on all sides by the pretty villa-residences of the North Shore,
and pass round Pinchgut Island, now strongly fortified—so
named on account of some convicts imprisoned there having
been forgotten and left to starve —and across Farm Cove past
Fort Macquarie until we reach the Circular Quay. This
wharf runs all round Sydney Cove, and is now a very busy
spot —pleasure steamers, launches, and boats of all descriptions
coming and going. Throw the mind back a century,
when Philip first brought his motley colonists round
from Botany, and behold, a wild rocky country, covered
with low scrub and bush, unfit for the growing of any-
thing wdiich an Englishman had been accustomed to,
inhabited by a savage people, certainly not dangerous,
but unfriendly to the white man, who thus came and
drove them from their most favoured haunts. All praise and
all honour to those pioneers who suffered that their children’s
children might enjoy the present magnificence. A man is still
living, we believe, in one of the Government asylums who at
one time owned part of this same Circular Quay, and who sold
it in consideration of a bottle of rum and a small sum of
money.
On landing, we will avoid the busy crowd and take a turn to
the left, which will take us past spacious warehouses and wool
stores on the one side, and a wharf, having the fine ships of
the “Orient,” “ P. and 0.,” and “ Messageries Maritimes ”
Lines alongside on the other. After a time we pass Fort
Macquarie, and look over a pretty sea wall upon one of the
many pretty bays of Port Jackson, wherein are anchored
several of Her Majesty’s ships of war, and the “ Wolverene,”
the first of the N.S.W. fleet. This embankment runs in a
half circle as far as Lady Macquarie’s chair, through the
gates of the Botanical Gardens, having entered which we find
ourselves in a very Eden. In no other place can such a com-
bination of natural beauty with the skill of the gardener be
found in the heart of a great city. We spend a few hours
here admiring the strange flowers and stranger trees of this
all-fruitful land. Trees of the tropics grow alongside the oak,
beech, and fir, the Moreton Bay fig-tree, the eucalyptus, the
acacias, and the palms being especially worthy of note. We
wander as far as Lady Macquarie’s chair, hewn out of the
solid rock, on a spot at one time sacred to the savage breast as
the place where the “ corroboree ” was held, where the pipe


of peace was smoked and the boomerang and stone spear first
gave the alarm of war. This is a headland which overlooks
Woolloomooloo Bay, round which we walk, through the
domain or government reserve which surrounds the garden on
every side, and find our way out past the Art Gallery and
Technological Museum into Macquarie Street, near to the
Governor’s house, which is a splendid mansion surrounded
by private grounds, and commanding most lovely views of the
harbour. About here stood the great exhibition building, and
it must have been a fine sight from the water. We are now
in Macquarie Street, opposite the Public Library, which is a
great boon to strangers seeking information, as also to the
Sydneyites themselves —the lending portion is higher up the
same street. This street is the abode of the professions in
Sydney, and is very English except in the verandahs and
balconies of the houses. The Colonial Secretary has at one
end of this street a magnificent office, and within stonesthrow
the Minister of Lands is established in a building which, when
complete, will be another ornament to this already ornate city.
The Eoyal Mint and the Sydney Hospital are situated on the
left, the latter building being in a neglected condition, partly
new, partly old; then the Government Depot appears, facing
a large square at the head of King’s Street, in which is a
statue of the Prince Consort and a lonely-looking marble
pedestal destined for the figure of Her Majesty the Queen, the
original statue intended for this having been lost in the great
fire. Hyde Park extends from this square on the left.
From the Macquarie Asylum we proceed along King Street,
where stands St. James’s Church, the oldest church in Sydney,
where the Governor has his pew, and whose copper-clad
steeple serves as a guide to mariners navigating the harbour.
This church was first intended for a law court, but a new
Governor, thinking to remove the cause rather than punish
the crime, had a spire added to the hall, and behold the
church !
Note how the names of all the streets recall the history of
the town. Here is Philip Street, running to the water’s edge.
Below this we first make our acquaintance with the steam
tramway, are by no means charmed by the clumsy cars and
clumsier locomotives, and are surprised that many accidents
do not occur, seeing the speed at which they run along
Elizabeth Street. Crossing Pitt Street, the merchants’
thoroughfare, we come to George Street, the business street
of Sydney. Walk along it, and one thinks one is in the High
Street of some large English town. The crowd hurry in the
same way, with like expressions ; the folk are dressed in the
latest fashions; and looking into the shop windows there is


nothing to remind us that we are on the opposite quarter of
the globe. We, probably, wish to post our letters, or inquire
for some, and here is the Post Office —one of the finest, and
certainly the most convenient building, in the Colonies, reach-
ing from George to Pitt Street, and under whose colonnades
one meets every shade of society, hears every tongue, and
mayhap chances upon a friend whom one never expected to
meet.
The further end of George Street, near the water, is almost
given up to Chinese tradesmen ; so, not wishing to trespass
upon the Celestials, we will retrace our steps up George
Street and look for the Town Hall —a magnificent structure
in the Italian style ; and next to it the Cathedral, which is
bold but bare withal. The Bishop, Canon Barry, is a well-
known ecclesiastic of Westminster Abbey celebrity.
George Street now widens considerably, and joins Elizabeth
Street, near which the Railway Terminus is situated. From
this point, trams branch off to all parts of Sydney. We may
take one to Forest Lodge and see the University and its fine
hall, together with the Scotch and Irish Colleges, and the
Medical School of Prince Alfred’s Hospital, which are all
affiliated to the University. The Hospital is a bijou of every
perfection and improvement in the treatment of the sick.
Another tram might take us to Leichardt —a very healthy
suburb for the working man; as, also, is the neighbouring
Balmain. These two suburbs are separated from Sydney
proper by an arm of the harbour, across which steam ferry
boats are continually running.
We will return, however, to George Street, and shall not fail
to notice the two glories of Sydney tradesmen —the Arcades,
one of which is electrically lighted, and has an organ which is
worked by steam or some mechanical means. Through this
we pass into King Street, which one might call the sporting
thoroughfare. We wish to see the Roman Catholic Cathedral,
which, although incomplete, is planned in a really grand style,
and will, when finished, be the finest place of worship in
Australia, being as large as Durham, and larger than many
of our English cathedrals. It stands on a plot of ground
between Hyde Park and the road to Woolloomooloo, a very
pretty suburb or township.
Let us take the South Head coach, and experience one of
the finest drives in the world; the harbour running into a
number of pretty bays on the one hand, and a country rich in
villas on the other. We pass through William Street, the
main thoroughfare of this thickly-populated district, and arrive
at Darlinghurst, of unenviable notoriety on account of its gaol,
through which we arrive at Darling Point, and are surprised


at the evident wealth of all around (this being the Belgravia
and Kensington of Sydney), and the beauty of the houses, of
which Mr. Tooth’s, the brewer, surpasses in sumptuousness
of design. The view of the stream, as we roll along the road,
is beyond description, dotted as it is with large and small
islands, making it a perfect puzzle to navigation; and one
wonders how mariners find their way. We understand that all
these islands are reserved for strategical purposes by the
Government; and one of which, we hear, forms the dwelling-
place of the great oarsman, Laycock. Eushcutters Bay,
Elizabeth Bay, Double Bay, and Watson’s Bay are below us
in quick succession, their shores here and there sheltering
some retreat of a rich man. At South Head we view the
fortifications, which are really grand in their way, and would,
doubtless, in conjunction with those across at Middle Head,
prove very effective in the event of an attack from the sea.
To our left, on returning home, we pass pretty Waverley
and prettier Woolahra —suburbs reached by tram from Bridge
Street. Our coach puts us down at Hyde Park Square ; and
we walk through this narrow strip of a reserve, and meet with
a statue of Captain Cook, then have a running glance at the
contents of the Sydney Museum—a Grecian building of some
pretension. Crossing to Elizabeth Street, a Byzantine-like build-
ing strikes us, and we learn it is the Jewish Synagogue. Near
this we find the market—unworthy the city, being an old and
incommodious building. Doubtless the energies of the autho-
rities will soon build one to rival the Eastern market of
Melbourne, for one knows that such rivalry exists in most
other things.
In Sydney the streets are after the English style, occasion-
ally losing themselves in a turn; but one never finds a Melbourne
street guilty of such a thing—perfectly parallelogrammic and
rectangular is it. We prefer the crooked streets and pleasant
byeways, and from the market will keep to them, passing
through Wynyard Square, on towards Miller’s Point, near
which is the Observatory towering on a rock, which is all cut
away around for the public convenience. From this observa-
tory we get a splendid view of the “ pool ” of Sydney, where
we see the flags of all nations flying from ships along the
wharves, and of the Parramatta Eiver and Cockatoo Island,
across to the north shore. Passing down hill, and through
the Argyle Cut, a road made beneath other roads through
the solid rock, we again come to George Street, near the
Circular Quay. Let us now take one of the North Shore
Ferry boats, and in a few minutes we are passing round
Dawes’ Point, on which is a battery; and after calling
at Milsom’s Point (whence a cable tram is being made into


the country) and at McMahon’s Point, we proceed to the top
of Lavender Bay —a most beautiful introduction to the North
Shore. Here ladies and gentlemen may find splendid bathing
and swimming without fear of sharks. Walking up the stair-
way, cut from the rock, we are surprised to find this district so
pretty, and, though not quite so aristocratic as the vis-a-vis
Darling Point, yet eminently respectable. A bridge, ere long,
will connect Sydney with St. Leonard’s, and then!—well, I
should wish to be a property owner on the North Shore. Let
me now take you to a spot where, we trust, many of our
number will spend their first really happy days; for Coogee
shares with the Blue Mountains those on their honeymoon
bent. To get to Coogee we pass through Moore Park —a
very extensive, but not fully laid out domain—and notice the
way to the Zoo and the Eandwick racecourse, through the
town of Eandwick; and then comes a sandy hush, now rapidly
being built upon, until we see, as the tram rushes down the
hill, the ocean once more. A word of caution: Don't bathe at
Coogee ! There are three or more theatres, and all the best
plays and operas may be seen soon after their appearance in
London. Concerts are an every-day occurrence, there being
several musical societies. One cannot help regretting the use-
to which these halls are placed on Sunday, which is the
preaching of anti-Christ.
The present population of the city and suburbs is estimated
at 250,000 souls, more than half of whom are resident in the
suburbs.
We have said enough about Sydney and its suburbs, but will
append a little statistical information which will give some
idea as to the importance of New South Wales, and trust will
lead many to abandon the wretchedness of the English climate
and the squalidity of the large towns for this beautiful and
glorious country.
CHAPTEE IX.
THE CLIMATE AND A FEW SOCIAL STATISTICS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The immense stretch of country over some nine degrees of
latitude gives as great a diversity of climate as can be found in
Europe—from the intense cold of Scotland found in the
elevated districts of the Great Dividing Eange, to the balmy


air of the Mediterranean shores, met with in the neighbour-
hood of the metropolis, the mean temperature of which is
about 62 degrees F., which is also nearly the mean of the
whole colony. On the banks of the Clarence River we have a
climate tropical in its heat and humidity, whilst away on the
tablelands we may be braced up with a cold of 22 degrees F.,
and see the snows so familiar in the land of our birth. In
no part of New South Wales can the climate he called
unhealthy, as is proved by the remarkable absence of those
epidemics which try to such a fearful extent the European
temperament in some other of our possessions, and also by the
excess of births over deaths, which in 1881 amounted to
151 ’33 per cent., while many authenticated cases of extreme
longevity are by no means uncommon. During six out of the
twelve months of the year the climate is delightful, even when
the thermometer registers its highest. This heat is tolerable,
the light brilliant, and the sky cloudless in the daytime, and
the coolness of the evenings affords a welcome change. Out-
door life in Australia is not at all a thing to be feared, and an
Englishman soon loses that stay-at-home-fire- side feeling which
characterises him in his own country, and with it much of the
churlishness and John Bullism which make him so often the
butt of his travelling companions of brighter climes. The
year is divided, as in the old country, into four seasons, the
.spring months being September, October, and November,
which are, perhaps, the most pleasant; the summer months,
December, January, and February; the autumn months,
March, April, and May; the winter months, June, July, and
August. The cold of the latter is somewhat akin to that of
the spring at home, the day being warm and the nights cold ;
but never as severe as experienced in Europe, except in the
most elevated districts, some thousands of feet above the
sea-level.
The dry seasons, so great a terror of yore, are becoming year
by year less fearful, the settlement of the interior increasing
not only the supply of water in the creeks and rivers, but the
wealth of the squatters is providing such reservoirs for the con-
servation of the abundant rains, and so many wells for reaching
un undoubted water supply below, that the droughts of the
future will not mean death to the stock and ruin to the
holders.
New South AVales made little headway up to the year 1810,
either in increase of population, or in the opening out of its
abundant resources, the progress, of which we are now reaping
the benefit, dating from the arrival in that year of Governor
Macquorie, who found the colony in much need of firm govern-
ment and of moral reform. It consisted of little else than the


home county of Cumberland and a part of Camden, with the
small dependency of Van Diemen’s Land, whilst now it leads the
van of civilisation in the Southern Ocean, with its four children
—Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand—emu-
lating their parent’s career. The following figures will give
some idea of the rapid and steady increase of population, not-
withstanding the secession, in 1851, of the attractive and
valuable dependency of Victoria, with its 68,355 souls, and in
1859 of the northern territory of Queensland, which took from
its parent a population of 25,000, and which two countries have
since rivalled New South Wales in their efforts at colonisation
and progress :
Population of New South Wales in 1821 ... 29,783
» » 1831 ... 51,155
>. » « 1841 ... 149,669
» 1851 ... 197,168
» 1861 ... 358,278
„ 1871 ... 519,182
1881 ... 781,265
The population at the end of 1883 was estimated at 869,310,
and at the present time it probably exceeds 900,000. Governor
Sir Hercules Robinson has prophesied that within the next half
century the population of the Australian group will have
reached thirty millions!* and one cannot doubt it, since the
increase at present is at the rate of 50 per cent, in a decade.
About one-third of the population is resident in and about
Sydney, so that the interior is yet but thinly peopled, and stands
out in marked contrast with the overcrowded condition of the
United Kingdom, with her thirty-four millions; of France, with
its thirty-seven millions; and the forty-four millions of Ger-
many ; yet still more, when we consider New South Wales as
two-and-a-half times the size of the United Kingdom, as a
third larger than France, and nearly a third larger than the
Kaiser’s dominions. Again, let us see the number of people
per square mile, and we shall be further surprised. In New
South Wales there are 3 persons, in England 291, in France
180, and in G ermany 201, to the square mile. We may see now
how incumbent it is upon the mother country to spare a por-
tion of her superabundant population, and transplant it to &
fair and brighter clime, where life is longer, and better worth
the living, and where, as can be proved, each inhabitant con-
sumes far more of British manufactures than does the average
person in England itself.
The political and social condition of New South Wales is in
every way satisfactory, the country having enjoyed, since 1856,
a Constitution securing to them the vital principles of British
liberty with a further exercise of democratic power, as instanced


in a policy of manhood suffrage, a free press, and a perfect
equality of religions.
The Governor represents the Queen, and the axiom holds
good here, as at home, that “ The King can do no wrong ! ” he
being advised by a responsible Ministry, chosen from a Legisla-
tive Council, the members of which hold their seats for life,
and a Legislative Assembly, which is the first in power, and is
elected under a Triennial Act, Both Houses are guided by the
rules and practice of the British Parliament, but, happily,
have less abuses and fewer vested interests to combat with.
Justice is administered according to the good old forms of
Westminster, and life and property are as secure in all parts of
New South Wales as in the United Kingdom.
There are no workhouses nor rates for the relief of the poor
in New South Wales ; but there exist many means of assisting
the indigent and helpless, who, however, form but a very small
proportion of the population, the colony contrasting in this, as
in other respects, most favourably with European countries.
The working man has here what he only dreams of in other
less favoured lands, that is, short hours conjoined with high
wages, an eight-hour system of labour being in force. This,
combined with the cheapness of the common necessaries of
life, and the many opportunities for improving the spare hours
afforded by the educational institutions founded by the Govern-
ment, render the industrial classes a better educated, more
contented, orderly, and prosperous part of the community than
they can possibly be in any European country. They become
thrifty under the healthful competition of their fellows in the
race for a competence and comfort in old age, as evidenced by
a sum of £1,466,086 standing to the credit of 42,274 depositors
in the different savings banks in the year 1882, and, in addition,
by a sum of £1,158,454 credited to 31,852 depositors in the
Government savings banks, thus making a grand total of
£2,624,540, as the savings of the working class in a population
barely exceeding 800,000. Places of religious worship are
numerous, every sect being represented. In 1882 there were
some 1,420 churches, with 768 ministers, and an average
attendance of 226,134 : also 1,318 Sunday-schools, with 9,160
teachers, and 102,141 scholars.
All the leading friendly societies of the United Kingdom are
found here, several of the branch organisations in Sydney and
elsewhere possessing a considerable number of members, the
Oddfellows and Foresters having large and commodious halls
of their own. The principles of Freemasonry are popular,
the English and New South Wales constitutions being each
represented by its own hall.
New South Wales was the first colony in Australasia to


found an University. It was incorporated in 1851, and is
constituted on the model of the British Universities. It is
supported by the State, at an immense expense, in order to
offer the highest forms of culture to all, without any dis-
tinction whatsoever. It has the power of granting degrees in
arts, law, medicine, and science, and its graduates are entitled
to the same rank, title, and precedence as the graduates of the
Universities of the United Kingdom.
Education is compulsory, the school fees averaging 3d. per
week, being paid into the treasury as revenue. The teachers
are Civil servants, and are paid fixed salaries. The Govern-
ment has also established superior public schools, and high
schools preparatory to the University teaching, and also night
schools and classes for the convenience of artisans and other
students unable to attend during the daytime.
The teaching is so far non-sectarian as to enable parents of
every creed to send their children to these public schools
without fear of their faith being tampered with; on the other
hand, the ministers of the various sects are admitted, for not
more than one hour daily, to impart the religious teaching of
their several bodies. Thus we see that the educational
system is like to the other Australian institutions, upon a
broad footing of equality, the child of the poorest being able
to attain the proudest place, given that he have the necessary
material in him.
CHAPTER X.
THE INDUSTRIES AND WEALTH OF NEW
SOUTH WALES.
The mineral wealth of New South Wales is beyond con-
ception and without precedent. It lies on the surface,
unscientific persons having fallen across mines of wealth
beyond the dreams of avarice ! The coal, which is, in the
•estimation of experts and engineers, as good and better than
that of Great Britain, crops up above the surface of the soil
alongside the railway, and in the immediate neighbourhood of
the metropolis. To the north of Sydney an immense field
opens out, and is now largely worked, with the growing port
of Newcastle for its outlet, and again, to the south, the
Illawarra coal-fields, with the pretty harbour of Wollongong.
These coaling stations are the most important and accessible
of the Southern Hemisphere, and bid fair to make New South
Wales the foremost of the Australasian colonies.


In close proximity to the coal are found some of the richest
and most valuable of iron ores, and at Mittagong, in the
south, and at Lithgow, there are ironworks in active
operation, with blast furnaces, rolling mills, puddling fur-
naces, and all the other necessary appliances.
No sooner are we beyond the range of the carboniferous
deposits, with its kindred minerals, than we come upon a rich
territory abounding in copper, lead, and silver, while tin is
also profitably worked, the lodes being similar to those of
Cornwall, yet it will be many years before the deposits of
stream tin are exhausted. The Cobar Copper district is one
of the richest in the world, and the immense quantity raised
may be estimated by its value in 1880, which was £364,059.
Silver is apparently inexhaustible at Sunny Corner, a mining
town not far from the city of Bathurst, as also at Silverton in
the far west, beyond Wilcannia,
Gold is sprinkled by Nature with a bountiful hand all
over the colony, and gold mining has recently received fresh
impetus by great finds in the neighbourhood of Mudgee, and
with the present improved machinery, the reworking of the
old fields is becoming a profitable undertaking. Vast tracts
of country known to be auriferous are yet unprospected, and
await the lucky diggers.
The gems of New South Wales are varied and numerous,
the diamond being worked profitably at Bingera, Mudgee, and
along the Cudgegong Eiver. Eubies, emeralds, topazes,
sapphires, opals, amethysts, garnets, and many others too
plentiful to enumerate, are awaiting the arrival of explorers
to give up their wealth and beauty.
Kerosene shale is distributed throughout the coal measures,
and the manufacture of a first-class illuminating oil is fast
becoming an important and profitable industry. Amongst
other minerals may be mentioned cinnabar, antimony, asbestos
and bismuth, which are found in considerable quantity.
Without doubt, New South Wales offers the best field for all
classes of miners.
The manufacturing industries of New South Wales are
undoubtedly annually increasing, but, considering the cheap-
ness and nearness of the raw material, and the expense of
importing manufactured articles from other countries, it is
surprising that capital and labour should not be further
employed in this direction, as it might assuredly be with some
fair amount of success. In 1882 the total number of factories
was 3,036, employing no less than 32,660 hands. Of these,
178 works, with 3,371 hands, were dependent upon or con-
nected with agriculture; 331, employing 3,380 hands, were
working raw material, and dependent upon the pastoral


interest; 316, employing 2,237 hands, were engaged in the
manufacture of articles of food; 941, with 6,686 hands, were
in the building and allied trades ; 204, employing 3,142 hands,
were devoted to the production of machinery; while the
remaining 1,066, employing 13,844 hands, were connected
with miscellaneous trades and industries.
Amongst the leading manufacturing interests of the colony
are those connected with the production of leather and
leather goods, the number of hands employed in the trade
being nearly 7,000, and the value of exported colonial boots
and leather amounted in 1882 to T 191,050.
The manufacture of woollens is one of the oldest industries
of the colony, and many of the tweeds produced are equal to
those from European sources. Every branch of the manu-
facture of clothing, either male or female, is in an advanced
stage of perfection, and the fashions of Europe are copied by
the deft fingers of the fair colonials.
The carriage factories are also on the increase, and the
carriages and buggies turned out of the Sydney workshops are
of the first order of merit.
Sugar and wine-pressing are also growing industries ; and
oven now the perfection of refining machinery makes our
sugar second to none; and our wines rival the best vintages
of France.
Paper mills are to be found at Liverpool, near Sydney, and
some superior papers are there manufactured.
Chemical works are established at Balmain, where all the
acids required in the manufactures are made by Messrs.
Elliott Brothers.
Household furniture is largely made in the colony, as also
are ornamental ironwork for balconies, terracotta, pottery,
tiles, bricks, and other articles.
Shipyards, ironworks, and in fact everything needed in the
colony, may be found in and around the metropolis.
Dependent upon and necessary to the growth of the in-
dustries of New South Wales are its splendid railway systems,
.and its magnificent fleets of steamers. In a country like this,
where internal water communication is almost impossible, the
railway becomes a supreme necessity as an aid to the great
highroads, enabling the squatter and farmer, miner and manu-
facturer, to send their goods quickly, safely, and at the least
cost to the best markets. With each new extension of the
line new districts, hitherto barren, are opened out, and
rendered productive; new industries spring up, and every-
where the iron horse is welcomed as the forerunner of wealth
and happiness.
Twenty-five years after the opening of the first railway in


England, between Liverpool and Manchester, we had a line in
Australia, running between Sydney and Parramatta, opened for
traffic on September 20,1855. This was a private venture ; as
also the one laid between Newcastle and Maitland, about the
same time ; but they are now in the hands of the Government,
who work the system throughout. There are three main lines
■—running north, south, and west. The Northern line, having
its terminus at Newcastle, runs as far as Glen Innes, a dis-
distance of 298 miles ; and 16 miles further we come to
the Queensland border, at Tenterfield, to which a line is
being put down. Sydney will shortly be connected by a line
to Newcastle, which will put it in direct communication with,
the rich mineral and pastoral districts of the north, and with
Brisbane. The Western system runs from Sydney to Nyngan,
a distance of 377 miles, and is being continued to Bourke,
thus opening out the immense pastoral and mineral wealth of
the Ear West. A further extension will put Sydney in com-
munication with Wilcannia, a town to which the whole trade
of the Barling Eiver will converge. The first part of this
Western line is noteworthy, on account of the picturesque
mountain scenery through which it runs, and still more by the
great engineering feat of crossing a range of mountains, some
4,000 feet high, which is accomplished by the Zigzag and the
Great Zigzag, works unsurpassed in this century, and by
tunnels and viaducts, constructed at an immense expense.
The Southern line runs through a pastoral and agricultural
country to the border town of Albury, thus permitting of
passengers proceeding expeditiously and comfortably to Mel-
bourne. Branches from these main lines open out the dif-
ferent countries on the road. The engines and carriages are
well made, and on the American principle, with sleeping
accommodation for long journeys. They are mostly built in.
the colony by Messrs. Hudson Brothers, who control one
of the largest industrial establishments in the Southern
Hemisphere.
One will be struck by the spacious and well-built stations,
and by the presence in such a far country of all the most
modern accessories to comfort, safety, and despatch.
The sum of T 14,765,429 was, up to the end of 1882, spent
upon the construction of the various lines; but now that the
great difficulty of crossing the Blue Mountains is overcome
the future outlay will be much less. In the same year the
earnings of the railway showed a profit of over 5 per cent, on
the capital invested. In 1883 there were 1,365 miles of
railway completed, and 602 miles under construction. A
system ot steam tramways in the metropolis is worked by
the Government, and had its origin at the opening of the


Great Exhibition, -when a line was opened between the Eedfern
Railway Station and the Exhibition, which proved a grand
success, and led to the laying of similar lines to all the
principal suburbs.
The position of Sydney, its matchless harbour, its mercantile
and monetary importance, combined with an abundant supply
of coal, iron, and timber, and the great facilities for ship-
building and repairing, will ever secure to it the first place in
the Southern Hemisphere. Upwards of fifty of the finest
steamers in the world (including the fine fleets of the Orient
and Peninsular and Oriental Companies), trade and have their
headquarters in Sydney. The local shipping firms, some half-
score in number, have magnificent fleets for the intercolonial
and coasting trades.
The number of vessels entering the various ports of New
South Wales during 1882 was 2,437, consisting of 1,179 sailing
ships, and 1,258 steam vessels, the aggregate tonnage being
1,686,620. Of these 1,640 were of British or Colonial owner-
ship, the remaining 797 being chiefly German, American, and
French. During the same period the number of ships leaving
the ports of the Colony were 2,340, with a total of 1,640,045
tons. Some splendid clipper lines, notably the White Star ot
Aberdeen, have a fair share of the wool and Colonial produce
trade. The general value of imports in 1883 was £20,960,157,
and the exports £19,886,018, making the total trade of the
Colony for the year £40,846,175. The bulk of this trade is
with Great Britain, each inhabitant on an average contri-
buting £4B 18s. to it. The customs revenue for the year 1882
was £1,514,263, chiefly from spirits, wine, beer, and tobacco.
There were 65 vessels in 1882 built in the colony, with a ton-
nage of 4,734, while 128, built chiefly in British yards, were
registered, representing together a total of 22,010 tons.
Sydney is in direct telegraphic communication with all the
principal places of the colony, and with the other Australasian
capitals, and through Adelaide and Port Darwin with the
United Kingdom and Europe.
CHAPTER XI.
PASTOBAL BESOUBCES AND AGBICULTUUAL
PBOSPECTS.
The mainstay of Australia is its flocks and herds, and more
particularly so of New South Wales, whence the other colonies
have sprung. Immense tracts of rich pasture land, especially in


the western districts, support thousands upon thousands of
sheep, and holdings of over 300,000 acres are by no means
uncommon, upon which the proprietors have built splendid
mansions, in many cases surrounded with little villages of de-
pendents. There is practically no limit to the employment of
capital and skill in this direction, and labour in any way con-
nected with it is sure of a market. The industries of wool-
washing, fellmongering, and tanning are largely on the increase,
and in a short time we shall doubtless see New South Wales
manufacturing a great part of her raw material herself, in the
place of exporting and re-importing.
In 1834 New South Wales had more horses than any other
Australasian colony, and these are by dealers pronounced
among the best for the Indian market. They then numbered
326,964. There were 1,646,753 cattle, which, excepting
Queensland, is a greater number than possessed by any
neighbouring country ; and of sheep, a flock of 34,418,488
stands unrivalled in number as in excellence of quality. The
pigs in 1884 numbered 189,050. Of late years, large quantities
of mutton and beef have been exported to Europe, and there
is every probability of this trade becoming one of national
importance, seeing that the meat is pronounced by experienced
chefs to be equal to any home-fed stock, and in no degree
impaired by the freezing process of Messrs. Bell-Colman, by
which it is preserved.
The wool of Australian producers has taken prizes and
medals in all the great exhibitions, and Mr. Macarthur, the
father of the wool industry, has shown that the climate and
soil of New South Wales is capable of making bad fleeces
good and good fleeces better !
Agricultural settlement is the great want of the colony, and
until we get the interior peopled with tillers of the soil we
cannot rank as one of the first amongst nations. Many
things have militated against the interests of agriculture,
notably the rush for gold in 1851, and the great ease with
which fortunes are made in other ways; yet, notwith-
standing these drawbacks, we have made great and rapid
strides in the cultivation of our rich and virgin soil. Steam
cultivation and all the modern agricultural appliances are now
being used, and squatters are giving place to graziers, the
system of land and stock farming, common in England, being
a certain sign of progress.
The great food-producing country is on the banks of the
rivers running from the great watershed of the country to the
sea, along which is a soil capable of growing every kind of cereal,
fruit, and vegetable. The banks of the Tweed, Clarence, and
Eichmond give an area of 4,000,000 acres to the cultivation of


every sub-tropical product, such as maize, sugar, the vine, cotton,
arrowroot, coffee, and tea. Further south are the rivers
Bellinger, Macleay, Hastings, and Manning, with a large area
given over to maize and sugar, w T hile corn and lucerne are
largely grown on the Hunter and Lower Hunter. Near the
metropolis grazing becomes more common and profitable,
although corn and hay are abundantly produced. South of
Sydney, on the beautiful Illawarra, we come to the veritable
garden of Australia, with Eden as one of its ports. Here the
dairy farmer is afforded every advantage both for the
economical production of his commodities, and their sale
through the proximity of the metropolis by sea and rail.
Milk, butter, cheese, eggs, ham and bacon proceed from this
happy land. The high lands about Goulbourn offer a climate
similar to England, but shorn of its severity, and a rich soil
upon which cereals, fruits, and vegetables thrive. About
15,000,000 acres are available for such purposes, and again
North we reach table lands 3,000 feet above the sea, where
some 14,000,000 acres are suited to similar crops. The yield of
wheat is about 15'00 bushels to the acre, of oats 21T5, of
barley 20’96, and of potatoes 2‘47, but it must be remembered
this is with farming of the rudest kind, and generally by in-
experienced hands. Such land may be acquired by law upon
easy terms ; every one, even minors, if not under 16 years of
age, can select the best available land, from 40 to 640 acres, at
20s. an acre, of which a fourth must be paid down, the re-
mainder, bearing 5 per cent, interest, is payable after the
expiration of five years, by annual instalments at the rate of
Is. per acre, or the whole balance at the option of the selector.
A further 10s. an acre is to be expended upon improvements (a
term liberally construed) within a period of five years, during
which time the purchaser must also reside on his selection.
Upon completion of the conditions required by the Land Act, the
selector becomes entitled to the freehold. Labour is compara-
tively cheap, communication is good by rail and road all over
the colony, the taxation is light (£2 4s, lOd. per head), living
remarkably cheap, and life and property secure under an
orderly government, with perfect equality and toleration, com-
bined with a genial climate and cloudless sky. With these
advantages, what can a man want more to complete a paradise
on earth ?
We have before spoken of the vine, and its successful culti-
vation in New South Wales, which offers such temptations to
vine-dressers to emigrate ; but we failed to mention the mul-
berry, which also thrives here and supports the silkworm,
although, unfortunately, sericulture has not hitherto proved
a profitable investment.


The large variety of fruits which thrive in the colony give
another instance of the diversity of soil and climate which
the country enjoys. Apples, over 200 varieties; pears, over
100 varieties; apricots, over 20 species; cherries, over 40 kinds;
nectarines, over 19 varieties; peaches, over 45; plums, over
60; grapes, over 50; mulberries, figs, medlars, quinces, almonds,
nuts, guavas, passion fruit, blackberries, custard apples, rasp-
berries, currants, gooseberries, oranges, lemons and limes,
shaddocks, citrons, bananas, strawberries, chestnuts, walnuts,
Jack fruit, loquats, date plums, dates, cocoanuts, Chinese
raisins, Chinese longan, pineapples, pomegranate, rose apples,
Cape gooseberries, and olives, complete our list of the many
good things to be enjoyed in this far country Eastward Ho !
CHAPTER XII.
COUNSEL ON ABBIVAL.
To Single Women. —As soon as convenient after arriving
in port, the Government convey the girls off the ship, and
take charge of them at their depot in Sydney, until such time
as they may be either claimed by their parents and relations,
or engaged into some respectable family for service.
The emigration depot is situated near Hyde Park, and is a
large, barrack-like building, erected by Governor Macquarie
for a convict house, afterwards used for barracks, now an
asylum for old and infirm women, a part of it being appro-
priated for emigration purposes. This hospital is to be shortly
removed into a country district. We understand the accom-
modation and fare to be similar to that of the Plymouth depot,
and can speak personally of the kind and hearty treatment of
the matron in charge.
The arrival of the ship is advertised in the papers, together
with particulars of the girls wishing for employment, when
ladies wanting servants, governesses, dressmakers, &c., obtain
passes from the office, and are admitted on the appointed day
to the hiring-room, girls being allowed to make their own
terms with their future mistresses.
A girl without friends in the colony would do well to accept
any situation which, on reference to the matron, is thought a
good one, and not to wait with the expectation of something
better turning up. At first the remuneration may not be so
much as expected; but what employer of labour of any kind
likes to give the highest rate of wages before he has tried the


skill of the employed? After a few weeks with a mistress,
she will he certain to appreciate your good qualities, and will,
doubtless, of her own accord, offer you better terms.
Even girls who have friends in Sydney are advised to take
some situation rather than leave the depot to be, mayhap, a
burden on those good people, inasmuch as better places and
better pay are to be had* by a new arrival engaged from the
depot than would be given to a person seeking a situation
herself. The reason for this, indeed, is not far to seek; for
have not the agents in England already inquired into the
character of the immigrants ; and on landing do they not, as
it were, come with a letter of recommendation from the Agent-
General ?
Many single women, we have known, come out to join some
young man with whom they were acquainted at home, and
since he has done well he wisely looks towards his native
village for a partner in his success. We believe that in such
cases arrangements are made for their being married either at
or from the depot itself.
When one considers for a moment, it will strike us that
these young women are really the mothers of the nations to be,
and it is to them we have to look for a future healthy and
well-trained generation of boys and girls. Therefore it is of
the highest importance that a very good class of girls should
be sent into a new country. Speaking from our own experi-
ence, having accompanied over 800 single women to Sydney,
we cannot withhold our testimony to the uniform good con-
duct, good looks, and good physique of the Australian mothers
to come.
To Single Men. —Persons emigrating under this class have,
as a rule, some trade which they can work at as soon
as they arrive in the new country. Some are skilled artisans,
engravers, carpenters, &c.; others are ploughmen, shepherds,
gardeners, gamekeepers, and the like, for whose information
we append a list of the current rates of wages in New South
Wales. On arriving there, after the necessary medical inspec-
tion, the Emigration Board meet on board to inquire into the
general conduct of the voyage, the members of the Board
giving advice to the new arrivals as to the best districts for
a workman to go to. A hiring day is advertised on the ship
and in the daily papers, when the men are landed at the
Government expense, and proceed to the hiring room, where
they will meet with employers of all kinds of labour.
Our best advice is to take the first likely thing offered, in
order to make a start, be it ever so little ; and having once
obtained a good character as a workman in the colony, all
will then be plain sailing to future success.


To Married People. —The like facilities are offered to
married as to single men, and having got work either in town
or up country, they should go direct to it, so as to economise
expense. Five clear days are allowed by the Government,
during which time the single men and married folk are pro-
vided for on board the ship. We advise the women and children
being kept aboard until a home is found for them, or until it has
been decided in what part of the colony the work lies ; when,
railway passes being obtained, they should be taken off the ship
and proceed at once to their destination. An officer of the
Government comes aboard to grant free passes to any station
on the New South Wales Government railways, and will,
doubtless, give any information as to time of train, and manner
of place it is proposed to go to.
The drafts obtained in Plymouth on the Sydney banks
will be endorsed by the emigration officer, and thus made
payable at the bank, situate in George Street.
Luggage, &c., is all conveyed ashore free of charge.
If employment be obtained in Sydney, of course a house will
be necessary, and to give new chums some idea as to rent, the
following is fairly correct; —
Small cottages in Sydney, or suburbs, three or four rooms,
and kitchen, 10s. to 12s. per week.
Small houses in suburbs, three or four rooms with kitchen,
14s. to 18s. per week.
In Sydney, larger houses from 20s. to 255. per week,
upwards.
Board and lodging for single men from 14s. to 18s. per week.
In the case of married folk, we should almost advise two
families to co-operate and take a large house in one of the
healthy suburbs, paying from 20s. to 255. per week ; or better,
buy a plot of ground and run up your own castle upon it. This
is readily done through building societies.
Below will be found the current rate of wages for all kinds
of labour, together with approximate prices of a few of the
necessaries of life. The furniture required in this warm
country is extremely light and meagre, the less the better.
CUEEENT EATES OF WAGES.
With Board and Lodging :
£ s. £ s.
... 60 0 to 80 0 perann.,
... 40 0 „ 52 0
... 40 0 „ 52 0
...40 0 „ 65 0 ~
... 40 0 „ 52 o
... 40 0 „ 75 0
Married couples for stations
Farm labourers
Bullock-drivers
Horse-team drivers'..
Boundary riders
Stockmen


Shepherds
Road-makers
Grooms ...
Gardeners (country)
„ (in town)
Blacksmiths (country
Bakers ...
Butchers...
Cooks (private houses)
„ (hotels)
Laundresses
House and parlour maids
General servants
Nursemaids
Grooms and coachmen (in town)
Useful boys on stations
Without Board and Lodging : —
£ s.
. 35 0 to 45 0 per arm.
. 52 0 „ 65 0
.40 0 „ 60 0
. 40 0 „ 52 0
. 52 0 „ 65 0
.75 0 ~ 80 0 ~
. 110 ~ 3 0 per week.
. 110 „ 3 0
. 30 0 „ 65 0 per ana.
.45 0 „ 75 0 „
.32 0 „ 52 0 „
.26 0 „ 35 0 ~
26 0 „ 45 0 „
. 26 0 „ 35 0
. 45 0 „ 65 0
, 16 0 „ 30 0 „
s. d. s. d.
Wheelwrights (country) ... ... ... 70 0 per week.
Railway labourers ... ... ... ... 7 0 per day.
Gangers... ... ... ... ... 8 6 ~
Brickmakers ... ... ... 22 6 to 25 0 per 1,000.
Potters ... ... ... ... ... 50 0 per week.
Pipemakers ... ... ... ... 50 0 „
Tinsmiths ... ... ... 42 0 „ 63 0 ~
Galvanised iron-workers ... ... 9 0 ~ 10 0 per day.
(The two trades last mentioned work ten hours to the day.)
Lumpers and wharf labourers :
Day work for handling general cargo
Do. coal
Night work
Plumbers
Gas-fitters
(These two trades work eight hours to the day.)
Coopers ...
Do. on piece as follows :
Wine-casks ...
Oil-casks
Tierces
Hogsheads
Ten-gallon kegs
Five ~ ~
Two „
1 0 per hour.
1 3 „
1 6 „
8 0 to 10 0 per day.
8 0 „ 11 0
8 0 to 10 0 per day.
... 22 6 per tun.
... 20 0
3 0 (old) 3 6 (new) each-
-6 0 each.
2 9 „
2 0 to 2 3 „
... 1 6 „
Tallow casks ... ... ... 13 6 to 15 0 per tun.
The following are the current prices paid for labour in some of the
principal trades of the colony, which of course vary somewhat in different
districts: —
d. s. d.
W aggon-builders
Carriage-builders
Carriage-painters
Sawyers, in mill
Compositors
Bookwork
1 0 to 13 per hour.
010 „ 16
0 10 1 3
09„ 1 3
... 1 0 „ 11 per 1,000.
„1 0 „
... 10 0 ~ 11 0 per day
... 7 0 „ 8 0
Stonemasons
Stonemasons’ labourers
Plasterers ...
11 o „ 12 0
70„ 9 0
Plasterers’ labourers


6
0
to
15
0
per pair.
1
0
3
0
each.
0
3
0
6
per yard.
0
4
0
74
yy
7
6
16
6
each.
2
6
7
0
0
«
yy
1
6
per yard.
7
6
„
15
0
each.
7
0
yy
12
0
1
6
yy
4
0
3
0
yy
7
0
yy
0
74
yy
1
6
per yard.
0
9
2
0
yy
1
6
yy
4
6
each.
4
6
yy
6
0
per pair.
2
6
5
6
each.
0
9
yy
2
0
per pair.
s. d. s. d.
Bricklayers
Bricklayers’ labourers
Carpenters
10 0 to 12 0 per day.
70„ 9 0
9 0 „ 11 0
Joiners ... ... ... ... 10 0 „ 11 0
Painters... ... ... ... 9 0 „ 10 0
Shipwrights ... ... ... 9 0 „ 12 0 „
Labourers ... ... ... 7 0 „ 9 0 „
Saddlers... ... ... ... 43 0 ~ 55 0 per week.
Tailors (paid by the piece) can average about 50 0 „ 70 0 „
Shoemakers do. do. ...
„ jobbing
Shipsmiths
* Furnace men
# Engine-fitters
# General fitters
strikers
*lron-moulders
* Boiler-makers’ assistants
labourers in iron works
# Engine-drivers
ers
# Brass-finishers
*Machine-men in fitting shop
*Coal-miners
Saw-mill hands
... 35 0 „ 50 0
... 50 0 „ 60 0
...10,, 16 per hour.
... 0 8|„ 011
0 10 „ 13
1 0 „ 1 5i „
Oil „ 15
11„ 1 3
10„ 1 2
10„ 1 6
0 8 „ 010 „
1 0 ~ 1 4
10„ 1 4
10„ 1 3
08„ 0 9
0 7i„ 010
0 9* „ 010
12„ 1 3
011 „ 13
... 010 „ 12
...10 0 „ 15 0 per day.
...09,, 10 per hour.
The above trades, connected with the Iron and Engineering departments,
work eight hours a day, with one or two breaks.
*Not in demand at present (June, 1883),
CORRECT PRICES OP CLOTHING IN SYDNEY FOR PERSONS OF
THE LABOURING CLASS.
Women’s. s. d. s. d.
Blankets
Bonnets, straw
Calico, unbleached
„ white
Dresses, merino or alpaca
„ print
Flannel
Mattresses
Palliasses
Petticoats,calico ...
„ flannel
Sheeting, grey calico
„ white ...
Shifts...
Shoes...
Stays ...
Stockings


10
0
to
16
0
2
9
yy
3
9
yy
0
4
yy
0
6
yy
2
0
yy
4
6
2
6
yy
6
0
yy
1
0
yy
3
0
3
6
yy
6
6
3
0
yy
4
6
,,
2
0
yy
3
6
3
6
yy
6
0
yy
4
6
yy
5
6
per pair.
0
6
,,
0
10
yy
1
0
1
6
yy
1
0
yy
2
0
yy
1
6
yy
2
6
yy
6
0
yy
12
0
2
6
yy
3
0
yy
5
G
yy
7
0
yy
4
0
yy
6
6
each.
25
0
„
Men’s
s. d. s. d.
6 6 per pair.
2 0 each.
Boots, strong
Caps ...
Coats, shepherds’
Frocks, duck
Handkerchiefs, cotton
Hats, felt
„ Manilla or Panama
„ straw
y } Oil (I W ••• •••
Shirts, Crimean ... ... ■
„ white cotton
~ coloured or striped cotton
~ flannel (under), or merino
Shoes, strong
Socks, cotton
~ woollen
Stockings, cotton
~ woollen
Trousers, common (tweed)
~ duck ...
moleskin
Tests, common (tweed)
Suits, drill or moleskin
„ tweed or cloth
20 0 „ 40 0
PROVISIONS—RETAIL PRICES, CURRENT RATES.
Bacon...
Bread...
Butter, fresh
„ salt
Candles, mould
Cheese, English ...
~ New Zealand
„ American
~ Colonial...
Coffee...
Eggs ...
12nd
Milk ...
Meat, beef, fresh ...
„ ~ salt ...
„ mutton, fresh
„ ~ salt
„ pork
„ veal
Mustard
Oil, kerosene
Oatmeal
Pepper
Potatoes
Sago
Salt
Soap .
Starch
0 10 per lb.
1 0
0 4 per 2 lb. loaf.
1 6 per lb.
10
0 5
16
1 0
13
13
16
1 3 per dozen.
12 0 } per 100 llx
0 6 per quart.
0 4 to 0 6 per lb.
04 „ 0
04„ 0 6
04„ 0 6
04„ 0 8
04„ 0 8
10„ 2 0
2 4 per gallon,
0 4 per lb,
10
7 0 per cwt.
0 3per lb.
0 6
6 0 per cwt.
28 0 per cwt.
0 6 per lb.


Sugar...
Tea ..,
Tobacco, American
„ Colonial
Honey
Hay, oaten
~ lucerne
„ grass
Maize ...
Oats ...
Bran
Pollard
Chaff ...
Coal ...
W00d...
Apples
Bananas
Oranges
Turnips
Onions
Cabbages
Carrots
Parsnips
d. s. d
0 3 to 0 4 per lb.
16„ 2 6
3 6
2 6
180 0 per ton.
170 0
100 0
7 0 per bushel.
4 6
1 6
1 8
8 0 per cwt.
24 0 per ton.
20 0
1 6 „ 2 0 per dozen.
1 6
2 0
3 0 per doz. bunches,
0 2 per lb.
6 0 „12 0 per dozen.
3 0 per doz. bunches.
3 0
CHAPTER XIII.
FARE THEE WELL.
My task is finished, and if it gives as much pleasure to the
reader as the writer enjoyed in compiling it, he wull be well
enough satisfied. The object of the work, namely, to give all
a clear insight into the working of the system of emigration,
has been kept steadily in view throughout, nor have we for-
gotten our indebtedness to the passengers of the “ Belgic,”'
insomuch as its life has been taken as a type from which
others may form some idea of the voyage.
The Greater Britain is yet but sparsely populated; there is.
room for still more immigrants ; and with the surety of better
pay, better prospects, and far more pleasure in this life, we
do not despair of one time seeing thousands upon thousands
more of England’s hard-worked sons crossing the ocean to
join us in a new and less poverty-stricken home, East-
ward Ho !
Having tender recollections of that leviathan among ships,
the “ Belgravia,” of the swan-like “ Aberdeen,” and the


sturdy simplicity and plainness of the “ Gulf of Mexico,’'
together with more recent and pleasant reminiscences of the
superb “ Belgic,” we give below the newspaper reports of the
arrivals of these four vessels.
The s.s. “ Belgravia.”
The s.s. “ Belgravia/’ which, as already announced, arrived on Friday night,
left Plymouth Sound at 4 p.m. on March 7, with 874 immigrants, equal to 735*
statute adults. The passengers were classified as follows : —156 married
couples, 182 single men, 128 single women, 117 boys, 110 girls under 12, and
25 infants. Their nationalities were—7o9 English, 16 Scotch, 147 Irish, and 2
foreigners. Two infants under 12 months died during the passage, one of
them having been in a very delicate state of health when taken on board.
There were three births, so that the “ Belgravia ” has arrived with 873 souls
from London. On leaving the Cape she brought 30 passengers from that
colony, which, together with the ship’s company of 87, made in all 990 souls.
The classification of the immigrants is as follows: —Shoeing smith, 1; cabinet-
makers, 3; harmonium maker, 1; scale maker, 1 ; tool maker, 1; railway
carriage makers, 2; sawyer, 1 ; brush makers, 2; bakers, 3 ; wheelwrights, 2 ;
butler, 1; miners, 7; plumbers, 10 ; carmen, 3; plasterers, 7; brickmaker, 1;
carter, 1; lath-render, 1; coopers, 2 ; pipemaker, 1; brass worker, 1; cigar-
maker, 1; printer’s devil, 1; butcher, 1; tarpaulin dresser, 1; engineer, 1;
clicker, 1 ; warp beamer, 1 ; lead chaser, 1 ; shepherd, 1; stencil platecutter,
1 ; warehouseman, 1; zinc worker, 1 ; glazier and paperhanger, 1; painters,
15; agricultural labourers, 58; gardeners, 11 ; masons and bricklayers, 17;
carpenters and joiners, 28; gas fitters, 5; tailors, 3; shoemakers, 9; black-
smiths, 3 ; quarrymen, 2 ; saddlers, 2 ; coachbuilder, 1; tinsmith, 1; grooms
and coachmen, 8 ; mine sinker, 1; railway porters, 7. This is the first vessel
that has arrived in any one of these colonies from London with such a large
number of passengers and so heavy a cargo. The immigrants themselves are
a superior class, nearly all young and hale. The accommodation was of the
usual kind provided on immigrant vessels, and could hardly have been better
of its kind. The vessel was built for the passenger trade, and the experience
of years has been brought to bear in her construction, with the most satis-
factory results in the matter of ventilation, as well in the economy of space.
The deck accommodation was ample for all requirements, and throughout
there was no overcrowding of immigrants, and no complaints whatever
in this respect. Indeed, the passengers speak of the arrangements for their
comfort in terms of unqualified satisfaction. The discipline throughout was
excellent, the passengers adapting themselves most readily to the con-
ditions of life on shipboard. Bringing out such a large number of people
on one vessel was regarded as somewhat of an experiment, and I)r.
Huxtable was therefore anxious at first as to the matter of discipline,
.and also lest amongst so many the germs of some infectious disease
might not have been brought on board. As regards the discipline, how-
ever, the very fact of there being so many persons together appeared
to cause people to settle down comfortably from the very start ;
and as regards fear of disease, the subsequent freedom from sickness
proved the anxiety to have been unfounded. In the matter of health
there was no serious sickness during the passage, and the average health
was much higher than in the most healthy towns. In case of any sick-
ness, accommodation was provided for 20 patients. The whole of the officers
were put in the saloon, and their quarters under the bridge converted into a
hospital for the married couples and single men. The smoking room in the
house aft was transformed iuto a hospital for the single women. Every
precaution was taken for the isolation of cases of infectious disease, should
any break out. Fortunately, these precautions, however necessary, were not
required. To show that there -was ample room for the 1,000 persons on board.


we may mention that the “ Belgravia” has carried as many as 1,700 persons on
one trip from England to New York. The single girls were under the superin-
tendence of Miss Bant, as matron, with Miss Norton, assistant matron, and
were retired to their quarters every evening at sundown. All the passengers
speak highly of the way in which the ship was provisioned, and there were no
complaints either in regard to quantity or quality of the food. The vessel
carried an ample supply of fresh food in her refrigerating chamber for the
voyage, and this, no doubt, was one of the causes which tended to the good
health of the company throughout. At the conclusion of the voyage, 87 cap-
tains of messes voluntarily signed a book, in which they spoke with satisfaction
of the perfectness of the cooking arrangements, and acknowledged the courtesy
of the purser, Mr. Aitken, and the chief steward, Mr. W. Johnstone. Services
were conducted twice every Sunday (w.p.). Dr. Huxtable officiating, the
Captain reading the lessons, and always there was a large congregation.
Early in the voyage an efficient choir of ten was formed under the conductor-
ship of Mr. Bloomfield, who had previously been a choirmaster, and some of
the services were choral, adding greatly to the pleasure of the voyage. The
monotony of the voyage was agreeably broken in various ways. The passen-
gers appear to have been particularly strong in the musical department, and a
capital band of instrumentalists was formed, which did good service at several
entertainments from time to time. On April 5 a concert was given by a
number of young ladies, when an excellent programme of varied selections was
rendered, and the audience were so pleased that they requested to have more
entertainments of a similar nature, the result being that several other concerts
were held at regular intervals. Mr. Cooper and Mr. Johnstone acted as joint
conductors. There was also a baby show, and the prize baby duly sketched in
The Belgravia Times. Several temperance meetings were held during the
voyage, a number of the immigrants wearing the “ blue ribbon.” Six numbers
of a paper called The Belgravia Times were written, containing interesting notes
of the voyage, &c., besides having some well-executed illustrations by Mr. Eobert
B. F, Lowe, an artist of considerable ability, who embarked at the Cape. A
school was conducted ou board, under the management of Mr. Bright, who
performed his duties in a most satisfactory manner. There was an average
attendance of 80 scholars. On Thursday last the presentation of prizes took
place, when Dr. Huxtable presided. The proceedings were enlivened by sing-
ing, recitations, &c., by the children, and varied at the close by the presentation
of an address to the doctor, expressive of thanks for his care for and courtesy
towards the passengers throughout the voyage. Dr. Huxtable was health
officer, and the manner in which the people under his care have arrived is
highly creditable to him. He was last here in the ship “ Illawarra,” which
arrived with 500 immigrants in good health, and after a most successful
voyage. Mr. Johnson was dispenser, and was indefatigable in the performance
of his duties. Life on board from the day of sailing up to arrival appears to
have been most pleasant, and it is gratifying to hear every one speaking in
terms of unqualified praise of the officers, and the officers affirming that a more
orderly class of immigrants could not be desired. The health officer (Dr.
Mackellar) boarded the “ Belgravia ” early on Saturday morning, and at once
admitted her to pratique, and about 9 o’clock she left her anchorage and
steamed up to her moorings in Neutral Bay, the passengers on the way up
passing before the assistant health officer. Immediately on mooring, the single
women were taken off and proceeded to the immigration depot. The married
couples and single men are to be landed to-morrow. Shortly after the vessel
moored she was visited by the immigration agent, Mr. Wise, accompanied by
Messrs Burns and Fletcher, Ms.L.A. Great satisfaction was expressed by Dr.
Mackellar and others at the manner in which the vessel has arrived, and the
fact of her being in every respect the best of any of the vessels of this service
which have visited Sydney. —The Belgravia Times , April 5, 1884.


The s.s. “ Aberdeen.’
Shortly after noon on Saturday last the fine s.s. “ Aberdeen ” entered
Port Jackson for the sixth time. Never before had she brought so many people
to these shores, and consequently never had her arrival here been looked forward
to with so much interest, not only on the part of those on board, but also by
numerous relatives and friends ashore, anxiously awaiting their coming.
Indeed, many who at the present moment are perfect strangers to those who
have just finished their long voyage from the mother country have for some
weeks past felt a keen interest in them, and during the last few days have
eagerly scanned the daily papers in order to glean, if possible, informa-
tion telling of the near approach of the “ Aberdeen ” and its living freight.
The reason why is not far to seek. On this trip the “ Aberdeen ” was char-
tered by the Orient Company, in connection with their contract with the New
South Wales Government, to bring British emigrants to this colony ; and as
news travels faster than even steamships do, it became known soon after the
“Aberdeen” left the “right little, tight little island,” that among those who
crowded her decks was a larger number of unmarried women than had ever
been brought to Sydney by any vessel on a single trip. What visions imme-
diately rose before the eyes of would-be mistresses of the bonnie lassies that
were coming to this land of promise for such as they. Was it not natural,
therefore, that among the good housewives of Sydney, at any rate, there were
many who rejoiced greatly last Saturday when they learnt of the safe arrival
of the “ Aberdeen ” ? To-day they wfill readily unite with everybody else in
offering a hearty welcome to our new colonists.
It was at midday on Thursday, September 11, that no less than 611 men,
women, and children, stepped from the wharf of the emigrant depot, Plymouth,
on board the well-known paddle-boat, “ Smeaton,” which conveyed them, bag
and baggage, to the “ Aberdeen,” lying at anchor just within the breakwater,
under the command of Captain J. A. Barclay, and manned by a crew of 73
hands. It was at once found that ample accommodation had been provided for
everybody and everything. Whilst many were busily engaged below in making
their temporary homes as snug and comfortable as was possible under the
changed and, to them, extraordinary circumstances of their mode of living, the
anchor was weighed, and the “Aberdeen ” sped away at the rate of 11 knots
an hour across the channel. Mr. George Thompson, chief partner in the firm
of George Thompson and Co., the owners of the “ Aberdeen,” saw the vessel
off. The commencement of the voyage was, of course, rendered extremely
enjoyable—we mean far from agreeable and inspiriting—by the usual attacks
of mahde-mer ; but, fortunately, after the lapse of three days, all, or nearly all,
were well again. Almost a week passed by after the coast of Cornwall became
lost to view before land was sighted again. On Tuesday, September 16, the
Salvages were seen early in the day, towards evening Teneriffe and the
Grand Canary Islands were left behind, and at 8 p.m. the cloud-capped Peak
was looked upon for the last time, perhaps, by many, in all its grandeur. Days
slipped by until September 19, when a heavy squall was encountered, and
necessitated the retirement “ below ” of many who perhaps had already begun
to think that they had become almost as accustomed to the dangers of the deep
as their friends, the storm-tossed mariners. They found out their mistake,
or rather were quickly convinced of it. Nothing out of the ordinary routine
occurred until Tuesday, September 24, when at half-past three in the afternoon
the engines were stopped, owing to some bolts on the low-pressure crank-shaft
coupling having given way. New bolts having been fitted, the engines were
started again at 9.30 on the following morning. During the stoppage some
excellent sport was had with the “ pirates of the ocean,” who were fished for
with the (to them) ever seductive piece of pork at the end of a log line. Mr.
Shark, No. 1, was caught after many unsuccessful, but exciting attempts, and
was hoisted on board amid loud cheers. He having received his quietus, his
carcase was returned to what had been his natural element. The same modus
operandi was followed in the case of Mr. Shark, No, 2, On September 26, a


strong head wind and a heavy sea made progress slow and patients for the
doctor. They again felt inclined to say, for they could not sing—
A queer sort of up and down motion
Which comes from the treacherous ocean,
Has inspired me with the notion
That I never was meant for the sea.
Before breakfast on Sunday, September 28, the historical rock of St. Helena
came in sight, and at 11.30 a,m. the “ Aberdeen” cast anchor at rather less than
a quarter of a mile from shore. Natives, or other residents of the place of
exile of Napoleon the Great, unaware of the cause of the vessel’s visit, and
perhaps thinking that those on board the “Aberdeen” were some “new
chums,” lost no time in paddling to the steamship’s side ; but alas ! for their
disappointment, the voyagers were bound for another clime, and were
restricted by the ship’s regulations from landing before they reached sunny
New South Wales. So the St. Helenian boatmen did not reap the rich harvest
they had anticipated, but were obliged to “pull” back to the island sadder and
not richer men. They, however, obtained some compensation at the hands of
their fellow-islanders, who delighted themselves by being rowed to and from
and round about the noble “ Aberdeen,” which stayed at St. Helena five days.
Eepairs rendered necessary by the mishap to the engines on September 24,
having been completed—and it was for this reason the vessal “ made” St.
Helena —the “ Aberdeen” steamed away from the island on October 3, at 6.30
a.m. Six days afterwards Cape Town was passed, 200 miles off. During the
next few days the weather was exceedingly rough, there being frequent showers
of hail, rain, snow, and sleet. On October 25 the “ Aberdeen” was abreast of
the westernmost point of Australia—Cape Leuwin— and on October 30 she
passed Cape Otway. . Finally, as already stated, she reached Port Jackson on
last Saturday, and at a quarter to one anchored off Watson’s Bay.
The tale of our new colonists’ life on the ocean wave, as told by several of
them to our representative on Saturday afternoon, is, on the whole, a very
pleasant one. But whilst every cloud has its silver lining, so joy is sometimes
linked with sorrow. The sorrowful circumstances connected with this voyage
of the “Aberdeen” were, happily, few ; but one was very sad, for the death of
a male emigrant from heart disease, on October 12, deprived a wife of the
bread-winner for herself and a large family. Three other deaths occurred on
various dates from natural causes. One child died, aged seven months, and
twins born whilst the “Aberdeen” was at St. Helena lived only about a
fortnight. Throughout the voyage the general health of the emigrants was
very good, and there was an absolute immunity from accident. The pro-
fessional services of Dr. L. Ealston-Huxtable (formerly of the s.s. “ Belgravia”
and the ship “ Illawarra”), and his assistant, Mr. F. E. Johnson, were, there-
fore, not called into much requisition. The hospitals, of which three had been
provided, were not used at all, except for maternity cases, four children being
born. Thus the number of births equalled that of deaths, and the “Aberdeen ”
arrives at her destination with as many souls on board as embarked at
Plymouth. The satisfactory health statistics doubtless resulted from the
excellent arrangements, both for the accommodation and the dieting of the
emigrants. The single women were berthed aft, the single men amidships,
and the married couples and their children forward. The after part of the
vessel was barricaded off from the rest of it by gates in the alleyways under-
neath the bridge-deck. These gates were kept locked, the sailors having, in
order to get from aft to forward, and vice versa, to pass over the bridge-deck.
To assist in preserving order, twelve constables, selected at Plymouth from
amonf the male emigrants, were distributed in the various “quarters.” The
diet supplied to the emigrants was, as to quantity, strictly in accordance with
the scale sanctioned by the New South Wales Government, and the quality was
without exception very good. Indeed, there has been no cause for complaint
of any kind whatever. This remark applies equally to the manner in which
the emigrants have been treated, and to the way in which they have conducted
themselves. Miss Bant, who, with Mrs. Osborne, has been in charge of the
single women, states that she never before had such “a nice lot of young


women ” under her supervision, and she has acted as matron on board emigrant
ships for several years past, the present being her fourteenth or fifteenth
voyage in that capacity from England to these colonies. As to amusements,
the emigrants fared exceedingly well. Among the entertainments were some
very enjoyable concerts given on the quarter-deck. The perusal of The
Aberdeen Times, which, under the conductorship of Mr. F. P. Johnson,
appeared weekly, and contained, among other contributions, a capital paper on
New South Wales and the other Australasian colonies, also assisted to while
away the time, as well as to afford interesting and valuable information. Those
who had relatives in any other portion of the vessel than that in which they were
themselves quartered, were permitted to visit them each Sunday afternoon for a
couple of hours —a concession that was much appreciated. For the youngsters
there were two schools, one under the mastership of Mr. McCorquodale, and
the other taught by Miss Pose. A few days before the “ Aberdeen ” reached
Port Jackson, prizes were distributed among the most deserving scholars, and
there was also an attractive exhibition of fancy work done by the single women.
When the “Aberdeen” anchored off Watson’s Bay, she was boarded by
Dr. Sibley, the assistant health officer, who, finding everything in a satisfactory
condition, advised Dr. Mackellar, the health officer, accordingly, and in reply
received permission to grant the vessel pratique. After about two hours’
detention, the “Aberdeen” steamed up to her anchorage in Neutral Bay, where
Dr. Mackellar came on board, and after an inspection of the immigrants and
their quarters, expressed themselves as being highly pleased. So, of course,
were our new colonists with the magnificent view they obtained whilst the
“ Aberneen ” rode at anchor in “ our beautiful harbour,” whose surface was
crowded with numerous yachts taking part in the Double Bay regatta, and
other craft of various sorts and sizes. The latest arrivals in this land of peace
and plenty were, however, not a little startled by the booming of heavy guns
being fired on land by some of our brave defenders at practice, and they were
quite as much unprepared for the information kindly volunteered by one of the
visitors from the city, that this colony maintained a standing army and a
gallant navy, to strike terror into the hearts of our enemies.
Early to-day the unnominated single women will come ashore, and be
taken to the Immigration Depdt, at the top of King-street, where they will be
open for hire in the course of a day or so. To-day, also, the Immigration Board
will meet as usual, on board the “ Aberdeen,” and if everything be considered
satisfactory, the other immigrants will be allowed to land as soon as possible.
It may be mentioned that the single women are mostly domestic servants,
and are principally Scotch or Irish. There are very few English. The
majority of the single men are labourers, and most of them hail from the
Emerald Isle. The following is the classification:—Assisted: 26 married
couples and children; 26 single men; 166 single women. Nominated: 38
married couples and families; 61 single men; 107 single women. Total number
of souls, 611, equal to 520| statute adults. Trades are represented as follows :
—Farm and other labourers, 88; • gasmaker, 1; carpenters and joiners, 10;
miners, 12; bricklayers, 5; blacksmiths, 2; carriage builder, 1; tailors, 4;
brickmaker, 1; carvers and gilders, 2; butcher, 1; dyer, 1: signwriter, 1;
cabinetmaker, 1; clerks, 2; schoolmaster, 1; patternmaker, 1; engineer, 1;
baker, 1; plasterer, 1; warehouseman, 1; compositor, 1; potter, 1; painters,
4; grocers, 2; telegraph operator, 1; brickmakers, 3. Total, 151.— Daily
Telegraph, November 5, 1884.
The s.s. “ Gulf of Mexico.”
The s.s. “ Gulf of Mexico,” whose arrival with immigrants was reported
in yesterday’s issue, seems to have had a very tempestuous and trying voyage.
From the appended reports it will be seen that she has received a considerable
amount of damage ; but the immigrants, apart from the cheerlessness brought
about by the stormy, unpleasant weather, have enjoyed very good health, and are


reported to have behaved in the most exemplary manner under circumstances
harassing to even experienced mariners. Nothing like organised amusements
could be got up; and the commander, surgeon, and officers, while spoken of in
the highest terms for their attention, &c., were quite unable to do anything in
this way to while away the time, as their duties in looking after the ship were
so onerous as to occupy almost the whole of the time at their disposal. The
majority of the immigrants are Irish, the remainder being made up of Scotch
and English; the first-named of the men are nearly all farm labourers, while
the Scotch and English are mechanics. The single girls are mostly general
servants. There embarked at Plymouth 582 souls; of these there were 36 married
couples, 162 single men, 182 single women, 75 boys under 12 years of age, 80
girls under 12 years, and 11 infants. Dr. Huxtable, well and favourably known
in the Government service, has acted as medical superintendent, with Mr. Fred
Johnson as his assistant. Miss Chicken as matron, and Miss Tidmarsh sub-
matron, and all seemed to have performed their duties very satisfactorily.
The “ Gulf of Mexico ” has been a regular trader to this port. She is of the
cargo-carrying type, and her adaptability for the conveyance of immigrants
may be judged from the descriptions below. It is probable she will be released
from quarantine to-day. During the first six days we had a succession of gales
from the southward, with a heavy cross sea. On the night of the 27th January,
the second after leaving, we lost two boats. The starboard one was carried
away, davits and all; the other one first had its bows smashed in, and was
then swept overboard. At the same time the main trysail boom was smashed,
and the female hospital on the after-deck, near the wheelhouse, was damaged,
a portion of the roof being carried away, and allowing the seas to get in among
the spare bedding and hospital stores, which were greatly damaged. The same
weather continued for a week, during which we had no rest whatever. Next
afternoon a serious accident happened to one of the seamen. He was engaged
hoisting the masthead light, when the ship gave a very heavy lurch, and he
was thrown clean overboard. I thought he would never come in again; but he
clung to the billiards, and when the ship righted herself he came on board
again, but with such force that he smashed up against the fore booby hatch,
and fractured his left thigh bone so badly that the surgeon-superintendent
considered amputation necessary. But the weather was such that the opera-
tion could not be attempted, the ship pitching and rolling about very badly,
and it was therefore decided to put the poor fellow ashore at Teneriffe, which
was accordingly done. During the next few days two sheep pens, the bake-
house, and the issuing room of stores were very bady damaged, and a consider-
able quantity of stores were spoilt, thus materially enhancing the difficulty of
supplying the immigrants. Throughout all this time the ship rolled very
heavily indeed; and in addition to the damage already recorded, the water-
closets, bakehouse, and galleys were again all more or less damaged. Indeed,
the galley forward, which had been provided for the use of the officers and
crew, was damaged so seriously as to be utterly useless, and during the rest of
the voyage the one galley had to serve for both officers, crew, and immigrants.
The decks fore and aft were swept by the seas more or less all this time.
Everything possible was done by Captain Allan to ease the ship, and improve
the condition of the immigrants’ quarters. During most of the time the vessel
was head on to the sea, and her course occasionally varied hourly in order to
meet the perplexing cross sea and heavy roll. Our condition throughout was
rendered more serious by the extremely heavy rolling, due, apparently, to
imperfect loading. On the third day the single girls and married women and
children were allowed on the lee side of the bridge, and had their food served
out to them there. The ventilators, while they were below, had all to be closed,
to prevent the water from getting down, so that it can well be imagined the
passengers were glad to get on deck to breathe the fresh air, even mixed with
salt spray. The officers and petty officers of the ship were most assiduous in
this time of trouble to add to the comfort of the passengers, a bright example
being set in this respect by the commander of the ship. Captain Allan. For a
week after leaving Teneriffe the carpenters were busily employed repairing the
deck-houses and immigrants’ quarters. On February 13 the first case of


scarlet fever appeared on board. The patient was immediately isolated, and as
the case was a mild one it was hoped the disease would not spread. Table Bay
was reached on February 23; but owing to a strong, squally wind blowing right
off the shore, coaling operations could not be commenced until next day, and
the steamer was therefore considerably delayed. She started again on
February 25, and three days afterwards encountered very heavy weather. On
the 2nd of March there was a fresh S.W. breeze with a heavy swell, in which
the ship rolled considerably. At 7.30 p.m. the steam’steering-gear broke down,
a link of the chain having given way. The hand steering-gear was imme-
diately connected, but that at once gave way also, owing to a heavy sea striking
the helm. The engines were slowed down, and fore and aft sail set imme-
diately ; but the ship rolled very heavily, and considerable bodies of water
found their way into the single women’s compartment, through the booby
hatches, the forward one of which was for some time in immediate danger of
giving way altogether, which would have been a very serious matter. As soon
as possible tarpaulins were secured over both hatches. Shortly after 1 a.m.
the damage to the steering-gear was repaired, after a period of six hours’
terrible suspense, to the relief of all. On March 3 the hand steering-gear,
being found irreparable, was, after much difficulty, smashed up and thrown
overboard. There was also a likelihood of its damaging the temporary steer-
ing-gear. On March 10 the issuing room was again damaged, some of the
stores were lost, and the storekeeper was knocked down and injured, but not
seriously. Next day, the ship still rolling heavily, the water-closets on the
fore deck were again smashed up, but this was the last of the troubles so far
as the weather was concerned. On March 19 another case of scarlet fever
occurred, but, like the first, it was a mild one.— B. M. Herald, March 26, 1885.
s.s. “ Belgic.”
Ever since the introduction of steamers for the conveyance of immigrants
from the old country to our shores the flow of new arrivals has been greater
than when the service was carried out with sailing vessels. This, to a con-
siderable extent, is brought about, firstly, by the facilities afforded, and,
secondly, by the shorter duration of and the welcome breaks in the voyage.
On Saturday the Orient Company’s chartered steamer “ Belgic ” reached Port
Jackson with 593 immigrants from Plymouth. The “ Belgic/’ has made a remark-
ably quick passage out, and has also brought into port three over the number
that appeared on her list when she started. One of the three turned up on
board several days after leaving, one family having one child more than was
specified on the official document. The other two were born on board. There
were no deaths during the voyage, and this, combined with the fact that the trip
has been entirely free from sickness of a contagious nature, led Dr. Sibley, the
Assistant Health Officer, to clear the vessel on Saturday and allow her to proceed
up the harbour. Dr. Sibley made the usual inspection, and was so pleased
with the cleanliness of each apartment that he took the opportunity of personally
complimenting the immigrants. On leaving Plymouth the “Belgic” had on board
46 married couples, 148 single men, 211 single women, 64 boys under 12 years of
age, 67 girls under 12 years, and 8 infants, making a total of 590 souls, equal to
516 statute adults. The main portion of the immigrants are Irish, although there
is a good sprinkling of Englishmen and Scotchmen. Miners, stokers, carpenters
and joiners, tin and coppersmiths, farm and general labourers, bricklayers and
blacksmiths are the principal callings of the men, whilst among the single women
are to be found domestic servants, cooks laundresses, &c. As an immigrant
steamer, the “ Belgic” is, perhaps, complete at all points; in fact, it would be
almost an impossibility to find a better boat for this work. The system of ventila-
tion is a special feature. Cowl’s patent and the usual inboard ventilating appa-
ratus being in use. The ship is lighted throughout with the electric light, and she
also carries a refrigerator. The electric light worked splendidly, and proved
a great boon, naked lights being entirely dispensed with. The refrigerator.


too, was very much appreciated, fresh meats being served out to the immi-
grants four times a week. No complaints to speak of were lodged, and the
majority of the immigrants say that they have fared far better than they
expected. The single men were allotted the fore part of the ship, the married
people amidships and aft, and the single women right aft. All the quarters
are on the main deck. Life on board seems to have been of an exceedingly
pleasant character, amusements and entertainments being frequent. Several
concerts given in the saloon proved very successful, as a considerable amount of
musical talent was displayed. Mr. Wooten, the hospital assistant, took a
prominent part in the concerts, and the captain and officers, together with the
surgeon, superintendent, and matron, lent a willing hand. Divine service was
held every Sunday, and a day school for the youngsters was creditably carried
out by by Mr. Treadgold. The discipline maintained throughout the ship has
been perfect. Each apartment is in capital order, and the ship from stem to
stern presents a clean and trim appearance. Dr. L. E. Huxtable, who has had
considerable experience in the immigration service, is the surgeon-superin-
tendent on board. Dr. Huxtable has voyaged to Sydney in the Belgravia,
Aberdeen, and Gulf of Mexico, and his efforts to promote the general welfare
of the immigrants have at all times been highly appreciated. That his
services were valued on this trip is frankly set out in an address presented to
the doctor previous to arrival. Mr. Frederick Johnson was the dispenser on
board, and as usual carried out his duties to the satisfaction of all concerned.
Mr. Johnson has written a book of his experiences during four trips with
immigrants to Sydney, which he intends publishing as a guide to those who
wish to cast their lot among us. The duties of matron on the Belgic have on
this trip been performed by Miss Chicken, a lady whose many goodly qualities
specially fit her for such a position. No less than 211 single women have been
under the care of Miss Chicken, and all have arrived in the best of health, a
fact that speaks well for the sanitary arrangements on the ship. The Belgic
is commanded by Captain W, H. Walker, who is a stranger to Sydney. With
him as chief officer is Mr. Wright. Messrs. Beckman, Taylor, and Taw are
second, third, and fourth officers respectively. Mr. Easdown is the purser and
chief steward, and Mr. Graham chief in the engine-room. The voyage has
been accomplished in a little under 42 days, the average speed being 12.3 knots
per hour. The best day’s work was 336 miles.
The “Belgic” left Plymouth Sound with fine weather,and was soon clear of
the Channel. The run to Teneriffe was marked by moderately easterly winds
and a smooth sea. Santa Cruz, the first place of call, was reached at 7 a.m.
on August 4, after a capital run of four days 17 hours 15 minutes from
Plymouth. The bunkers having been replenished with coal, the “Belgic”
resumed her voyage at 7.38 p.m. same day, and carried easterly weather to the
Equator, crossed on August 11 at noon. Thence moderate to fresh southerly
and south-east breezes were met with to Cape Town. The “ Belgic ” anchored
in Table Bay at 4.50p.m. on the 20th, and after coaling she left at 2.22 p.m. on
the following day. She had westerly winds increasing to moderate gales after
leaving the Cape, and although there was a heavy sea, the steamer behaved
well and came through uninjured. St. Paul’s Island was passed at 1.22 a.m.
on August 31, and the meridian of Cape Leuwin crossed at 10 p.m. on
September 5. Thence fresh easterly winds and a heavy sea prevailed to Cape
Otway, passed at noon on the 10th. Strong head winds were encountered
along the coast. The “ Belgic” entered port at 1.25 p.m. on Saturday, and upon
being admitted to pratique steamed up to the Orient Company’s moorings in
Neutral Bay. A number of boats laden with the friends and relations of the
immigrants went off to the ship yesterday, but as no one was allowed on board
they had to be content with greeting those on the steamer from the boats
alongside. The single women will be landed this morning and taken to the
Hyde Park Depot. The remainder of the new arrivals will be allowed to
leave the ship after the Immigration Board have held their usual sitting on
board.
The “Belgic” belongs to the famous Oceanic Steam Navigation Company’s
line, owned by Messrs. Ismay, Emery, and Co., and consequently flies the


White Star flag at the mizzen. The steamers of this line trade between New
York and Liverpool, and their steaming capabilities are well known to the
travelling public. The “ Belgic ”is the first representative of the line that has
visited this port, and is, moreover, the latest acquisition to the fleet, having
been built this year by Messrs. Harland and Wolff, of Belfast. On this, her
maiden voyage, she has acquitted herself remarkably well, and on the long
stretch of steaming from Santa Cruz to the Cape, and thence to Sydney, the
machinery worked splendidly, and to the entire satisfaction of the chief engineer.
Steel has been used in her construction, and for workmanship and finish the
vessel is well up to the mark. In length the “Belgic” measures 420 ft., her beam
is 42ft. 6in., and depth of hold 31ft. 9in. This gives her a net register of 2,698
tons, and a gross measurement of 4,212 tons. The “ Belgic ” is sister liner to the
Doric, which was taken up in New Zealand as a cruiser. She is turtle-backed
over forward and aft, has three decks—viz., promenade, main, and haul up—
and is rigged as a four-masted barque. There is accommodation for over 100
first-class passengers, and upwards of 1,200 steerage, the latter being quartered
on the main deck fore and aft. The main or dining saloon is entirely separate
from the staterooms. It is square shaped, and is well lighted and ventilated
by a large skylight overhead, and by numerous ports all round. This saloon
extends to the break of the spar deck, and adjoining it, running aft, are the
pantry, galley, engineers’ berths, messroom, storeroom, &c. Dining tables,
capable of seating upwards of 100 passengers, are placed on each side of the
dining saloon. Illumination is supplied by electro-plated swinging lamps,
available for either oil or electric light. The sides of the saloon are panelled
in floral devices, relieved with polished and handsomely carved mahogany
and satin wood. The panelling of the doors is filled in with stained glass of
rich design. Eevolving chairs are in use, and settees handsomely covered with
plush vevet give the dining saloon a most charming appearance. The dining
saloon is supplied with a piano, and there is a handsome library. Marble
tables for the use of the stewards and drawers for the silverware are also
supplied. The state rooms are on the main deck, and extend well forward.
On this trip portions have been divided and fitted out for the married couples.
The state rooms are arranged to accommodate two or four passengers, and are
fitted up on a luxurious scale. Patent lavatories, electric bells leading to the
steward’s apartment, and electric lights are provided in each state room, and
there is plenty of light and ventilation. The ladies’ cabin is situated on the
starboard side on the main deck, and communicating with it are dressing and
bath rooms, supplied with every toilet requisite. The baths are of marble.
On the promenade deck, in two separate deckhouses well forward, are the
ladies’ boudoir and smoking-room. These are lighted with large ports and
panelled and decorated in the highest style of art. The furniture and appoint-
ments are richly upholstered, and every convenience has been provided.
These, being immediately over the main or dining saloon, are easily reached by
companion-ways, which on this trip have been partitioned off for the conveni-
ence of immigrants. Forward of the ladies’ boudoir is the captain’s room, a
cosy apartment, fully equipped with all latest improvements and handsomely
furnished. Adjoining the captain’s room is the wheelhouse and chartroom,
whilst overhead is the bridge from whence the ship is commanded. The officers
are located forward in a house on the spar deck, and the crew are below under
the turtle-back forward. There is a washing-house, pantry, &c., aft for the
use of the steerage passengers. The “ Belgic” has a straight stem and round
stern. Her lines are extremely graceful. The hull is divided into seven com-
partments, and provision is made for the conveyance of 250 tons of water
ballast. A constant supply of water is maintained by a pulsometer pump for
deck washing and sanitary purposes. Circulating water for main engines is
supplied by centrifugal pumps. One of Hawkins’s patent condensers is placed
in the engine-room, and there is a boiler for supplying steam for same. The
condenser will condense 2,500 gals, per day for the use of the crew and
passengers. A condenser is connected with main boilers, which will condense
3,000 gals, per day. The steam-steering gear is from Bow and M'Laughlan’s


Thistle Works, Scotland. It can be worked either from bridge or turtle-back
aft. Hand gear is at command in case of accident to the steam gear.
The refrigerating chambers are on the Bell-Coleman principle, discharging
10,000 cubic feet of cold air per hour. The light in use is the Edison-Swan,
driven by two of Simon’s 8-horse power engines placed in the engine-room in
charge of the engineer on watch. The total number of engines on board is 32,
The “ Belgic” has a spacious hatchway and powerful steam winches for the rapid
working of cargo. Upon discharge of cargo at this port, the “ Belgic” proceeds
to Hongkong, via Newcastle. At China she will be placed under the Oriental
and Occidental Steamship Company’s flag, and will run between Hongkong
and Yokohama. —Daily Telegraph, Sept. 14, 1885.
W, Speaight & Sons, Printers, Fetter Lane, London.




AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND & TASMANIA.
ORIENT LINE.
FORTNIGHTLY MAIL SERVICE,
Via SUEZ CANAL.
The magnificent full-powered Steamships belonging to the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited, and the Pacific Steam Navigation Company,
leave London every alternate Thursday, and Plymouth one day later, for
Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney direct, and take Passengers on through
tickets for all ports in Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand.
FARES . — First Class, 50 guineas and upwards ; Second Class, 35 guineas
and upwards j Third Class, closed cabins, with Two Berths, 22 guineas each ;
Third Class, closed cabins, with Four Berths, 20 guineas each; Steerige, open
berths for Men only, 16 guineas each.
F. GREEN & CO., )
13, Fenchurch Avenue, London, E.C.: (
Manaqers.
ANDERSON, ANDERSON & CO., I
6, Fenchurch Avenue, London, E.C. /
For Freight or Passage apply to the latter firm.
