

NEW AUSTRALIA
9
1
A REPORT PRESENTED to the BRITISH BOARD
of the NEW AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION.
. . BY . .
ALFRED ROGERS.
MURDOCH & CO., 26 Paternoster 5q., LONDON, E.C.
1896.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


“NEW MORAL WORLD” SERIES
EDITED BY ARTHUR BAKER, M.A.
(THREEPENCE EACH.)
i. A PLEA FOR COMMUNISM.
2. SHAKERS AND SHAKERISM. ( Nearly Ready.)
3. THE BROOK FARM EXPERIMENT.
(Nearly Ready.)
Other Issues to follow.
MURDOCH 5 Co., 26 Paternoster Sq., London. E.C.
■e


NEW AUSTRALIA.
A REPORT PRESENTED TO THE BRITISH BOARD OF
THE NEW AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION.
ALFRED ROGERS.
LONDON:
MURDOCH & CO., 26 PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
MDCCCXCVI.
pvsvsru.


Other Issues to follow.
MURDOCH 5 Co., 26 Paternoster Sq. t London. E.C.
1508
02236146 8


NEW AUSTRALIA.
A REPORT PRESENTED TO THE BRITISH BOARD OF
THE NEW AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION.
ALFRED ROGERS.
LONDON:
MURDOCH & CO., 26 PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
MDCCCXCVI




INTRODUCTORY LETTER.
Tuyu Rugua (via Cavallero), Asuncion,
Paraguay, 16th January, 1896.
The Committee,
British Board New Australia
Association, London.
Gentlemen,
I have the pleasure to enclose herewith
my report upon the New Australia Colony. I have
delayed sending it to you on account of the peculiar
state of affairs existing in the colony, which has
threatened its very existence. However, there is
now no further ground for apprehension, so I take
this opportunity of placing it in your hands,
believing you will be anxiously awaiting its
arrival. You may rely upon all the information
given, as I have taken particular pains to get at
the whole truth; and, indeed, I may say I have
had exceptional advantages for so doing. Shortly
after my arrival here I engaged in agricultural
and forest work for some six weeks or so, thus
gaining an insight into the practical part of the
labour necessary here. I have stayed frequently at
the various settlements, and have become intimate
with the members generally and their opinions.


I have also been through all the minutes, books,
contracts, and other documents; and am well
acquainted with the various details. As you will
judge from the tenor of the report, the state of
the colony is very unsatisfactory. Its affairs have
been thoroughly mismanaged, and it has suffered
from the presence of men and women totally out
of sympathy with its aims and objects. The want
of management has caused the loss of many valu-
able members, and the numbers of the colonists
will be still further reduced, until there remain a
few solid, determined men, true to the principles
with which they set out, and with the grit necessary
to pull the association through its present troubles.
For such men I anticipate a very fine future, and
for such others as will join them. There is no doubt
that the colony started with too many flourishings
of trumpets, too many advertisements, too many
cattle; everything was on too large a scale for such
little men to manage. It has had to come down to
the present low level instead of being gradually
built up. The over-inflated bubble has burst. With
the numbers reduced as they are, the amount of
live stock should be a good start, and when the
system of working has been completely re-organised,
and put upon a business footing, progress should be
steady. There has been lately a serious attempt to
break up the colony, in which all the officials are


implicated; they have been working to this end for
the past twelve months, meaning to divide all the
assets and work upon individualistic lines. I think
I may say they have been defeated in their nefarious
plans, and at any rate they have all had to resign
office. Casey is the new chairman, though at the
moment of writing not yet in office. His acceptance
of office will cause a renewal of confidence, and the
work of re-organisation will be started immediately.
Though not a member yet, I have been requested to
take the secretaryship, and may do so for a short
time. There is a great deal of work before us, but
we have no doubt of being able to set things right.
I will not say any more on these points at present,
as I may mislead you unintentionally. I shall take
an early opportunity of acquainting you with the
whole of the facts, but nothing need deter you from
organising in the meantime. I send you also a note,
“ Advice to intending Colonists,” which may be
useful.
Trusting my work here will meet with your
approval,
I remain, Gentlemen,
Yours faithfully,
ALFRED ROGERS


ADVICE TO INTENDING COLONISTS.
i. Make up your mind that you are going to
make your home here and to lead a country life.
Don’t come unless you can put up with a few
hardships, and thoroughly believe and understand
the principles laid down in the Constitution.
2. Make sure that you are in good health and
sound in constitution. Sick people are of little use
here, and doctors are few.
3. Married men jvith large families are not
suitable at present.
4. Single men should not come out unless they
have made arrangements to set up a home in
twelve months or so after their arrival. Bachelor
life is not altogether pleasant, unless a man has a
hobby to occupy his thoughts and spare time.
5. Women coming out should not forget that all
the household work falls upon them —washing,
mending, &c.
6. Single women are greatly needed and should
come out with married folk until organisation is
set afoot properly.
7. Families should bring every article of
household use with them, excepting perhaps
chairs, tables, and bedsteads. Plenty of clothes
and boots, sufficient for at least two years hard
wear; thin things for summer and thick for
winter. Rolls of cotton shirting, prints, calicos,
flannelettes, cloth, canvas, mosquito-netting, cheap
muslin, curtains. Enamelled tin cups, plates,
saucers, strong knives, forks, spoons; plenty of


pots and pans of all kinds, kettles, preserving pan
for jam-making, strong stove for use with wood,
pails, washing tubs (zinc), wringer, mangle, sewing
machine, strong clock, etc., etc.; garden and fruit
seeds, musical instruments. Men should have good
strong boots, gaiters, saddle and bridle, stout tent,
revolver or shot-gun, good sheath knife, axe,
cutlass, all garden tools, a few carpenter’s tools,
throw for splitting shingles, wedges for splitting
slates; in fact every tool they can lay hands on
besides their trade tools; strong soft felt hats with
wide brim, hammock, plenty of odd leather straps,
wire netting, galvanised iron.
Tools and other heavy things should be packed
in good strong wine barrels which would be very
handy here. Clothes in tin boxes. Remember
boots wear quickly, and bring dubbin, as they are
always getting wet. Everything should be clearly
marked with owner’s name, and all boxes clearly
labelled with full address. If luggage is sent
forward, consign it through to Mr Enrique Plate,
Asuncion—the agent of the colony. Let him have
Bill of Lading and full particulars. Always let
him know when to expect you and by what ship.
People should take passage to Buenos Ayres,
and to avoid trouble with luggage write to the
“ Villa Longa,” a large firm of carriers who will
arrange for transhipment to river boat and landing
at end of journey in Asuncion. Any luggage
landed in Buenos Ayres should be labelled “In
transit for Paraguay.”
People coming out should form themselves into


a party and travel by cargo steamer with their
luggage, thereby lessening expenses. I cannot
recommend steerage by any line of boats—cheap
and nasty. The Spanish and Portuguese emigrants
are most unpleasant to be amongst. Colonists
travelling by Plateure Co. boats up river should
apply for 25 per cent, reduction in fare.
If they should come steerage by mail boats for
economy, they should bring their own knives and
forks, tinned meats, cocoa, extract of meat, tinned
milk, etc., for use on voyage. Never change more
gold than absolutely needed, either in Buenos
Ayres or Asuncion.
Don’t take any heed of the various idle tales
and rumours you may hear on voyage up river.
Argentine people are interested in preventing emi-
gration to Paraguay. Remember that under the
new rules you pay all your own expenses to colony,
and have three months in which to look round and
decide; and if you don’t like it you are at perfect
liberty to go away.
Paraguay will boom in a few years—those on
the spot will naturally benefit.
ALFRED ROGERS.
p.S. —Every colonist should bring cards (several
packs), chess, draughts, cribbage board, cricket set,
lawn tennis set, and any game they can get hold
of.
The address of the Villa Longa in Buenos Ayres
is “ The Manager,” Villa Longa, 236 to 260
Calle Balcarce, Buenos Ayres.


The New Australia Report
ALFRED ROGERS.
PRESENTED TO THE BRITISH BOARD OF THE
NEW AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION.
♦
A REPORT UPON THE NEW AUSTRALIA
COLONY IN PARAGUAY.
Under the name of the New Australia Co-operative
Settlement Association a number of small capitalists
from Australia formed themselves into a society, in
order to pioneer and develop a large tract of land
granted to them, under certain conditions, by the
government of Paraguay. The members of this
association have fixed principles by which they are
guided in their dealings with one another, but to the
outside world they are by the laws of Paraguay a
land company, registered in Asuncion under the
name of the “ Sociedad Co-operatera Colonizadova
Nueva Australia.” This “ Sociedad ” is the legal
basis upon which the association rests. The titles
to the land and all other property whatsoever are
held by the Sociedad in names of its president and
directors, and all matters of business, either between
individual members and the association, or between
the association and the general public, must be


conducted through the Sociedad in order to be valid
at law. The objects and powers of the Sociedad
are set forth in the Articles of Association (Appendix
I.). The shareholders in the Sociedad number eight,
who are elected by the members from amongst
themselves. These eight men hold one share each
and the balance of the 2000 shares en bloc, the whole
being held in trust for the members of the associa-
tion. Of these eight shareholders one is director
of the association, and by virtue of that office
chairman or presidente of the Sociedad, and from
the others three directors are elected, who with the
presidente form the directorate of the Sociedad. As
I have mentioned above, the internal organisation
of the colony is carried on by certain fixed principles
defined in its Constitution, and by other rules and
regulations, agreed to yearly by a two-thirds majority
of all members (Appendix II.). This Constitution
is one of the most vital points to be observed in
connection with the colony, for it is the very spirit
and essence of pure Communism, and it was in
order to carry out the principles of Communism to
their fullest extent that the colony was founded.
How far the colony has been guided by these
principles, and what influence they may have had
in bringing the colony to its present condition, will
be shown later on. I will now proceed to give
details as to the land and its resources, climate, &c.,
particulars of the various settlements, a review of
the business done and results, social conditions,
prospects, &c.
The Government of Paraguay have granted the
colony provisional titles for sixty-seven leagues of


land, say, in English measurement, 310,000 acres.
The concession is for 100 leagues, to be granted to
the colony absolutely if at the end of six years from
the date of the contract they shall have introduced
twelve hundred families, to consist of from four to
six thousand people. Under the present circum-
stances, there seems to be little, if any, chance
of the colony fulfilling its part of the contract
with the Government, and it will not then be able
to retain the present concession. The colonists
have, however, applied to the Government for full
titles to some thirty leagues known as the Lowry
estate, and it is highly probable that the Govern-
ment will grant this request and cancel the old
contract. The Lowry estate is the land upon
which the colony is at present settled. It consists
of some 130,000 acres of fine grass knd forest
country, containing one of the best grazing camps
in Paraguay, capable of carrying upwards of 50,000
head of cattle, and there is no doubt that it could
easily bear a population of 5000 people. The five
settlements forming the New Australia Colony are
spread over a distance of ten miles. Starting from
Las Ovejas, which is about five miles in a straight
line from the northern boundary, and which is at
present the official centre, they are in the following
order: —Las Ovejas, Tuyu Rugua, La Novia, Las'
Amigos, and Loma Rugua. I propose to deal with
each settlement separately.
Very little is known about the land which forms Mazo and
the remainder of the concession, known as Mazo
and Codas. The latter was referred to in the
prospector’s report, and it was intended to have


been the site for the first settlement, being bordered
by the River Tibicuari, but this was changed for the
present site. It is supposed by many to have been
the choicest spot in the whole concession, but it has
not yet been properly prospected, neither has Mazo.
The Lowry land itself has not been sufficiently
prospected for us to be able to judge fairly of its
advantages, and it will be necessary that the colony
should have this done in a thorough manner.
The whole of the Lowry estate exhibits the same
general features—long stretches of rolling grass land
(called campo ) and swamp ( estero), broken up by
ridges and masses of forest (monte). This alternation
of forest and undulating plain presents very beautiful
landscapes, and is at all times pleasing to the eye.
Small creeks are to be found in all directions, many
of which are running throughout the year, the water
being very good for drinking purposes. In times of
much rain the swamps or esteros become almost
impassable, and the creeks are difficult to cross.
Experienced stockmen from Australia are unani-
mous in their opinion as to the suitability of this
land for rearing and fattening cattle. The grass is
always green, droughts being unknown, and, pro-
vided that it is burnt off at the proper season, it
makes excellent grazing. It requires to be heavily
stocked, however; more so, perhaps, than in Aus-
tralia. The cattle require a great deal of attention,
as the grubs and other insect pests are very
numerous, and fatal to young calves if not seen to
in time. They have also to be supplied with salt,
as there are no salty plants growing wild, as in
the plains in Australia. Horses also thrive well,


but require the same careful attention as the
cattle.
Little is known of the composition of the soil; it compos-
, . . ...... ition of
vanes greatly in appearance and in suitability for soil,
crops. There is a vast difference between the land
of the campo and that of the cleared monte in this
respect, the latter being in every way greatly
superior. Then, again, the cleared monte land
varies greatly, and it will require an exhaustive
analysis before its qualities can be known and
turned to the greatest advantage. It will also be
necessary in time to have the estate mapped out
geologically, as there may be mineral wealth at
present unthought of. Much of the campo is a
red soil, strong in silica, with subsoil of clay. Iron-
stone is to be found in irregular patches, and
sandstone is also to be found suitable for building.
There appear to be several varieties of clay, useful
for brick and pottery making. Limestone has not
yet been found, the soil being very deficient in lime.
The cleared monte appears to be a sandy loam, in
parts very rich in decayed vegetable matter, also
with a subsoil of clay, and suited for the growth of
most semi-tropical plants. On the whole it may be
considered very fertile, but difficult to cultivate and
keep clean, owing to the rapid growth of weeds.
The forest or monte is perhaps the most striking The
feature in the estate, and is probably destined to be
one of the chief sources of wealth. To penetrate
it without first cutting a track would be almost
impossible, so thick is it with timber and tangled
masses of vines and scrub. There are woods here
of marvellous strength and tenacity, others suited


for the finest cabinet work, innumerable dye and
medicinal plants and barks, wonderful flowers and
fruits, birds of gorgeous plumage ; but as yet the
colonists have not had the knowledge and skill, or
even the desire, to make the best of this vast
store-house of natural wealth.
The bamboo cane grows plentifully in places,
rather far, however, from the present settlements.
It is used in the roofs of thatched houses.
There are also varieties of cane useful for
wicker-work, and no doubt a small industry in
basket-making will be soon set afoot with these
materials at hand. There are one or two varieties
of grass used for thatching, but the colonists are
finding that shingle roofs are better, for the grass is
difficult to cut.
There are several wild fruits to be found in the
montes, the names of many being at present
unknown. Although so plentiful, they can hardly be
reckoned upon as an article of food, as they have to
be sought for. The orange, both bitter and sweet,
grows in wild profusion, the latter being particularly
fine. Groves of them are to be found everywhere,
planted mostly in the time of the dictator Lopez.
They may be said to be eatable all the year round.
Other fruits are the guava, Cape gooseberry, peach,
raspberry, guayacau, nandupo, fig, myrtleberry,
yakaratia, passion-fruit, Papan apple, coco palm,
mulberry, paguari, a kind of currant and a curious
fruit like a pomegranate.
There are many wild animals, none of them
ferocious by nature. They are very rarely seen and
do not attack man, indeed it requires an experienced


hunter to find them. A jaguar may be heard of at
times, as well as the puma and a small leopard.
Others are the wild pig, deer, and monkey, fairly
numerous, especially away from the settlements,
wolf, fox, guinea-pig, racoon, ant-bear, armadillo,
tapir.
Snakes are numerous, but there is little danger
from them. They do not attack unless cornered or
struck, and are easily killed ; many are harmless.
Some are certainly venomous and their bite would
be fatal, but the children go barefooted with
impunity. These snakes destroy many chickens,
but are being reduced in number rapidly. Lizards
and iguanas, frogs and toads abound, the iguanas
being very destructive of eggs. Caymen are to be
found in the rivers, but there is no stream of any
size within eight or nine miles of the settlements.
The forest is full of bird life, but it would require
a specialist to enumerate the many species. Those
that are serviceable as food are few in variety. The
most common are the partridge and martinet, which
are to be found in the campo in plenty, also the
plover. In the monte there is what is called a monte-
turkey, a large bird of which there are believed to be
several varieties. For wild duck one must go to the
lakes some nine miles distant from Las Ovejas.
Parrots are exceedingly numerous, and make good
eating.
The whole country teems with insect life in every
shape and form. The following are the most
common :
Locust. —This dreaded insect has so far spared
New Australia, but makes its appearance every


three or four years, and is always to be expected.
As in other parts of the world, little can be done to
stay its ravages, and it spares nothing in its onward
progress.
Mosquito.-*- As in similar climates, this troublesome
insect is only too plentiful. It is necessary to have
a mosquito curtain over one’s bed in the summer,
but it is not long before one is acclimatised to them.
Jigger or Sand Flea. —This is a tiny insect that
burrows under the skin, generally under the feet,
depositing a bag of eggs. These if allowed to
remain are troublesome to get rid of, and when taken
out they leave a hole which it is best to fill in with
tobacco ash. Those who go barefooted get a good
many, but there is no trouble if they are taken out
immediately. They can be kept out of the houses
by keeping the floor scrupulously clean, and it is
best never to leave one’s boots on the floor.
Cricket. —This is a very annoying pest, being very
destructive of clothing. Thatch roofs harbour them,
but they can be kept away by cleanliness. Fowls
round the house also help to keep them down.
Cockroach. —Another accompaniment of dirt easily
kept down.
March or horse fly. —This is a very annoying fly,
persistently buzzing round one until it bites, leaving
a spot of blood. The ordinary house fly is not more
plentiful than at home.
Sand fly. —There are two kinds of these, one so
small as to be hardly visible. They are very thick
in some places, and where they bite they leave a
little dark red speck. They are certainly worse than
the English midge.


Tick. —Men working in the monte, and all live stock,
are troubled with these. They are somewhat like a
flea, only flatter, and they bury their head under the
skin. Unless taken out carefully they may leave a
bad sore. I am told, however, that they are not
nearly so bad as the Australian tick. The cow tick
is very much larger.
Bee. —There is a large bee whose sting is very
painful, and a very small kind which will nearly
smother you when working in the open and sweating.
The latter, however, do not sting, as they are only
attracted by the sweat.
Hornet. —Of this insect there are many species, all
of which give a very painful sting. If left alone they
will not molest one, but will attack if one goes too
near their nest. With some kinds the sting is really
severe.
Mona. —This is a grub which grows from eggs laid
under the skin of men and animals by a large black
moth. It raises a lump and is painful until the grub
matures, when it can be easily squeezed out.
Ant. —Ants are infinite in number and variety.
Many of them sting severely, others both bite and
sting, and others still are destructive of plants.
The Tarantula , or hairy spider, is said to be com-
mon in parts of the country, but it has not been
found on the Colony. I have heard of the
of scorpions and centipedes, but they are apparently
exceedingly rare. There is also a green caterpillar
which causes inflammation if it touches the skin.
Though insects are so abundant, and perhaps
annoying to the new-comer, it is not long before
one becomes quite indifferent to these pests.


Strictly speaking, there are no diseases. Where
there is so much swampy ground, and a hot sun,
there is sure to be a slight malaria, and to this
cause may be attributed perhaps the Chu-Chu, a
kind of intermittent fever. It is easily cured, and
lasts but a few days if seen to in time. Some people,
especially children, are troubled by a kind of blight
in the eyes. It is not serious, however, and is also
easily cured. Pasmedora is a painful complaint,
generally attacking the legs. It breaks out in open
sores, which spread if not looked after at once.
Many suppose it to arise from too much scratching.
Most new-comers are troubled with boils for a time,
very annoying while they last, but not difficult to get
rid of. They probably arise from the heating food.
Coughs and colds seem to be unknown. The health
of the community, as a whole, is remarkable, and a
stranger cannot fail to be impressed with the general
healthy appearance of men, women, and children.
Several who were invalided in Australia say they are
completely restored to health.
The climate appears in every respect to be
perfectly adapted to the white man.
It is very changeable, and there are apparently
only two seasons —winter and summer. When the
north wind blows, it is hot, even in winter; when
there is a south wind, it is cold, even though it be
summer. lam told that for nine months in the year
the climate is almost perfect, and my own experience
is that it could hardly be better. The heat is a very
moist heat, and one feels it more than a dry heat,
as it causes a very free perspiration. Before a storm
it becomes very oppressive, and on the storm burst-


ing there is generally a welcome change. Mornings
and evenings in the summer are cool and really
delightful, and in winter cold. The winter is cold
enough at times for an overcoat, and it is generally
pleasant to sit round a fire of an evening. The rain-
fall is ample, and is well distributed throughout the
year.
It is no doubt in some respects a disadvantage to
the colony to be so far away from Asuncion, which
is the capital and port of Paraguay, but there are
compensations in soil and situation. A train leaves
every morning from Asuncion, in the summer at 6.30
a.m., in the winter at 7 a.m., for Villa Rica, distant
nearly one hundred miles. It arrives at Caballero,
say 70 miles, about 12.30 to 1 p.m. From Caballero
station to the colony is reckoned to be n leagues,
say 32 miles. The road passes through campo,
swamp, and monte, and cannot be called a good
road; in fact it is very bad in some places. A man
on horseback can do the distance easily in a day,
and the- four-horse waggon of the colony can do the
same if pushed. A native bullock cart, or carretta,
will take two or three days over the same journey.
A better idea can be gained from the fact that the
produce of the colony, if it leave early in the morn-
ing, can be placed in Asuncion in the afternoon of
the next day. There is also a road to Villa Rica,
which used to be the former means of communication
with the capital, but it is longer both by train and
road, the latter being in a very bad state of repair.
From Loma Rugua to the Tibicuari is 7 miles as
the crow flies, but the way lies through an impass-
able swamp, some two miles across. If this could


be drained and corduroyed, the settlement would be
only 10 miles from the railway. The settlements
themselves are joined by a continuous road, passing
though plain and monte. It is good enough for
ordinary purposes, but will bear improving.
There is difficulty at times in crossing the creek
about one mile from Las Ovejas when swollen in
times of flood.
Las Ovejas is the only settlement built in the
campo. It is situated on a gentle rise open to all
the breezes that blow, and commanding magnifi-
cent views of the surrounding country from every
point. Eminently suitable as a cattle station, it is
not fitted for ordinary settlement purposes, being
too far away from the monte, and having but little
ground suited for crops. It is the oldest settlement,
and Pioneer Terrace still stands. Here is situated
the general office and library, and also the boot-
maker’s shop. The central office, like the majority
of the houses in the place, is built of wood of the
worst kind, the walls are mere wattle and daub, and
the roof is poorly thatched ; it is doubtful if it will
last much longer unless continually repaired. The
same may be said of the rest of the houses. They
were put up hurriedly, and were only intended to
be temporary, but they have had to do duty till
the present time, and must serve for another twelve
months. With few exceptions they are built in
the same style, generally consisting of two rooms,
with a fireplace outside under cover. Some have
verandahs, and fireplaces inside, and have been
made fairly comfortable. At the back of each
house is the usual convenience, but there has been


no attempt to fence in the allotments, which are
far too small. Fowls run over them, and prevent
anything growing. The whole design of the town-
ship shews a total lack of any aesthetic feeling, or
even a desire to respect the privacy of families,
the houses being too close to each other. The
barn is perhaps the only permanent building in the
place, and is really well made. The schoolhouse
and cook’s galley have recently been burnt down.
From ignorance of the right kinds of wood to use,
much of the fencing done will be useless in a
year or so.
Las Ovejas is a good deal behind the other
settlements, owing to the number of hands employed
in purely communal work as compared with those
engaged in production, and it seems highly probable
that the centre will be shifted in the near future,
most of the residents making their homes in the
other camps. Till quite lately agricultural work
had been conducted in a very slipshod fashion, the
land was never kept properly clean, nor was there
any system by which the value of the past work
could be estimated. Experience has shown that
the campo land is not fitted for food crops, unless
properly manured and well kept.
A few miles out from the settlement is the main
cattle camp, under charge of the head stockman.
Each settlement has a proportion of cows and work-
ing bullocks sufficient for its immediate needs, the
remainder are out in this camp, or in “the run”
as it is termed here. The whole number at present
belonging to the colony is estimated at between 460
and 480 head. The breed will stand a good deal


of improvement, and a few head of new stock will be
required for this purpose. The same remark applies
to the horses, which are for the most part weedy.
The total number of these belonging to the colony
is estimated at 170 to 180. The pigs are doing fairly
well, those at Loma Rugua being in the best con-
dition, and of better breed. They increase rapidly,
and at present number over 270 all told. Fowls,
turkeys, ducks, &c., are all private property, and
are estimated to reach 1500.
Area under cultivation, 45-I acres, divided as
follows:—
Garden. —4 acres, where are grown tomatoes,
cabbages, onions, celery, parsley, varieties of beans,
various spices and herbs, arrowroot, Brazilian
potatoes, asparagus, pumpkins, marrows, melons,
turnips, bananas, pine apples, fig trees, apricots,
peaches, mulberries, coffee, &c.
Farm Crops. —Maize, 25 acres ; mandioca, 9 acres;
sweet potatoes, acres; sugar cane, 4 acres,
millet, 1 acre.
Implements. —Garden. Barely sufficient for present
needs barrow, watering cans, hoes, forks, and
spades. Wanted—small hoes (English size), drill
sower, forks, wire netting and fencing, force pump
and hose. Farm —tip-dray, pig-cart, 2 carrettas,
Flying Dutchman plough, drill plough, double
furrow plough, iron plough, 3 garden ploughs,
disc harrow, 2 harrows, sower, reaper, hay rake,
scarifyer, mattocks, machetes, hoes, spades, and
forks. Also, a sugar mill (wooden) and treacle pit
(stone). Wanted strong iron single furrow
ploughs, 5 to 6 cwt.


Stock. —Working bullocks, 22 ; horses, 5.
The Forestry Department is short of axes, mauls, Forestry
entering wedges, mattocks, cross-cut saws, scrub meutf 1
hooks, and machetes.
About 34 cows are milked daily, giving an Dairy,
average of 80 pints a day. This amount is gradually
increasing, as the cows become more domesticated.
The Smithy is sadly in need of repair, the roof Biack-
, . . , T , ■, Smith’S
having almost disappeared. Implements anvil, Depart-
large forge and bellows, small forge, lathe, grind-
stone, 2 vices, and sundry tools. The department
is very deficient in tools, and will require a complete
set. However, excellent work has been turned out
despite the many difficulties. Charcoal is made as
wanted.
There are no carpenters left at this settlement, carpeu-
and the tools remaining are very few. The men Depart-
generally use their own. There is a bench under
cover.
The Bootmaking Department contains sufficient Bo°t-
-0 . , maker's
tools for two men, and a sewing machine. Wanted Depart-
-0 merit.
—iron lasts, pillars and sockets, and roller. Two
men and one boy turned out 20 to 30 pairs of boots
per month, and did general repairs.
This might have been easily developed into a
revenue earning department, as there is a demand
in the country for good boots. As with other depart- v
ments, it has been neglected, and the opportunity is
lost for the present, for the two bootmakers are now
earning a living outside.
The Dispensary is in charge of a practical chemist, Dispeu-
and is an important department which should be sary ’
always kept up to the mark. Its sphere of usefulness


is capable of being developed. There is a fair stock
of drugs on hand, but no apparatus. The following
are needed:—Glass eye-baths, graduated glass meas-
urer, compo-mortars, oiled silk, glass syringes in
wooden cases, cotton wool absorbent, lint, red and
blue litmus paper, filter paper (white and grey),
apothecary’s scales, surgical scissors, test tubes,
omega syringe, clinical thermometers, stethoscopes,
funnels, pocket dressing instruments, suspenders,
glass retorts.
The office and dispensary are at present in the
same room, an arrangement not altogether satis-
factory. There is always a fair amount of work on
hand for the secretary, who, besides keeping the
books, acts as postmaster and is responsible for the
making up of accounts and the various settlement
reports, besides keeping the minutes of the various
meetings. Still I am of opinion that his sphere of
duties might well have been enlarged. As an inform-
ation department it would have been invaluable, and
a great aid to the colony. At present there are no
reliable statistics of any kind whatever, and at the
time when they are badly needed. The stock of
stationery is getting low. The library is very small;
books of reference are urgently needed, especially
such books as “ Spen’s Encyclopedia,” Works on
Agriculture, Sugar Refining, Tobacco Culture,
Treatment of Fibres, Spices, and Grain, &c., &c.
The laundry is very incomplete, and totally in-
adequate for present needs. Boiling coppers, wash-
ing and wringing machines, mangles, tubs, &c., are
urgently required.
A reference to Appendix 111. on the Check System


will show that most articles of produce and all bought
goods pass through the store. There is no reserve
of tools, nails, tin-sheet, iron, &c., to fall back upon,
and these have to be purchased as funds admit.
Good scales are badly wanted, one weighing up to
15 lbs,, and platform scales to weigh up to 250 lbs.
Each settlement has a store for local use, but the
principal store should be properly equipped.
The foregoing details regarding departments of
labour apply of course to each settlement, none of
which are properly equipped for the labour that has
to be done. For some time the colony will have to
put up with makeshifts, but progress is sadly
hindered thereby.
It will be remembered that Las Ovejas is built
upon a high ridge of campo land. Two miles to the
south is another ridge, but of monte, extending to
Loma Rugua, and on the northern face of this ridge
lies Tuyu Rugua. The road from Las Ovejas
descends gradually for a mile till it reaches the
creek, and then is fairly level till within a few yards
of the ridge, when it rises abruptly. Here will be
noticed an entire change of soil ; it is a kind of red
sandy loam, and, judging by the crops it bears, very
fertile. The monte is very dense, and abounds in
valuable timber. All the land used in building and
agriculture has had to be cleared of trees and scrub
—very arduous labour, but amply repaid by the
results. The view from this settlement is magnifi-
cent, and we could hardly desire a fairer spot in
which to form a settlement. The creek passes quite
close, making an additional attraction. It seems to
be the general opinion that in time this will be the


chief settlement, as its natural advantages are sure
to tell’in the long run. With some amount of labour
the creek could be dammed, thus providing a constant
source of power, and it is highly probable that all
the machinery of the colony will be centred near by.
Progress here has recently received a severe shock
owing to a fire burning five out of eight houses
erected. A fresh start has been made, as many of
the Las Ovejas men have determined to make their
homes there. Some 27 acres of scrub have been
felled, and the following will show the amount under
cultivation.
Garden. — acres, well situated and kept in fine
condition. Vegetables, grown much the same as in
Las Ovejas, with a few additions.
Farm. Maize, 17 acres; Kaffir corn, 3 acres;
mandioca, acres ; sweet potatoes, 4 acres ; ramie,
1 acre. Wanted—rhubarb root, hop seed, raspberry
and strawberry plants, potato onions.
Stock. —Cows, 10; calves, 10 ; working bullocks,
10; horses, 6; pigs, 18; fowls, turkeys, &c. In-
dividual allotments are about f acre. A township
has been surveyed, and building operations begun.
All the fencing and paddocks are built of good wood
and likely to be permanent.
Continuing in a southerly direction by the road
through the monte for two miles, you reach the
village settlement of La Novia. This is built
right in the monte, but is being cleared to the
campo eastwards. Though only started some six
or seven months, a great deal of work has been
accomplished. The houses are of a better class,
with shingle roofs, and the fencing is permanent.


The soil here is also remarkably fertile, and the
maize crop is expected to average 40 to 50 bushels
per acre as at Tuyu Rugua. The individual allot-
ments are about t 7 q acre each, most of them planted
with tobacco, which grows well. The area under
cultivation is just under 10 acres, as follows :
Garden. None; dependent on other camps for
supplies.
Farm. —Maize, 7 acres, 5 of which are also under
pumpkins; mandioca, sweet'potatoes, ij. Coffee
plants, 2500.
Stock. —Cows, 10; calves, 9 ; working bullocks, 8;
horses, 6 ; pigs, 6.
Implements. —Carretta, grindstone, forge and anvil,
mattocks, hoes, axes, machetes, &c.
Leaving La Novia and continuing by the road,
you emerge upon the open plain, the ridge being
on your right hand. A fine stretch of country is
before you, the horizon being bounded by a chain
of hills near Villa Rica, over thirty miles away.
To your left is a stretch of plain, mostly estero,
bounded by a ridge of monte. Keeping the road
for another mile and a half, Las Amigos will be
seen to your right, built upon the edge of the monte,
the second village settlement. The view from the
village is very fine, but the place is more exposed
to the cold south wind than La Novia or Tuyu-.
Here again the houses are more substantial, and
there is a solid appearance about the fences and
paddocks, which looks as if the men had made
their homes in the place. It was started about the
same time as La Novia, but has had the advant-
age of using old native clearings.


Garden. —None at present.
Farm. —Maize, 9 acres; mandioca, acres ;
sweet potatoes, 3 acres; coffee plants, 1000.
Stock. —Cows, 14; calves, 15; working bullocks,
15 ; horses, 9 ; pigs, 8 ; fowls, turkeys, &c.
Implements. —Carretta and ordinary tools, such as
hoes, axes, mattocks, &c. Allotments are about
acre.
From Las Amigos there are two roads to Loma,
the one continuing along the plain from La Novia,
the other keeping through the monte for awhile,
leading again through the monte to the plain on the
other side of the ridge, where it crosses the road to
San Jose and Caballero, and there entering the
monte again—distant some four miles. This settle-
ment is situated right in the monte, and has only a
small frontage to the campo. It was formed by the
second batch of colonists from Australia, consisting
mostly of single men. For a long time this was the
most active settlement, and a great deal of work has
been done. The ground cleared for cultivation, in-
cluding old native clearings, is upwards of 80 acres.
Here is situated the little machinery the colony
possesses, the corn mill, the grist mill, and latterly
the saw-mill. The houses are built very close
together, and are of the same style as Las Ovejas,
but perhaps better built. The allotments are only
acre, which is far too small, but they look well, as a
good deal of work has been expended upon them.
There are numerous orange groves around, yielding
a constant supply of fruit. The galley is a good
structure, and the single men’s mess is well looked
after by two cooks, assisted by one of the girls. A


good deal of the work done, however, is only
temporary, and will have to be done over with better
material. The area under cultivation is nearly 70
acres, as follows :
Garden. —6 acres, well laid out, and kept in good
condition. Has supplied the market in Asuncion
with fine cabbages and English potatoes. All vege-
tables as in other settlements. Several thousand
coffee plants all doing well. Has also acres
tobacco, well kept and in fine order.
Farm. —Maize, 40 acres; kaffir corn, 4 acres ;
millet, \ acre ; mandioca, 5 acres; sweet potatoes, 3
acres (more to go in); English potatoes, 3 acres ;
sugar-cane, 6 acres.
Implements. —4 - horse waggon, carrettas, Flying
Dutchman plough, double furrow plough, 4 scari-
fyers, 2 scufflers, 2 ordinary ploughs, axes, hoes,
mattocks, spades, forks, barrow, machetes, mauls,
cross-cut saws, &c.
Other machinery —wooden cane mill, with boiling
pans and concrete tank. Four-horse-power portable
engine, complete saw bench and sundry tools.
Ramie machine, corn-sheller, grist mill, horse-power
apparatus. The saw bench is turning out 8-inch
planks, and other wood for furniture and houses.
There is also a saw-pit for breaking down logs.
Stock. —Cows and calves, 45 ; working bullocks,
30; horses, 24; pigs, 35; fowls are very numer-
ous.
Carpenter's Shop. —Good bench and odd tools, such
as planes, saws, and augers. Men mostly work with
their own. Association tools are much spread about,
many being lost.


Blacksmith's Shop. —ln very bad repair. Forge and
anvil and sundry odd tools, enough for ordinary jobs.
Tannery. —Three tan pits in use, cemented and
bricked. Very fair leather is turned out, the barks
used being curupay and timbo.
School and Store. — The same building has been
used by both. Twelve children attended the school,
and were reckoned to be in the fourth standard, but
the master has now left. There is a small library,
which will stand being added to largely.
Throughout all the settlements a great deal of
carelessness has been shown in regard to tools.
There does not seem to be any one responsible for
them, and consequently they have been taken for
private use, and in many cases men going away
have taken Association tools with them. Men are
very careless also with their carts and other gear,
much valuable labour being taken up with repairs.
Each settlement is very short of saddles and harness,
and this causes great inconvenience at times. At
each camp there are several wells, and in all cases
the water is good.
The mainstay of the colony as regards food is
maize. This grows well, especially in the monte
lands, where it reaches a height of from 8 to 10 feet.
Taking it all round, 30 bushels per acre may be
confidently expected. Even at this figure, which is
low, there should be a return this year of 100 tons,
amply sufficient for all purposes. Of this maize
excellent bread is made, especially if the grain is
mixed with a little milk and mandioca flour or a
small quantity of sweet potato. As porridge it is
even superior to oatmeal, every one taking it this


way. Again, mixed with eggs and treacle it makes
very good pudding.
The supply of meat is now very short, at the
most two beasts a week. Even then it is very old
bulls or used up working bullocks that are killed.
In the early days the animals were killed recklessly,
from 10 to 14 per week, a great portion of which
was waste. Pigs are killed now and then, and a
little bacon is made, but there are not enough for
a constant supply. The people look none the worse
for their semi-vegetarian diet.
Mandioca is a root plant which grows well on any
soil. It is very nearly pure starch, but makes
excellent flour, and can be used for custards and
puddings. Boiled in water it serves very well for
an ordinary vegetable.
Sweet potatoes, cabbages, pumpkins, melons,
lettuce, &c,, &c., in fact, nearly all known vege-
tables thrive luxuriantly (some of the cabbages
weighing upwards of 10 lbs.), and there need
never be any lack of these for food. New seed
is required, however, each year, as it seems to
deteriorate rapidly.
Oranges, guavas, &c., are plentiful, and with
treacle make excellent jam.
Sugar-cane thrives well, and is one of the main-
stays of the colony. The cane is crushed in a
wooden mill, and the expressed juice is boiled in
open pans until of the required thickness. The
treacle thus made is very rich and of a delicious
flavour.
Wheat has been tried, but has so far failed,
having in all cases been planted too late and


damaged by rust. There does not seem to be enough
lime in the soil.
The supply of milk is gradually improving. It is
rich in cream, and makes very good butter. The
quantity at present given by each cow averages from
3 to 4 pints daily.
Mate is perhaps the only drink, and is used in
large quantities. This refreshing beverage is only
known on the continent of S. America, but its use
is always extending. It is made from the dried
leaves of the Ilex Pavaguayensis, which grows wild
in Paraguay and Brazil, and is only to be found in
certain parts of the country. So far all endeavours
to cultivate it have failed. It is somewhat bitter
and astringent, and is infused like tea ; and though
it takes some time to get accustomed to it, those
who have taken to it even prefer it to the latter.
Taken as the natives take it, very strong and boil-
ing hot, sucked through a metal tube called a
bombilla, it has wonderful sustaining powers.
Now that the people own fowls, these have in-
creased rapidly, and the supply of eggs from private
sources will be a great factor in the future food
supply. The same applies to ducks, turkeys, &c.
Up till recently the education of the children has
been fairly well attended to. Now, however, that
the schoolhouse and all books, &c., at Las' Ovejas
have been burnt, and the schoolmaster has left
Loma Rugua, matters are at a standstill in this
respect. The Government have been applied to
for a schoolmaster, but no definite reply has been
received so far. In the meantime the children are
running wild, and the question will have to be taken


seriously in hand (Appendix IV.). At the village
settlements no provision at all has been made for
educating the children, and for some time to come
parents will have to attend to this themselves.
Sanitary conveniences are naturally crude, and
must be so for some time to come. The system of
earth closets seems to be healthy enough, but in a
place like Las Ovejas, where the houses are too
crowded, the presence of so many of these closets
in a limited area is most offensive.
The creeks and springs are made use of for bath-
ing purposes, otherwise the household tub has to
do duty. The creek at Tuyu Rugua, and pond and
shower bath at Loma, are a great boon to bathers.
The washing for families and single men is
divided up amongst the women, though it cannot
be said that all do their share, many refusing to
do communal work altogether. This makes it
very hard upon those who are willing to do the
work, especially as the appliances are so few.
It would have been easy to have made proper
washing machines, but many of the women seem to
prefer to work by hand.
While funds lasted, kerosene was used for light,
being cheap and handy. Now that economy is
necessary, some substitute will have to be found, as
light is a necessity in the winter months. The
material for making crude oil lies around in abun-
dance, the palm nut only requiring to be cracked
and heated. The natives prepare oil for their own
use from these nuts, but the colonists will make no
effort unless forced by circumstances.
The colony is deficient in the means of providing


recreation. Cricket is popular, and there are good
players, but very little apparatus. Fishing has
been tried with some small success. Those who
have guns and ammunition can have fair sport,
though the country is difficult to shoot over. Those
who have saddles and bridles can generally get
a horse to ride. There is a great want of cards,
chess, draughts, &c., and other like amusements,
but the absence of light makes it almost impossible
for the men to meet together of an evening. In the
early days there wa£ a very good band, a very
popular institution, which served to keep the mem-
bers together. The instruments were good, and
there were plenty of them, and for a while the
bandmaster, who owned them all, was very enthu-
siastic. He became disheartened, however, with-
drew his instruments, and is now busy selling them !
While it was going, it was reckoned to be the best
band in Paraguay.
There have been a good number of amateur
theatrical performances and concerts, for the colony
is by no means deficient in talent of this kind. Of
social life as known at home there is not much. The
people are too short of household necessities to be
able to extend much hospitality. Every now and
then a dance is arranged, or a surprise party, and
these often last till early morning. The New Aus-
tralians are great dancers, and even after a hard
day’s work are always prepared to make a night of
it. For music they are dependent on concertinas
and similar instruments, the only piano and organ
on the colony being privately owned.
The present secretary holds a formal appointment


from the Government as postmaster, at a salary of Post office
25 dollars per month. New Australia is a registered
post office, and there is a mail to and fro averaging
once per week. The service is defective, many
letters from home parts going astray, but it is
improving.
The chairman receives appointment from the Authority-
Government as local magistrate. Lane used this
authority on several occasions, and caused much
bad feeling in consequence. The present chairman
is unable to furnish me with the extent of his powers
and authority in this direction, and the office is
practically in abeyance.
The magistrate or intendente acts also as regis- Births, •
0 . iii , Marriages.
trar of births, marriages, and deaths, and may grant and
certificates for either. Returns are made yearly to Deaths '
the Government. For a birth the signature of the
mother and midwife is necessary in the register.
For a death a certificate is required from the doctor
or other person in attendance. In marriage there is
a civil ceremony, which takes place before the
registrar. The consent of parents or guardians is
necessary, or of some person acting in loco parentis.
I am now about to treat of the business transac- History of
the
tions of the colony, the various contracts and Movement
agreements, the revenue and expenditure, the finan-
cial position and prospects, &c.; but before so doing
it will be necessary to present a brief history of the
association from the very beginning, in order that
the causes which have produced the present state
of affairs may be fully appreciated.
The idea of starting a co-operative colony was by
no means new in Australia, but the repeated defeats


of labour organisations in their fight against capita-
lism gave the chance to the founders of the New
Australia movement. Working men were weary of
the struggle and sick at heart, the prospects of
better times seemed hopeless, and they were only
too glad to go to some land where the capitalist was
not. The organisers of New Australia seized the
opportunity, dosed men and women with extravagant
sentiment; the prospectors gave glowing accounts of
the land which had been granted by the Paraguayan
Government; the leader, William Lane, pictured
the working man’s paradise that was to be; and
so excitement about the colony was worked up to
fever heat. Thousands were going to join the move-
ment; organisation went rapidly ahead. Now, had
there been a thorough practical business man at the
head of affairs, instead of a crazy theorist, New
Australia would have had to-day a population of
several thousand intelligent working men and women.
The chance was one of a century, and the founder of
such a movement would have been famous for all
time. As it was, the leaders appear to have been
men of straw, and as the movement progressed their
weakness became more apparent. From the begin-
ning there appears to have been reckless extravagance
and mismanagement; they were always floundering
in debt, and had to resort to desperate means in
order to raise funds, though subscriptions were
pouring in day by day. Some thousands were spent
in purchasing and fitting out a sailing vessel, the
Royal Tar —an arrant piece of folly; and more
thousands were consumed in keeping members in
camp at Sydney—a proceeding that was little short


of madness. The departure of the Royal Tar with
the first batch of colonists was made the occasion of
a great display, and enthusiasm ran high. The
delay in her departure, put down by the leaders as
owing to the interference of the Government, was
on account of the dock dues not having been paid,
but finally she left with some 200 souls on board,
stores, and £2s in cash, with orders to delay on the
voyage to Monte Video until there should be time
for the Sydney office to collect and wire more funds,
with which to proceed up river. It very soon
became evident that Lane was no leader of men,
as discontent was rife ere they had proceeded
half way on the journey, and two parties were
formed—those solid for him, the others in opposition.
Remember, too, Lane had been given absolute
power, and that every one on board was ignorant
of the true state of affairs, which had been mis-
represented to them from the very beginning.
Before leaving, the people were advised to sell all
their household effects, and the bushmen their
saddles and other gear, and this had been done
at a terrible sacrifice ; besides which they had paid
in all the money on their persons. Landed in
Paraguay with but few things of their own and
not a cent in their pockets, they were to find that
nothing had been prepared for them, and they were
in the midst of the rainy season ! They were led
as far away from civilisation as the limits of the
concession allowed, and there had to begin their
colony.
It is not necessary to again go into the details of
the causes which led to the first split, when 87 souls


left the colony, as the story has so often been made
public. Lane as a high-souled enthusiast in the
cause of labour, and Lane as a despot crafty,
mendacious, almost afraid to meet men face to face
—were two different men. As the first he roused
the enthusiasm of thousands; as the second he was
able to draw out all the worst passions and the
most evil thoughts of those whom he had so far led.
Hence the first split.
The second batch arrived, mostly single men, and
these he ordered to settle some ten miles away from
the first camp. His policy consisted in keeping the
members ignorant of their position financially and
otherwise, here and in Australia; and his treatment
of those not in the swim with him was one of studied
contempt. Indeed, after hearing so many accounts
of the events of that time, told me by people who
had been there from the beginning, it is hardly
possible to suppose that the man was in his right
mind. This is confirmed by a friend of mine,
who joined the colony as schoolmaster, and who,
writing under date 15th May, 1894, sa Y s —“Lane
plainly told me himself that he could work only with
fanatics. He has ‘ seen God in propria persona and
got special revelations from Him,’ he says; and the
man confessed to me himself he meant to make
himself a benevolent despot in the community! ”
There is also no doubt that Lane had decided upon
separating with a chosen few from the main body
before reaching Paraguay, and that he reserved the
choicest ground in the concession, Codas, for this
purpose. Such being the case, it is easy to under-
stand Lane’s position as a religious fanatic ; to such


a man everything he did, however unscrupulous it
might appear to others, was justifiable in his own
eyes.
Events were rapidly leading to a crisis, and in the
results that followed the lead was taken by Gilbert
Casey, as spokesman of the majority. Lane pro-
claimed the constitution and resigned, leaving the
colony with some 45 adherents, taking with him tools
and cattle. He applied to the Board of Management
for the right to settle on the Codas land, which was
refused him, so he proceeded to Caazapa and there
formed Cosme Colony. And now the old colony set
to work to recover its lost ground, a task not impos-
sible, and one which, had both the men and their
leaders set about it in a common-sense manner, could
easily have been accomplished. They had lost 87
souls, followed by another 45, besides other small
withdrawals, and their leader, and were left with
a debt of £2OO, while organisation in Australia
had also stopped. Before Lane left, all the
cattle, tools, &c., which had stood in his sole
name, were transferred to the seven trustees and
director as shareholders of the Sociedad. There
was also property in Australia, and in order to take
over this for the Association Gilbert Casey was
appointed agent, with full powers to take over the
books, documents, cash, Royal Tar, and other
securities, and to place the organisation upon a
proper footing. On arrival in Sydney, Mr Casey
took immediate steps to carry out his instruc-
tions. This part of the history of New Australia
is very black, and reflects the greatest discredit on
the old officials, and, in fact, leaves the way open


for charges of the gravest character. Despite his
very best endeavours, Mr Casey was unable either
to get the books or the securities transferred, and
the upshot of it all was that somehow the property
was sold, including the Royal Tar; the secretary, W.
W. Head, disappeared, and later on Hall, who
succeeded him, disappeared also, leaving nothing
behind. It is therefore not known how much money
was subscribed to the association, and how it was
spent, save that amount which was remitted to
Paraguay,
Casey, then, had nothing left to do but to organise,
and in this he was successful, remitting some
and sending off 50 to 60 colonists. There still
remained, however, a large number of people,
estimated at 200, who had paid in their all to the
old association, and who were left stranded, and are
at this moment still unable to proceed to the colony.
After the split, work upon the colony was maintained
vigorously for a time, but the men chosen to direct
affairs do not appear to have had the necessary
ability or even the full confidence of the members,
and the history of the colony from that time to the
present is nothing but a series of blunders. Due
allowance must be made, of course, for the fact that
they were left in debt, were ignorant of the language
and customs of the country, and of the nature of
their resources; but the most serious mistakes were
made by direct violation of principles. The financial
position of the colony has been going from bad to
worse, and the most valuable assets are no longer
available.
The first business transaction of any importance


was the Ramie Contract, dated 14th September, 1894, contract,
for 7 years with W. W. Smith. But if huge
profits were to be made out of the cultivation and
treatment of this fibre, as Mr Smith stated, it is very
doubtful whether he would have parted with his know-
ledge of the subject. So far as I have learnt, he
really knows little about the fibre, and has not given
the experiment the attention and care he promised.
Anyhow the management were foolish to engage
in the production of an article they knew nothing
whatever about, which had no regular market, and
was in a purely experimental stage all over the
world. Some ten acres in all were planted, taking
up a great deal of valuable labour, and a machine
which was bought was certainly not the most efficient
in the market. As a source of revenue I fear it will
be some time before this crop will be of any value.
As for the contract itself, I am of opinion that, not
being entered into with the Sociedad, but only the
association, it is not legal, and can at any time be
set aside.
The second event of importance was the intro- walker’s
duction by Mr Walker of his scheme for amending bcheme-
the constitution. It was the first of many insidious
attempts to get the colonists to change the principles
which they had pledged themselves to carry out,
and did incalculable harm in drawing the attention
of the people away from more urgent points for
discussion. Fortunately it did not receive a two-
thirds majority in its favour, and was therefore
rejected.
Next comes the Cattle Contract, dated 19th cattle
February, 1895, f° r the sale of 1000 head of cattle Contract ’


to sundry persons. Of all the measures passed by
the Board of Management, this was the worst, the
effects of which it will take many years to wipe out,
and it is one of the main causes of the present state
of the colony.
Shortly after the arrival of the first settlers, a herd
of 2500 head of cattle, horses, &c., was purchased,
which was spread over several camps, some of them
6or 7 miles distant from Las Ovejas. It is doubtful
now whether the herd was even counted, but the
number was taken at that figure. After the split,
the colony was left in debt, and besides, from that
time onward, they were living cn capital. Clothes
ran short, funds were low, and money was wanted to
start the village settlements. The sale of 1000 head
was proposed, after which, taking into consideration
the number already sold from time to time in
small lots, and those which they had eaten, and
also the increase, they reckoned upon having
1000 head left. Walker, the business agent,
had a contract soon ready, and it was rushed
through before the people had time to consider
it, and as hurriedly carried out. The men of Loma
Rugua had at once petitioned against it, but it was
too late. The contract was for 1000 head at $27 per
head, calves up to two years being thrown in. The
cattle were mustered, when to the surprise of
every one, not a thousand head could be found.
928 were sold, and some 4500 calves thrown in for
nothing. Evidently there had been a huge blunder,
and yet, owing to the disgraceful want of system, no
one was responsible. The price at which they were
sold was, also, I am told, ridiculous, as shortly after-


wards the hides alone fetched that figure. The
whole business reflects the greatest discredit upon
the proposers of the contract, and the officials who
carried it through. The colony was left with barely
sufficient cattle to go on with. Men became dis-
heartened, and I am told many left on this account.
It will take some years before the colony recovers
its position in regard to stock. Had the cattle been
sold in small lots, it is reckoned that one half of the
number sold would have realised more than the
contract.
Then we have the Timber Contract, dated 6th
February, 1895, for three years with H. E. Stanley.
This was another ill-advised contract, entered into
without proper consideration, the ill effects of which
will be very far reaching. Next to the cattle the
timber was undoubtedly the most valuable asset of
the colony, and it has been practically given away.
Another point to be considered is that the granting of
a monopoly, such as this, to one individual, violates
the principles which one and all professed such a
desire to uphold ; and it is doubtful whether they had
a right to grant such a contract until such time as
their own contract with the Government had been
fulfilled. Moreover, the contract is so worded that
the colony is debarred from cutting timber and
selling it, although the officials are by no means
clear as to the exact meaning to be attached to the
contract! Their ignorance and carelessness in such
a vital matter merits the gravest censure, especially
seeing that they had been most active in canvassing
the members to vote for the measure. After careful
thought in the light of previous contracts and


schemes, I am of the bpinion that interests, other
than those of the colony, were involved in this
matter. So far the monetary gain to the colony has
been very slight, but they have lost a quantity of
their most valuable and most accessible timber,
which they can never replace. Properly managed,
the timber should by this time have been a valuable
source of revenue.
The Village Settlement Scheme was another
blunder. It is difficult to appreciate to the full the
reasons which led to the passing of this scheme,
for of its ill effects there is ample evidence. No
doubt the individual members of the colony differed
greatly in their habits, tastes and ideas, and it
was thought that the formation of villages of the
character laid down in the scheme would more
effectually develop the individuality of those join-
ing them, and allow those of like habits and
sympathies to work and live together. On the
other hand,, however, it meant a departure from
the great principle of co-operation, so necessary in
the early stages of the colony’s growth. It
meant, besides, a division of tools that could be ill
afforded, and the building of unnecessary paddocks,
fences, and galleys. It meant the spending of more
capital upon wire, tools, and other necessaries ; and
this the colony could not afford. In the future,
doubtless, it may be advantageous for the people to
separate into smaller groups, when food supply shall
have been assured, and a steady revenue be coming
in, but for the present the division into five settle-
ments causes a serious waste of effort and time.
Although nominally under the control of the Board


of Management, the work of production is carried on
by the different settlements as may be decided
locally. Consequently there is no system in the
method of production, and so long as this is the case
the results will not be satisfactory. I have no doubt
that ere long the colony will find it necessary to
concentrate into one or two large settlements, if they
wish to make real progress (Appendix IV.).
Macdonald’s Scheme was the last really serious Mac-
attempt to alter the constitution, and was defeated scheme 8
after much discussion by a large majority. Mr
Macdonald had become an extreme advocate for
individual settlement, as opposed to communal
settlement, and shortly after the defeat of his scheme
he left the colony.
I have given then the outlines of the events which
go to make up the history of the colony, but even
at the time I write, matters are coming to a crisis,
for the present state of affairs cannot last long.
I have been through all the books and accounts of General
the Sociedad, which appear to have been well kept. Busmess
Under Lane’s management this part of the business
was neglected, but since his departure this work has
been carried out more methodically. The accounts
reveal nothing irregular, but the money of the
Sociedad does not appear to have been wisely spent.
There has been extravagance, and the absolute need
of strict economy in the early stages of the colony
does not seem to have been appreciated. The members
apparently did not realise that they were living on
capital, for while this lasted, little effort seems to
have been made to obtain revenue. The
expenditure is determined by the Board at their


monthly meeting, when the orders from the various
settlements and from individuals for goods are
discussed, and if agreed to, passed. This Board of
Management is a clumsy method of arranging the
minor business of the community; the best part of
its time is taken up in discussing trifling details,
whilst really urgent and important matters are
allowed to slide. The usual matters coming before
the Board are applications for clothes, tools, stores,
leaves of absence, also applications from outsiders
for renting ground, running cattle, selling or buying
stock, &c.
Upon the prospects of earning a revenue the exis-
tence of the colony depends, and it would naturally
be expected that this question should have been
thoroughly examined from all points of view, and
that, with an experience of two years as a guide,
the colonists should now have a very fair know-
ledge of the local and outside market requirements,
and of the capabilities of the colony to meet them;
also, that accurate statistics should have been com-
piled, showing the results of labour, the amount of
labour required for food supply and other com-
munal purposes, and the surplus labour which
could be devoted to revenue purposes. I regret to
say, however, that none of these things have been
done. This serious question of revenue, the very
foundation upon which the colony was to be built,
has been studiously neglected, and no statistics are
available. Spasmodic efforts have been made now and
again, as witness the Ramie experiment, but there
has been no attempt to face the problem honestly and
to direct the efforts of the colony to some definite


purpose. A beginning has been made now, but the
funds are exhausted, and the men will be heavily
handicapped in the coming struggle to make both
ends meet. An important statement has recently
been drawn up by the Secretary, showing clearly
the amount of money that must be earned per
annum in order to supply the colony with the
necessities of life which cannot be produced by
their own labour; from which it will be seen that
a sum of £1 per annum has to be earned by
each male adult, in addition to the local production
of food. This amount appears to be very small,
but there is no doubt that it is sufficiently accurate.
In Paraguay itself, there is not a large market for
produce, but yet enough, if properly worked, to keep
the colony going.
The following articles are at present under con-
sideration for purposes of revenue, but my own
information is necessarily slight.
Cattle and, Timber. —The colony has for the time
being destroyed its chances in these respects.
Dairy Produce. —There is a constant demand for
butter and cheese, but there are no appliances. It
may be possible to make butter in the winter, and
cheese all the year round. In summer it is too hot
to make butter, unless a specially built dairy is
constructed. The people are experimenting in these
directions.
Garden Produce. —They have been able to sell a fair
quantity of early English potatoes, which fetch as
much as £l3 per ton. The business is capable of ex-
tension, if properly managed. There is also a demand
for other vegetables, and this should be a profitable


undertaking, as no vegetables have hitherto been
produced in Paraguay of so fine a quality as those
from the colony.
Fruits. — Bananas fetch a good price and grow
luxuriantly in the country, being of very fine
quality. There are not more than from 200 to 300-
trees in the colony, whereas there might have been
2000 to 3000. They take three years to mature, how-
ever. Oranges are exported to Argentina in great
quantities, but the people need a large supply for
their own use. The making of jam, marmalade, or
fruit pulp should engage their attention.
Sugar is imported, but there is no reason why the
colony should not supply the demand. Cane thrives
well, and were enough planted, and careful statistics
prepared, there should not be much difficulty in
obtaining the necessary implements on easy terms.
Pigs increase rapidly, and if they be of good breed*
sell well. There is always a demand for hams and
bacon. So far there has been barely sufficient food
grown for pigs on the ground.
Boots and Leather. —For the time being they have
lost the opportunity of obtaining a revenue from this
source. Properly managed, a good business could
have been done. Even now a small tannery would
pay well under a skilled hand.
Carraway Seed and Aniseed, or Fennel, grow luxur-
iantly, and should fetch a good price in the London
market.
Alfalfa. —There is a demand in Asuncion for this.
Experiments, so far, have been badly conducted.
Flax grows fairly well; there is always a demand
in the outside world for Linseed.


Tobacco grows splendidly, and is of fine quality, but
it requires great skill in curing to be saleable in the
London market. The Argentina people have taxed
it out of their market.
Coffee. —In another two years a certain revenue
will be derived from this source. There are some
4000 trees planted, and Paraguayan coffee is of very
good quality The amount produced increases yearly
up to the tenth year.
Cotton. —The native cotton is, I am told, of very
good quality. The natives manufacture excellent
cloth from it with very primitive machinery.
Rice fetches a good price locally and grows well.
It requires machinery to clean it properly.
Bee-keeping is a profitable industry.
There is a host of minor industries, such as
furniture-making, hat-making, broom and basket
making, &c., &c., that if developed would bring in
a small revenue. The great point to be observed
is this—the colony can grow its own food; anything
that can be sold that will fetch a slight return over
and above freight and other charges will be so much
revenue. The labour employed need not be counted
as a factor in the cost, providing a profit, however
small, can be derived. A sample of Ramie fibre
is now in London, and may be seen on applica-
tion to the British Board, It is not possible to
give more than the barest outlines of what may
represent the future sources of income ; they have
yet to be tried by experience; and I prefer to
wait until the present revenue committee have
presented their report before I say anything further.
In years to come it will pay the colony better to let


the natives grow all raw material, and purchase it
from them and manufacture it; but this will need
a larger amount of capital than the colony has any
prospects of obtaining for some time.
The present position of the colony may be
summarised as follows:
i. They have provisional titles for some 350,000
acres of rich agricultural and pastoral land, heavily
stocked with valuable timber.
2. The climate is delightful and very healthy,
though the heat is at times extreme.
3. There is an abundance of water all the year
round.
4. There are no taxes of any kind to pay or
import or export duties upon goods brought by
colonists. This concession lasts for ten years from
the date of contract with the Government.
5. They have a quantity of dead work accom-
plished, though there is plenty in hand to do.
6. There are not enough houses for the present
population.
7. The food supply for the coming year will be
ample, with the exception of meat and treacle.
8. They are short of clothes, tools, machines, and
household goods, saddles and harness, &c.
9. The number of live stock is small, but increas-
ing rapidly in quantity and quality.
10. The population is small, say 200 souls, more
members leaving than arriving.
11. The funds are low, and there is very little
to fall back upon by which they can raise money.
12. They have no definite policy as to obtaining
revenue, and are working without purpose.


13. Their officials have lost faith in the con-
stitution, and are actively opposed to it.
Now, it will be asked, how is it that an association
of this kind, starting with so many advantages, has
come so low, and that a body of people above the
average of workers have failed so far to reap the
benefits that could so easily have been derived from
these advantages ? How is it that men have lost
faith in themselves and their principles in so short
a time, and that a movement which promised to
be the most important of the century has dwindled
into a small colony of 200 souls ? Of the people
themselves some blame the constitution, some the
officials, others each other! How is it all to be
explained? It is easy, perhaps, to be wise after the
event, but those things that were done were certain
to lead to the present condition of things.
Among all the mismanaged schemes ever brought
forward, this will surely take a high place. The
idea of a New Australia was right at bottom, the
principles by which the idea was to be developed
were right, the time was right, but the idea was
loaded with cant and humbug; the principles were
distorted into absurd and narrow rules and regula-
tions; the leaders chosen to carry out the idea were,
in its early stages, and with a few grand exceptions,
blind theorists, and men utterly lacking in the
necessary qualifications. Advertised and puffed all
over the world as the scheme then was, it was like a
valuable old piece of carving that has been gilded
and painted and varnished to look like new, and to
suit the popular fancy; now that the gilt and the
paint and the varnish have worn off, the real solid


background is left. In spite of the present position
I think the idea is still sound, and that there are
enough men to carry it through. For a long time
sentiment was the ruling factor in New Australia,
business being left in the background ; now both
sentiment and business are in the background. For
the moment there seems to be nothing but mutual
distrust, greed, jealousy and unkindness ; but I do
not think it is more than a passing distemper.
Necessity will force attention to business, and senti-
ment may then take its right place. So many of the
men who came out to the colony belonged to the
nomadic class of Australians, men who were continu-
ally on the move, working from station to station,
unaccustomed to any authority save that which
pleased them at the time. As they wandered in
Australia, so they wandered over to Paraguay, and
many of them have already wandered back again ;
splendid workers, but not suited to the hum-drum
life of a pioneer colony. Used to having money in
their pockets, they found themselves penniless in the
colony, and therefore tied to it. Not having the
means to get away, they became discontented and
determined to get away. I think, had they each
been left with a few pounds in their pockets, they
would have stood by the colony to this day. The
liberty which was allowed under the constitution
was more than men had been accustomed to under
old conditions, and soon degenerated into license.
No one, not even the chairman, had any authority;
and to-day the general cry is, “ we want a leader, a
strong man to get us out of our difficulties.”
There are good artisans here, and men used to


putting their hands to any kind of work, but not
enough practical farmers. Men are wanted, and,
moreover, men who have determined to settle and
to make their homes in the country. For such New
Australia offers manifold advantages. There is no
chance of failure, if they set about making revenue
instead of talking Communism. Life here under
any conditions is preferable to the uncertainty and
meanness of life in a town like London or other large
towns. Here a man is his own master : he owns a
large area of land in common with his fellows, he can
ride, shoot, fish, do anything he likes, besides having
absolute liberty of speech and thought. The same
with women. As the man or woman is, so will his
or her life be —narrow and dull, or full of life and
interest; only, those who do come out must make up
their minds to work for some definite object on some
definite plan, and not trust to their enthusiasm for a
principle or to their blind faith in some sentimental
fad to carry them through. I think that New Australia
will have to concentrate its forces, agree to do its
work in a business-like way, elect new and more
trustworthy officials, and see that these understand
their responsibilities ; it must observe economy in
every detail, and be content to put up with another
year or two of hardship. It will lose most of its
single men, for they cannot do without clothes to
work in, besides seeing no chance of making a home
for themselves for some time to come. It will
depend upon the organisation of new families, who,
under the new rules, should be a more suitable class
of colonists.
After all is said and done, New Australia is still


young, only in its third year, and it is yet too early
to prophesy its final success or failure. The latter
should be impossible, though the colony is at present
under a very dark cloud, and all eyes are strained
looking for the silver lining.
ALFRED ROGERS.
Colonia Nueva Australia,
Las Ovejas, Paraguay,
i gth December, 1895.


APPENDIX.
—♦ —
APPENDIX I.
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
Chapter I. —Name, Object, Duration.
Art. I. The Name of the Company is “The New
Australia Co-operative Colonization Society,” founded
to carry out the objects expressed in the following articles.
Art. ll.—The object of the Company is to acquire and
pioneer the lands granted by the Paraguayan Government in
the departments of Ajos, Villa Rica, Mbocayaty, Caaguaza,
and other lands that may be acquired beforehand, with the
object of forming a Co-operative Colony.
Art. lll.—The Company will have its head office or seat
in the colony Nueva Australia, Department of Ajos, Paraguay.
Art. IV.—The duration of the Society remains fixed for
twenty years, to count from the day on which these statutes
are approved by the Superior Government. This term can be
prolonged by a general meeting of shareholders whose members
represent three quarters of the total number of shares sub-
scribed.
Art. V.—The Society can cease before the limit of duration
by a decision of a general meeting called for that object, if
sanctioned by a number of shareholders representing three
quarters of the total.
Chapter ll.— Capital, Shares, and Rights of the
Shareholders.
Art. VI. — The capital of the Company is fixed at /20,000,
divided into 2000 shares oi £lO each—already subscribed and
paid, which shares will pay neither interest nor dividend.


Art. Vll.—Each shareholder will have the right to effect
contracts relating to his shares with the approval of the
Directors, and only according to their stipulations. A faithful
copy of any contract will be deposited in the head office of
the Company, and will be read immediately after the opening
of a general meeting of shareholders, and before beginning to
treat of other matters. No share will be transferred in the
books of the Company in a manner contrary to the stipulations
of such contracts without previous consent of the Directory.
No shareholder will be recognised in any general meeting
contrary to the stipulations of these contracts.
Art. VIII.—The President of the Company for the time of
its duration will act as mandatory of all the shareholders
residing abroad, excepting those shareholders who give
notice in writing that they have named another shareholder
to act individually in their name. The shareholders residing
abroad will have the right to meet to examine accounts and
investigate the business of the Company, and can at this
meeting name their mandatories to represent them in Paraguay.
They and their representatives will vote unanimously with the
shares which they hold.
Art. IX.—Each six months a general meeting will be called
at the head office of the Company on the first Monday in
September, and the first Monday in March, at 3 p.m. Fifteen
days beforehand notice will be given, with a list of the matters
to be discussed. Any other matter despatched in such meeting
without a previous notice of forty-eight hours will be con-
sidered null and void. If a majority of shares are not
represented by either the presence of the shareholders or of
their representatives, no such meeting nor any other meeting
will be valid, but will remain adjourned from week to week for
twenty-eight days. After the termination of this period, any
number of shareholders will constitute a legal meeting.
Art. X.—The half-yearly meeting of shareholders will elect
Directors and President, and will have full power to investigate
matters and examine the business of the Company. The
votes at all meetings will be by shares, counting each share as
■one vote.


Art. XL—An extraordinary meeting can be called at any
time by the President, and will be held at the head office of the
Company after the shareholders have received notice a week
before date of such meeting. Such meeting will have all the
rights of the half-yearly meeting, and if representing a twentieth
part of the shares can call at any time a general meeting of
shareholders, giving to the President with their signatures at
the foot fifteen days notice.
Art. Xll.—The first Directory will consist of four persons,
whose functions will be honorary:—William Lane (President),
Alfred Walker, Charles Holyer, and James Mooney, who will
manage the business of the Company for six months. Three
Directors form a quorum. The Directors will be eligible for
re-election, and in case of a vacancy it must be filled by the
President until a general meeting can be called.
Art. XIII.—The functions and duties of the Directors are:—
(a) To manage all the social interests, and work for their
greatest advantage; (b) to fix the Budget and authorise extra-
ordinary matters; (c) dictate internal regulations; (d) authorise
contracts made by the Society, including those of buying and
selling; (e) present at the general meetings the balances and
reports, according to Art. x 6.
Art. XIV. —The functions and duties of the President are;
— (a) To represent the Society legally; (b) to convene ordinary
and extraordinary meetings according to the statutes and with
consent of the Directory; (c) to preside at the meetings and
decide the voting in cases of equality of votes in the sessions of
the Directory; ( d ) to execute the resolutions of the meetings
and of the Directory, and to provide for the carrying out of
these statutes; ( e) to sign, together with one Director, the\
provisions and definite titles of the shares, receipts, transfers,
contracts, acts, and other documents that emanate from the
Society, and carry them through; (f) to sign, together with one
Director, the writings relating to the concession of the lands in
favour of the Company by the Superior Government.
Art. XV. There must be elected an Auditor every six
months at the general meeting.


Art. XVl.—The Directors will present to the Auditor a
report of the Company every three months, which will be
published for three days, and each six months a balance and
detailed account of the operations of the Company, with
proposal of reserves, &c. The Auditor will examine and give
his report in this respect. Ten days before the general meeting
the report and balance-sheet will be published in a newspaper
which circulates in the vicinity of the Company.
Art. XVII.—A majority of three-fourths of the shares will
be required at an extraordinary meeting called to resolve the
following Dissolution of the Company, prolonging its dura-
tion, fusion with other companies, reduction of capital, increase
of capital, change of object, all other modifications of the
Constitution.


APPENDIX 11.
MUTUAL AGREEMENT SIGNED BY ALL MEMBERS
OF THE NEW AUSTRALIA CO-OPERATIVE
SETTLEMENT ASSOCIATION.
CONSTITUTION.
i. The New Australia Co-operative Settlement Asso-
•CIATION.
2. The formation and establishment of a colony in Paraguay
South America, upon the following principles :
3. Ownership by the community of all the means of produc-
tion, exchange and distribution.
4. Conduct by the community of all production, exchange
and distribution.
5. Superintendence by the community of all labour-saving
machinery.
6. Maintenance by the community of all children under the
guardianship of parents.
7. Maintenance by the community of all sanitary and educa-
tional establishments.
8. Saving by the community of all capital needed.
9. Division of remaining wealth produced among all adult
members of the community, without regard to sex, age, office, or
mental or physical capacity.
MODE OF ADMINISTRATION AND REGULATIONS.
10. Subject to the authority of the laws of Paraguay, which all
members pledge themselves to observe loyally, the following
authority and regulations shall be observed between the members
■of the community :
11. Ballot vote of all adult members to be supreme authority.
12. Director and a Board of Management elected by a two-
thirds majority in a general ballot, to be sole executive authority.


13. Superintendents elected by a two-thirds majority of depart-
mental ballot to be sole departmental authority, subject to the
Director and Board of Management.
14. Regulations affecting the community at large to be con-
firmed by a two-thirds majority of all voters interested.
15. Departmental regulations to be confirmed by a two-thirds
majority of all voters.
16. All regulations to be submitted annually for continuation
or rejection.
17. Disputes arising between the community and any member
or members, to be decided in equity by an arbitrator mutually
agreed upon between the community and the member or members
interested.
18. Disputes arising between members to be decided in equity
by an arbitrator mutually agreed upon by them.
19. Expulsion from the Association for persistent and wilful
offences against the well-being of the community to be decreed
by a two-thirds majority vote of all voters.
20. All offices to be vacated annually, and whenever occupants
cease to retain the confidence of their constituents.
21. The individuality of every member in thought, religion,
speech, and leisure, and in all matters whatsoever whereby the
individuality of others is not effected, to be held inviolable.
22. The sexes to be recognised as equally entitled to full
membership.
23. Religion not to be officially recognised by the community.
24. For the common good all members shall abstain from
fermented and spirituous liquors unless prescribed medicinally.
25. Any 25 members may at any time take the initiative and
convene a public meeting, of which seven days notice shall be
given, for the consideration of any stated business; such meeting
may elect its own chairman, and, provided a two-thirds majority
be obtained at a ballot vote seven clear days after such meeting,
the decision arrived at shall be held as valid and become law.
26. Members of the Association shall be those who have
(a) satisfied the Board of Management or any authorised agent
as to their desirability; (b) signed the constitution and have
complied with all conditions.
27. The membership list of the N. A. C. S. A. shall be kept in


the central office of the Association in Paraguay, and the persons
whose names are on the list shall be regarded as constituting the
said Association, and the list shall be subject to alteration by the
Director on twenty-one days notice being given of any intended
addition or erasure of names.
28. The control of the Association shall be in the hands of a Manage-
Director and a Board of Management.
29. The Board of Management shall be composed of the Compo-
Director and a Deputy Director, and two managers from each °
community elected by a two-thirds majority vote of all voters.
30. The Board of Management may receive any written
suggestions, complaints, or other matters which members may
wish to bring before it.
31. Re-arrangement of representation upon the Board of Man-
agement may be made at any time by a two-thirds majority vote
of all voters.
32. The Board of Management shall have full authority (a) to Functions
expend the funds in its hands as may seem to it best for the good of Boaid '
of the Association; (b) to make such terms and arrangements
with the Government of Paraguay as may conduce to the main-
tenance of cordial and loyal relationship with such Government;
(c) it shall have all other powers necessary for the carrying on -
of the purposes of the Association.
33. The Director shall exercise the authority, and execute the Exercise of
recommendations and resolutions of the Board of Management, Authont -'-
excepting only the expending of the general funds of the Associ-
ation.
34. The Deputy Director shall supervise all departments, and Deputy
shall give a general monthly report of all work done in each. Director-
-35. Departmental Superintendents shall supervise all work in superiu-
their particular department; shall faithfully keep a job time tendejlts-
sheet, which they shall supply to the Deputy Director in their
respective communities, at least once a week, and shall have full
control of, and be responsible for, all tools and material in their
department.
36. Election. —A Treasurer shall be elected by a two-thirds Treasurer,
majority vote of all voters.
37. Functions. —He shall have charge of the bank books of the
Association, and shall pay no money except by order of the


Board of Management. He shall produce vouchers for all cash
payments, and any securities he may hold in hand at every audit
of accounts. He shall, on receipt of a written notice, signed by
the Director and any three of the Board of Management, deliver
up to the Director, within seven days, all books, monies,
cheques, and other property of the Association which he may
possess.
38. Suspension. —He shall be subject to suspension by the
Director pending notification to the members of the Association,
who may by a two-thirds majority declare the office vacant,
and elect another Treasurer at any time.
39. Election. —The Secretary shall be elected by a two-thirds
majority vote of all voters.
40. Functions. —He shall sign all official letters and announce-
ments of the Board of Management. He shall receive all monies
for the Board of Management and put them at once into the
bank named by the Board, forwarding the deposit slip to the
Treasurer within three days of making the deposit. He shall be
under the instructions of the Director, and shall perform such
duties as may be assigned to him. He shall keep for reference
all reports and correspondence received by the Board of Manage-
ment, and copies of all reports and correspondence emanating
from the Board of Management. Any member may examine the
records of the Association at any time and may request a copy
of any specified record at any time.
41. Suspension. —He shall be subject to suspension by the
Director pending notification to the members, who may by a
two-thirds majority declare the office vacant and elect another
Secretary at any time.
42. It shall be incumbent on all children, between the ages of
6 and 15 years, to attend the Association schools. Children who
will not so attend school shall be compelled to work.
43. It shall be incumbent on all women to organise for assist-
ing in communal work to the best of their ability, and for this
purpose the women in each settlement shall form themselves
into a committee for the purpose of deciding upon and appor-
tioning the work to be done by each.
44. In case of non-fulfilment of duties apportioned by such
committee they shall have power to report the same to the


Board of Management, who wdll deal with the matter as
provided for.
45. The Association may at its discretion prohibit the Marriage,
marriage of any man under 18 years of age or any woman
under 16 years of age.
46. Qualification. —Members of the Association shall be those Member-
who have satisfied the Board of Management, or their author- ship-
ised agents, as to their desirability, and signed the constitution.
47. Disqualification. —The following shall not be admitted to
membership : — (a) Any not knowing English so as to understand
and be understood, excepting relatives or sweethearts of members;
(b) Any person of colour, including any married to persons of
colour; (c) Any living together otherwise than in lawful
marriage; (d) any of questionable reputation; (e) any person
of such unsound health as would render him or her a danger or
a burden to the community; (f) any objectionable by reason of
past disloyalty to the labour movement, or such as are clearly
opposed to the common good.
48. Every member, by act of joining the Association, agrees payments,
to subscribe to its funds all he may possess when he is finally
enrolled, tradesmen’s tools and personal effects excepted. Such
subscription to be not less than for every male adult above
the age of eighteen years.
49. Volunteers will be enrolled on the payment of a prelim- volunteers
inary fee of £lO, which sum remains the property of the Associa-
tion, and cannot be withdrawn.
50. All charges of freight, passage, &c., from the point of Freight
departure to the colony, to be defrayed by such volunteers. Pas Sa
51. At the expiration of three months from the date of their probation?
arrival in the colony, all volunteers will be required to complete
the necessary conditions of membership, or leave the colony at
their own expense.
52. Wives of members are admitted free; also all single wives and
women between the ages of 16 and 25 years. Single
53. Exceptions may be made to all the above at the discretion Exceptions
of the Board of Management or its duly authorised agents.
54. The Board of Management, with the consent of members, Agents,
shall appoint agents and such other officers as will enable organ-
isation to be effectually conducted, and shall see that such


officers are acceptable to, and have the confidence of, all
members in their respective localities.
55. To facilitate organisation, groups shall be formed by
authorised agents whenever convenient, and shall be recog-
nised as the centre of the Association in their respective districts.
56. No agent shall bind the Association to the carrying of any
contract by a greater bond than the deposit of such sums as may
be at the time in his hands, but he may, at his discretion, agree,
by such deposits, to increase the bond at a future date.
57. The authorised agents shall supervise emigration so as to
lighten, as far as possible, the attendant hardships; shall see
that every member is provided with personal necessaries, and
that carriage is available, as far as possible, for personal effects ;
shall advise, whenever, necessary, and shall make regulations as
may seem desirable for the well-being of emigrating members.
58. The Association offer grants of land to individuals, or
groups of individuals, not members of the Association, on terms
to be arranged between such individuals and the Board of Man-
agement or its duly authorised agents. Such terms to be
approved of by a two-thirds majority vote of all voters.
59. Amendment of this constitution and regulations to be
made only by a two-thirds majority vote of all voters.


APPENDIX 111.
“LABOUR-CHECK” SYSTEM
i. Each adult member of the Association is entitled to a credit
of $4-20 per week; minors between the ages of 15 and 18, I 4 ;
children as below.*
2. A list of prices of articles, likely to be required, will be kept
posted in the store. The storekeeper to order any article asked
for, if a credit exists to the amount ordered and the article can be
obtained in Asuncion.
3. All articles grown on the settlement must be sold through
the store. Prices to be fixed by a committee, consisting of the
Director, the Secretary, and the Storekeeper, and as far as
possible at current rates.
4. Members who receive their food from the co-operative mess
will form a committee, and instruct the cooks at what rate they
can draw from each credit.
5. If the quantity of any article be limited, and the demand
greater than the supply, the said article shall be divided among
the applicants.
6. Each person over 15 years of age is also entitled to a cloth-
ing allowance of $2 per week ; under 15 years, $1 per week. The
accumulations under this rule to be solely spent on necessary
articles of clothing, ordered through the store.
7. A receiving book shall be kept by the Storekeeper at each
settlement, and all articles, whether produced or imported, be
entered therein, and copies furnished to the central office.
8. The scale of diet, both as to quantities and prices, shall be
adjustable from time to time.
9. The Board of Management is empowered to reduce any
person’s credit for proved offences.
May 21 st, 1895.
* Children between o and 1
1 and 5
5 and 10
10 and 15
#O-50
1 80


APPENDIX IV
EXTRACTS FROM A SUPPLEMENTARY LETTER
BY MR ROGERS.
April 30th, 1896
I think it will be necessary to inform you of the course of
events in the colony since my last report. I find very little to
alter in what I wrote then, and I had to a certain extent antici-
pated what has since taken place.
Casey is now President, and I am confident that he will be
succcessful, for he has a strong Board of Management behind
him, is determined to carry out the Constitution, and will
swerve neither to the right nor the left from the line he con-
ceives it to be his duty to follow. And the colonists are really
well off in many ways. Their stock is in fine condition, always
increasing and improving ; they have an ample supply of food
for the coming year ; much of the dead work is done; the
health of the community is excellent; they have a Government
subsidy of 800 dollars a month, though Casey fought hard
against it; the Government is also to send them schoolmasters,
and grant them definite titles to some 26,000 acres of land.
They are also going to concentrate their labour on one or only
two settlements, plant tobacco, cotton, and other articles in
large quantities for revenue purposes ; above all, they have two
and a half years valuable experience to guide them. There is
nothing now to stop them from going ahead and acquiring real
solid comforts, in addition to their present blessings of health,
liberty, and congenial work.
I trust that organisation in England will proceed apace; there
is no reason now why people should be deterred from going out.
*** For further information apply to the Secretary of the
British New Australia Board, c/o Murdoch & Co., 26 Pater-
noster Square, London, E.C.


MURDOCH & CO.,
26 Paternoster Square, LONDON, E.C.,
Will send on application their Catalogue of Communist
and Sociological Works. They have in stock several
copies of Nordhoff’s American Communities, Noyes’
American Socialisms, Hennell’s Social Systems, and
similar works.
They also supply the following :
From Bondage to Brotherhood
By J. C. Kenworthy. One Shilling.
Merrie England By Nunquam. Threepence.
The New Order. Monthly, One Penny.
Organ of the Croydon Brotherhood.
Brotherhood. Monthly, One Penny.
Edited by Bruce Wallace, M.A.
Towards Fraternal Organisation.
One Penny. By Bruce Wallace, M.A.


■
# ■
■ - ■ ■■ ■ ~ y
•
i
• - >- ••
■ ■ . ■ ■ ■ ■
.
»
v ‘ ; . v ; :• > ( > ■ • , / ■*! v. *' v, ' - *' • V* * '
j
if-
■
' ■ ' ; : , .v' ' : i x _■ 1 '/ - V. ,|i
- •* * ■, ' ’,v,. ■ ■ ■ l ' I
-
• V
■ ■ r , • \ , ■ ' ' ’ ' • '■ 1 1 ■'
*
.„i -v ■ ,, .■ ■ ■' :,/
, < - /;: <
V
v , . •• V'- ' V' \ \
C- I v, ■
