

NEW
HISTORICAL PAINTIML
BATMAN’S TREATY WITH THE
ABORIGINES
MERRI CREEK, 6th JUNE, 1835,
RESULTING IN THE
FOUNDATION OF MELBOURNE, AND THE
SUCCESSFUL COLONISATION OF
VICTORIA,
PAINTED 3Y
J. W. BURTT,
EMPIRE CHAMBERS, COLLINS ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
SIZE OF PICTURE, 12 FEET BY 7 FEET.
MELBOURNE
ALEX. M‘KINLEY & CO., ALFRED PLACE, COLLINS ST. EAST.




HISTORICAL PAINTING
BATMAN’S TREATY WITH THE
ABORIGINES
MERRI CREEK, 6th JUNE, 1835,
RESULTING IN THE
FOUNDATION OF MELBOURNE, AND THE
SUCCESSFUL COLONISATION OF
VICTORIA, »
PAINTED BY
J. W. BURTT,
EMPIRE CHAMBERS , COLLINS ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
SIZE OF PICTURE, 13 FEET BY 7 FEET.
MELBOURNE:
AL?X. M‘KINLEY & CO., ALFRED PLACE, COLLINS ST. EAST,


■'■T.


/ r '
HN 12th May, 1835, John Batman, accom-
B|| panied by three assistant white men, and
seven Sydney civilised blacks as interpreters, sailed
from Launceston, Tasmania, in the Rebecca schooner
—engaged for the purposes of the colonising expedi-
tion—with stores and provisions for settlement, and
goods suitable for distribution to the natives.
They landed near Geelong, camped, and made
friends with the natives by giving them presents,
and travelled to Merri Creek, now virtually part of
Melbourne, where a bargain for land was made, the
area secured including the sites of Melbourne and
Geelong, together with intermediate and adjacent
country.
BATMAN’S DIARY.
Batman, in his Diary, now in the Melbourne
Public Library, says, under date 6th June, 1835 :
“ I found eight chiefs, who possessed the whole
of the country near Port Phillip—three brothers,
all the same name, Jaga Jaga, and two of them six
foot high and very good-lo'oking—and after full


explanation I purchased two large tracts of land,
about 600,000 acres, more or less, and delivered
over to them blankets, knives, looking-glasses,
tomahawks, scissors, beads, flour, &c., as payment,
and also agreed to give a tribute or rent yearly.
The parchment the eight chiefs signed this after-
noon, delivering to me some of the soil as giving
me full possession of the tracts of land. This took
■place alongside of a beautiful stream of water,
and from whence my land commences, and where a
tree is marked four ways to know the corner
boundary.
“June 7th, Sunday. —Delivered over more property
on the banks of the stream, which I have named
Batmans Creek after my good self. . . I think
the principal chief stands 6ft. 4in. high, and is as fine-
looking a man as ever I saw. I crossed Batman’s
Creek and walked through a thinly-timbered forest
of box, gum, sheoak and wattle, covered with
excellent grasses.
“June Bth.—. . . The boat went up the large
river (Yarra) 1 have spoken of, which comes from
the east, and I am glad to state about six miles up
found the river all good water and very deep.
This will be the place for a Village.
[Here Melbourne now stands .]
“June 9th. —Landed provisions for settlement, four
boats full. Selected spot for house, garden, &c. j


eight men in charge, blacks and whites, with three
months’ supply, or more, of provisions. Also a large
quantity of potatoes for planting, and all kinds of
garden seeds.”
The deeds of the land referred to above are also
in the Public Library, together with the diary.
For the portraits of Batman and the other figures,
Mr. Burtt is indebted to two or three surviving
pioneers, who were able to describe them from
memory, and to aid with suggestions, during
progress of the picture.
The following Certificates have been obtained from
Witnesses now living respecting the Picture.
From Mr. Egbert Eussell, the first Government
Land Surveyor in Victoria—also an amateur land-
scape painter , and who remembers the spot depicted
where the treaty was made.
“As about the oldest living colonist, and one
well acquainted with the country, from the year
1836, I have no hesitation in saying that, inde-
pendent of the artistic merit of the work, it is
remarkable for the truthful character of the
landscape and also of the general appearance and
peculiarities of the natives.
(Signed) Egbert Eussell.”


From T. D. Weatherly, the first baker in Mel-
bourne, and purchaser at the first Government
Land Sale , June, 1837, of half-acre allotment
N.W. corner Queen and Little Collins streets, and
also of another half-acre in Swanston-street at the
Second Sale in November.
Mr. Weatherly says : — u I came to Melbourne
from Tasmania, 14th November, 1836. I was the
first baker in Melbourne. I knew John Bat-
man, both then and previously, in Tasmania. I
consider the portrait figure of him in the
picture an excellent likeness. I also knew James
Gunn, a Highlander in his employ, also shown
in the picture, as true as a photograph could
make it.
(Signed) T. D. Weatherly.”
From Mb. M‘Nab, Settler, Green Point, near
Lilydale.
“ 1 gladly avail myself of this opportunity to
place on record my testimony as to the accuracy
of the figures in your picture. The central black
figure, the chief, Jaga Jaga, I was intimately
acquainted with —in fact, both he and his son
were in my employ for some considerable time.
He (the chief) was particularly tall and vigorous,
and an unusually favourable specimen of the
aborigines. X consider you have succeeded in
making a very good likeness of him.
(Signed) Duncan M‘Nab.”


From Robt. Frost, School of Design, Melbourne
Public Library.
“1 arrived in Melbourne in December, 1835, in
the Rebecca schooner, from Launceston, on her.
second trip to Victoria, Captain Wheeler. I knew
John Batman well, and helped with my father, who
was the first undertaker in Melbourne, to bury him.
I also knew the three white men in Batmans
employ, viz,, William Todd, James Gunn and Alex.
Thomson. I consider the figures of these, as depicted
in your canvas, to be faithful portraits.
(Signed) Robert Frost.”
Eai*ly j4isto**y of Victoria.
£??' HE narration in brief of the following well-authenticated facts,
compiled from Westgarth’s “Australia Felix,” Bonwick’s
“Port Phillip,” &c., will be found interesting to all students of
Victorian history, and will assist in the proper understanding of the
picture. Every endeavour has been made by the artist by sketches
taken on the spot, by getting descriptions from the few men now
living who knew Batman and his party, and the aborigines who
were treated with, to make the picture absolutely true as to details
and surroundings. The testimony of these witnesses is appended,
showing that the artist has been successful in his endeavour to be
historically correct.
On 18th April, 1770, Captain Cook’s expedition first saw Point
Hicks, a little to the westward of Cape Howe, and therefore
within the boundaries of the colony of Victoria.
On 4th January, 1798, Mr. Bass, after whom Bass’ Strait is
named, discovered Western Port, and remained there thirteen
days to repair the whale boat in which he was making his adven-
turous voyage of exploration from Sydney.


On 15th February, 1802, Lieutenant John Murray entered Port
Phillip in Her Majesty’s 40-ton brig, Lady Nelson.
On Bth October, 1803, the expedition under Governor Collins
landed near the entrance to Port Phillip, and the futile attempt
was made to form a settlement on the eastern shores of the Bay*
On 24th-25th January, 1804, the settlement was abandoned, and
the party removed to Eisdon, in Yan Diemen’s Land.
In 1824, and at the close of that year, Hume and Howell left
Yass, and crossing the Snowy Alps, reached Mount Macedon and
Geelong. Hume’s overland trip from Sydney to Geelong and back
was published in the Sydney Herald, 1833. Referring to that publi-
cation afterwards he says :—“ My letters attracted the attention
of Van Diemen’s Land settlers, who, acting upon it, went over,
and, finding my statement of the nature of the country around
Port Phillip correct, effected the first successful settlement at
Hobson’s Bay.” This does not, however, alter the fact elsewhere
alluded to, that Batman applied to the Government to authorise
his proposed settlement six years before.
In 1830, Captain Sturt discovered the 'Murray, and traced it
to its embouchere.
In June, 1836, Major Mitchell, travelling for exploration
purposes from Sydney, discovered the Goulburn, the Loddon, the
Richardson, the Avoca and Glenelg rivers. Returning, the
party came upon the whaling, farming and pastoral establish-
ment of the Messrs. Henty, from Launceston.
We come now to Batman’s Expedition, May, 1835, as
previously described.
Some Interesting Particulars of Batman—His
Antecedents, Character and Career-
John Batman, born at Parramatta, Hew South Wales, in 1800,
His father, William Batman, came out in 1797 as Christian
missionary in the South Seas. When about twenty years old the
former went to Tasmania. Tall, well proportioned, endowed with
prodigious strength, inexhaustible energy and indomitable will, he
was the beau ideal of a roving bushman. For several years a bush-
ranger named Brady carried on his depredations, notwithstanding
soldiers, constables and settlers endeavoured to capture him.
Batman was successful in doing so, and was rewarded with a grant
of 1000 acres of land. He was also useful in bringing to a termi-
nation a rising among the natives, called the Black War. The
Rev. John West, in his “ History of Tasmania,” says :—“Among
those distinguished for the knowledge of the bush, compassion for


the natives and skill for pursuing them, Mr. Batman is the
subject of frequent and approving mention.” Batman received a
party into his house, and endeavoured to win their regard ; fed,
clothed and soothed them. When some of them disappointed his
hopes by throwing off their garments and retiring into the bush,
he still persevered in attempting their reclamation, being one of
the few who entertained a strong belief in the power of kindness.
These services were acknowledged by a further grant of 2000 acres.
Batman the True Pioneer of Victorian Settlement.
That John Batman is entitled to take first place in the settle-
ment of Victoria can hardly be doubted. Messrs. Henty, in
1834, formed their settlement at Portland, but were unable to
obtain grants of land from the Sydney Government, But the
first persons who sought in a proper and legitimate manner to
establish themselves on Victorian soil were John Batman, in
conjunction with J. H. Wedge, Government land surveyor, and
J. T. Gellibrand, ex-Attorney-General of Van Diemen’s Land.
Batman’s Proposal to Government at Sydney, January,
1827, tor leave to found a settlement at Port
Phillip.
Application was made to the Government at Sydney by letter,
11th January, 1827, asking permission to settle here, and for a grant
of land in consideration of bringing over “ sheep, highly improved
of Merino breed, pure South Devon cattle and a fine breed of
horses ”to the value of £SOOO. Although it was the custom of
the time to make free and considerable grants of land both in
New South Wales and Vam Diemen’s Land to settlers who arrived
with capital, yet the then Governor, Darling, refused on this
occasion. Mr. Wedge, the Tasmanian Government Surveyor, was
also on intimate terms with Batman, In 1856 he wrote, “So
early as 1825, on the occasion of my surveying and marking off
his (Batman’s) grant of land at Ben Lomond rivulet (the 1000
acres awarded by the Government for the capture of Brady, the
bushranger) we discussed the question of exploring the mainland.
After the refusal by the Government of the application before
alluded to, Mr. Batman and myself ultimately agreed to carry it
out as a private enterprise, in conjunction with Mr. Gellibrand
and others, and an association was subsequently formed and
Batman took the lead of the expedition, and his report on return
being favourable, the association were confirmed in their deter-
mination to send over stock and take possession of the country.
I resigned my appointment and went over 18th July ....
I gave the name of Yarra to the river owing to the two natives


who were with me pointing to it calling out Yarra Yarra —but I
afterwards learnt that the words were what they used to designate
a waterfall, as they afterwards gave the same name to a small fall
in the River Werribee, as we crossed it on our way back to
Indented Head. On my return to headquarters, I broke up the
establishment and removed it to the north bank of Yarra and
encamped where St. James’ Cathedral now stands.”
The following are the names of the members of the association :
—John Batman, Captain Swanston (leading partner Derwent
Bank), Mr. Simpson (Police Magistrate, Campbelltown), Mr.
Sams (son of the Under-Sheriff, Launceston), Mr. Mercer (a
Major on half-pay), Mr, Collicott (the Postmaster), Mr. Sinclair
(Superintendent), Mr. Wedge (Government Surveyor, with
whom Batman consulted upon the project ten years before),
Mr. Arthur (nephew of the Governor) and Messrs. John and
William Robertson), J. T. Geliibrand (Solicitor), and Messrs.
Collicott, Cotterell, Connolly and Bannister.
Batman’s First Landing in 1835.
The first landing, according to the diary, was on 29th May :
“Passed through Heads 9 a.m., anchored in small bay about
twelve miles up and went ashore. On 31st May : Fell in with
tribe of natives; they seemed quite pleased with my natives, who
could partially understand them.” He gave a quantity of presents.
In return, “ A young woman, very good-looking, gave me a hand-
some basket of her own make.” From this to 6th June the diary
describes country travelled over, recognisable as Yarra, Saltwater
River, Moonie Ponds, Keilor and Werribee Plains. He narrates
friendly meetings with natives and other incidents, and comments
enthusiastically upon its superior pastoral capabilities. In his
official report to the Government on his return, compiled in part
from diary, he says :—“ 6th June :We fell in with a native man,
his wife and three children, who received my natives with
apparent cordiality, and informed them that the women to whom
I had given presents, although belonging to another tribe, had
communicated the reception they had met with from us. The
friendly black led them toward his comrades. Suddenly six men
and as many spears were seen in the rear, “ When we stopped
they threw aside their weapons, and came very friendly up to us.
After shaking hands, and my giving them tomahawks, knives, <tc.,
they took us with them about a mile back, where we found huts,
women and children.”
The Land Purchase.
“I joined this tribe with Jaga Jaga—some fifty persons—about
12 o’clock, and stayed with them till 12 o’clock next day. I fully


explained to them that the object of my visit was to purchase from
them a tract of their country ; that I intended to settle amongst
■them with iny wife and seven daughters ; and that I intended to
bring to their country sheep and cattle ; I also explained my wish
to protect them in every way, to employ them the same as my own
natives,and also to clothe and feed them. And I also proposed to
pay them an annual tribute in necessaries as a compensation for
the enjoyment of their land. The chiefs appeared most fully to com-
prehend my proposals, and were much delighted with the prospect
of having me to live amongst them. I then explained to them
the boundaries of the land I wished to purchase, and which are
defined by hills to which they have affixed native names, and the
limits of the land purchased by me are defined in the chart which
I have the honour of transmitting taken from my personal survey
Batman’s Successor.
Batman’s glowing description of the country on his return to
Tasmania for stock and further supplies, together with his account
of the mildness and friendliness of the natives, caused a rush of
settlers. Among them J. P. Fawkner, who was the first to pitch
his tent on the banks of the Yarra, the date of his doing so being
10th October, 1835.
Difficulty in Getting Government Grant of Land.
Governor Arthur (Tasmania) reporting to Home Government
on Batman’s land transaction, says of him: : —“ He is an enter-
prising settler, He has acted with prudence as well as humanity
in making it his first effort to conciliate the native tribe with
whom he negotiated, and I trust that the good feeling which he
appears to have established will be perpetuated.”
Meeting with antagonism to their claim as purchasers of land
from the natives, the association sought legal opinion in England as
to the validity of the treaty. Mr. Burge, who was then considered
the highest authority on colonial law, while admitting that the
Crown could “ legally oust the association from possession,” says ;
“ The enterprise manifested by the expedition, the respectability
of the parties engaged in it, and the equitable and judicious
manner in which they conducted the intercourse with the native
tribes, and made their purchase afford a strong ground for antici-
pating that the Crown would, in conformity with its practice on
other occasions, on a proper application give its sanction to and
confirm the purchase which the association has made. Lord
Hardwicke expressed a very strong opinion that the possessions of
persons making these settlements ought to receive the fullest
protection. . . . I am of opinion that the association should
make an application to the Government for a confirmation of the
purchase. . . .
“London, 16th January, 1836.”


“ We have perused the extremely able and elaborate opinion of
Mr. Burge, and entirely concur in the conclusions at which
he has arrived upon each of the queries submitted to us.
“ ThOS. PEMBBRTOIf.
“ W. W. Follbtt.
“21st January, 1836.”
Though the agreement might not be legalised, there was a recog-
nition of such persons’ claim to the favour of the Crown for a
grant of such lands. William Penn had received his charter,
when, to secure his possessions from molestation and to satisfy his
own conscientious scruples, he chose to enter into that famous treaty
with the Indians. As the Crown had conferred the right of an
enormous possession in South Australia to one private association
that had rendered no previous service, had made no discovery, and
taken no initiative in settlement, how much greater expectations
of Royal consideration might not be indulged by this association
that had absolutely located themselves upon the new shore, and
had conducted themselves so fairly and honourably towards the
inhabitants. But there was this difference between the two
-companies—one was an organisation of Members of Parliament
and distinguished British gentlemen j the other was merely a con-
federacy of a few colonists in remote settlements of Van Diemen’s
land. At last, when the patience of Batman and his colleagues
was well nigh exhausted, and most of them had sold their shares
for a trifle to Messrs. Swanston and Learmonth, they were allowed
the sum of £7OOO as compensation, and which was much below
their actual outlay.
Batman died on 6th May, 1839, possessed of considerable pro-
perty in Melbourne, it is true, but his estate was dissipated by
legal expenses incuned in proving a badly -drawn will. He and his
companions who had undertaken the colonisation of Port Phillip
were men of station, education and influence. Many of them had
been identified with the best interests of the aborigines, and were
expert in the management of them. The savages were treated
with kindness by the pioneer party from the time of their landing
at Indented Head, but Batman and his associates could never
induce the Government to recognise their treaty with the natives
as a legal document, although there seems to have been good
reason to believe that the natives themselves were willing to he
bound by the conveyance they had made.
ALEX. M'KINLET AND CO., PRINTERS,
I.CE, COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


1508
02236239


