

NEW YEAR’S DAY
ON THE
MOUNTAIN.
jl Smraian ®tot»as H salt.
CONTENTS :— lntroduction—The Sailor who was the Seventh
Son—Dennis the Piper—The Squatter’s Story—
The New Year—New Year’s Day—A Teetotaller’s
Experience—Lost on the Mountain—The Missing
Mr, Launder—Conclusion,
Introduction,
It was on New Year’s Day, 18—, that a company of just thirteen persona
were seated on the shady side of “ the Rocking Stone,” engaged in disposing
of that substantial kind of lunch which parties who make holiday trips to
the summit of Mount Wellington are in the habit of indulging in ; the
labor of conveying the said repast in baskets and parcels some five or six
miles through the mountain air serving the purpose of creating that best
of all sauces—a first-rate appetite.
They were on the shady side ; to those who know the mountain, this is
equivalent to announcing that the day was fine and sunny ; for, unless the
atmosphere is glowing with the sun’s smile, no one, unless it were a stray
Patagonian, but would choose the other ; the fowls, tongues, pies, tartlets,
and other eatables were soon disposed of; and then a ruddy-faced gentleman
of some forty years of age, producing from his pocket a curious-looking
implement, which upon further acquaintance proved to be composd of a
metal bottle and drinking cup, poured out a fair modicum of its contents,
and mingling therewith a small portion of a more innocent liquid, said in
a jovial voice, —“ Ladies and gentlemen, I propose a toast—a Happy New
Year and many of them to our Gracious Sovereign Queen Victoria ! ”
A quiet-looking young man, who might have passed for a medical
student or a linen-draper’s shopman, but who was really a ‘ Solicitor,’
Attorney, &c. ‘just passed,’ pi’oduced from a wallet wdiich had hung the
Whole morning from a strap across his shoulder two bottles of wine, and
having handed round the enlivening fluid to such of his companions as
chose to partake thereof, the toast was drank with all the loyalty which
Tasmanians profess—and let us hope feel.
“ Mr. Chairman,” said a squeaking voice which proceeded from a small
man, of no particular age, that is, he might have been anything between


twenty and fifty, —“ I propose three cheers for Her Majesty , and, holding
aloft the tea-cup into which he had with great parade poured some water,
he attempted to lead the cry : —(it was something like a young chicken
trying for the first time to crow), —but the jolly “ hip ! hip ! hurrah 1 ” of
the ruddy-faced man drowned it entirely, and that clannish feeling of
unity so prominent in Englishmen, whether on their own native soil or at
the antipodes, and which exhibits itself most in expressions of loyalty to
their common Sovereign, caused the echoes of the mountain to resound to
the cheers of the holiday party, as probably the said echoes had never
done before.
Our party consisted of thirteen: there was the ruddy-faced man, Captain
Tench, as he was called, master of a vessel trading between Hobart Town
and Sydney, and his daughter Mary, a laughing black-eyed lass of eighteen
years of age ; there was the quiet young man (Mr. Thomson), and a lady
with long flaxen ringlets, who was introduced by him to the company as-
“ Miss Jackson,” but who was supposed to be on her promotion to the
name of her introducer ; there was also Mr. Samuel Clayton, (a squatter
from New South Wales), who, dressed in a style somewhat peculiar to
himself—quite fashionable—perhaps a little beyond the fashion ; he was
short, rather stout, and made considerable use of an eye-glass suspended
from a black ribbon round his neck ; he was supposed to be the possessor
of a fabulous number of cattle and sheep, and to freight with wool more
ships than ever cleared out from the colony ; all which particulars were
duly impressed by Mrs. De Lacy upon her rather faded daughter Miss
Catherine; the intentions of the old lady in doing so, must have been
entirely innocent of matrimonial speculation, seeing that Miss Catherine
owned to “ twenty-nine,” and was said to have remained at that interest-
ing period of female life for several years past, and the swain in question
could scarcely have been more than twenty-five: Mr. De Lacy was there also - T
he was a solemn-looking old gentleman, very upright, with grey hair and an
exceedingly thin habit of body, in this sense contrasting strongly with his
help-mate, who, as far at least as physical proportions were concerned,
might truly be called his better half; being a lady of such weight in the
world, that it seemed a marvel for her to have raised herself so high above
the level of the sea.
In addition to these, there was a rather young married couple. Charles
Launder had emigrated from England some three years previously with his
wife and one infant; he had embarked his small capital in trade, and
managed gradually to diminish it; his family had in the mean time
increased by two, and it was whispered among his neighbours that he was
not far off from the Insolvent Court. His wife, a quiet little body, seemed
on this occasion to be exceedingly fidgetty, and scarcely joined In the
general conversation, or answered questions in so random a manner, that
it was evident her thoughts were, from some cause or other pre-occupied :
people said afterwards it was a sense of the evil impending.
The party, originally twelve, had been completed by Mr. Theophilus
Judd and his wife ; these were the Master and Mistress of a Government
school, a short distance from town; they were distantly related to Captain
Tench, who considered Mr. Theophilus to be the highest of all authorities
in sublunary matters in general—excepting only that with which the
Captain was most familiar —seamanship.
But the voice ?—that belonged to Mr. John Toppper, measuring about
four feet eight inches in height, and somewhat more than the inches in
thickness; he had a countenance almost as peculiar as his voice, for a
most decided squint, or something worse, made his features appear all
awry ; then he shambled along with the gait of a tired ostrich, getting
over a great deal of ground with apparently litttle fatigue, but as appa-


jfently with a. great deal of labour. This singular specimen of humanity
was raised up something towards the height ot his fellows by a hat some-
times called by envious boys a “ chimney-pot,” which appeared to occupy
one quarter of his stature : but in soma respects Mr. Topper was a great
man ;he was ‘ used to public speaking,’ being Vice-President or Secretary
or something else to the Temperance Society ; (perhaps this was the reason
of his addressing the Captain as ‘ Mr. Chairman ’) where his eloquence
was weekly exercised ;it was said by his enemies that he was mad upon
the subject of 1 Total Abstinence,’ and that he had a habit of insulting all
who dilfered from him ; this was probably slander, but it is true that he
did sometimes put forward his notions on the subject upon very unfitting
occasions; and he had, moreover, a habit of inviting himself into company
where his presence was not wished for, and was quite oblivious of any
hints that it could well be spared. Thus, having resolved upon a stroll
up the mountain, and happening to have the slightest possible acquain-
tance with Mr. Thomson, he had, much to the annoyance of that gentle-
man, and probably also of Miss Jackson, seized upon the accident of his
overtaking them on the route, as a reason for his sticking by them mr the
rest of the day ; and thus increasing the number of the party, to the great
horror of Mrs. t>e Lacy, who “ knew no good would come of it ”to the
ominous number of thirteen.
“ I was once at a party,” said the old lady, “just like this, only it was a
wedding breakfast, where there were thirteen in number, and I’ve no
doubt one of them died in the course of the year ; I know three of us nad
violent colds the day after, for it was a very warm day and we sat with
the windows open, and the wind did blow rather, for it was in March :
well I I wish we had another among us, or one less ; (these three words
were half-whispered to her husband as she looked very severely at Mr.
Topper) ; well! I’m sure no good will come of it.”
“ Cheer up, madam,” said the jovial man, “ these things don’t always
come true, and if they did, we can’t help it—though I knew an instance
but, never mind, make your ship snug, keep a good look out, and never
reckon up squalls till you see them coming—that’s my maxim.”
“ Very good, Sir,” replied the somewhat illogical lady, “ but squalls do
come, and we are thirteen any ho w.”
“ Suppose I make it twelve, Ma’am,” said Charles Launder,—” the man
at the Ice-house told me he knew where some waratahs were to be found ;
as I wish to get a few I will go down, and if I’m not back in time, you
can pick me up on the track : good bye, Fanny! good day for the present,
ladies and gentlemen.”
Mrs. Launder returned her husband’s “good bye” with some hesitation;
she seemed agitated and uncomfortable : —could it be that she had a pre-
sentiment of his fate ?—so Mrs. De Lacy asked herself a few days after-
recovering herself with an effort, she continued “ It’s getting cold, I
think I’ll go a little way with you Charles and run back.” So saying,
she followed his footsteps.
“ That young couple are a pattern to married people in general, —said
Mr. Theophilus Judd, looking towards them as they* were about parting
company,—“ they are taking leave as if for a long separation . don t you
think Mrs. Launder a very affectionate wife, my dear ? ”
“Oh 1 I dare say she is,” replied Mrs. Judd, tossing and bridling,—” I don t
believe in such affectation between old married people, they’ve been mar-
ried long enough to know better.” _
“As some other people have done, my dear ! ” —replied Mr. Theophilus ;
at which a faint smile might he seen on two or three faces, for it was
whispered among their friends, that whatever honey Cupid might have
mingled in the nuptial draught of the Judds, it had not left its flavour on


twenty
aloft th
he atte
trying 1
the rud
unity s<
the ant:
their co
the cht
done hr
Our i
Tench,
and Sy<
3 r ears oj
with loi
<( Miss
name o;
from Ni
himself-
short, r;
from a
of a fab
ships th
duly in
Catheri
entirely
owned 1
ing peri
could sc
: of
;■ at
r to
ain
iwn
een
idy
' as
the
tter
.vaa
dec!
iSOlf
ore
r ere
liss
een
•ine
3St-
ion
so - t
he was a solemn-looking old gentleman, very upright, with grey hair and an
exceedingly thin habit of body, in this sense contrasting strongly with his
help-mate, who, as far at least as physical proportions were concerned,
might truly be called his better half; being a lady of such weight in the
world, that it seemed a marvel for her to have raised herself so high above
the level of the sea.
In addition to these, there was a rather young married couple. Charles
Launder had emigrated from England some three years previously with his
wife and one infant; he had embarked his small capital in trade, and
managed gradually to diminish it; his family had in the mean time
increased by two, and it was whispered among his neighbours that he was
not far off from the Insolvent Court. His wife, a quiet little body, seemed
on this occasion to be exceedingly fidgetty, and scarcely joined in the
general conversation, or answered questions in so random a manner, that
it was evident her thoughts were, from some cause or other pre-occupied :
people said afterwards it was a sense of the evil impending.
The party, originally twelve, had been completed by Mr, Theophilus
Judd and his wife ; these were the Master and Mistress of a Government
school, a short distance from town; they were distantly related to Captain
Tench, who considered Mr. Theophilus to be the highest of all authorities
in sublunary matters in general—excepting only that with which the
Captain was most familiar —seamanship.
But the voice?—that belonged to Mr. John Toppper, measuring about
four feet eight inches in height, and somewhat more than the inches in
thickness ; he had a countenance almost as peculiar as his voice, for a
most decided squint, or something worse, made his features appear all
awry ; then he shambled along with the gait of a tired ostrich, getting
over a great deal of ground with apparently litttle fatigue, but as appa-


ready with a great deal of labour. This singular specimen Of humanity
was raised up something towards the height of his fellows by a hat some-
times called by envious boys a “ chimney-pot,” which appeared to occupy
one quarter of his stature : but in some respects Mr. Topper was a great
man ; he was ‘ used to public speaking,’ being Vice-President or Secretary
or something else to the Temperance Society ; (perhaps this was the reason
of his addressing the Captain as ‘ Mr. Chairman ’) where his eloquence
was weekly exercised : it was said by his enemies that he was mad upon
the subject of ‘ Total Abstinence,’ and that he had a habit of insulting all
who differed from him ; this was probably slander, but it is true that he
did sometimes put forward his notions on the subject upon very unfitting
occasions; and he had, moreover, a habit of inviting himself into company
where his presence was not wished for, and was quite oblivious of any
hints that it could well be spared. Thus, having resolved upon a stroll
up the mountain, and happening to have the slightest possible acquain-
tance with Mr. Thomson, he had, much to the annoyance of that gentle-
man, and probably also of Miss Jackson, seized upon the accident of his
overtaking them on the route, as a reason for his sticking by them for the
rest of the day ; and thus increasing the number of the party, to the great
horror of Mrs. De Lacy, who “ knew no good would come of it ” to the
ominous number of thirteen.
“ I was once at a party,” said the old lady, “just like this, only it was a
wedding breakfast, where there were thirteen in number, and I’ve no
doubt one of them died in the course of the year ; I know three of us had
violent colds the day after, for it was a very warm day and we sat with
the windows open, and the wind did blow rather, for it was in March :
well! I wish we had another among us, or one less; (these three words
were half-whispered to her husband as she looked very severely at Mr.
Topper) ; well! I’m sure no good will come of it.”
“ Cheer up, madam,” said the jovial man, “ these things don’t always
come true, and if they did, we can’t help it—though I knew an instance —■
but, never mind, make your ship snug, keep a good look out, and never
reckon up squalls till you see them coming—that’s my maxim.”
“ Very good, Sir,” replied the somewhat illogical lady, “ but squalls do
come, and we are thirteen any ho w.”
“ Suppose I make it twelve, Ma’am,” said Charles Launder, —“ the man
at the Ice-house told me he knew where some waratahs were to be found ;
as I wish to get a few I will go down, and if I’m not back in time, you
can pick me up on the track ; good bye, Fanny! good day for the present,
ladies and gentlemen.”
Mrs. Launder returned her husband’s “ good bye ” with some hesitation ;
She seemed agitated and uncomfortable ; —could it be that she had a pre-
sentiment of his fate ?—so Mrs. De Lacy asked herself a few days after-
recovering herself with an effort, she continued—“ It’s getting cold, I
think I’ll go a little way with you Charles and run back.” So saying,
she followed his footsteps.
“ That young couple are a pattern to married people in general,”—said
Mr. Theophilus Judd, looking towards them as they* were about parting
company,—“ they are taking leave as if for a long separation : don’t you
think Mrs. Launder a very affectionate wife, my dear ? ”
“Oh ! Idare say she is,” replied Mrs. Judd, tossing and bridling,—“ I don’t
believe in such affectation between old married people, they’ve been mar-
ried long enough to know better.”
“ As some other people have done, my dear ! ” —replied Mr. Theophilus ;
at which a faint smile might be seen on two or three faces, for it was
whispered among their friends, that whatever honey Cupid might have
mingled in the nuptial draught of the Judds, it had not left its flavour on


their lips much beyond the period popularly said to be redolent of sack
sweets.
“ You were saying, Captain Tench,” broke in Mr. Thomson, who felt
rather uncomfortable during this brief matrimonial exposd, and was*
desirous of changing the subject, “you were saying that—that you knew
an instance—”
“ Oh! do tell us,” exclaimed Mrs. De Lacy,—“l’m sure thirteen in a
party never ends well.”
“ My dear madam, what I alluded to had nothing to do with the num-
ber thirteen.”
“ Do tell us, Captain,” said Catherine in her softest tones, (for she knew
the Captain was a widower and she did not like to throw away a chance),.
do tell us, to oblige me ! ”
The Captain was a man of gallantry—the most obliging Captain in the
world to his lady passengers—-he could not resist the appeal of the fair
spinster, and taking another draught of his favorite beverage, replied,—
“ Well, Miss, if the company is agreeable, I will tell you the story of
The Sailor who was the Seventh Son,
“ When I was a younker, I was second mate of the Mary Barton, a brig
hailing from Sunderland in the north of England ; she was a Collier, and
we ran up and down the German Ocean, (for we usually loaded for Lon-
don), and had our share of the bad weather for which that Sea is
“ I’ve made many a voyage ’tween England and New South Wales
since, and have scarcely seen so much bad weather in them all, as I used
to experience every other trip or so ; sometimes a heavy, damp fog that
would serve, as my old Captain used to say, for victuals, if it did not do
for drink ; sometimes a drizzling sleet, half like hail and as sharp as
needles ; squalls from all points of the compass, which semed set on to
worry us seamen with constant shifting of sails and the like ; sometimes
you’d be roused up from your watch below—the night dark as pitch and
the sea chopping and heaving about like mad—with the cry of ‘ bout
ship ! ’ and find when you came on deck that the sheets were all ice and
the deck as bad. Ah ! a British coaster’s the vessel to learn seamanship in,
after all; —but, no matter ; we did have some fair weather, and then we
forgot all the bad, and could sing and be jolly.”
“ All but our first mate; he was a queer fellow ; better messmate never
trod a plank, but as glum as an undertaker at a christening ; I couldn’t
make him out at all.”
“ Old man ” said I, one day to him, —we call’d him 4 old man,’ for he was
getting grey, and looked fifty ; “ can’t you spin us a yarn I I’m sure by the
cut of your jib you’ve seen something in your life worth telling of; cheer
up a bit this sun-shiny day, and let a young’un like me have the profit of
your experience.”
“Ah ! Jim,” he replied, with a sigh that would have made the fortune
of a playactor, “ I’ve little to tell ; I’ve been knocking about in one craft
or other since I -was twelve years old, and I’ve always been looking for-
ward to next New Year’s day.”
“ What weather’s coming up then “ old fellow 1 ” said I, laughing, (for it
seem’d queer fora man to be, as it were, steering any way half his life, and
only expecting a land-mark after more than thirty years look out), is it to
rain dollars or bank notes on that day ? ”
“ Listen ! ” said he solemnly, “I am under a spell! ”
“ A spell ? ” said I, “ what’s that ? witchcraft, or what ? (we younkers
were just then thinking ourselves too wise to believe in such things) I’d
give the spell a wide berth, and not trouble over it.”


My father—lie went on—was a landsman ;he rented a small farm
tiear Torquay, and I was the last of eight children ; all that were left of
them in my remembrance was a sister four years older than myself; and I
was repeatedly told that I was the seventh boy ; which fact became so
impressed on my memory, that it has always appeared to me a necessary
part of my existence ; as if I could not by any possibility have been any-
thing else, such as the fifth, sixth, or such like ; but of course these things
are fated, and we can’t help ourselves : as I grew up, I got fond of mingling
with the seamen and boys who would sometimes ramble about our place ;
and in spite of my father’s wishes that I should keep ashore, made up my
mind to go aboard ship.”
“ My mother had died while I was quite an infant, and my sister had
in some sort supplied her place to mepoor Bella ! I was very fond of
her, and when I heard how that rascal of a Londoner persuaded her to
marry him, and afterwards broke her heart by his ill treatment of her, I
felt that if I could have got at him, I should not have left a whole bone
in his skin ; but he’s gone too, and all the harm I wish him is, that he may
suffer in the next world just twice as much as my sister did here through
him —the scoundrel! ”
When I was about twelve years old, it was agreed that I should he
apprenticed aboard the Flying Fish , a schooner that had two or three
times visited Torquay ; the skipper was a decent fellow, and did his duty
by me, and when he was drowned some twenty years after, when the
Flying Fish went to grief on the Goodwin Sands, I felt almost as much
sorrow as when my father died three years before,
“ My father talked seriously to me before I left home ; he gave me the
best of advice, and I hope I have endeavoured to follow it; I could not help
trying to do so at any rate, for at the conclusion he said ‘Now Jim ! re-
member one thing ; I was my father’s seventh son, and you are my seventh ;
seven is a wonderful number, seven times seven has a mysterious influence ;
I feel certain you will be safe till your forty- ninth birthday ; then some-
thing will happen ; God bless you my hoy ! and keep you safe if possible
over that day.”
“ I felt very queer at this ; I could see from my father’s manner that
he felt sure I should die on my forty-ninth birthday, but did not like to
tell me so ; I remembered too that I had heard it remarked more than once
by our neighbours, that the seventh son of the seventh son never lived
to be fifty : however, like most lads, I thought my fiftieth year a long way
off, and did not let the saying trouble me over much then, though I always
had it in remembrance, and I think it has kept me from many a folly
which young sailors often fall into.”
“ I parted from my father and sister, and went to kiss little Nelly : this
was a little girl about three years old, who had been left at our house in
some strange way by a beggar woman ; my sister had persuaded my father
not to send the child away, and we had all got very fond of her ; ‘ Good
bye Jim ! ’ said the little wench, ‘ come back and see Nelly ; ’ and so
I departed.”
“ I served out my time in the Flying Irish, during which period I made
several calls at home —my father was getting older, my sister was thinking
of marrying, and Nelly was fast growing out of her babyhood. I then got
a berth as second mate in the Talbot, the captain of which was part owner,
and traded from one place to another as occasion offered ; I little thought
then that I should never see my father or sister again.”
“ While serving in this vessel I had one or two narrow escapes from death;
I was washed overboard once by a sea that swept our deck clear of every-
thing that could bo carried away; five of the crew were in the same
predicament, and we never saw them more ; but I was actually wash’d on


board again, little the worse for my ducking! I remembered then my father's
saying that I was safe till my forty-ninth birthday ; and when on another
occasion I fell off the main topsail yard into the sea, the ship going twelve
knots, and kept myself afloat till picked up two hours after by the boat
sent in search of me; I settled down into the conviction, that has never since
left me, of that day being fated to see my death : don’t smile, I’m sure it’s
fated.”
“ The Talbot was wrecked when I had been nearly two years aboard
her, on a small island in the South Pacific ; a coral reef lay off some dis-
tance to wind’ard of it, and somehow we managed to go* right on it: I
and four others were all that reached the land.”
“ I could almost make a book concerning our lives on that secluded
spot, for more than fourteen years : rye were like so many Robinson
Crusoes ; there were no inhabitants, though the place was full of
things fitted for human food; we picked up a few things from the
wreck, and managed pretty tolerably, considering our circumstances ;
we never sa ; w a sail, nor any sign of any other people than ourselves,
till as I said, more than fourteen years after; when one day we saw
a ships’ boat drifting past the reef outside ; then we began to think of
the possibility of leaving our prison, and I being the best swimmer volun-
teer’d to bring the boat in : throwing off my clothes, I swam off, but found
the distance greater than I expected; the wind too freshen’d from the
land, and I had some difficulty in reaching the object of my endeavours ;
when I did so, I was so much exhausted as scarcely to be able to get in ;
which I did at last, and found she was empty, with the exception of a
tin box ; all at once I saw’ I had no means of returning, a possibility which
in our eagerness none of us had thought of, but in some sort had taken
for granted ! I was too much fatigued to think of swimming back against
the swell which was rapidly rising; and, overcome with horror at my
situation, laid myself down in despair.”
“ As my fatigue wore off, I began to calculate what I could do ; —nothing !
that was the only answer my mind returned to me—to lay there and
starve, or perish from the cold night air, seemed my doom ; however, I
knew I was the seventh son, and my forty-ninth birthday was not near
yet,”
“ I opened the tin box; it contained biscuits, perhaps five or six pounds
weight ; had I had my clothes, I thought I might hold ont a few days,
but, —without them ? ”
“I passed the rest pf the day gazing earnestly at the fast-receding
island which I had been so eager to leave, and which I should soon see nq
more ; the moon rose, and I watched the low cloud which the land soon
melted into, till I could trace it no longer : I felt heart-sick, laid down, and
slept: I have often wondered how I could do so.”
“ I awoke ; it seemed to me as if I was surrounded with ice, the chill
was awful; I coffld not for some time move a finger ; at length the sun
rose, and its warmth enabled my blood to circulate once more ; gradually
I moved my hands, my arms ; I rubbed my body, and in about two hours
was able to think of my situation.”
Nothing whatever was in sight, save one large sea fowl in the distance;
no island—that was lost to me ; not a sail, scarcely a hope of one ; where
did my boat come from 1 I examined her carfelly ; there was one locker,
open and empty : nothing by which I could make out even the country
where she was built ; I could tell, and that was all, that she was a
foreigner.”
“ I ate ravenously of the biscuits, for I was desperately hungry; I
watched the endless circle of waves around me all day ; the night came, the
cold, the wretched cold ; and, when I could bear it no longer, I slept, as I


thought, the sleep of death.”
“ I awoke again : I was in a berth on board a Swedish barque bound for
home : the boat belonged to her, having been left alongside in a calm ; the
painter had not been securely fastened, and she had drifted away unper-
ceived ; fortunately for me, they had taken pains to recover her, and had
done so in time to save my life. I described to them as well as I was able,
the situation of the island where I had left my companions in misfortune—
the captain made efforts to sight it, but failed in them all. I have
endeavoured to give the bearings of the place to several Captains trading
in those parts, but have never heard anything of my messmates, who of
course think me dead long ago.”
“ With some little delay I reached home ; my father was dying : I don’t
know whether he recognized me ; for seventeen years of hardship had altered
me from the gay lad of nineteen to the worn man of thirty-six, but it was
a satisfaction to me to be there at such a time : Nelly did not remember
me at first; and I could see nothing of the little girl of ten years old,
whose parting tears I had kissed away so long before, in the tall handsome
woman of seven and twenty.”
“ My father, like most of the small farmers in the neighbourhood, had
mot saved any money : Nelly and I shared the few relics of old times
between us as remembrances of the departed ; and I returned, as sailors
always do, to the sea.”
“ Not, however, till Nelly had told me all my sister’s troubles, and we
■had got into the way of chatting together, almost as we had done years
■before; and Ido believe that if it had not been for the spell that is on me I
should have fallen in love with her : perhaps I did ; if so, I kept it to
myself; I could not think of asking her to marry a doom’d man, who had
just so many days or years to live ; it would have been like a man marrying
■while under sentence of death ; but we were very good friends noth with-
standing ; when we parted tears stood in her eyes : oh ! if I had not been
■fated—but no matter.”
“ I must tell you that Nelly’s parentage had been discovered through some
newspaper notice that I could never quite make out : somehow, a small
annual income had come to her, and she had relations, well to do, in
Exeter,”
Since then, I have been knocking about in one craft or other ; but, when-
ever I’ve had a run ashore, I’ve always gone to see Nelly : poor thing ! I
believe she is glad to see me, and I’m sure she grieves when I leave ; but,
if I get another leave-taking other it’s as much as I expect,—l’m forty-nine
next New Year’s day.”
“ Such was the tale,” continued the Captain, and I must confess that I
felt more serious after hearing it; it did seem strange that he should have
had such hair-breadth escapes, and also a presentiment that his forty-ninth
birthday would be his last. We made our trip, and the November fogs
were coming on as we lay at anchor above Sunderland bridge t one day the
skipper told me I should have the other mate’s berth, as he was about
leaving the vessel, and, sure enough, next day he prepared for his departure ;
‘ good bye younker,’ said he, sadly, “ I shall never put my foot on a ship’s
deck again,’ I'm forty-nine come New Year's day."
“ I shook his hand," bade him farewell, and felt almost as though I was
parting from him on his death-bed; but my duty required my active
exertions, and the feeling wore off. We arrived in the Thames on Christmas
day, and brought up in the Pool as usual; it was holiday time, I was
comparatively idle, and the fate which I felt was hanging over my late
messmate again pressed on my mind ; so, obtaining a few days’ leave of
absence I booked a place in the Exeter Mail, and made my way to Tor-
quay, where I arrived about mid-day, on the second of January ; with


considerable anxiety, I made the necessary inquiries about my friend j
and at length was informed that he—
“ Died in a fit,” said Mrs. DeLacy.
“ Of a “ broken heart,” suggested Miss Jackson.
“ Drowned himself, I suspect,” said Miss Catherine.
“Went mad possibly,” said Mr. Clayton,
“ Got drunk, and fell down the cliff,” squeak’d Mr. Topper,
“ Shot himself,” said Mr. Judd,”
“ Hung himself,” said Mrs. J.”
“ He was dead of course,” said Mr. Thomson.”
“No 1 ” laughed the Captain, “ HE WAS MARRIED.”
“ I’ve no doubt he died during the year,” said Mrs. He Lacy, half
interrogatively.”
“ So far from it,” said the Captain, “ that, when I visited the place two
years ago, I found him and his wife, the little Nelly of his tale, still
keeping ‘ The Hope and Anchor,’ as they had done since their marriage ;
with some half dozen boys and girls of various ages, assisting them in
consuming the profits,”
That’s almost like a ghost story ” said Mr. Clayton. “ I wonder our
fair friends (bowing politely to the daughter of the narrator) are not look-
ing about them for some mountain spirit to arise and punish us for intruding
on his domain.”
“ Indeed,” replied the lady he was addressing, “ it would almost seem
that some unearthly power had been at work here : how came that large
stone elevated into its position, balanced so evenly that a child’s hand can
rock it ? Then, the ‘ Plough’d Field,’ as they term it, how impossible it seems
to me to account for the extraordinary positions in which stones of such
enormous dimensions are to be seen ! For my own part, I have never been
up here without having my thoughts taken out of myself and my own small
affairs, to dwell upon the wonderful appearances which are around us, and
to speculate on things invisible ! ”
“ Ah 1 I perceive Miss Tench you would say with Hamlet—
“ There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”
so saying, the fashionable owner of innumerable flocks and herds bowed
again, and produced from his pocket a small roll of paper, which he slowly
unrolled, and with the aid of his eye-glass began to inspect.”
“ ‘ Fair play’s a jewel ’ young man,” said the Captain, “ you’ve had my
story, and I think you might oblige us with the contents of that small
volume if, as I suppose it to be, it is something you have brought to assist
in wiling away an hour.”
“ With pleasure,” returned the other “ but I think I see Mr, Launder
returning, suppose I wait till he arrives ? ”
It turned out, however, not to be Mr, Launder but a gentleman with
black hair, and plenty of it; a dirty face, and hands to match: clothes that
did not fit him ; and a hat which had lost half its brim, and the crown of
which was only attached to the other parts at one or two points possibly
jts owner wished to keep up a good ventilation in the region of the brain.
“ It’s the man from the ice-house ” said Miss Catherine.
“ So it is ” said her father, “Well Larry, what is it? ”
Larry put his right foot in advance, drew it back slowly, bent his body,
recovered his perpendicular, and, holding up a bunch of mountain flowers
replied—
“ Which is the masther’s wife your honour ? I was to give this to her
and tp tell her that the masther’s gone to the Falls, God bless him ! and


ean’t be back till it’s lateish like, and that’ll be tay time, he says, yon r
honour.”
The flowers were handed over to the fair owner ; and the messenger
repeating the ceremony with which he had introduced himself, was about
retiring, when he was stayed by an observation from our friend the
squatter.
“ The Ladies wish to know, Larry, if you have any idea how this Rock-
ing Stone was set up, or how the stones on the Ploughed Field were put in
their places ? ”
“ Sure I don’t know, your honour, but I’ve heard tell of the same ; and,
if it isn’t thrue it can’t be far wrong, seeing that it was all owing to ould
Ireland.”
“ Old Ireland! ” said Mr. Clayton, “ how can that be ? that’s at the
opposite side of the world.”
“ Sure for you, and you’re right,” said Larry, “ but, for all that, it was
owing to ould Ireland that all this came about.”
“ How so ? ” said his questioner.
“ Fait, and I don’t mind telling the likes of you,” said Larry ; and, seat-
ing himself on the top of a huge stone, he began—?
The Legend op Dennis the Piper.
f< My grandfather, your honour, that had two aci’es of pratee land of his
own in the county Cork, near a place called Macroom, had the bringing
o’ me up, your honour, seeing that my mother was dead before I was born,
or near to it, for I don’t remember her ; and I had no father, at laste not
left to me, for he was dead or gone somehow ; and my grandfather took
to me and brought me up, and edicated me, and all that : —well, it was
him as tould me, and I don’t think he knew it himself, barring that he
had some ould papers which his grandfather had before him, and which,
I was tould, had been got together by his schoolmaster many years before :
but they was all thrue for the praist had read ’em, and my grandfather said
that he laughed and gave’em back to him, which he never would ha’done
if they were not thrue—and my grandfather used to tell me the same, as
we sat at the door of our cabin on the banks of the river ; and I know it
all by heart like a pathernosther.”
“ Well—in the ould time, long ago—so long that nobody knows nothing
about it, there lived in thim parts a great ancestor of my grandfather’s,
and his name was Dennis ; and that’s how I came be called Larry, seeing
that he was a piper and I wasn’t, for sure nobody could tell then whether I
should be or shouldn’t; and fait, I never was afther all, but became an
immigrator instead and came here,”
“ Dennis the piper was a great man in those days : sure and didn’t the
King have him to play the jig when he danced 1 and didn’t he play at all
the jintlefo’ks’ gatherings ? and didn’t the purty little feet of the lasses
follow his music hour afther hour as they danced on the green turf by the
river side ? and didn’t he play the bravest of tunes when he went at the head
of the King’s armies to battle ? Sure he did all this and more too : and
he was a great favo’rit, especially with the lasses ; but none of ’em yet
had him for her bachelor, seeing he didn’t love any of ’em at all as yet,
but gave his heart intirely to the music ; except one little corner where the
face of the King’s daughther shone brightly ; for she was the maiden that
Dennis would have had for his wife had she been a piper’s daughter, or
had he been a King in his own right.
“ Dennis continued to play on all occashins, and sometimes on no occa-
sion ; for Sheena, that was the princess’s name, used to listen to him
lundly ; and sometimes, when he plaised her exceedingly, would smile on


him the sweetest of smiles ; so that the little corner in his heart grew bigger
and bigger, till at last it filled up the whole space ; and Dennis began to
lament that he wasn’t grand enough to ask the King for his daughther ; and
he took to sauntering about the hills after night-fall, and solacing himself
with the tunes that Sheena loved best, till the dawn of day would send
him home to his bed,”
“ One favorite place for his nightly wanderings was a green valley lying
betune the Muskerry mountains and the river Lee; and there he would sit
night afther night piping away so sweetly that he would forget everything
else, even his sorrow about Sheena ; and begin to think he heard sounds of
little feet pattering on the grass around him, timing their steps to his
music, and ceasing when he ceased to play.”
“ So he played on night afther night, till once at new mooli he saw faint
shadows like tiny maidens in gossamer dresses tripping around him as he
played; and, what surprised him most was, that one of them, to whom
the others always gave place, had a face like Sheena’s, and always smiled
•on his music as Sheena did.”
“ This had gone on for many moons, when it happened once that, as he was
playing away the best of his tunes and the shadows were flitting about
him, they all at once became fully visible to him ; and the one that looked
like Sheena sat herself down on a beautiful throne all goold and emeralds ;
and had in her hand a lovely wand of silver, with a di’mond as large as a
•chesnut at the top of it, and the light of which shone on the whole com-
pany, s© that he saw them as plain as if it was noon-day; and all the others
bowed down to her and ranged themselves on each side ; and then he knew
that the one who resembled Sheena was the queen of the fairies.”
“ Presently the queen beckon’d one of the ladies to her, and sent her to
Dennis with a message ; and in coorse he tuk off his hat when she came
near and made her a low' rev’rence, (for he had the best of manners), and
the lady said—
“ Dennis, her Majesty thanks you for your music, and makes you her
chief piper for ever.”
“ Tell her Majisty, I’m much obliged to her for the honour,” for he thought
it was only a honour, and didn’t know that his answer was binding till
the queen should choose to release him. “ Tell her Majisty, I’m much
obleeg’d for the honour,” said he, and then he felt all over queer like as if
he couldn’t go home as usual; and soon, sure enough, the queen said—
“ Piper, follow to our palace; ” and Dennis couldn’t help bowing and doing
as he was bid, for wasn’t he now piper to the fairy queen? and couldn’t she
tnrn him into a hedgehog or any other wild baste if he didn’t 1 ”
“And they led him such a walk as he had never taken before; up
hills afther hills, and along valley afther valley, till they arrived at the most
beautiful spot he ever saw in his life —there were bowers of roses and
Jassimins; and couches, all fragrant with blossoms; and they first bedeck’d
themselves, and then Dennis, with flowers; and he felt himself shrinking
and shrinking, till at last, he was’nt much bigger than the queen of the
fairies herself; and they gave him wine out of the flower-cups, till he felt
elevated in spirit, and almost forgot that he was Dennis, and almost forgot
Sheena.”
“Ah 1 it was well for him that he did’nt quite forget her; for the queen
smiled on him her sweetest of smiles, and pressed his hand tinderly as she
sated him on a throne of lilies by the side of her, and tould him that he was
lord of her heart, and that he might become ruler of all she possess’d—and
Dennis soon found out that the queen of the fairies was in love with him.”
“ Then he began to think of Sheena again : it was thrue this one
look’d like Sheena, and smiled like her ; hut he well knew that she was’nt
•Sheena herself; and that in coorse all this was put on him as a delushin ;


and that p’raps the rale face of the queen was very diff rent—though the
fairies are all good-looking ; and that p’raps her rale smile was more like
a frown, as some people’s is even among mortals ; and through all of it
Dennis resolved that the rale Sheena should be the lady of his heart ; and
he tould the fairy queen the same in the civil’ist of jinteel language, as he
well knew how to use.”
“ But the queen would’nt allow him to depart, for she hoped that in time
he would forget Sheena, and become the king of her dominhions. So she
made a circle around her with her wand, and immediately the whole com-
pany, Dennis, and all, went sinking, sinking, into the earth, or rather the
earth was sinking with them ; and they went down, down, for hours, till
Dennis saw a glimmer o’ light below them, and the stars came one afther
another as the earth open’d, and they stood again on the green turf—some-
where hereabouts.”
“ Then the queen waved her wand again and said, “ Let my slaves
apphear ! ” and from all the valleys around, and overtopping the hills, Den-
nis saw arisin tremendhous black men, with horns on their heads, the
craythurs, and long tails, and Dennis said they had hoofs like horses, and
that each of ’em flourish’d about him the stem of an enormhous trhee : they
were dress’d in a strange fashion and wore huge leather aprons, as though
they had been engaged in some toil.”
“ Slaves,” said the queen, “ bring samples from my mines and strew them
before me ! ’’and the giants disappeahr’d, and soon return’d with their aprons
filled with huge masses of goold and silver, which they threw down at random,
and Dennis always said that the sight of such treashures almost took the breath
out of his boddy, for that it was wondherfi.il in the extrheme to behold :
and the queen whisper’d to one of her maidens, who whisk’d off from
Dennis’s arm the bag in which he usually carried his pipes, and fill’d it
with some small pebbles which she pick’d from the ground ; afther which
the queen said—“ Dennis, my boy, are you willing to give me your heart
and share with me the treashures I possess? what my slaves have strewn
around us is my wedding dowry—this bag contains Sheena’s ; choose
your brhifie! ”
“Blaise your Majisty,” said Dennis, “my heart has been given to
glieena, and I cannot as a jintleman recall it, even to give it your Majisty
—(he had been well edicated and could spake jinteelly.)
“So the queen said, —“ Walk with me, Dennis,” and they walked together
and had a long convershation; and one of the slaves followed, like a footman
behind a great lady, with his trhee in one hand and a large lump of goold
in the other, which he kept tossing up as an amusement as he walked
behind them; and the queen saw that Dennis was getting narvouslike, fearing
that it might fall on him and smash him; so she ordher’d the slave to throw
it away, and he did so in coorse, and I believe that (pointing to the Keck-
ing Stone) is the vexy lump of goold he threw away.”
“ Stop a bit, Paddy,” said the squatter, “ how can that be ? seeing that
there can be no doubt of that stone being stone ; and, unfortunately for us,
not a lump of gold.”
“ Sure, and wasn’t I going to tell you now,” said the other, “ that when
the queen found that Dennis was dethermin’d to be thrue to Sheena, she
gave him permisshion to depart ; and declharing that her own marriage
dowry should not enrich any one else, she wav’d her wand towards
what is now the ! Ploughed Field,’ and pointed it to the lump that had
been pitch’d down here ; and so the goold and silver was chang’d into stone
and remains so to this day, as you may all see; and the slaves who brought
the treashure vanish’d away intirely, much to Dennis’s satisfaction, and have
never been seen since in these parts as I’ve heard on ; and then the queen
making tendher adhieus to Dennis, waved her wand oyer him, and he felt


himself sinking into the earth again, and knew nothing more till he found
himself on the very spot in ould Ireland where he had so often play’d his
pipes to the fairies.”
“ Now Dennis at first thought he had been in a dhrame, and would never
have known betther ; only, when he went to put his pipes up in the bag,
sure and he found that it was full of sthones, which the fairy had put into
it, and in coorse, that brought the facts to his mind ; and when he turn’d,
the sthones out, what should they be but rubies, and emheralds, and
diamonds, and purls, and the like, which the good fairy had chang’d the
sthones into, as a reward for his consthancy to Sheena : and so Dennis
became the richest man in the counthry, and was married to the king’s
daughther, and succeeded him on the throne, and became the most cele-
brated of the illustrihous kings of ould Ireland in the long bye-gone time ;
but yet every year, while he lived, on the anniversary of his rethurn, he
went to the valley where he had played to the fairies; and though he
would play hour afther hour the sweetest of his music, he never more
heard the tread of their tiny feet, nor caught a glimpse of their gossamher
dresses ; but it is said that on the night of his funerhal, for he died at
last, another celebrhated piper saw a funerhal proceshen, of a very
small appearhance, winding its way up the mounthains ; which he
thought was the good queen of the fairies, paying resphect to the sowl of
Dennis the piper; and that’s all I know about the affair at all, your
honour.”
“ And a very respectable amount of knowledge it is Paddy, said Mr,
Clayton, but how did your worthy ancestor know that this is the wonder-
ful country where he saw such golden visions ? ”
“ Sure, and he didn’t know at all,” said,Paddy; “ it’s myself that found it
out; for does’nt every body expect the goold to be got out of the rooks yet 1
and is’nt it plain that the giants that Dennis saw were divils ? and ain’t
divils the same as demons ? and was’nt this the counthry, whatever you
call it now, that was named originally Van Demon'& Land ? ”
Larry was dismissed with some substantial testimonials of the company’s
gratification ; and the conversation growing out of his rather discursive
narrative beginning to flag, Mr. Clayton was called on to fulfil his
promise, and began as follows :
“ My father was among the earliest of the free settlers in the Colony of
New South Wales. He was a young man when he left England, bringing
with him a small capital, a wife, and two children (my eldest brother
and sister). In the early part of his career, he had many difficulties to
encounter; but had at length established himself near the Macquarie river,
where he owned a moderate-sized sheep-run, and had erected a comfort-
able homestead. It was soon after he was settled there that he met with
an adventure which he thought worthy of being committed to paper, and
which I will now read ; he called it—
‘The Squatter’s Story.’”
“ It was about eight years after my arrival in the Colony, that I left my
home one fine day in October, in search of a good run for my increasing
flocks ; the direction I took was to the northward, as I thought that the
country between the Macquarie and the Lachlan was likely to contain many
suitable lots for my purpose ; I was accompanied by two of my assigned
servants and my eldest boy, then between ten and eleven years of age : I
left my other two servants, who had been with me three or four years and
onjwhom I could quite depend, to attend to the home affairs and as a


protection to my wife and young children ; although I had little apprehen-
sion of any danger befalling them, as at that time there was not that
rancorous hostility to the ‘ white fellows ’ on the part of the natives, which
has since been recorded in so many brutal massacres, and retaliated upon
them so unmercifully.”
“ Jim Parsons and Sandy Dick were the names by which my two men
whom I left at home were known ; they were shipmates, and had origin-
ally been London pick-pockets ; but while in my service evinced the most
scrupulous honesty, and seemed altogether contented with their social
position. My wife had the assistance of a female servant 4 Government’ of
course, and as there were sufficient provisions for nearly two months in
the house, I left without any fear of danger or even discomfort happening
to those I left behind me.”
44 There was occasionally about the homestead a partially civilized black
fellow, whom we called 1 Coshy ; ’ he was handy at tending sheep when
inclined (which was not often), and very clever at tracking them if they
went astray : he was not to be seen when I left.”
“ I took with me Tom and Matthew ; the former was my oldest servant
and considered himself the head man of my establishment; he was a
free-spoken, good hearted fellow—had been transported for poaching, and
was a capital hand with a gun. Matthew had not been with me many
months, and none of us could understand him ; he went about the place
as a man might be supposed to do in a dream ; did whatever he was direc-
ted, but we never knew whether he did it willingly or not; he took his fair
share of all meals with the other men, but never laughed or joked with
them : we did not know the reason of his expatriation, and he had never
alluded to it in any way ; he had that expression of countenance which
some would call sullen and others sorrowful. I had scarcely had cause of
complaint against him, but could not say that I was altogether satisfied
with his conduct.”
41 1 carried my double-barrel’d fowling-piece, Tom was armed with an
old musket, Matthew with a horse-pistol, and my boy Walter had a toma-
hawk stuck in his girdle, more with the intention of chopping wood for our
fires, than of using it as a defensive or offensive weapon. We each had an
opossum rug strapped on our shoulders, and carried amongst us such provi-
sions as we had thought it necessary to take : we intended to depend on
kangaroos, parrots, and other native game of the district for our animal
food; and, except a small flask of brandy, took no fluids with us on the
trip, as we were sure to fall in with small streams or water-holes, both of which
were common in our own neighbourhood.”
44 It took us the whole day to reach to the top of the first range of hills
with which we were not familiar ; and gathering together a quantity of
dry wood we made a capital fire, by the aid of which we made a good
supper off the flesh of a young kangaroo which I had shot during the day;
to which repast we also contributed from the contents of our bags ; and
finishing with the customary jug of tea, disposed ourselves by the fire for
the night, Tom being left to mount guard for the first watch.”
44 1 had some indistinct dream of a dispute with the blacks ; and as I
roused myself on waking, fancied I heard the jabbering of a native :
I jumped up immediately and saw Tom conversing with one, who, as I
neared them, proved to be Coshy.”
44 4 Coshy go wid Massa,’ ” said the black, and seated himself on the
trunk of a prostrate gum tree ; where he kept repeating the same words, so
often and with such emphasis, that I at once saw it would be useless to
deny him his wish ; as in that case, he would have been sure to have
followed on our tracks; so, although I would much rather he had been at
the homestead, I gave him the desired permission, and he went and laid


down by the fire, while I relieved Tom from his watch and walked
leisurely to and fro.”
“ I spent more than an hour in thinking over the probable fate of the
natives of this place : my own opinion had been, that, by kind treatmeut
they might be converted into excellent servants, but experience had not
strengthened this idea; they appeared to me to have a natural laziness,
and a disinclination to engage in any regular employment, while they seemed
to prefer their own miserable and precarious mode of existence to one
which appears to us more comfortable ;—perhaps, because it accords more
with the notions which, under the influence of civilized society, we have
adopted. I remembered too, that a few weeks before my journey, a black
fellow had been found shot through the head on the run of one of my
neighbours, ten miles to the northward : suspicion pointed to one of his
shepherds, but no evidence had then been, nor ever was given to fix the
crime on him or any one else ; but the man had been killed, and was taken
away by his tribe, with every demonstration of anger and grief.”
“ As the night passed on, I felt considerable uneasiness, as I reflected'oh
possible retaliations which the blacks might make on innocent parties ;
for I knew that their notions of justice would lead them to visit on the
whites a white man’s offence, without any consideration of the possible or
even evident innocence of individuals, in the matter provoking their
hostility. But the bright morning sun in the clear blue sky drove the
uncomfortable fancies from my mind, and having breakfasted, we went on
our way.”
“ Nothing particular occurred during the next few days. I found a
capital run, on which I have since reared some thousands of sheep; we had
made a good day’s journey homeward and were passing the night as usual,
when we were aroused by Matthew, who was taking his turn to watch,
and who had heard voices, but could give no further information than
that they were certainly the voices of natives. My son Walter was miss-
ing ! and Coshy also I ”
‘‘ What was to be done ? In what direction should we go in pursuit ?
These, and a hundred other questions pressed on my mind, which was in
that excited state which prevents one from deciding calmly—in my
almost from deciding at all. Matthew insisted that Coshy had gone back
to his tribe and had carried my boy with him, most probably for a cannibal
feast. Here was an idea for a father’s imagination to lay hold of, and
torture him with anguish intolerable ! I called loudly on my boy by
name, but not the smallest response met my anxious ear ; and I was com-
pelled to await the daylight which seemed determined never to come, ere I
could take any steps whatever towards gaining intelligence of him. ”
“ At day-break we began the search as we had arranged in the darkness.
Matthew was left at our halting-place, with directions to ‘ coo-ee ’ if any
thing occurred ; while Tom and I, with our fire-arms and
made for two hills a little in our rear, from which we hoped to have a
better view of the surrounding country.”
“ With my thoughts wandering in sad confusion, I made my way over
about two miles of tolerably open ground, and entered the bush which
grew rather thickly up the hill that was to be my look-out. I had not
reached half way to the summit, when I heard a slight noise on my
right; I listen’d in vain—advanced—heard it once more in front of me—
and immediately after saw in a thicket whence the noise proceeded, a
pair of bright eyes fixed on me—a moment, and they were gone—so
quickly, that I could scarcely be certain that my excited nervous condition
had not created the appearance. I did not call out my son’s name,
though he was uppermost in ray mind, for the eyes had struck my appre-
hensive faculties as those of a black : I called ‘ Coshy ! Coshy !’— the only


answer I received was a light spear through the collar of my jacket: feeling'
instinctively the danger of my situation, I fired one of my barrels in the
direction the spear came from, apparently without any other effect than
that of causing my assailant to betake himself to a safer distance ; at all
events, he did not repeat his attack. ”
“ For a few moments I debated in my own mind whether to proceed on
my search, or return ; but my doubts were speedily ended by a loud
coo-ee 1 from Matthew ; and returning the call, I rushed down towards
the clear ground, as fast as I could make my way through the scrub : the
first opening I arrived at showed me that he was in close conflict with
some half dozen of natives, and that Tom was fast hastening to his assist-
ance : I continued my speed, but ere I gained sight of the spot again, I
heard the report of their fire-arms, and a loud yell from the blacks, whom
I perceived shortly after hurrying through the bushes, one of their number
being carried along, either dead, or dying ; and another limping along,
with the blood flowing from a wound in his leg : the firing off my other barrel
accelerated their speed ; and in a few minutes I joined my men. Tom was
unhurt; he was supporting the head of Matthew, who was lying on the
ground, with a spear wound in his side—he was evidently dying.”
“ Master, ” he faintly uttered, “ I’m done for, my wife shoot-
ing her sent here rage jealous forgive God
bless ,” his utterance became indistinct, and in a few minutes the
unfortunate man had completed his miserable avid inglorious life ; —which
had thus been shorten’d in defence of the property of a master who had
never trusted or understood him. How much romance may have been con-
cealed under that rough exterior, no one ever knew.”
“ Tom, and I scraped a deep hole in the sandy ground ; placed the
remains of the poor fellow in it, and covered the spot with the stones which
were lying around : poor Matthew’s grave has since been turfed over, and
a Wattle tree now marks the spot where the body of the erring, and sor-
row-stricken man reposes.”
“We loaded our pieces, and resumed our sad journey homewards. To
me, it was the most melancholy period of my life : my boy—my eldest
bom —the hope of my heart —was gone ! I felt all but certain that he had
been slain by the blacks, and I believed that the treacherous Coshy had
been concerned in the affair ; I am afraid that we are too prone, when
suffering, to seek for some one to hate as the cause of it; and certain it is
that we are often wrong in our judgments on such occasions. I afterwards
had reason to believe that Coshy’s absence might be attributed to far
better motives; and that he might have left rather with a view to protect
my boy than to betray him ;—but to proceed.”
“ It had been difficult for me to turn my steps homewards, till I had as-
certained my poor boy’s fate ; but, what could I do in the matter ? To
proceed on a nearly hopeless search through the endless labyrinths of the
forest would in all probability be walking into the midst of an unknown
number of ambushed enemies—and yet, to go home, without making
further attempts at discovery, seemed impossible : home ! should I fine one ?
It had struck me the very moment I had missed my son, that revenge for
the murder committed on my neighbour’s run, was the cause of my misfor-
tune. What other savage deed might not have been perpetrated ? Should
I find any home ? Should I again see my wife and remaining children ?
These thoughts had decided me ; and, melancholy and wretched as I was,
we were hastening homewards.”
“ It was on the afternoon of the eighth day from that of my departure,
that we came in sight of my station : we were yet some miles distant, and
the view was not distinct; the house was there certainly, but smoke was
ascending from three or four spots around, which, as we pressed on, we


found to be the ruins of some of the outbuildings : we heard a confused
noise, and as we got nearer, could make out several natives about the
place, evidently engaged in the attempt to bum the house ; we tire off our
pieces, and shouted as loudly as we could, to let the inmates know that our
assistance (such as it was) was at hand ; a discharge of fire-arms came
from the house in reply; and the blacks quickly made a retreat to the
opposite side.”
“ I did not know how to act —if we made for the house, we should pro-
bably be speared in the attempt; and if we reached it, could do nothing
to prevent the blacks ultimately setting it on fire, and destroying us all in
the ruins, or in our struggles to escape. Help from our neighbours, dis-
tant as they all were, seemed very unlikely to arrive ; and we resolved to
make a rush upon the hidden natives, and afterwards to be guided—as so
many have been both before and since—by circumstances.”
“ We loaded our pieces ; and, making a circuit, in hopes of avoiding the
keen eyes which we knew would be looking for us, we arrived in the rear
of the savages—a discharge came from the house —I fired one of my barrels,
and Tom, at the same time, sent a bullet from his musket; the blacks took
to fight, with the exception of one strapping fellow, who, catching sight of
me, threw a spear, which grazed my arm, and brandishing his waddie,
came leaping towards me ; the shot from my other barrel wounded him in
the side ; but rushing on, he grappled with me ; his strength was enor-
mous ; and, having brought me to the ground, he was raising his waddie
to brain me, when a well-directed blow from Tom’s clubbed musket, (he
had come to my assistance at the very moment of need) crash’d down
upon his arm. With a yell, like that of a wild beast, he leaped among the
bushes, and we saw him no more ; —two days afterwards, his dead body
was discovered at the distance of about half-a-mile.”
“ We entered the house, and, in the warmth of our first greetings, I was
momentarily relieved from my great grief; but ‘ where is* Watty 1 ’ where’s
Watty ? sounding from all sides, brought the weight back on my soul
immediately.”
“ Where is my boy 1 ” cried my wife, looking searchingly in my face,
‘ my boy ! my poor boy ! he is kill’d ; oh ! what shall I do ? my boy !my
poor boy ! ”
“ It was not till a heavy flood of tears came to her relief that I was able
to calm down her excited feelings sufficiently to give her the particulars df
our loss, and to make her understand that there was yet a possibility, (I
could not say probability) of our seeing Walter again alive.”
“ I was then able to gather the particulars of what had occured during my
absence : it appeared that matters went on much as usual till two days pre-*
vious to my return, when nine black fellows were seen approaching the
house ; they came on in such a way as, fortunately* to excite the suspicion
of the two men left in charge, and they closed up the house ere they arrived.
Sandy Dick volunteered to await their approach in the yard, but was soon
driven in by a shower of spears, which was their first salutation on arrival:
* well my friends,’ said Sandy, as Jim barr’d the door behind him, ‘ we’ll
try and return the compliment ; ’ and reaching down the large blunderbuss
which was kept ready loaded against contingencies, pointed it through a
hole purposely left in the shutters, and fired it into the midst of his assail-
ants ; it was loaded with large shots, many of which took effect, and
created a feeling among the recipients that it would be as well to retire ;
they had, after some consultation amongst themselves, returned to the
assault; and continued at intervals to fire the outbuildings, and endeavour
to do the same to the house ; but had always been driven back by dis-
charges from Sandy’s weapon, aided by occasional kettles of scalding
water, which Jim Parsons contrived to favor them with. Our arrival had


turned the scale against them, and they had lost no time in decamping ;
we afterwards found that one had died from the wounds inflicted by the
doughty knight of the blunderbuss.”
“ News of the outbreak was send down to Sydney ; and small parties of
the military scoured the country around us; I frequently left my sorrowing
family to accompany them, and we made all possible search for my boy ;
but two months expired, without any, even the slightest clue to his fate
being obtained. ”
“I had been out at this period three days, with a sergeant’s party of
twelve ; we had reached to some forty miles nearer the Lachlan, than the
halting place where my boy had been lost, when we saw the smoke of a
fire, about two miles to the westward : it was nearly dark, and we made
for the place directly ; we arrived, under cover of the scrub, within thirty
yards of it, and saw about twenty natives sitting down ; the sergeant
ordered the men to fire ; they did so (having got to look on the blacks as
so many noxious animals) and killed three of them. We heard a shout
to the left of us, and saw my boy, my Walter, running towards us, with
Coshy apparently in pursuit; several of the blacks ran in a direction to
intercept them, and to my astonishment made rather towards their own
countryman. My boy was soon in my arms, while poor Coshy, he whom
we had all deemed the worst enemy we had amongst them, fell to the
ground, pierced with seven spears, and brained by the blow of a heavy
waddie.”
“ It appeared from my hoy’s account, that he was awakened on the night
we missed him, by the pressure of a hand on his face ; that a cloth was
forced into his mouth, and that in that state he was carried off by a strong
black fellow : that afterwards the gag was removed, and he was forced
along with them ; being occasionally carried, ■when unable to exert suffi-
cient speed for their purpose ; Coshy accompanied them, and once carried
him a short distance ; when he informed him, that he was there with a
view to assist him, if possible. My boy found out that their intention was
to take him before the whole tribe ; but he never ascertained anything as
to their final purpose : Coshy, who frequently acted as guard over him, had
told him to run for it, when they heard our guns ; and had followed after in
the hope of reaching us—but the unfortunate fellow had paid the penalty
of his gratitude for small kindnesses ; and was now lying dead, a memento
of the black man’s vengeance. He was buried a few days after by the
side of Matthew—and the black and the white servant alike received the
tribute of our grateful tears. ”
“ It is difficult to describe the scene when we arrived home : I took care
to go in first, for I feared that the unexpected joy would be too much for
my wife. ‘My boy !my dear boy ! ’ she exclaimed at intervals during the
rest of the day ; and she provided such a feast for the next, as was not
seen in the neighbourhood for many a year after ; we all, our military
friends included, rioted on the ‘ fat of the land.’ Indeed, I am sure, that
if she had been possessed of a dozen fatted calves, they would all have
been killed to do honour to the repast.”
“ It was long before population increased around us, but we never again
had a hostile visit from the natives; the immediate relatives of the
murder’d man having been so reduced by the soldiery, as to have given up
even the hope of retaliation.”
“ Did your brother, Mr. Clayton, ever venture about the country after
his adventure with the blacks,” enquired Miss Tench, who had appeared
to take great interest in the narrative.
I really cannot tell you,” was the reply, “ it was so many years before
my time ; for I must inform you that I am only his half-brother ; he is


now in England, and has spent his life chiefly in India, where he was dis-
tinguished during the late mutiny, having entered the army at an early
age.”
“ Suppose we drink a glass of wine to his health,” continued he ; and
the two remaining bottles were opened, and pretty nearly emptied by the
united efforts of those assembled ; always excepting Mr. Topper, who,
having given the others to understand that he was a “total abstainer,”
had pledged every toast in what he termed the “ crystal stream.” The day
being remarkably fine, and the party having settled down into a pleasant
little gathering ; another half-hour was spent in social, and perhaps in one
or two instances rather tender gossiping; Captain Tench’s ruddy face
smiled with good humoured jollity over them all, and his tine manly voice
suddenly gave vent to his feelings in the following carol—
THE NEW YEAR.
The new year! how smoothly, how pleasantly now
He smiles on the sun-shiny hour !
As brightly on us, on the rude mountain side,
As on fashion, on wealth, or on pow’r!
Let us welcome him then with a sun-shiny heart,
H e’ll stay with us many a day;
And let us feel sure that we’ve used him aright,
When we find that he’s going away.
No doubt, ere he leaves us, his frown may appear :
What then P We’re his hosts for the time ;
And we’ll welcome our guest, while the shade on his brow
Tells only of sorrow—not crime!
If we but act rightly, he’ll never do wrong
To us—meet what trouble we may;
But he’ll smile just as brightly the hour he departs
As he shines on the mountain to-day!
Considerable gratification was expressed when the Captain’s effusion
was ended ; and rising, he politely enquired if Miss Jackson would kindly
oblige them with a song suitable to the season : the lady, as ladies on
such occasions generally do, excused herself for a variety of reasons, good,
bad, and indifferent; but chiefly, because she was unacquainted with any
suitable ballad ; she believed, however, that Mr. Thomson had been writing
some poetry in the early part of the day, while they had been listening to
Trinity Bells, and she was sure he would be happy to bring it before the
company; after this, poor Mr. Thomson had no choice but to obey the
behest of his “ lady faire ” and, with many excuses, he proceeded to read
the following stanzas—
NEW YEAR’S HAY.
’ Tis New Year’s Hay ! right merrily
Peal out the jocund bells;
And, at the sound, more cheerily
With Hope each bosom swells :
And, while her spell is on the soul,
Past blessings still we slight,
To paint the future with a sky
All sunshine—day and night!
Ah ! ’t will be well, if once again
A Now Year’s Hay we see.
If mem’ry then can dwell upon
This present one with glee !


And, wherefore not ? must lovely Hope
A cheat for ever prove ?
Or is there but a fleeting Joy
In friendship, or in love P
Oh! surely no ! if we but turn
Our hopes where Reason guides,
Trust only in a worthy friend.
And love where Virtue ’bides ;
Then we may welcome with delight,
Nor fear them fade away;
The visions happy, fond, and bright,
That bless this New Year’s Day.
When Mr. Thomson concluded, some discussion ensued as to the compa-
rative merits of the two compositions ; and Mr. Topper, having expressed
himself warmly on the subject, was called on to contribute his own song .
he excused himself on the ground of having ‘ no voice,’ (a statement which
was the cause of some slight merriment between the Captain and Mr.
Clayton, and some suppressed tittering on the part of the ladies) but he
-volunteered to relate—
A Tee Totallbr’s Experience,
“ When I was a boy in London, I was apprenticed to a man of the
name of Staight. Ho was a maker of Sextants and other instruments for
the opticians’ shops, and did a large business —principally in country
towns. As his connection lay far and wide, and he was his own traveller,
he was necessarily away from home a large portion of the year, leaving
the management of his business in the hands of an intelligent steady man,
by name Reynolds.”
“ My master’s family, when I went apprentice, consisted of two sons and
three daughters : it is of the two sons I have to speak. Henry, the eldest,
at that time was about nine years old —a fine lad, tolerably
well-educated, but unfortunately very much spoiled by his mother, who
could not bear that her darling (for such he was) should be crossed or
contradicted in any way. George, who was about two years younger, was
a very different lad ; he did not appear to be as bright, was certainly not
so handsome, and did not altogether appear likely to make a man ot such
mark as his brother ; of course, considering his age, he had been equally
well educated.”
“The family did not reside on the business premises, hut some two
miles from, town ; and it was only from occasional visits of the boys that I
was enabled to form any judgment as to their respective characters ; but
Henry was my favourite, and indeed the favourite of the whole shop.
George was very observant; and, childlike, would tattle at home of what-
ever he noticed in the shop : ami, although none of the workmen (as tar
as my knowledge extends) had ever received a reprimand from ‘ the gover-
nor ’ in consequence of Master George’s reports ; yet, workmen in London
dislike anything that has even the appearance of espionage, and our work-
men certainly preferred Henry to his brother.”
“ My master, himself, paid but little attention to the immediate business
of the shop, even when he was at home. So long as Mr. Reynolds would
send out the orders quickly, and get all the accounts made out ready for
the different‘journeys,’ it mattered little to his chief, who placed (and
I think justly) the highest confidence in his integrity, how he managed the
affairs of the shop in detail. It so happen’d that many of the best hands
in the trade were, and I fear still are, (although the temperance cause has
worked wonders among that class of people), a terrible drunken set; —men


who would take their glass of ale or spirits more than once daily when
not ‘on the spree,’ and, occasionally, be away drinking for many days
together. One of them, a clever workman, earning his three or four
pounds a-week; and who, when sober, was a sensible man, who could then
rail at his own tolly in ever being otherwise ; was notorious, even amongst
them, for the frequency and violence of his outbreaks of intemperance,
He had a wife and live young children, and then had a home and all
reasonable comforts ; yet, before I left London, he had died in a work*
house, to which he had been removed from a door-step in the street, where
he was found lying in a state of half-insensibility after one of his drunken
bouts ; his home had been broken up long before ; and his wife and chil-
dren were left to struggle or to starve, as their energies or opportunities
firght determine.”
“ But to return ; —Mr. Reynolds employed several of these men, and I
fear the shop, while it was considered in the trade as the ‘ best-handed,'
was also known to be the most ‘ unsteady.’ ”
“ Before I was out of my time, Henry had taken his place at the work-
bench ; his father wishing to make him a first-rate workman ; to this end,
he was placed between two of the best hands, one of whom was the man I
have just alluded to ; —this, I fear, was the first step in the lad’s progress to
ruin ; for he soon got the habit of drinking occasionally with them, and of
accompanying them to the public houses after 1 shop time and though I
know Mr. Reynolds did all he could to prevent it, and threatened to
acquaint his father it he did not alter ; yet, he got nothing from him but
promises of withdrawing from the men’s society, which promises were too
frequently broken. At length, the unhappy youth went out with one of
them on a drunken “ spree, ” of course, he was led into all sorts of bad
company, and initiated into the vicious habits, which men of the sort too
often acquire. A policeman came to the shop to inform us that he was
at the Station house —drunk —and there Mr. Reynolds found him, and
thence, when sober enough, he conducted him home. I believe he did his
duty by the lad, and acquainted his mother (his father was out on a
journey ; ) with the bad tendency of the companionship he was forming ;
but I tear that no serious steps were taken by the lady to avert the pro-
bable consequences ; certain it is that, if she did, they were of little avail.”
“ I may state that my master, although I never saw him, as it is termed,
“the worse for liquor,” was what is called a “jolly fellow,” I have no
doubt that he was a great man in all the “ Commercial Rooms ” that he
frequented ; and that he always voted in the affirmative, when the ques-
tion as to an additional bottle of wine was discussed : whether this “jolly”
habit of his may have had anything to do with the lad’s tendencies I
cannot say ; but, I have heard it suggested.”
“ Time wore on ; the second son George went into the counting house ;
Mr. Staight evidently intending the two lads to be able to carry on the
business between them—and a capital arrangement it seemed; if it had
not been for the drink, it would have been carried out.”
“ Henry had great talents, and rather looked down upon the other lads,
as he could surpass their workmanship ; George went on steady, and
plodding ; and for some time kept his brother, for very shame’s sake ; from
accompanying the workman after ‘ shop time,’ so much as before. But,
now and then, he would go on his own way, and on one occasion, he was
away from home two days ; and then returned, half fuddled ; having
married his father’s housemaid, who was missing at the same time.”
“ At this time, he was nearly twenty-two years of age, (for I remained in
that shop till I left London) and was not nearly so good a workman as
when he was sixteen —and as year, after year, went on, so did his work
deteriorate, till it would hardly pass muster with that of the youngest,


apprentices ; George stepped into Mr. Reynold’s place, the latter having left
the establishment to commence a business in another line for himself; and
managed things admirably. One thing puzzled me much : I knew that he,
was in the habit of going with country customers to ‘ take a glass of wine,’
and always spoke of temperance being better than abstinence ; but all at
once, he announced that he and his brother had taken the pledge for six
months ; and during that time the customers were not invited to the usual
leave-taking : the six months out, the pledge was abandoned; and the
customers were invited as before : he afterwards announced that he and
his brother would be ‘ total abstainers ’ for a year ; and so far as he was
concerned, the pledge was redeemed; but his brother—who had kept sober
during the first period, and, although he broke out before its conclusion, kept
his pledge for ten months of the second—then gave way altogether, and was
away drinking for six weeks ; when he returned, ghastly looking, palsied,
and seriously ill : he recovered however ; but, alsolutely refused to pledge
himself again ; saying-—that he felt he should break his promise, if he did
so. And George returned to his old habits —treating the customers when
they called, as he had been used to do ; and displaying the same steady
habits he had always followed.”
“ He said to me one day—for he always spoke more to me than to the
other men-—* I dare say you wonder why I took the pledge temporarily,
and have not continued it.’ ”
“ Certainly,’’ I said, “ it did seem strange to me.”—(l had then been a
tee-totaller for some years.)
“ I did it,” he said, “ for my brother’s sake, I hoped to reclaim him
gradually, for I kew he would struggle te keep his word. You may be
sure it was not on my own account, as I can keep sober without it.”
“Ah ! sir,” I replied, “but drinking has not the temptation for you that
it has for him.”
“ Excuse me,” he said, “for contradicting you ;but it has quite as much :
whenever I drink one glass of wine, I feel an almost unconquerable crav-
ing to get more, and if I did not happen to have greater strength of mind
than my poor brother, I should give way the same as he does, and be just
as bad.”
“ Then why ? ” said I, “ do you not become a total abstainer at once, for
your own safety and as an example to your brother as well as to others ? ”
“ Because,” he replied, “in the first place, it would interfere with my
business ; ” (I thought of the country customers ) “in the second place, my
true safety lies in learning to subdue my own bad propensities : and, in
the third place, my example is likely to be of the greatest value when
placed on the truest basis ; and I think that our duty demands of us to
use without abusing the gifts of Providence.”
“Of course I thought he was wrong altogether; but he was a man to act
up to his own standard of right and wrong.”
“ The other poor fellow went on from bad to worse ; and, when I left
England, he and his increasing family were nearly supported by his
brother, who, my old my old master being dead, was at the head of what
he had increased to a very flourishing concern, and had, as he told me,
but one serious sorrow —the impossibility of helping his brother effectually.”
“ Hear ! hear ! ” —called the Captain, when the relation was over—“ a
very good tale, but I consider—” and then the company went into one of
those pro and con arguments which, on the subject of Temperance, seem
almost interminable—till Mr. Thomson suggested that as the day was
declining, they had better get down to the “ Springs” and look after Mr.
Launder.”
The Springs ” is the name of that particular spot in the mountain


track, where the water which runs down to supply the stream for Degraves’
Mill is first collect id into an artificial channel. This water, being the pro-
duct of the snow which falls on the top of the mountain, filters through
the soil, and at last pours down towards Hobart Town one of the purest
known water supplies. An enterprising individual has lately extemporised
a sort of Bush Hotel at this place ; but at the time I am writing of visitors
had to light their own fires, and boil their own kettles, before they could
partake of the traveller’s most enjoyable refreshment—his tea ; perhaps
this amateur gipsying added zest to the expedition, for mountain parties
wore more frequent occurrences at that time than at present.
The party was soon re-crossing the “ Ploughed Field,” and it was curious
to see how the growing intimacy of the day had emboldened the gentle-
men to proffer those attentions to the ladies which they had not thought
of doing in the morning: Mr. Clayton was almost as attentive to Miss
Tench as the privileged Mr. Thomson was to Miss Jackson ; Mr. De Lacy
thought himself called on to divide his courtesies between his spouse and
Mrs. Launder; while Miss Catherine was helped over an occasional cavern
or round a sedgy swamp, by whichever of the two unoccupied gentlemen who
was nearest to her at the time ; it has been whispered, that she did cling
to the arm of the Captain rather longer than was positively necessary ;
but a lady of her mature age must be allowed to be the best judge of
etiquette under such circumstances. The upper ice-house was reached,
without their late companion putting in an appearance; and the whole
party trudged merrily down to the well-known resting-place : Larry, who
had a hut close by, assisted them in their culinary preparations ; but he
had seen nothing more of Mr. Launder ; and, during the afternoon meal,
hints began to be thrown out of the danger that was incurred by solitary
wanderers in that desolate region : Mr. Topper insisted that Mr. Launder
was lost, although he appeared to have been well acquainted with the
track. “ Scarcely likely,” said Captain Tench, “ for the track to the Falls is
almost as plain as that down to Degraves’,—he’ll be back presently to tea.”
But he did not come back to tea ; and the conversation grew serious ;
within two hours it,',would be as dark as a fine moonless summer night in
Tasmania ever is ; and whatever danger he was incurring would then be
increased.
“ Do you think he can possibly have missed his way, Mr. Judd 1 ” said the
Captain.
“ Not very likely, I should say,” replied the schoolmaster ; “ but I have
been—
LOST ON THE MOUNTAIN,”
“ It was five years ago, rather earlier in the season than at present, that
I and two male friends ascended, on as fine a morning apparently as this
was. We intended tc make a longjourney of it; to reach to the Pinnacle,
make ourselves acquainted with as much of the top of the mountain as
possible, and then make our way to the Falls before returning home.”
“We met at Degraves’ at sun-rise ; and passing the few houses occupied
by some of the workmen, soon arrived at the stream which crosses the
track ; the beautiful clearness of the water induced us to drink, and we
sauntered on in the best of health and spirits ; as we ascended we were
cheered by the songs of birds from the young gum-trees we passed, while
the white flowers of the wild lily and the small red bells of the heather
gratified our visual organs ; as we turned off to the steeper parts of the
ascent, the bold outline of the mountain, through occasional openings in
the forest, stood out in the sunshine majestically : amused by the call of
the magpie and the occasional clatter of the jackass, we made nothing of
the two or three rather abrupt rises we had to surmount; and took our


breakfast somewhere about here with first-class appetites ; we crossed the
water-course, and, winding along the path that leads to the next steep
ascent, had a most glorious view of the Derwent and the surrounding
country : glowing in the brilliant rays of the sun ; the whole scene seemed
revelling in luxuriance, and drew from us all acclamations of enjoyment;
with a little toil we climbed to the Ploughed Field, and, disregarding the
prognostication of the man in charge of the ice-house, that we shoidd have
rain, made our way to the Rocking Stone, and dispersed ourselves in dif-
ferent directions, agreeing to meet at the Pinnacle.”
“ I had a great fancy to reach some large trees which we saw to the
nor’-west of us ; and, rather against the advice of my companions, who
wished to arrive at the Pinnacle from different directions, but were anx-
ious that we should each keep, if possible, in sight of the others, set off,
little thinking of the difficulties I was to meet with.”
“ I had proceeded half-a-mile, over large stones and small swamps, with
an occasional patch of half-melted snow ; when, looking round after my
two friends, I found a mist had arisen and hidden them from my view ; I
did not altogether like it, but, thinking it would soon disperse, went on,
the sun shining clearly befoi’e me ; presently, I found mists rising on each
side, and soon the trees were shut out from my sight by a thick cloud ;to
add to my discomfort, a damp began to fall, which soon increased to a
close rain, drenching me to the skin ”
“ When I first saw the mist, I had hallo’ed to my companions and had
heard their shouts in return ; but, afterwards, I had shouted and coidd not
be certain that I heard their replies, although sometimes I fancied I did.”
“ I was now wet through, and felt thoroughly cold; we each had carried
our own provisions, and it happenened, fortunately for me, that I had
possession of our solitary brandy flask ; I sheltered myself as well as I
could under the lee of a huge stone, ate a considerable portion of my pro-
vender, and took a moderate draught of the spirit: I was then able to
reckon up my position.”
“ I soon found that I had but a very confused notion as to the direction
I wished to go ; and, as I feared I might wander just the wrong way in
the mist, I determined for the present to remain stationary ; I did so for a
long time, and, at length, the rain somehat abating, made the best calcu-
lation I could as to the line I ought to follow, and started anew ; I went
on, over ground which looked like that I had traversed, for about two
hours; when a heavier rain and an increasing thickness made me seek
the best shelter I could find ;it was a very bad one, and I was obliged to
make another attack on my sandwiches to keep myself equal to my task ;
I shouted repeatedly, but could not hear a reply.”
“ Hours passed, and the weather got worse, till a brisk wind arose ; the
night was coming on, and, at last, the veil was lifted and the stars shone
brightly; from them I was able to tell nearly the direction I had to follow ;
and, had the night continued clear, I should have easily found my way ;
but it again clouded over, again rained, and set in for a spell of bad wea-
ther, which lasted three days. On I went, thinking I was right; now and
then I heard distant shouts, which I replied to ; but, every time I heard
them, they seemed to come in different directions ; and my companions, I
afterwards found, were separated in search of me, which partly accounts
for it.”
“ I suddenly fell into a large hole, deeper than myself; I hurt one of my
arms, not seriously, and endeavoured to get out; for some time my
attempts were vain, and I began to have fears of starving to death, like a
rat in a neglected trap : at length I scrambled up a rough huge stone,
which formed the not quite perpendicular side of the small cave : I took
a drink from my flask, and, finishing the rest of my provisions, started


again, determined to get somewhere.”
“ It is a wonder that I did not perish in some of thelthiok*forests into
which I might have wandered ; fortunately, I soon found that I was
descending; and, when the day broke, which it did at last, I saw at no
great distance, a miserable-looking hut; which, you may be sure I was not
long in reaching, and where I received a rough, but a cordial welcome.”
“ That was, perhaps, the rudest specimen of a human habitation, and
its owner, perhaps, the rudest specimen of humanity I had ever seen ; but
never in my life did my heart open more cordially to a fellow-creature, or
my alimentary organs enjoy a greater treat than on that morning, when
the rough man regaled me with tea and bacon, and piloted me into King-
ston, whence I soon found my way into town.”
The tea was finished, the various individuals of the party had finally
pack’d their baskets and wallets for the journey home ; they had waited
far beyond the time they had intended ; and still their companion of the
morning did not return. After some consultation, it was arranged that
Mr. De Lacy and Mr. Thompson should escort the ladies to town, and the
other gentlemen should remain till their acquaintance made his appearance ;
or, if he did not do so in a reasonable time, take such steps as they might
deem advisable under the circumstances, and the party was broken up. It
was generally thought that the wife of the absent person was not quite so
so much agitated, as might have been expected from her evident affection
for her husband ; but it sometimes happens that great perturbation of
mind is concealed under a comparitively calm countenance. So farewells
were exchanged ; those who were homeward-bound hastened down the
track ; and the others remained, with the full expectation that it would
not be long before their watch would be releived, by the appearance of
THE MISSING MR. LAUNDER.
“ It’s my opinion,” squeaked Mr. Topper, “ that the gentleman has lost
his way : as it will be moonlight, I think we had better go and look for him
at once.”
“ He may have been taken ill, or possibly have met with some accident,”
said Mr. Judd, “ it is certainly necessary to do something ; I am of the
same opinion as our friend.”
“ Oh! he’ll turn up all right enough,” said the Captain,” “ I don’t believe
in a man losing him self while he has light to steer by but 'we may as well
go and look after him, what say you, young man ? ”
This observation was addressed to Mr. Clayton, who replied, ‘ quite right
to look for him : ’ but I should suggest that two of us go off towards the
Falls ; and the others remain here, in case he returns by some other track :
the party that first sights him should light a fire as a signal to that effect.
So the captain, and the schoolmaster, lighted their cigars ; and with a
fire in Larry’s hut, prepared for their vigil; while the Squatter, and our
friend Topper, (accompanied by Larry,) started for the Falls,; Mr. Topper
did wonders ; he darted off the tracks into thickets, where he fancied he
saw the missing gentleman’s hat ; pointed out the easiest way of getting
round or over the fallen gum trees ; and was always positive that their
late companion was lost, and would meet with a horrible death.
“ Only think,” said he, ‘ there’s nothing to eat in the bush, and perhaps,
he will not find water, dear me ; do let us make haste, coo-ee-ee.”
Poor fellow! his desire was to raise a shout, that might be heard for
miles ; but his unfortunate voice could not carry many yards ; but the cry
was taken up by the lustier voices of his companions—and again, and
again, at intervals ; but, with no response.


Thus they went on : they reached “ the Falls,” and far beyond ; they
penetrated through the bush, till fatigue compelled them to halt; they
made a sort of breakfast, on some small refreshments they had with them,
and sat down till the morning.
And then, from several directions, came shouts, fast, and loud : the
alarm had been given in town ; and several parties had volunteered to go
and aid in the search. Soldiers too were ordered out, for the same pur-
pose—and all that day, and the next, the mountain echoes were continually
awakened by the loud “coo-ee and tires gleamed from its sides, as signals
to the wanderer : —but they found him not. “Ah”! ‘ said Mrs. De Lacy
—“ this is the ending of the party of thirteen ”!
And there was great lamentation in the town : one house in particular
was closed, as for a death ; and when it was re-opened, Mrs. Launder, and
her children, appeared in the garb of mourning ; and there was much sym-
pathy evinced, and the trade of the shop for a time increased ; and then
there was a subscription to send her to Sydney, where she had friends; and
she departed, amid cordial farewells ; and nothing more was heard of her
for some time.
Two years afterwards, she remitted to Hobart Town, sufficient money to
pay all the debts of her late husband ; and was voted to be the best and
most devoted of wives ; and the gratified creditors sent her a “ testimonial,”
and in a short time, the whole affair was forgotten.
But it chanced to be brought under the notice of the Hobart Town
public again ; for one of the Citizens, who was in Sydney, for a month or
two, reported, on his return, that there was a flurishing business there, in
the same line as that which had been carried on in Hobart Town, by the
Launders—and that a couple, closely resembling them in person, voice, and
manners, were the contented owners of the Establishment.
CONCLUSION.
It was Hew Year’s Day, exactly one year later than that alluded to in
the foregoing pages ; and Captain Tench was sitting in company with Mr.
Judd, in the garden of the latter, discussing matters in general and a small
bowl of punch in particular.
“ One of my reasons for calling on you, Judd,” said the Captain, “ was
to show you this : ” —and he pointed to the column over the leader of the
Sydney Empire. Mr. Judd looked, —and read—
“ Maeeied. —At Paramatta, by the Rev. John Smith, Samuel Clayton,
Esq., of Waramaboo, to Mary, eldest daughter of James Tench, Esq. of
Hobart Town.”
“ It is rather odd,” said Mr. Judd, “ that yesterday’s Mercury has some-
thing of the same kind.—Listen ”
“ Maeeied. —On the 26th December, at St. David’s Cathedral, by the
Venerable Archdeacon Davies, Francis Thomson, Esq., of Battery
Point, to Miss Emma Jackson, only daughter of the late James
Jackson, Esq. of Glenarchy,”
“ There, Captain, that will match your news. Is it true, may I ask, if a
similar announcement will shortly appear on your account ? ”
“Well, I can’t say,” was the reply;—“ but the De Lacys are very re-
spectable people, and Miss Catherine ”
“ Ah! I see,” said Mr. Judd, smiling, “ there will be, at least, three
couples to remember our New Yeae’s Day on the Mountain.”
PRATT & SON, PRINTERS, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART TOWN.


M agdtj
