

(yc^i . 1
rtj
NEW SOUTH WALES COAL FIELDS.
By Wm. Keene, F.G-.5., London; M.A.S., Bordeaux; Corresponding Member
Q-eo. Ins., Vienna; and N. S. Wales G-overnment Examiner of Coal Fields.
PAL2EOZOIC FOSSILS.
Mb. W. Keene, the Government Examiner of Coal Fields, thus
describes a very interesting and valuable collection of rocks, fossils,
and minerals, exhibited by him: —
“ These specimens show the super and sub-carboniferous rocks,
and the coal measures, presenting eleven different seams to
working, all of which are more or less worked at various levels—
from 450 feet below to 1,500 feet above the sea.
“ The first, second, and third seams are worked in the Illawarra
District, at Mount Keira, Bellambi, and Bulli; the third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth seams are worked at Newcastle
and Wallsend, and at Minmi, on the Hunter River; the ninth,
tenth, and eleventh, at East and West Maitland, and Branxton,
near Dalwood.
“ The present shipments from the Collieries amount to 20,000
tons weekly.”
Referring to the specimens shown in this collection, I may now
enter upon some further particulars :
The seam of the Australian Agricultural Company, worked at
the Colliery known as the Borehole, is 163 feet from the surface,
and 150 feet below the sea-level. Its average thickness is about
10 feet, with dip to the south-east of lin 20. This coal is
highly bituminous, and remarkable, in common with the Borehole
and Minmi seams, for its tendency to reniform and orbicular
fracture—a peculiarity w r hich appears to belong to the middle
seams of the series; the upper and lower seams being more
disposed to splinty cleavage, and burning to ash with little cinder.
This coal is greatly esteemed in the Melbourne and Californian
markets. Ships of large tonnage can load at the staiths of the
Company, to which the coal is taken from the pit’s mouth by
locomotives, a distance of about two miles.
Wallsend Colliery.—The coal in this pit is 127 feet from the
surface, and 80 feet below the sea-level; 9 feet 10 inches in
thickness, including partings, which divide the seam into three
bands. The partings are together about 10 inches in thickness.
The Wallsend workings are situated about half-way between


Minmi and Newcastle, the strata rising towards the north-west
ranges. The works connect with Newcastle by a branch railway
to join the Great Northern line at Waratah, about four miles
from the port, and the locomotives take coals to the ship’s side
at the rate of 500 tons or more daily.
The Waratah Colliery, near Newcastle, is worked by a Sydney
proprietory, and they ship coal by the public cranes at Newcastle
Wharf, or at Port Waratah, where they have erected a shipping
staith of their own, and at which vessels drawing 14 feet of
water can load. They have on one occasion shipped as much as
900 tons in a day, and their present out-put is about 3,500 tons per
week.
Lambton Colliery is near to the Wallsend, and belongs to and
is worked by the Scottish Australian Company. The seam crops
out towards the river, but they have worked to the dip till they
are now under 300 feet of cover, and their present extraction is
about 200,000 tons per annum.
The price of good large round coal at all the Newcastle Col-
lieries is 9s. 3d. per ton delivered on board, and the nut coal ss.
per ton. The Panama line of steamers use Australian coal, and
the Dutch Steam Navigation Company, working in the Java and
China seas, send here for their supplies.
The Minmi Colliery Company work the seam at 90 feet from the
surface, and 20 feet above the sea-level. An outcrop of the seam
is visible in a creek about 400 yards from the shaft, rising in a
northerly direction lin 18. It appears to be the second seam
below the chert rock which covers the Coal and Copper Company’s
seam at Burwood, and is bedded on a hard sandstone grit of good
building stone. The coal is much liked by the blacksmiths of
the district, and the small makes a good coke, as does the small
coal of the Collieries of the Newcastle District generally. Messrs.
J. and A. Brown, the owners of these mines, raise about 300 tons
a day, which is shipped at Hexham, a township on the banks of
the Hunter River, 10 miles from Newcastle; or the coal is sent
down in barges laden with boxes, which are hoisted by a steam
crane so as to load ships of any tonnage whilst at anchor in the
stream. The seam averages 6 feet of clean coal.
The Four-mile Creek Company carries on its operations in the
East Maitland District, near to the head of the navigation of the
Hunter River, 15 miles from Newcastle. There are at least three
workable seams recognizable in this district; and that worked is
8 feet 6 inches in thickness, 5 feet 6 inches of which is a splint
coal of very superior quality, chiefly used by the steamers navi-
gating daily between Morpeth and Sydney.
The admirable regularity with which these ocean steamers
perform their service—their engines of 160 horse-power easily
kept to the top of their speed with steam to spare and blowing


at the valve, give sufficient and constant evidence of the excellence
of the coal; in fact, I have long considered, and often expressed
the opinion, that good clean, hand-picked, New South Wales
coal is at least equal if not preferable to the best coals of England,
when these latter have been twice transhipped; that is to say, in
the state in which English coal can alone be got in Sydney, and
at double the price of the best produce of our own mines.
The Eour-mile Creek is a hard splint coal, does not clinker, and
burns to a fine dry ash —is very comparable to the coals shipped
from Groole, in Yorkshire, whilst our bituminous coals may be
likened in quality to the “ Hartley.”
Descending the strata, and below all the seams of these Col-
lieries, at West Maitland, about 5 miles north from Four-mile
Creek, two seams of cannel and splinty coal are worked, the pro-
perty of the Hon. Bourn Bussell.
This cannel coal is most useful, and chiefly employed for
domestic purposes.
Fifteen miles to the northward these lower seams again crop
out in Anvil and Dalwood Creeks, and are worked at Branxton.
The coal is in good repute as a steam fuel.
Thirty miles further to the northward, at Bix’s Creek, near
Singleton, a seam of good coal is worked, and this concludes the
collection from the Northern District.
Sixty miles south from Sydney are the ports of Bellambi and
Wollongong; and though they cannot be compared for accommo-
dation with the port of Newcastle, the energy of the coal-owners
of the district, and the facility with which coals can be worked by
“ day-levels” from a 7-feet seam, which shows itself in section
along many miles of the mountain range, assure to this field a
progressive development to prove the inexhaustible resources of
New South Wales in mineral fuel; and will be a guarantee to
commercial interests that no combination or monopoly can long
disturb the regularity of the supply.
By reference to the collection I exhibit, it will be seen that I
can recognize eleven distinct seams, which are more or less
worked. The same series of seams extends from Newcastle to
the Wollongong District, disturbed and broken up only by com-
paratively modern eruptions of porphyries and basalts.
On the lands of the Australian Agricultural Company, a few
miles from Stroud, a seam more than 30 feet in thickness crops
out in the length of a creek, and this thickness has been verified
by several trial-pits sunk on the dip side. There are many partings
of shale and fire-clay, and the coal is of various quality in the
thickness of the seam; but there is quite sufficient of good coal
for profitable working, if its inland position did not render it
wholly unavailable, in face of coal so easily accessible from the
sea-board as that of Newcastle and Wollongong.


But late researches have laid open very extensive deposits of
rich iron ore with limestone in their vicinity, and all near to water-
carriage. Such combined advantages may probably dispose so
wealthy a company to make the necessary outlay for establishing
an iron manufacture, of which the Colony stands much in need.
Specimens of this iron ore, limestone, and coal may be seen in the
mineral frame of the Company connected with the coal seam
exhibits of New South Wales, which I have had the honor to
prepare for the Exhibition.
The discovery of our wealth in brown cannel oil coals and oil
shales will enable us to manufacture all the oil needful for our
own consumption, and even to export the raw article. We know
that it exists in many places at wide areas apart, as may be seen
by reference to the map ; and like to the richness of our coal
seams, which richness is not excelled in an equal vertical section
in any part of the world, we may expect that the oil shales will
be of as great importance in their development; and if we do
not find oil springs, we may possess such beds of the solid mate-
rial as will justify the expenditure of all the capital needful to
keep up a steady and unfailing supply of the valuable and varied
products which these shales and coals will yield.
The works already in activity at Hartley and America Creek,
and others preparing to operate in different localities, with the
general approval of the quality of the oil produced, will justify
our most sanguine anticipations on this subject.
As regards the geological age of coal in New South Wales, I
may repeat what I have already published—that it would be easy
to add pages on this subject, if it were not irrelevant to the
question with which I am now occupied, except so far as the
geological age of coal is inseparably connected with its commercial
value. That is to say —though there may be, and there is, much
bad coal in the palaeozoic or true carboniferous series, a really
good coal in the oolitic lias, or tertiary deposits is a thing unknown.
To class the mineral fuel of New South Wales as belonging to
either of these latter formations would be at once to discredit and
condemn it in the market of the world, until, despite discredit
and condemnation, its merits were discovered, when it would be
tardily acknowledged that the condemnation had proceeded from
an error in science, arising out of a deficient or too superficial
investigation, or the too facile application of inapplicable theories.
“ A reference to the collection I exhibit will settle this question,
which has been so long and ably contested by the Bev. W. B.
Clarke; and, for the reasons stated, I may be permitted a few
words more on the subject. Ail the seams of the New South
Wales Coal Field, from the lowest which intercalate with silurian
fossils (spirifer, radiata, &c.), devonian flora (lepidodendron,


cyclopteris, adiantites), and the bellerophon and crinoideaof the
mountain limestone, to the highest and latest deposited seams, in
which the flora (equisctacsea, asterophyllites, &c.) approach the
oolitic character, all are deposited conformably and almost in
parallelism, one on the other; covered also conformably by 1,000
feet of sandstone, upon which again has been quietly deposited
the Wyanamatta beds, which I have called the false coal measures ;
for with all the appearances of being coal-bearing they contain
no coal, but a flora probably nearer approaching to that of the
oolite.
“ The lower beds of the coal series of New South Wales are,
then, geologically older than any worked in Europe; whilst the
upper beds represent the most recent of the European true carbon-
iferous formation. And as all the coal seams, from the silurian
upwards, are deposited conformably, I must conclude that this
portion of the globe was comparatively free from violent eruptions
and disturbances from the silurian to the permian epoch, and
that the alternate submergences and elevations of the land must
have been slow and gradual.
“ In stating my opinion here as to the age of the carboniferous
deposits of New South Wales, I am in part repeating only what
I reported after my first examination in this field in 1853. I
then wrote : —‘ The coal is a true coal, not lignite, or a deposit of
the tertiary epoch, but belongs to the true coal formation —is
overlaid by regular beds of secondary sandstone, lying in con-
formable strata upon it.’ ”
W. KEENE,
Government Examiner of Coal Fields ;
F.G.S., London; M.A.S., of Bordeaux;
Cor. Mem. Geo. Ins., of Vienna.
Newcastle, New South Wales,
10th January, 1867.
Since the above date, and on the 30th April, 1868, Mr. Keene
reported the discovery of a seam of coal 22 feet in thickness, at
Greta, near Branxton, in which he found no less than seven
varieties of coal, all good, separated only by thin partings of shale.
The uppermost coal is like a resinite, glossy and transparent at
the edge, lighting readily at a candle-flame ; and this is followed
by a bed of brown petroleum coal, like to the Bog-head coal;
then a considerable thickness of cannelite, and lower down in the
seam, divided only by a thin parting of shale, is 5 feet 9 inches
and 4 feet 3 inches of excellent bright steam coal, equal to any
yet worked in the district.
Mr. Keene concludes his Beport thus:—“ I cannot refrain from
saying that it is more remarkable for variety and quantity of coal


than any coal seam which has come under my observation in any
part of the world. Its geological position is below the spirifer
beds ; it is the lowest seam but one of our carboniferous deposits,
and will be found to extend from Greta over a large area. Its
proximity to the Great Northern Eailway, and the excellent
quality of the coal, will insure its being extensively worked.”
At a still later date (28th April, 1870) Mr. Keene addressed
the following Eeport to the Under Secretary for Lands, which
gives much interesting information on the working of our Col-
lieries during the past year, the quantity of coal extracted, with
the total number of persons employed; and in the case of the
Australian Agricultural Company’s Colliery, the number of
persons immediately dependant on the working of that Company’s
Colliery.
Coal Eields Office,
Newcastle, 28 April, 1870.
I do myself the honor to forward you herewith the
Eeports of the Inspector of Collieries, Mr. Thos. Lewis, for the
year 1869 ; and in attention to the request in your letter of the
22nd instant, that I would report upon the condition and pros-
pects of the coal fields in the past year, I beg to state, for the
information of the Honorable the Secretary for Lands, that no
preceding year has equalled the promise and activity of 1869.
2. The quality of our coal is year by year better appreciated,
and I am informed that at Madras it meets English coal at equal
prices, and is greatly esteemed for gas manufacture. In the
China market the difference in price, which used to be from five
to six thalers has fallen to one-and-a-half thaler. I have
always expressed the opinion that time would dissipate the pre-
judices as to the qualities of our coal, and that when shipped
direct from the mines here, it would be found to be more ad-
vantageous in use than English coal, generally subjected to two
or three transhipments.
3. The error as to the geological position of our coal, and
which attributed it to a much later age than the European beds,
has entirely disappeared, and in a “ Treatise on Coal and Coal
Mining,” by Warington Smyth, published only two years ago
during his presidency of the Geological Society, he says that the
numerous observations on them, contributed by Mr. Beete Jukes,
the Eeverend W. B. Clarke, Mr. Selwyn, and Mr. W. Keene,
leave no doubt as to the palaeozoic character of the lower part of
a great conformable series of “ strata,” and in the table of
stratified rocks he places the New South Wales coal as belonging
to a period from the Devonian to the Trias.


4. New works are in progress in various directions. New
Lambton is an important extension of our colliery workings, and
the original Lambton, or Scottish Australian Company, is engaged
in an important and interesting sinking for coal, at Stockton, on
the North Shore, opposite Newcastle. A cast-iron “tubbing,”
or shaft, of 7 feet diameter, has, in a few weeks work, been very
expertly let down, without pumping out the water, through 82
feet of loose sand, to the clay-bed, by special, ingenious, and well
adapted contrivances of the Manager, Mr. Croudace; and I
expect that from knowledge acquired by previous borings they
will win the same seam as is worked by the Australian Agricul-
tural Company, at a depth of about 240 feet.
5. Messrs. Vindin and Mitchell are commencing operations at
Greta ; and further to the north, in the direction of the line of
railway, coal is found near Muswellbrook, at Wingen, Page’s
River, and Murrurundi. In the west, researches continue to be
made for workable seams near Mount Victoria and Little Hartley.
The Western Petroleum Coal Company have greatly increased
their facilities of transport to the railway, and a fine seam of
coal has been opened at Lithgow Valley, near to the Bowenfells
Railway Station. The Reverend W. B. Clarke has reported on
this seam for a Company now forming to work it, and from my
own examination I can confirm all that Mr. Clarke has reported
as to the extent, thickness, quality, and facility of working of
this coal. In the south, Wollongong maintains its reputation as
producing a good steam coal, and near to the Great Southern
Railway seams have been proved to be workable at various points,
particularly at the Cataract and Sutton Porest.
6. I have examined seams more than 700 miles to the north of
Newcastle, belonging to the same deposits we are working here,
covered and underlaid by the same fossil flora and fauna; and we
may, without boasting, claim to rank with the most extensive
coal field in the world.
7. A very correct idea may be formed of the number of persons
supported by our colliery workings, independent of navigation, by
the following statistical table, furnished to me by the courtesy of
Mr. Mere wether, taken from the books of the Australian Agricul-
tural Company, and which shows the number of persons immediately
dependent on the workings of that Company’s colliery only: —
Sundry
Miners and |
Wheelers... )
uur cumcry wuriviiigs, inucpunuunt ui ntivAgctiiuii, vy
statistical table, furnished to me by tbe courtesy of
her, taken from the books of the Australian Agricul-
y, and which shows the number of persons immediately
the workings of that Company’s colliery only: —
Men. Women. chUdren. Children. Total,
3 3 4 3 13
109 57 91 84 341
264 165 218 250 897
376 225 313 337 1,251


8. From the same books it appears that of the 376 persons
directly employed, as shown in the preceding table, an average of
278 were getters and wheelers of coal, to whom was paid the
gross sum of £28,861 Is. 7d., or at the rate of £lO3 16s. 4d. per
man per annum, equal to 7s. 6d. per day for each day worked.
The total quantity of coal raised by this Company w r as 168,108
tons.
9. I also annex a tabular statement of the numbers of persons
employed in each Colliery, and the quantities of coal raised, from
which it will be seen that the entire quantity of coal raised in
1869 by the Collieries of Newcastle and its vicinity, including
Minmi, amount to 778,263 tons. The Northern pits have raised
35,892, and the Southern, 99,091 tons ; and 6,276 tons of oil-coal
and shale have been raised in the Southern and Western Dis-
tricts, making a total of 919,522 tons.
10. On the average it may be estimated that 2,000 tons of
shipping enter, and 2,000 tons of shipping per day leave, the
port of Newcastle. The new coal staiths when ready for use will
greatly facilitate the work of loading, to the great advantage of
the port. From all I can learn from the principal mercantile
houses of Newcastle, an equal, and probably a greater, amount of
business may be expected in this than in the last year, for the
exportation to India, China, and San Francisco, is steadily on the
increase. The shipment to the latter port was 21,895 in 1868,
increased to 65,589 tons in 1869 ; and already, in the first
quarter of the present year, the shipments amount to 19,774
tons.
11. The complaints of insufficient ventilation in some of the
Collieries, as set forth in the reports of Mr. Inspector Lewis for
the last six months, have given me much anxiety, fori considered
it doubtful that I would obtain any conviction under the Act
without some very positive means of proving the fact out of the
mine. To effect this object I have made a very simple apparatus
for showing the purity of any volume of air in which it may be
placed, and which I can exhibit in action to any Bench of Magis-
trates to support any complaints I may judge necessary to bring
before them. I therefore consider that the law will be sufficient
as it stands ; should it prove otherwise I will report it to you.
12. I have given attention to all accidents as they have arisen,
of which particulars will be found in Mr. Lewis’s Reports, with
a tabular statement annexed.
I have, &c.,
WILLIAM KEENE,
Examiner of Coal Fields.
The Under Secretary for Lands.
