

NEWGATE;
. • I
• 4 ■
OR,
* *
DESULTORY SKETCHES IN A PRISON
# •
* m • •+» '
• * „ >*
& Poem.


Printed by E. Hewlett, 10, Frith Street, Soho.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The few Desultory Sketches, contained in
the following’ short Poem, are such chiefly as
have presented to my personal observation, in
the very limited view, which I have been en-
abled to take, of the Interior of my Prison-
house. The Production lays no pretension to
poetical distinction; being - a plain “ matter-of-
fact delineation;” and, therefore, wanting one
of the chief Ingredients of Poesy. The frame
of mind, and the afflicting circumstances, un-
der which it has been written, are adverse to
flights of Genius, or of Fancy; and will be
admitted by Candor, a sufficient Apology for
its defects. If I appear to have dwelt too long
upon my own particular Case, I indulge the
Hope, “ that, by every feeling Mind, the Ego-
tism will be pardoned;” and that the “ Suffer-


“ ings, connected with it, will be at once regret-
“ ted and commiserated.”
Those sufferings, I feel it a duty to declare,
have been alleviated, as much as possible, by
the kind indulgence of Mr. Brown, the Go-
vernor, and by the humane attentions of the
Rev. H. S. Cotton, the Ordinary, and of W.
H. Box, Esq. the Surgeon of the Prison; to
whom I am happy in this public opportunity
of expressing the grateful Acknowledgments,
and the unaffected Esteem, to which the Hu-
manity and Benevolence, that distinguish their
Conduct, possess so just a claim.
Infirmary Newgat e,
Nov. Qth , 1818.
ADVERTISEMENT.


NEWGATE;
OR,
DESULTORY SKETCHES IN A PRISON
a
From these dark walls, where Guilt with Misery dwells;
Where Oaths and Blasphemy pollute the cells;
Where unfledged Vice, by dire Example led,
Aspires to bolder flights, and deeds of dread;
Where every sense by scenes of Sin is shock’d,
And ev’n Repentance is reviled, and mock’d ;
Where every Crime contracts a fouler stain.
And all the Ends of Punishment are vain ;
Where revels every damning Vice uncheck’d,
While chains and gibbets lose their hoped effect ;
From scenes like these, awhile the Muse would flee,
And pour her sorrows, u Addington !” to thee !


Alas! within these horrid walls confin’d.
How shall the Bard unbend his anguished mind ?
Or, how with wonted ardor strike the strings,
While black Despair his tortured bosom wrings ?
Or, from his breast if some sad measures burst,
Produced ’mid plaints of woe, and scenes accurs’d,
Mournful must be the theme of acts abhorr’d,
And notes of sorrow vibrate on each chord!
On every side, alas! what prospects rise ;
What sounds, and sights assail the ears, and eyes ;
While frustrate breathe Religion's hallow'd prayers,
And Pity weeps, and Hope herself despairs!
Here, the young Sinner, in his earliest years,
Unripe in Reason, ripe in Guilt appears;
Spurns petty Vice, and far as Childhood can,
Apes, and exceeds the Infamy of Man!
Here, Lying, Theft, and Blasphemy pollute
His soul, and strike a deep and deadly root;


Th’ encroaching poison spreads thro’ all his frame,
While Mercy vainly labours to reclaim!
There, —lost to every female charm and grace,
A wretched Group, whom sordid crimes debase,
Unfeminine, in female garb are seen,
With daring aspect, and disorder’d mien•
With traits, that mark polluted minds within,
And Beauty’s loveliest features, marr’d by Sin.
While * one, perhaps, secluded from the rest,
Her Infant presses to her throbbing breast ;
Who, as the tear-drops glisten in her eyes,
With artless hand to stop their current tries;
Nor conscious of the fate, her Crime incurs,
u Mingles the tears of Innocence with hers!”
Unhappy Mother!—who, by Want misled,
Yearning to give her starving Orphan bread,
- ft
* Sarah Ward, under sentence of death for passing a forged “ Bank-of- ngland Note
I witnessed the affecting scene, I have imperfectly described.


The “ fatal paper” proffer’d —not unknown,
And for his safety sacrificed her own !
Ye Sons of Wealth! who England’s Bank direct,
Oh ! be the sacrifice of Vengeance check’d ;
Pause, ere ye strike, —the wretched Victims spare,
And be Prevention, not Revenge, your care !
For, while facility th* offence attends,
In vain Chains menace, and ev’n Death impends,
While Want and Vice th’ inviting crime complete,
And Spies and Tempters prowl thro’ every street.
In vain nnnumber’d Deaths our annals stain,
And Justice whets her keenest sword in vain;
While Mercy, exiled from the Judgment seat,
In Bayley’s bosom seeks her loved retreat!
Ye Blood-hounds! on your fellow men who prey ;
And ye, scarce less depraved, the bribe who pay ;
Ye hell-born Fiends! who first seduce to guilt.
Then cease not, till your Victim’s blood be spilt;


Who of that blood betray’d receive the price,
With which the sanguine Laws reward your Vice;
Outcast from man for ever be your fate,
And future direr Retribution wait
To scourge your crime with Justice’ vengeful sword;
A crime, ev’n by the common Damn’d abhorr’d;
A crime, by Hell’s Archdaemon’s guile produced,
Who first accused the victims, he seduced !
In yon * throng’d ward what mingled numbers meet!
Th’ incipient Pilferer, —th 5 experienced Cheat; —
The Burglar, whom dun Midnight’s shades conceal ;
The Wretch, whom pinching Famine prompts, to steal
<c A single fleece from Wealth’s unnumber’d fold
The Robber stern, who levies life or gold; —
The street-infesting Pickpocket is there,
i( Whose life the lenient Judge regrets to spare
a And with new Penal Statutes longs to load
“ The bloody Vengeance of our Legal Code!”
* The Smugglers’ Ward.


There Youth and Age, —the Novice, and Adept
In mazy Vice, in common chains are kept:
The blood-stain’d Murderer, most abhorr’d of men,
And He, who dies—“ the victim of his pen
Wretches, who slew “ the image of their God,”
Or wrought th’ inexpiable crime of “ Dodd
Or, which pre-eminence of guilt may claim,
The sin,—my cc Erin” owns not, ev’n in name!
All grades of Vice, of light, or deadly Sin,
Here herd, unclass’d, and mix th’ obstreperous din ;
Or, o’er their meals, each unbless’d scrap between,
Blurt oaths, and blasphemy, and jests obscene ;
While in one focus every crime confined,
“ The moral poison spreads from mind to mind.”
See yon lorn * Wretch, who, wrapp’d in thought profound,
Blind to each scene, and deaf to every sound,
* Mr. Day, committed on a charge of Forgery, who destroyed himself in the Smugglers’
Ward, on the sth Sept. last. His conduct and deportment, prior to the fatal act, are
faithfully delineated.


With vacant eye, and brow of mental gloom,
Paces with hurried step the grated room!
See the lost man, a victim to Despair,
With no kind friend, his bosom-griefs to share,
To give Religion’s dormant influence scope,
Or in his sinking heart rekindle Hope ;
The tide of stormy passions to controul,
Or soothe the phrenzied feelings of his soul;
With desperate fury raise the deadly knife,
And flee at once from misery and life!
Urged by Remorse, and Shame, and conscious Pride,
Shun a more guiltless fate by <c Suicide
Burst from his cell with heart-appalling groan,
And rush, unsummon’d, to th’ Eternal Throne.
See next yon * Mother, with her woes oppress’d,
While Shame, and Grief, and Love distract her breast,
* The mother of Mr. William Evison, a young gentleman, who was sentenced to death
on a charge of Forgery, but respited conditionally on his transportation. The picture is
delineated from the life.


With tottering step, dejected, pale, and weak,
Her only Offspring’s prison-dungeon seek !
See, not a tear on her wan cheek appears,
Her grief, alas! too deep, too big for tears!
A settled sorrow bows her widow’d head,
Her tears and smiles alike for ever fled ;
Behold her, worn by life-consuming care,
u A living emblem of confirm’d Despair
While deep-corroding Anguish blasts her bloom,
And, by slow Suffering bends her to the Tomb.
See, while the Bars her fond embraces part,
And Iron severs from' her yearning heart
Her hapless Son, —’mid vilest groups she waits,
While stern Controul guards the dividing gates;
u To press his hand—to breathe parental vows,
u The only solace, her sad fate allows!”
What deadly crime, what deep-stain’d sin was his
Which Justice visits with Revenge, like this ?


Alas! by Villains into Vice betray’d,
And first their Dupe, and then their Victim made,
The wretched Son Law’s direst Sentence shared,
While those escaped, his thoughtless youth who snared
Escaped, unpunish’d for their tenfold Blame,
And left their Victim to a fate of Shame!
Such are, alas! the Errors of our Laws,
That Guilt evades their force by legal flaws ;
While Frailty’s Sins, comparatively white,
Feel the whole weight of their vindictive Might!
See how, perverted by Forensic Art,
The worse is made appear the better part:
For wealthy Vice see venal Counsel plead,
And Innocence condemn’d—the Bar unfee’d !
Amid these scenes of Sorrow and Despair,
What generous Youth, with look of settled care,
And melancholy pace, advances slow,
His graceful head bow’d by the weight of woe;


While symptoms, that a bursting heart presage,
Mark his young aspect with the traits of age !
What early griefs his breast ingenuous feels,
“ His hollow eye, his sunken cheek reveals
While filial Love, and Nature’s heart-strings torn,
With deep despair impress his brow forlorn !
He , virtuous Son of an unhappy Sire,
Whom Dungeons menace, and Inflictions dire.
From foreign Realms, the deadly tidings known,
Returns to tenfold sorrows in his own ;
To cheer a Father’s griefs, console his heart,
And, in his sufferings more than bear a part! —
And thou, afflicted Parent! who, at last,
A life of honourable service past,
By one sad lapse, the Laws unvenial deem,
Hast cancell’d years of virtue and esteem;
Tho’ sunk in fame, in fortunes tho’ undone,
Still may’st thou glory in a matchless Son ;
A son, whose merits shall efface thy shame,
Restore thy fortunes, and redeem thy fame ;


O’er present gloom while brighter prospects blend.
From such a Son, and * Ashton for thy friend !
Lo! in another part, remoter yet.
Where dire disease in various shapes is met,
A wretched Mother with her Infants mourn,
“ Seven helpless Children from their father torn
While one unborn augments parental woes,
And points them with unutterable throes!
These, nursed in Ease, with fond indulgent Care,
Now, (sad reverse !) Want, Shame, and Sorrow share;
Their Sire, pursued by Legal Vengeance blind*
And, for one venial lapse, disgraced, confined, —
Confined ’mid felons, dungeons, bars, and chains,
While his swoln heart th’ unworthy Scene disdains :
Yet not by outward signs its grief reveals,
While, thus suppress’d, he more intensely feels ;
* The Poet, who designated Attorneys “ an Iron Race,” would have expunged his
harsh censure, and blushed at his illiberality, had he known this feeling, generous, disinter-
ested, and honourable member of the Profession.


But still, unconquer’d, with more scorn than hate,
Views the vindictive * Foe, that caused his fate I
Too soon, alas ! shall rise the dreaded morn.
Whose sun shall see this wretched Father torn.
Torn from his Children, o’er the stormy seas,
To the far regions of th’ Antipodes ;
If life so long its load of grief sustain,
Nor its rent fibres burst beneath the strain.
O Laws, inexorable and unwise!
To sever thus fond Nature’s tenderest ties;
With unrelenting Rage, and Vengeance stern,.
On the wide world the helpless Babes to turn.
To Want, to Woe, to Vice perhaps consign’d,
No Father to protect, or form their mindj
# Townsend Forester, D. D. Rector ofßroseley, Salop, and a Prebendary ofWorces*
ter, who, in consequence of an altercation with his Curate, (the Author of this Poem) first
made oath, “ that the latter had put him (a pigmy of six feet in height) in bodily fear; and
then caused a prosecution to be instituted by the Post-office against the Author, on a
charge of having- defrauded the Revenue of ten-pence, by counterfeiting a frank twenty
months before; an offence which has been visited by a sentence of “ Seven Years’
Transportation.”


To guard their Youth from Snares, that round them rise;
And point their Hopes to Realms beyond the Skies !
Less savage far the Tyrants, who of yore
Stern Moloch’s Altars stain’d with Infants’ gore;
Than those , who, while they spare the vital breath,
Condemn th’ immortal Mind to moral Death !
Who, while his Babes from their sad Sire they part,
To his lorn Exile add—a u broken heart!”
Ah ! whom has Justice, in her wrathful mood,
With such an u Avarice of Revenge” pursued,
As to the edge of rigid Laws, like this,
To add Inflictions,/ 4 to which Death were bliss;”
Which torture Innocence with pangs unjust,
And bow a Parent’s aged head to dust!
Yet this is He , who erst ’mid Chiefs renown’d,
And Sages learn’d, respect and welcome found ;
Who, Trafalgar’s triumphant scenes among,
Partook its trophies, and its glories sung:


Whose Soul, its innate grandeur prompt to prize,
Claim’d Independence, nor deign’d stoop to rise;
And hence, its homage to the Base denied,
Incurr’d the persecuting wrath of Pride!
Yet weep not, darling Babes, your Parent’s fate—
Free, tho’ in bonds, and in Misfortune, great!—
The Man, to whom an upright heart belongs,
Is nobler far, than who his merit wrongs;
And such, tho’ fallen awhile, shall rise again,
44 While Pride succumbs, and Envy gnaws her Chain.
And thou, loved Mourner! Thou, whose faithful heart
In all his sorrows long has borne a part,
With wonted firmness o’er your sufferings rise,
Dash the indignant tear-gems from your eyes,
And, worthy of the Man your heart reveres,
Yield not his foes the triumph of your tfcars;
But let this Solace calm the woes, you feel,
44 The Hand, that wounds, is merciful to heal


“ And He, who suffers Innocence to mourn,
“ Tempers the rude wind to the Lamb, that’s shorn!”
Tho’, by the World neglected, or betray’d,
In dungeon gloom some injured Victim laid,
With happier scenes contrast his bitter lot,
By former Friends forsaken, or forgot;
(For here , alas ! no Summer friends abound ;
Distress, their Zeal’s sure Antidote, is found;
And those, who shared his hospitable Store,
Fly the fallen Wretch, and know his face no more).
Nay those, whose early Youth his Care had form’d,
“ Whose breasts with generous emulation warm’d,
“ Nurtured their talents with parental toil,
u And planted Virtues in their mental Soil,
“ Ev’n * those, ingrate, his past deserts despise,
“ And raised, forget—to whom they owe their Rise !”
* For the honour of human nature, I am happy to say, the number of such instances is
not great. A few of these, however, ought to be particularized..
A Bookseller and Librarian of Exeter, whom from the age of eight years, till he was
bound apprentice to the trade, (of which he is now a master, and in flourishing circumstan-


Yet here some bright exceptions cheer the gloom,
As the dark night some glimmering Stars illume;
Oh ! be their Names, in Characters of Gold,
With those of high Chivalric Worth enroll’d;
And where a Damon and a Pythias shine.
Be * Parr’s inscribed, and, generous f Bridgman, thine.
ces,) “ I educated gratuitously ” stands foremost on this black list of the votaries of
Ingratitude!
A Foundling, rescued from two travelling mendicants, who acknowledged him to be a
stolen Child, should next be mentioned. This worthy Wight, 1 clothed, boarded, and
educated gratuitously, from his fifth to his thirteenth year; when I assisted in collecting a
sum of money, with which he was apprenticed to a respectable trade, and he is now, I
understand, a master tradesman in good circumstances; but his early Benefactor is entirely
forgotten 1
A Commander in the Navy, whom also I educated gratuitously from his eighth year, till
he was of an age to be received into the Royal Academy at Portsmouth, into which I then
obtained from Lord Spencer an order for his admission.
A Post Captain of ths same honourable Profession, for whose board and education I
never received one shilling. In 1804, I applied to this person, then a commander, on the
subject of my demand; when he assured me, in writing, “ that, though he did not hold
“ himself responsible for his father’s debts, yet as my claim was incurred for his personal
“ board and instruction, he would certainly discharge it at an early period” Fourteen
years have elapsed, but alas! that period has not yet arrived !
After mention of these more prominent instances, who will venture to pronounce the
above allegation, querulous or unfounded ?
* The disinterested, and indefatigable friend of young Eyison ; to whose active bene-
volence, and generous sympathy my pen is unable to do justice.
A Gentleman, with whom I have been five-and-twenty years on terms of the most inti-


Apart from hence, involved in deeper gloom,
Frowns in dark state, “ Fate’s dreaded Anti-room !”
But, oh ! what hand can raise the sable Screen,
That veils the horrors of the u final Scene
To the shock’d sight the dismal Cells expose,
“ Where death-doom’d Felons wait Life’s awful Close
Where, as the Night-clock strikes, the Culprits hear
The tread of Death, at every stroke more near;
And with the Day-break, startled Fancy eyes
Before their view the fatal Scaffold rise!
Yet deem not vainly,—in these dreary Cells,
With Guilt that Sorrow or Contrition dwells;
Or, thro’ the conscious Walls as Echo flies.
Her Voice repeats repentant groans, or sighs!
Oh ! no—ev’n here, by terrors unsubdued,
By Death unawed, Vice pens her blackest Brood !
Here the short Hours, which Penitence should claim,
Are blindly wasted in some sinful Game !
mate friendship, and who needs only to be generally known, in order to confirm the impar-
tiality and justice of the tribute, I am desirous to pay, to his honourable Consistency, manly
Sincerity, and genuine Philanthropy of Character.


“ Gaming,” of Fraud and Infamy the source,
By long indulgence gains resistless force ;
While “sentenced Wretches” hug th’ insatiate Vice,
And madly stake their Souls upon the Dice /
Ev’n here , dire Oaths and Blasphemies accurs’d,
Or impious Vows of deadly Vengeance burst ;
Here daemon-fury every sense appalls,
And shakes, with impotence of rage, the walls;
To swell th’ infernal Scene, while all around
The clanking Chains in mournful concert sound !
Haply ’mid these, if one of 66 stuff less stern,”
In whose sad Heart compunctious feelings yearn,
His Guilt bewail, —kiss the afflicting Rod,
And seek to commune with himself, and God ;
Surrounding Fiends oppose with scornful Mirth,
And drag the rising Sinner back to Earth;
Snatch from his grasp the Gospel’s truths divine,
And burn its pages on their Daemon’s Shrine I


Hark ! at this moment, tho’ the u Death Bell” toll,
And knell a fellow-culprit’s parting Soul;
While, with warm zeal, the pious Pastor’s prayer
Bids rising Hope dispel the fiend, Despair ;
While gazing Crowds th’ impressive Scene attend,
In whose awed Minds conflicting feelings blend ;
Yon hideous Group, ev’n at this hour of dread,
From whom the Victim to the Drop was led,
Mock his sad fate with horrid jests alone,
Nor with one serious thought regard their own :
Harden’d in guilt, Religion’s rites profane,
And crucify the Son of God again ;
And, while Heaven’s proffer’d Grace themselves contemn,
u Drag minor Sinners to the Gulf with them.”
Alas! while such the System here pursued,
Can Error be reclaim'd, or Grimes subdued ?
While, undistinguish’d by its varied Shades,
Vice, in one mass, each Prison Ward pervades,


As poisons blend, each subtilizing each ;)
How can the Law its purposed object reach ?
Ye Legislators! here your cares engage;
Here learn from damning facts experience sage;
And, urged by Truth, and patriot feelings warm,
Th’ Abuses of th’ “ Augean Den” reform!
These unremoved, believe this warning strain,
“ Bars, Dungeons, Chains, and Racks, and Death, are vain !
And here , Philanthropy! Thou loveliest Guest
From Heaven, with whom this Yale of Tears is bless’d;
Prompt,—Pain and Sorrow’s course to overtake,
Infusing balsam in the Wounds they make;
To Want, to Woe, to Guilt relief to bring,
And from each breast extract Affliction’s sting;
To mend the Heart, reform the erring Mind,
And to the life of Angels raise Mankind !
Celestial Guest 1 to thee while Nature pays
Affection s tribute, and the meed of praise;


With speechless grief, by Phrenzy’s fiend undone,
She views, in ruins laid, u thy dearest Son
Sees Folly triumph, without Pity’s check,
O’er Reason, Wisdom, Virtue’s noblest Wreck ;
While Pride succumbs, and bleeding Friendship yearns
And Faith herself, with wavering thought, discerns
“ The Wreck of Mind,” that urged the deadly deed,
Which ruling Heaven permitted, not decreed;
A deed, that clearly shows, as actions can,
“ How frail is Life, and what a Shade is Man!”
O Romilly !—admired, beloved, revered !
What British Heart thy mournful fate has heard,
Nor own’d a pang, deep, bitter, and severe,
As Sons, around an honour’d Parent’s Bier;
While, o’er this best of Patriots, and of Men,
They sigh, u We ne’er shall see his like again!”
To Him, —(but faint the Sketch the Bard can give;
Not West can bid the mimic Canvas live; —


Nor can the Muse’s skill, in magic line,
“ The mighty faculties of Soul define:’’)
To him had Nature given a heart refined ;
A strong, enlighten’d, comprehensive Mind,
Upright, and just,—that grasp’d with mighty span
The utmost intellectual Powers of Man !
With talents, judgment, wit, and learning graced,
And depth of thought, and elegance of taste;
Public and private Virtues gemm’d his Soul ;
And Piety confirm’d, and crown’d the whole!
Nor less with Patriot Worth were seen to blend
In him, the kindest Husband, Parent, Friend ;
The Poor man’s Patron, and the Tyrant’s dread;
His friend, whom every other friend had fled;
Prompt, at the Bar , wrongs to ward;
Prompt, in the Senate , Freedom’s rights to guard ;
Alike, in both , his powers superior shone,
Each maze of Law and Polity, his own,


Abstrusest points in each, and depths profound.
Which few can boast the Intellect to sound,
His Genius fathom'd, and his Judgment scann'd ;
u Ulysses' bow in its great Master's hand ! "
And while, Persuasion every sense beguiled,
Tho' unobtrusive, firm—*tho' earnest, mild;
His friends, his Worth and Talents matchless deem'd ;
And ev’n his foes (if foes he had) esteem'd !
So pure that Worthy not Envy's self could blame;
So bright those Talents , few can reach his fame;
He lived,- —his Country's Ornament and Pride ;
Nor gave her grief or pain—but when he died !
Such strong Connubial Love his heart possess'd,
One Soul inspired each sympathetic breast ;
He saw his Consort’s gentle Spirit rise,
Spurn'd Earth's gross bonds, and follow'd to the skies
Oh ! envied fate ! when Souls congenial join
In Life and Death: ec and may such fate be mine !'"


Not evn these Cells escaped his generous care;
His feeling Heart ev’n Guilt’s distress could share:
While u sanguine Dracos,” with relentless breath,
Visit each varied Shade of Crime with Death,
Truth, Wisdom, Mercy, urged his godlike aim,
Not to destroy the Culprit, but reclaim;
And hence, his fate while Virtue s Sons deplore,
Unwonted tears ev n ruthless Felons pour •
Here too the Bard, who, in his humble strains,
Base Adulation’s courtly Vice disdains ;
Proud to true Worth its genuine meed to pay,
* Bennet ! —to thee devotes his plausive lay ;
To thee, and blameless * Fry, whose virtuous zeal
Compassion ev’n for suffering Guilt can feel:
Unawed by female terrors, pierce the Cell,
Where Vice and Shame in destined union dwell;
Cheer the fall’n Culprit,—probe the Heart’s profound,
And pour Heaven’s balsam in the rankling wound;
* Names, too distinguished by public veneration, to require particular designation here


Intent, (would Britain’s Laws their succour lend !)
The Guilty less to punish, than amend;
And, timely chasten’d by Correction’s Rod,
Restore the fallen, —to Virtue, and to God !
O glorious effort! O illustrious deed !
May righteous Heaven the great attempt succeed !
And, tho’ no Bard in loftier strains proclaim
Each bless’d Philanthropist’s respected Name;
When towering columns low on Earth are laid,
And Kings and Conquerors fleeting glories fade ;
When Worlds, and Systems feel the Hand of Time,
Their Names, imperishable and sublime,
For rescued Sinners, by decree divine,
Thro’ Heaven’s eternal day, like stars shall shine !
Statesmen ! whom Homage, Wealth, and Power attend
To scenes like these your prompt regard extend :
And thou, whom Fame benign and mild reports,
O Addington! forsake the Pomp of Courts ;


And turn awhile, where groans your fellow Man,
u The Secrets of the Prison-house to scan ■!”
With Truths discriminating judgment, learn
'Twixt harden'd Guilt, and Error to discern;
And while on that , the Laws just wrath you pour.
Bid this, — cc be free, repent, and sin no more !"
For lo ! the great, eventful Day is near,
When Heavens just Judge in terrors shall appear;
When call'd to Sentence, at His high behest,
Alike shall rise th' Oppressor, and th' Oppress'd :
Then, the poor Captive, from his Dungeon freed,
With conscious firmness shall for Justice plead;
While the stern Tyrant, at Heaven's grand Assize,
u Shall want that Mercy, he on Earth denies !”


Fugitive Pieces
REAL SORROWS.
“ He best can paint them , who has felt them most,”
’Tis not the loud, obstreperous Grief,
That rudely clamours for relief;
’Tis not the querulous Lament,
In which impatience seeks a vent;
’Tis not the soft pathetic style,
Which aims our pity to beguile ;
That can to Truth’s keen eye impart
“ The real Sorrows of the Heart!”
No!—’tis the tear, in secret shed
Upon the starving Orphan’s head ;


The sigh, that will not be repress’d,
Breathed on the faithful Partner’s breast;
The bursting heart, —th’ imploring eye,
To Heaven upraised in agony,
With starts of desultory prayer,
While Hope is quenching in Despair;
The throbbing temple’s burning pain,
While Phrenzy’s Fiend usurps the brain; —
These are the traits, no Art can borrow,
u Of genuine Suffering, and Sorrow !”


THE PANGS OF QUITE EXTINGUISHED HOPE.
Few feel not, of which all have heard,
The Heart-disease of “Hope deferr’d;”
But, who can paint in all their scope,
“ The Pangs of quite extinguish’d Hope ?”
As, when the shadowy Twilight fades,
The sky Cimmerian gloom invades.
If haply ’thwart the Wanderer’s way
A gleam of Lightning dart its ray,
The transient flash of faithless Light
Illumes —then doubly dims his sight,
And, deepening from th’ electric spark,
Darkness becomes more dunly dark !
Such is the hapless state of him ,
Before whose eyes Hope’s visions swim ;


By well-feign’d Friendship taught to rise
In flattering Fancy’s loveliest dies:—
But, when he clasps, or thinks to clasp,
The shadowy form eludes his grasp,
And, as Hope’s prospects shone more fair,
More deep, more deadly, grows Despair !
Oh ! ye, who Confidence abuse,
Types of the false Chameleon’s hues;
With pleasing Colours who invite,
Which change with every Change of Light;
When on your faith you bid confide,
u The Wretch, in Sorrow’s furnace tried
Bid to his lips Hope’s cup be raised.
Then dash from his forbidden taste;
Think, that this practice of a Court
Is Death to him, with whom you sport!
Think, “ that to cheer Grief’s yearning heart,
u Then pierce with Disappointment’s dart,


“ Refines on Cruelty’s bad skill,
“ And is, —by lingering pains to kill!”
Think, those who Nature thus disgrace.
Are treacherous, unmanly, base!
Assassins, who their friends decoy
To meads of flowers, but to destroy ;
Conceal’d whose perfumed leaves beneath,
The Viper, Falsehood, whets his teeth ;
While, keener than the Viper’s fang,
“ Unkindness points the deadly Pang!”


THE OAK.
Yon Oak in infant years I planted,
Whose branches now so proudly spread•
And Heaven to it, and me, has granted,
To see full fifty Winters fled;
Yet still its boughs with Verdure bloom,
While I—am withering to the Tomb !
Tho’ many a Storm has beat on both,
And oft its leafy honours scatter’d ;
Those Storms have but confirm’d its growth.
Which this worn frame have sorely shatter’d;
With deeper root have fix’d the Tree;
But, ah J have bow’d, and weaken’d me!


Yet o’er those Seas, I firmly trust,
Where I so long was doom’d to wander.
When I am mix’d with kindred dust,
This Oak shall waft my Country’s thunder ;
Shall bear His Sons, of future birth,
Who first its Acorn sow’d in Earth !


THE STARRY HEAVEN
Whene’er yon spangled Vault I see,
And view each Planet, as it rolls,
Fond thoughts arise, “ those Orbs may be
6< The Regions of Departed Souls
Of different grades of Bliss possess’d,
And each more brilliant, as more bless’d
Oh !—could I ascertain the Star,
Where Laura’s Spirit loves to rest,
Of all Heaven’s orbs the brightest far,
As she, of all Earth’s Daughters best;
That Star alone should fix my eyes,
To trace its nightly fall, and rise !


And oh ! perhaps, from its bright Sphere,
My sainted Laura oft might bend.
And pitying view the pensive tear,
With which these eyes its Course attend ;
With which this bosom yearns for bliss—
“ Its only Heaven, where Laura is !”


THE PARTING.
Farewell, my Anna ! cease» grieve :
Too much this transient Parting moves thee
These darling pledges still I leave,
To tell thee, how thy Henry loves thee:
Think, —in each look, each word, that breaks
From them, thy Henry lives, and speaks !
From these dear Infants thou may’st gather
Some Comforts of thy widow’d life :
But ah ! not so their hapless Father,
Sever’d at once from Babes and Wife ;
His only Solace, the Reflection
Of their fond Smiles, and thy Affection !


Thus torn asunder from each other,
Tho’ much each Parent’s bosom feels ;
Her little Cherubs soothe the Mother;
The Father twofold pangs conceals;
A double Grief distracts his breast,
And doubly deep, because suppress’d!
Yet when kind Fate, his Sufferings over,
No longer bids thy Henry roam;
These Babes, their Father—thou, thy Lover —
And He, his Infants, Wife, and Home
Receiving,—present Sorrows’ measure
Shall balance, with proportion’d Pleasure !
Look forward, Love ! these pulses beating
With fear, —this heart, with anguish smarting,
Shall then be soothed :—the Joys of Meeting
Shall more than pay the Pangs of Parting;
And thus restored, —no more, —no, never !
Shall Fate these faithful bosoms sever !


TO LAURA.
Earth’s mantle of unsullied
Thy Purity, and Candor shows ;
But oh ! the icy Chains, that bind
The Streams, thy unrelenting Mind !
Oh ! may Love’s Sun display his beams,
And thaw thy Bosom’s icy Streams;
And bid its Snows, dissolving, prove
Warm tears of Tenderness, and Love!


TO A YOUNG LADY, WITH A PRESENT OF A WATCH
Deign, lovely Girl! this Monitor to wear,
To warn you, “ how Life’s Spring too swiftly flies:”
For, torn from Yow, its use I well can spare,
Who count the passing Moments by my Sighs!”


THE TRULY GENEROUS MAN
And a who is He, whose feeling mind,
“ By warm Benevolence refined,
“ Acts on true Delicacy’s plan,
cc The generous, yet considerate Man ?”
Not He, whose loudly blazon'd Deed
Of Public Praise invites the meed ;
Who tells the World the Sufferer’s debt,
Enroll’d in Charity’s Gazette:
Not He, who private Bounties blabs,
With one hand heals, with th’ other stabs:
Not He, who while he Penury aids,
With errors past the Wretch upbraids:


Nor He, who, while the wound he heals,
Shows not the Sympathy, he feels!
Oh ! no :—the truly liberal soul,
That seeks to aid, and to console;
That asks no human Praise to win,
But of the “ still small voice within,”
Unseen, as dews from Heaven descend,
Pi ’oves the Unhappy's secret Friend !
Or, if the Hand be seen at all,
Like that, which wrote upon the Wall,
’Tis seen, —and in a moment gone,
Soon as the destined Deed is doneJ
Or if, without a veil between,
The Agent must be known, and seen,
The shade, he throws o’er Misery’s faults,
Does not humiliate, but exalts.
His mild regard, his kind concern,
His feelings, that with Pity yearn;
His will, that grateful thanks suppress d
Should ne’er escape his Client’s breast,


Prove him of those, who nobly aim
“To bless by stealth, nor wish it, Fame;”
And, while his Alms he thus imparts,
He aids their Wants, and wins their Hearts !
Such is the Man, whose godlike worth
Angels rejoice to blazon forth;
And all his deeds, on Earth unspoke,
Record in Heaven:—and such is “^CokeT
* The patriotic, noble-minded proprietor of “Holkham.”


LINES OF CONSOLATION TO A DEPARTING CHRISTIAN
Though disease, in Life's fair bloom,
Bids thy health and strength decay ;
Though December s wintry gloom
Chills thy genial warmth of May ;
Mourn not, gentle Maid !—the Power,
Whose decrees can never err,
Oft removes Earth’s fairest flower,
To adorn Heaven’s bright Parterre!
Yes!—He, who our being grants,
And all Nature’s course controuls,
Youth, and Virtue oft transplants
To his Paradise of Souls!


What Is Life ? —A span at best.
Mark’d with Sorrow, Pain, and Sin:
A probationary Test,
Given, —a happier state to win !
Are not then more favour’d those,
Whom Heaven takes in earlier years.
Than—who long, ’mid Guilt and Woes,
Sojourn in this Yale of Tears?
Happiest those, who earliest die,
If their Happiness they know ;
Summon’d to their native Sky,
Ere by Sin they taste of Woe!
Such thy Lot!— Then, favour’d Maid!
Though thy outward Pangs increase,
Faint not; —for Religion s Aid
Yields internal Joy, and Peace !


Heavenward look, and God adore
On a Saviour’s Love depend:
He severer Sufferings bore.
Ere to Bliss he could ascend !
He thy every Pang shall soothe,
He, whose Mercy ne’er can fail,
For thee the Bed of Death shall smooth,
And guide thee thro’ his shadowy Vale
Around, (the scene Faith’s sacred glass
To the Christian’s vision brings,)
Pitying Angels frequent pass,
And fan thee with their balmy wings!
Hark !—lmagination’s ear
Drinks the Harp’s melodious strain,
While some kindred Seraph near
Soothes a dying Sister’s pain !


u Faint not, favour’d Mortal, yet!
u Bear awhile thy painful state ;
“ Soon, —discharged frail Nature’s Debt, —
“ Endless Joys thy Soul await! ”
“ Though thy Sufferings prove severe,
“ Though keen Anguish racks thy Mind ;
“ Though Affection prompts the tear,
“ And casts a lingering look behind ;
ec Soon these transient Pains shall cease;
“ Soon shall Grief forsake thy breast;
“ Cherubs round thee whisper Peace;
u Seraphs waft thee to thy Rest!
“ Lo ! (upraise thine Heart and Eyes;)
“ Heaven its Portals wide displays;
“ Angels beckon to the Skies;
“ O’er thee scenes of Glory blaze!


“ Happy soul!—the Trial’s past;
“ Robes of white thy Form invest ;
“ Pleasures, that for ever last,
“ Woo thee to a Saviour’s breast!
“ There, (dissolved Life’s empty Bubble,)
“ Springs a balm for all thy throes;
“ There, the Wicked cease to trouble ;
“ There, the Weary find Repose!”
Mercy’s God !—thine ear incline;
Though too oft my Conduct errs;
Though more years and sins are mine,
Grant, oh ! grant an End like tiers !


LINES
On the almost sudden Death of an amiable Boy, Six Years of Age ,
the only Son of his Afflicted Barents.
As the young Rose-bud, from its parent stem
Is rudely torn by some relentless hand ;
While yet the morning dews its foliage gem,
Ere yet its odours to the sense expand:
Such fate too oft the human Blossom meets.
Ere yet its vernal worth and graces bloom ;
Just gives the promise of maturer sweets ;
Then drooping sinks to an untimely tomb!
In thee, dear Child ! this awful truth is shown,
Whom human skill nor power avail’d to save ;
A deadly blight consumed the Bud, unblown,
And laid its sweetness in an early Grave!


APPENDIX.
No. L
Extract from the Examiner Sunday Paper, of 13 th September , 1818.
Old Bailey.— On Wednesday, Laurence Halloran, otherwise Gregory, Doctor
in Divinity, of King’s College, Aberdeen, a gentleman of most respectable appearance and
demeanour, and apparently about fifty years of age, was indicted, for having, in the month of
January, 1817, counterfeited a frank in the name of SirWM. Garrow, Knt., then a member
of Parliament,, and having thereby defrauded the Post-office of “ tern-pence.” On being
called upon to plead to the indictment, the prisoner, in a firm voice, addressed the Court to
the following effect:—“ In the long interval of -time, that has elapsed since the date of the
letter in question (upwards of twenty months), the death of the only person, who could have
established my innocence, having unfortunately precluded all possibility of exculpation, and
the total exhaustion of my pecuniary resources, and ruin of my circumstances, by the long
confinement I have undergone, having equally deprived me of all power to engage legal
advice and assistance, I feel, that I have no alternative, but to plead “ Guilty” to the charge,
and to throw myself on the clemency of the Court.”
Mr. Baron Graham admonished the prisoner, to reflect on the conduct, he was about to
adopt, before he decided on pleading. To which Dr. Halloran replied,—“ lam most
grateful for your Lordship’s counsel and consideration; but standing, as I do, single,
unarmed, and defenceless, against armed and powerful opponents, I am advised, that it
will be most prudent to decline the contest, from the hopelessness of success. I beg leave,
therefore, to persist in the plea of “ Guilty,” and to implore the commiseration of the
Court.”
A Solicitor, of the name of Hyatt, here offered, though not personally known to Dr.
Halloran, to undertake his defence, and to engage Counsel on his behalf; but the offer
was declined, and the plea recorded.


[A Correspondent gives us the following account of Dr. Halloran :—The name of
this unfortunate gentleman is not unknown in the Literary World. His publications, poetical
and theological, amount to seventeen. He conducted a School Establishment near Exeter,
upwards of twelve years, which was in the highest repute; and from which he turned out
many excellent scholars, who now fill respectable situations in life. Among these may be
reckoned the present Solicitor-General, Sir Robert Gifford, who was nine years his
pupil, and received from him the whole of his school education. It was at Dr. Hallo-
ran’s recommendation, that Sir Robert’s talents were devoted to the law. Dr. Hal-
loran has also been employed many years as a Naval and Military Chaplain, in which
engagements he was highly respected. He was three years and a half Chaplain and Secre-
tary to the Earl of Northesk, with whom he was present in the Britannia at the Battle of
Trafalgar, on which he published a poem. He was also on terms of friendship with Lords
Nelson, and Collingwood, to the former of whom he had been long known. He was
upwards of three years Chaplain to the Naval and Military Forces, and Rector of tli
public Grammar School, at the Cape of Good Hope. His last engagement, as Curate and
Lecturer of Brosely in Shropshire, has been a most unfortunate one ; for though highly
valued by the inhabitants, he was unfortunately on unfriendly terms with the Rector, Dr.
Townsend Forester, to whom the counterfeited frank was addressed, and who has been
the promoter of this novel prosecution, the first, that has ever taken place under the statute,
and which subjects the prisoner, after an active and useful life, now in the wane, to seven
years’ transportation. Dr. H. has a large family, at present in extreme distress from this
afflicting reverse. He is confined in the Infirmary in Newgate.]
No. XL
Extract from Bell’s Weekly Messenger, of Sunday Uh October , 1818.
Old Bailey, Wednesday, Sept. 30.—The whole of the trials having been gone through,
the Recorder proceeded to pass sentence upon the several prisoners.
Dr. Laurence Halloran, who had been convicted of forging a frank, in the name of
Sir William Garrow, M. P. was, among other prisoners, brought up to the bar, to
receive the sentence of the law.
Mr. Shelton, the Clerk of the Arraigns, having demanded in the usual form, whether
any of the prisoners had any thing to say, why sentence should not be passed upon them,
Laurence Halloran stepped forward, and humbly begged permission to address
the Court for a few minutes. He spoke nearly in these words:—


“My Lord, —I beg leave most respectfully to suggest to the Court, that the present
prosecution against me is the first, that has taken place under the statute; and though I
pretend not to develope the motives, by which it has been influenced, 1 hope I may be per-
mitted, without offence, to advert to the sufferings, I have already experienced under it;
sufferings, I humbly submit, more than equitably proportionate to the extent of the offence;
and which, to my feelings, have indeed been more deeply distressing—more dreadfully appall-
ing, than immediate death !
“My Lord, on suspicion of having counterfeited the frank in question, and of having
thereby defrauded the Post-office revenue of the sum of “ ten-pence;” I have been tom
from my home and my family, and incarcerated more than three months among the refuse of
mankind: and, though the Magistrate’s warrant extended only to the apprehension of my
person, my lodgings were searched ; my drawers and trunks rifled; my papers and several
articles of value seized, and carried away by the officer, without any legal authority; and
though some of these have since been returned, others are still most illegally detained and
withholden, which have no relevancy to, or connexion with, the charge against me, and of
which I pray, that the Court will be pleased to order immediate restitution. For the violent
manner, in which the officer, with five or six attendants, burst into my apartments, to execute
his warrant, ample justification is afforded by the false and malicious statement placed in
his hands by Dr. Townsend Forester (the learned and pious promoter of this novel
prosecution), representing me as a dangerous and desperate character, who always carried
loaded pistols about my person ; when, in reality, I had not been in possession of any such
implements for more than twelve months prior to my arrest. The motives of this malevo-
lent misrepresentation cannot be equivocal:—the officer soon discovered its fallacy; and his
subsequent conduct did honour to his feelings, and credit to his office.
“ My Lord, 1 stand before the Court, injured in health, in reputation, in circumstances, to
an extent, that cannot at present be calculated, on the sole charge of having defrauded the
Post-office of “ ten-pence and this, after an active and useful life of more than fifty years,
during which I have devoted considerable sums to purposes of public and private be-
neficence. The greater portion of those years, my Lord, has been employed in the service
of my country abroad, or in the education of youth, and the religious instruction of my
fellow creatures at home; with what credit and estimation, it behoves not m) self to declare.
But I hold in my hand testimonials, most respectable testimonials, of my character and
conduct during a period of twenty years, which I am desirous to submit to your Lordship’s
consideration. Their authenticity can be readily ascertained; and I trust, they may have
some influence on your Lordship’s judgment.
“ I beg leave also to state (and I hope I may do so without incurring the imputation of
presumption), that many gentlemen, educated by me, now fill respectable situations in the
learned professions, the army, navy, and commerce. Among these may be reckoned his
Majesty’s Solicitor-General, Sir Robert Gifford, who was nine years my pupil, and
received the whole of his school education from me. And I hope, my Lord, I may allege
some small claim to consideration, for having formed the mind and talents of a gentleman,


who is an ornament and an honour to his profession, and who is equally distinguished in
private life by every social and domestic virtue, and by the philanthropy and benevolence
of his character.
“My Lord, the frank charged to be a forgery, is dated in January, 1817, and I dare
aver, would have continued to lie dormant ad Greecas Calendas, had not an unfortunate
quarrel with my Rector, to whom it was addressed, and who is the promoter and cause of
the present prosecution, rescued it from oblivion, and introduced it to the notice of a
* Court of Justice.’ In that long interval of twenty months, the death of the only person,
who could have established my innocence, having precluded all possibility of exculpation ;
and the total ruin of my circumstances by my long confinement, and the unjust detention
of a large proportion of my stipend, due to me by the promoter of this prosecution, having
equally deprived me of all power to engage legal advice or assistance, I have felt, that I
had no alternative, but to succumb to the charge, and to allow judgment to be recorded
against me. But, I do most earnestly entreat your Lordship’s consideration of the only
plea I have to offer; the improbability, that any person, not in a state of absolute fatuity,
would voluntarily incur the hazard of being placed in the distressing predicament, in which
I now stand, for the sake of* ten-pence,’ and that ten-pence not to pass into his own pocket,
but into that of a stranger —the promoter of this prosecution.
** My Lord, I feel the fullest confidence, that your Lordship’s decision on this most
extraordinary case (as far as may depend upon yourself) will be regulated by the principles
of impartial justice.
« Adsit
“ Reg'ula, peccatis quae poenas irroget aequas;
“ Ne scutici dignum horribili sectere flagello.”
“ My Lord, it now only remains for me, respectfully to bow to the judgment of the
Court; which, I trust, I shall be enabled to meet with the fortitude of a man, and the resig-
nation of a Christian.”
The Recorder. —** The address, which you have now made to the Court, would have
been extremely proper at the time of your trial; but at this stage I can only pass that sen-
tence upon you, which lam bound to pass under the authority of the law. It is not in my
power to alter it. The Legislature gives the sentence, and it is solely my duty to pass it.”
The sentence of seven years’ transportation was then passed upon Laurence Halloran,
Samuel Dukes, John Jones, Joseph Saunders, Lydia Green, and Lyon Levy.
After sentence. Dr. Halloran again addressed the Bench, as follows:
** My Lord, —I earnestly implore your Lordship, that you will have the goodness to re-
commend my case to the humane consideration and clemency of his Royal Highmess, the
Prince Regent, in order to prevent the dreadful necessity of separating a parent from his
numerous family, who have no other friend on earth, to whom they can look up for support
or protection;—a separation which, I feel too sensibly, I cannot survive. If my imputed
offence must necessarily be visited with the extreme rigour of the law, instead of a compul-


ory exile for seven years, I am ready to go into voluntary banishment for the rest of my
life. For, indeed, my Lord, the treachery of pretended friends, and the relentless persecu-
tion of vindictive enemies, have left me little to regret in this country; to whose service,
all the best years of my unfortunate life have been faithfully and honourably devoted.”
The Recorder.— Whatever application you have to make to his Royal Highness, it
must be done through the medium of his Majesty’s Ministers.”
The prisoner bowed, and left the Court immediately.
No. 111.
To the Right Hon. Lord Viscount Sidmouth, Secretary of State for the Home
Department, fyc. fyc. fyc.
The Memorial of Laurence Halloran,* Doctor in Divinity, of King's College, Aberdeen.
Most Respectfully setteth forth.
That your Memorialist is, at present, confined in His Majesty’s Prison of Newgate,
under sentence of transportation for seven years, on a conviction of having, in the month
of January 1817, counterfeited a frank in the name of Sir William Garrow, and
of having thereby defrauded the Post-Office Revenue of the sum of “ ten-pencd ’ /
That, on this sole charge, your Memorialist has been torn from his home, and his
family, and incarcerated nearly four months among the refuse of mankind; —a punish-
ment, he humbly submits, more than equitably proportionate to the extent of his imputed
offence; and which to him has, indeed, been more afflicting, —more dreadfully appalling,
than immediate death.
That your Memorialist has, in consequence, been injured in health, reputation, and
circumstances, to an extent, that cannot at present be calculated, on the sole charge of
having defrauded the Post-Office of ‘ ten-pence; and this, after an active and useful fife
of “ fifty-three years,” during which he has devoted considerable sums to purposes of
public, and private beneficence.
That the greater portion of those years has been employed by your Memorialist,
in the service of his Country abroad, or in the education of youth, and the religious
instruction of his fellow creatures, at home ; with what success and estimation, it behoves
not himself to declare. But your Memorialist humbly begs leave, to submit to your
* By Diploma, dated in August, 1800.


Lordship’s favourable consideration, “ Testimonials of his Character and Conduct far
twenty years.” Their authenticity may be readily ascertained; and he confides, “ they
may have some influence upon your Lordship’s decision on his case.”
Your Memorialist begs to state, “ That his eldest son, Lieut, Halloran, has served
upwards of fifteen years in the Royal Marine Corps, with distinguished credit; and
was present at the glorious victory of Trafalgar, with your Memorialist, (who was
Secretary and Chaplain to Rear-Admiral the Earl of Northesk, in that memorable
engagement,) and also at the destruction of the French Squadron in Basque Roads;”
that your Memorialist’s son-in-law, Major Ryan, of the 93rd Regiment, has been in
His Majesty’s Service twenty-four years, and was severely wounded at New Orleans:—
and that your Memorialist’s late uncle, Wm. Gregory, Esq. was formerly Chief
Justice of Quebec, and subsequently one of His Majesty’s Judges for the province of
South Carolina.
In consideration of these services of himself, and family, and of his attested cha-
racter and conduct, during so large a portion of his life; and in compassion to the
feelings of a very respectable circle of relatives, and connexions, your Memorialist most
humbly, but earnestly implores your Lordship’s recommendation of his case, to the
humane consideration of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, for the purpose
of obtaining from the clemency of the Crown, the Remission of a Sentence, involving
such destructive consequences to your Memorialist’s numerous family, and such discredit
to his connexions, “on any conditions, which your Lordship muy think proper to
recommend, and which His Royal Highness may he pleased to prescribe
And your Memorialist, as in Duty and Gratitude
bound, will ever pray, &c.
L. H. HALLORAN.
Infirmary, Newgate, 6th
October, 1818.
No. IV.
(Copy.)
To the Right Hon. Lord Viscount Sidmouth, Secretary of State , Src. fyc. fyc.
My Lord,
For a fallen man, —a wretch in my unfortunate circumstances, —to address a
Nobleman, in your high official situation, hy Letter, is, I fear, such an infringement of


etiquette, as even the misery, which prompts it, can scarcely excuse. But, My Lord!—
feelings, verging on the phrenzy of desperation, cannot long vacillate between the
alternative of apparent informality, or incumbent destruction.—-In such an alternative,
delicacy were treason to the first principles of “ the Law of Nature.”
My Lord! my unhappy case is, I presume, distinctly before you. In my Memorial,
presented to your Lordship, on the 13th inst., I prayed a remission of my sentence, on
such conditions, as your Lordship might think proper to recommend, and as His Royal
Highness, the Prince Regent, might be pleased to prescribe. My subsequent Letter
to Sir Robt. Gifford, (which, he informs me, he forwarded to your Lordship,) was
more explicit. It entreated his good offices with your Lordship, for procuring a com-
mutation of my sentence, from a compulsory transportation for seven years, to a voluntary
exile from this country for life; for which it proposed ample and unexceptionable
security. And, I ventured to flatter myself. My Lord! “ that no principle of real
justice could be violated, by such admixture of mercy.” Permit me, my Lord! respect-
fully, but most earnestly, to repeat this proposition; and impressively to implore your
Lordship’s assent to its adoption.
My Lord! I have been sentenced to seven years’ transportation, on conviction of
a specific charge of—l hope, no very heinous complexion. Your Lordship has been
pleased to express your admission of my praise-worthy conduct, during a large portion
of my life. *
Let me entreat you, to poise the good, that has been acknowledged, against the
evil, that has been proved; and, while Justice holds the balance, to allow the make-
weight of mercy in the lighter scale. It is intimated to me, “ that various complaints
of ray conduct, unconnected with the present charge, have been poured through dif-
ferent channels, into your Lordship’s Office, for the base purpose of producing an
unfavourable bias on your Lordship’s judgment.” My Lord ! I need not either suggest,
“ that accusation does not constitute criminalityor advert to an eternal maxim of
equity, “ that every man has a right to be presumed innocent, till his guilt be clearly
established by legal evidence!” It is impossible for me to answer imputations, of the
very nature of which I am ignorant; and I appeal to your Lordship’s own sense of
justice, “ whether they should be allowed to operate decidedly to my prejudice,—deprived
as I am, by such ignorance, of all power to refute, explain, or extenuate !”—To a com-
plete justification of my conduct, I do not pretend. I acknowledge, with deep contrition,
it has been faulty, very faulty in many instances: —but I dare aver, that the shade,
which has been cast over it, would assume a less sombre hue, if every influencing
circumstance were fairly considered, in estimating its real degree of culpability.”
My Lord! I have suffered four months’ ignominious imprisonment, among the
most depraved of the human species. Consider, I conjure you, the degrading severity
of such infliction, to a mind of keen sensibility, to a Gentleman of education, and
respectable connexions* and associated, as I have hitherto been! Is there, I pray, no
other expedient, by which the avarice of legal vengeance can be satiated, to its further


indispensable extent, than the protraction of similar misery, through a term of seven
years? If, in my particular case, an exclusion from all participation of the Royal
Clemency be determined necessary; if the extreme rigour of the law can alone expiate
the imputed offence, I will resignedly bow to my fate, provided one only alleviation
be conceded; —if one qualifying drop alone of mercy be infused into my cup of bitter-
ness.—My Lord! I have seven young children; —five of them under seven years of
age, and their unhappy mother again pregnant. My ruin has involved them in misery,
and in want, bordering on destitution. They have not a friend on earth, capable of
affording them protection, or support. And, must these innocents be immolated to
the Moloch of vengeance for their father’s faults ? Must they be consigned to indigence,
wretchedness, perhaps perdition? torn from a parent’s guardianship, and cast on the
mercy of a pitiless world? My Lord! I solemnly declare, I shall consider immediate
death, comparative mercy, to this refinement on barbarity, this exquisite ingenuity of
mental torture, —the bare anticipation of which racks every fibre of my lacerated heart,
to the utmost tension of human endurance! Suffer me in my exile, even if Ibe indeed
banished to the remotest regions of the earth, from a country, which I have long and
faithfully served, and which must ever retain my warmest filial affection,) —suffer me, I pray
you, to reserve this one solace, which alone can render prolonged existence supportable ;
and my heart shall bless even the hand that wounds it, —by sealing the fiat of
my condemnation.!”
I have the honour to be, my Lord, with profound Respect,
Your Lordship’s faithful and devoted, but deeply
afflicted Servant, and Suppliant,
L. H. HALLORAN.
Infirmary, Newgate, 21st
October, 1818.
Anniversary of “ Trafalgar
No. V.
(Copy.)
To Sir Robert Gifford, Knt. His Majesty’s Solicitor General.
Infirmary, Newgate, 22d Oct. 1818.
My dear Sir,
To an application made yesterday to Lord Sidmouth, praying, “ that, in commutation
'* of the sentence of the law, I might be permitted to go into voluntary exile for life, giving


“ unexceptionable security, never to return to this countryhis Lordship replied, “that
“ he had taken the first legal opinions on the subject; and that such arrangement would
“ not be a sufficient prevention of my return.”—His Lordship’s recourse to legal advice
appears to imply a disposition, on his part, to meet the prayer of my petition; and I feel
the deepest regret, and equal surprise, at the opinion, which those, whom he consulted, have
advanced.—ln the case of Rear-Admiral Bradley, capitally convicted at Winchester,
on a prosecution by the Post-office, for a long series of frauds on that branch of the
revenue ; and of Mr. Aslett, similarly convicted for embezzlement, and forgery, this com-
mutation of the sentence of the law for perpetual banishment was conceded; and several
gentlemen, tried for treason in Ireland, received a like indulgence. With these examples,
recent in the memory of every one, I am, indeed, at a loss to conceive any rational ground
of objection, in a case, so comparatively trivial, as mine; and it would be a satisfaction to
me to learn, if you can favour me with information, what novel circumstance can have in-
fluenced a legal decision in my instance, so completely at variance with the precedents, I
have quoted.
I am aware of the delicacy of your situation, and equally so, of your good disposition
toward me. I therefore by no means press any further manifestation of the latter, in vio-
lation of the real, or presumed official duties of the former. lam most thankful, for what
you have attempted; however grieved, (as deeply grieved I cannot but feel,) at the failure
of your exertions.
I sincerely pray, my dear Sir Robert, for your long enjoyment of all earthly prospe-
rity ; amid which you will, perhaps, sometimes breathe a sigh of commiserating reflection
to the contrary fate of the man, who educated you:—who loved, and cherished you, as
a child of his own; and who must ever feel for you, the sincerest regard, and the warmest
attachment. Farewell!
Your affectionate, but most unfortunate friend,
L. H. HALLORAN.
No. VI.
Infirmary, Newgate, 20th November, 1818.
My Lord,
I once more presume to address you; and as this is, in all human probability, the last
time, I shall trespass upon your Lordship’s indulgence, I entreat you to peruse with at*
tention, and to weigh with candour, the observations, I beg leave to offer to your notice.


My friend, Major Nicolls, with that manly frankness, which marks his character, has
apprised me of every thing, that has occurred, in his repeated applications to your Lord-
ship on my behalf. On the first interview, he states, “ that your Lordship promised him, I
“ should not be sent to New South Wales, according to the sentence.” On the second,
that your tone was totally altered ; that you informed him, “ the law must take its course;”
adding, “ that you found, on inquiry, my whole life had been a tissue of villainy!” Whence
your Lordship derived your information, I cannot divine:—but were that life about to be ter-
minated at the mouth of a cannon, I would not hesitate to assert, “that such information is
“ most malicious and false!” I pretend not to aver, “ that my life has been free from
“ many and great errors;” but I will resolutely maintain, “ that those errors have been
“ rather of the head, than of the heart;” and, that, in no instance, is the charge alleged
“ justly imputable to my conduct.” In the face of banishment, —in the face of death itself,
I will vindicate my integrity: nor shall any human consideration induce me to succumb
under a false accusation. To Sir John Colpoys, and Captain Charles Bullen, who
applied to your Lordship on my behalf for a remission, or mitigation of my sentence, you
assigned a similar plea of “ had character ,” for non-compliance with their request: though
neither of those Gentlemen, to whom I had been known for many years, had been previously
aware of any such imputation on my conduct, till, to their infinite surprise, they heard it
alleged by such high authority. In illustration of the justice of so general, and unqualified
a charge, I annex an account of the whole of my life from the age of twenty, and of the
various places, at which I have resided: and I challenge inquiry into my conduct, by a
reference to the principal “ surviving inhabitants, at each place of my residence.”
“ From twenty, to thirty-two years of age, I resided at, and near Exeter, from whence
“ I presented to your Lordship testimonials, most respectably subscribed, of exemplary
“ conduct for those twelve years, to 1796.”
“ I next resided one year at Ivy Bridge, in Devonshire, in 1797.”
“ The following year I was Chaplain of Le Pompee, with the present Admiral
“ Vashon, whose certificate I sent to your Lordship, (1798.)”
“Of the next two years, I resided a few months in Devonshire Street, Queen’s
“ Square, and the residue at Elm, in Cambridgeshire, (1799, and 1800.)”
“ The year 1801, I passed in town, conducting a Naval Establishment in Scotland
“ Yard, under the patronage of the First Lord of the Admiralty.”
“ I passed part of the years 1802, and 1803, at the Hague, in Holland.—For my
“ conduct there, and the promotion of the interests of this country by my writings, I refer
“to Sir Robert Liston, then His Majesty’s Minister Plenipotentiary to the Batavian
“ Republic.”
“ From that time, until June 1806, I was Chaplain of the Britannia, and Secretary to
“ the Earl of Northesk, to whose certificate I refer for my conduct, during those three
“ years.”
“ The year 1807,1 passed at Bath, for the recovery of the health of my elder daughter.”
“ Till 1811 , I was Chaplain to the Naval and Military Forces at the Cape of Good


“ Hope, from which place numerous testimonials of my services, and good conduct are in
“ your Lordship’s hands.”
“ In 1812, also, I was with the late Dr. Bayley, in Northamptonshire. For my
“ conduct there I refer your Lordship to the Doctor’s nephew, Mr. Justice Bayley.”
“ The next year and a half, I passed at Hornsey, and at Thorndon, in Suffolk; and
“ the following two years at Lechlade, and Dursley, in Gloucestershire. Each of the
“ parishes of Thorndon, and Lechlade, addressed to the Lord Chancellor recommendatory
“ petitions on my behalf, for some professional preferment; signed voluntarily by all the
“ principal inhabitants of each place.”
“ The years 1816, 1817, and part of the current year, were passed at ‘Warbletop,
“ Sussex, and Broseley, Salop. From sixty-four of the most respectable parishioners of
“ the latter place, I possess most flattering testimonials; hut which your Lordship declined
“ to look at, when presented by Major Nicolls for your perusal’'
And now, my Lord, I must be bold to observe, “that a person, who for thirty years
“ has so conducted himself, as to engage the approbation, and friendship of those, most
** intimately connected with him, cannot possibly deserve the unqualified censure, which
“ your Lordship has been induced, by unjust representations, to attach to my conduct.”
My Lord! 1 challenge a fair, and open investigation, and lam willing to stand, or fall
by the result. But, 1 strenuously protest against a condemnation, founded on malicious,
and ex-parte evidence; —evidence too, that has been poured into the ** lion’s mouth,” by
secret, and unknown accusers!
I have the honour to be. My Lord,
Your Lordship’s faithful servant,
L. H. HALLORAN.
To the Rt. Honble. Lord Viscount Sidmouth.
No. VII.
* CERTIFICATE.—No. I.
We, whose names, are hereunto subscribed, do testify, that the Rev. Laurence Hal-
lo ran, conducted an establishment for classical and mathematical education in this neigh-
* The original of this Document was lodged with the Secretary at Christ’s Hospital in 1799, when
Dr, Halloran was a candidate for the appointment of Mathematical Master to that Institution.


bourhood, upwards of twelve years, with considerable reputation, and ability; and was held
in general estimation for his moral and literary character.
Witness our hands, at Alphington, this 10th January, 1799.
REV. WILLIAM ELLICOMBE, Rector of Alphington.
RICHARD ROUS, Clyst, St. George’s.
HUGH ELLICOMBE, Bridford.
BEN. PERING, St. Mary Arches, and St. Olave,
J. CARRINGTON, the Holy Trinity.
G. CROWTHER,- Curate of Shillingford.
JAMES WHITE, ESQ. Barrister at Law.
JOHN CODRINGTON, ESQ.
WILLIAM JAMES, ESQ.
No. 11.
This is to certify the Honorable the principal Officers, and Commissioners of His Majes-
ty’s Navy, That the Reverend Laurence Halloran, served as Chaplain of his Majesty’s
Ship Le Pompee, under my command, from the 3d day of November, 1797, to the 31st
Oct. 1798; during which time he regularly performed divine service, as often as the weather
and other circumstances would permit; and conducted himself in a manner, becoming the
character, and functions of a Clergyman.
Given under my hand, on board the said ship, &c. &c. &c.
J. VASHON, Captain.
No. 111.
These are to certify the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty*
that the Rev. Doctor Laurence Halloran served as Chaplain of His Majesty’s ship
“ Britannia,” under my command, from the 23d June 1803, to the 6th May 1804; and from
that time to the 21st June 1806, as Chaplain of the said ship, bearing my flag as Rear-Ad-
miral of the White; —and also as my Secretary.—During the above time, he regularly per-
formed divine service, as often as the weather, and other circumstances would admit; and
conducted himself to my entire satisfaction, and in a manner, becoming the character, and
functions of a Clergyman.
Given under my hand at Portsmouth, this 21st June 1806.
NORTHESK, Rear-Admiral


W. WILBERFORCE BIRD.
J. THOMAS CAMPBELL.
THOMAS ROWLES.
JOHN MURRAY.
MATTHEW GALL.
ROBERT ROW.
HARRY PHILLIPS.
J. E. MESTAER.
J. B. EBDEN.
K. DUNCAN.
J. C. CADOGAN.
T. MELVILL.
W. F. YENABLES.
J. R. THOMPSON.
JOSEPH JOHNSON.
EDWARD SMITH.
GEORGE REYNOLDS.
F. ROESCH.
ALEXANDER WATTS.
JOHN ELMORE.
J. MARTINSON.
AM. SINNOT.
H. MURRAY.
M. MORRISON.
EVAN ROGERS.
G. F. GRAND.
JAMES ROSS.
HAMILTON ROSS.
JOHN HOUGHTON.
ROBERT STUART.
J. STEPHEN VIRET.
RICHARD SHEPHERD.
ALEXANDER WALKER.
FRANCIS FYNN.
T AMES DICK.
JAMES KELLY.
No. IV.
Cape Town, Cape of Good Hope.
This is to certify, that the Rev. Doctor Halloran, Chaplain of Brigade to His Majesty’s
Forces, at this Settlement, has regularly and faithfully performed all professional duties for the
garrison of this place, from the 6th day of December, 1807, to the present date.
Given under my hand this Ist day of June 1810.
H. GREY, Lieutenant-General, Commander of the Forces.
F. A. WETHERALL, Major-General, Commandant of Cape Town.
No. V.,
Cape Town, Cape of Good Hope, 7th .Dec. 1808.
We, whose names are subscribed, inhabitants of this town, and members of the English
congregation, do voluntarily, and as an act of justice, bear the fullest testimony, “ that the
“ Rev. Doctor Halloran, Chaplain to His Majesty’s Forces, has discharged all the profes-
“ sional duties of Colonial Chaplain for the civil inhabitants of this town, by regularly per-
“ forming divine service in the reformed church twice every Sunday ; by the due administra-
“ tion of the Sacraments; by visiting the sick, and interring the dead; in a very exemplary,
“ impressive, and edifying manner; highly creditable to himself, and equally beneficial, and
“ satisfactory to the congregation ;” —who therefore earnestly solicit, that he may be con-
tinued, as their Minister.


(Signed)
THOMAS ROWLES.
GEORGE REYNOLDS.
WATTS & EBDEN.
JOHN HOUGHTON.
H. HOME.
JOHN OSMOND.
H. J. PALLISTER.
JOHN ELMORE.
J. ROWE.
A. M‘DONALD.
H. MURRAY.
W. F. VENABLES.
W. WILBERFORCE BIRD.
W. ROBERTSON.
EVAN ROGERS.
ALEX. ROBERTSON.
T. C. CADOGAN.
JOHN MURRAY.
WATTS & SMITH.
ROBERT STUART.
HENRY PHILLIPS.
C. M‘KENZIE.
HAMILTON ROSS.
THOMAS MELYILL
No. VI.
Cape Town, Cape of Good Hope, 25 th Dec. 1809.
The Rev. Doctor Halloran having, for two years, performed divine service in this co-
lony, for the English civil inhabitants, and for which he receives no emoluments whatever, —
the undersigned British Inhabitants, sensible of his unremitted attention, take the liberty of
making him a Christmas * offering; which they hope, he will accept, as a testimony of their
high respect, and regard for his character and exemplary conduct, and of their grateful
sense of his zeal and exertions for the promotion of religion in this colony.
* 1000 Dollars for the purchase of a piece of Plate.
No. VII.
To the Rev. Doctor Halloran, Chaplain to the Forces.
Cape Town, Feb. 2nd, 1811.
Dear Sir,
We have been deputed by a Committee of the British inhabitants of this place, deeply
sensible of the important benefits, which themselves, and families have received from your
professional services, since your residence among them; to request the favor of your accept-
ance of the enclosed * notes, in testimony of their gratitude and esteem; and to express
their sincere hopes, “ that you may obtain that justice in England, which has been refused
** to you here.”
Wo have the honor to be, Dear Sir,
with most affectionate regard.
Your obliged and faithful friends,
ROBERT STUART.
HAMILTON ROSS.
* For 1300 Dollars.


The annexed certificate has lately been handed to Lord Sidmouth by a Gentleman of the
first respectability, and whose character, public and private, needs no commendation, I can
offer: —
“ I hereby declare upon my honour, that 1 have been on the strictest terms of intimacy
“ and friendship with the Rev. Dr. Halloran, for a long series of years— know him to be
“ charitable, generous, humane, and delightingin the most noble actions; —neither do I con-
“ siderhim capable of wantonly wounding the feelings, or depreciating the character of any
“ man.
“JOHN H, BRIDGMAN, M. D.
“ Oct. sth. 1818. ”
“3, Crescent Place, New Bridge Street .”
(Copies.)
To the Rev. Doctor Hallo ran..
My Dear Sir,
In the whole course of my life, J never found a greater difficulty in addressing a friend than
at present —I am truly grieved and affected at your situation, and wish I could assist you
effectually; but I cannot,unless by speaking as to the excellent character, you possessed in
this neighbourhoods
Do you remember, I sent you an invitation one Saturday evening to come to my house, to
make a fourth at a rubber? Your reply to me made a deep impression on my mind; it
would do honour to the first Clergyman in England. I have preserved it, and annex a copy.
Would my appearance, or any thing I could say, do you any service on the trial? Would
the producing of that letter in Court be of any benefit ? I shall be most happy to hear from
you; and in the interim,, believe me to remain, most truly.
Your faithful friend,
W. B. DIAMOND, Surgeon.
10 th August, 1818, Haslar Green*.
[Doctor Halloran’s Reply, alluded to above.J
Rectory, Saturday, ISth April, 1816.
My Dear Sir,.
I should have much pleasure in meeting you this evening, were not that portion of my time
otherwise indespensably engaged- You will, I trust, do me the justice to believe, that Tam
neither a Bigot, nor an Enthusiast in matters of religion; yet as it will be my duty* to-morrow.


both to receive, and to administer to others, the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, I am too
sensible of my own infirmities and imperfections, to feel justified in performing, or participat-
ing, so awful a ceremony, without previous reflection and preparation. I assure myself, I
need say nothing more, in apology for begging leave, therefore, on the present occasion, to
decline the favour of your invitation.
I am, my dear Sir, very faithfully,
Yours, &c. &c. &c.
No. VIII.
(ORIGINAL LETTERS.)
Queen, Feb. 3rd, JBO6.
Dear Sir,
I HAVE read with great pleasure, your elegant Poem, in which you have admirably
commemorated the feats of a glorious day, and your just eulogium of our late great
Chief, which will ever make your Sermon valuable, —to those, who know how well your
praise is founded: and am much obliged for the favour, you have done me in the
perusal.
In your Poem, you have made me a very prominent figure. Would it not do as well
to make the “ Sovereign,” the principal object ? There is a flatness in the construction
of my name, which prevents its being introduced without injury to the verse ; but I am
truly sensible of the honour, you have done me, and much obliged to you.
I am, with great esteem, Dear Sir,
Your faithful, and most humble Servant,
COLLINGWOOD.
Sir,
I HAVE received the volume of Poems and the Sermon, you did me the honour to
send me; and 1 should not Reserve the pleasure, I have received from perusing them t
if I did not take the earliest opportunity, to express my sense of their merit. I have
taken the liberty of inclosing a draught, for a contribution towards the expense of the


publication; which I hope, you will have the goodness to accept: and I must add,
that I shall be glad of an opportunity to be acquainted with you, and to cultivate the
friendship of a man, who thinks so nobly, and who writes so well.
I am, with great esteem, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
Portman Square, May 25th, 1807. CARYSFORT.
Rosehill } Hants, July 30th, 1808.
Dear Sir,
If it is contrary to the rules and regulations of the Admiralty Board, that an
officer chequerd absent, should receive pay; I do not see, how I can with any propriety
apply to that Board, and desire them to do an act, which is contrary to their own order:
I will, however, inclose the letter to Mr. Tucker, for his opinion, which I will send yon.
I do not know, at present, of any flag officer, wanting a Chaplain and Secretary:
if I should, I will mention your name; but I cannot enter into any engagement myself
on that head.
My number of Domestic Chaplains, is at present full, but whenever there is a
vacancy, I will keep a scarf for you.
I am, Dear Sir, with sincere regard,
Your obedient Servant,
NORTHESK.
Sir,
The approbation of wise and good men, is the best reward, which on this side the
grave, can be bestowed upon us, for doing what we conceive to be right. Having reason
to believe, from the testimony of those, who are acquainted with you, that you come
under this description ; I cannot but be proud of the favourable opinion, which you are
so good as to entertain of my character and conduct; and have, therefore, no objection
to the compliment you olfer me; though the language of dedication is, but too often far
from doing real honour to either of the parties concerned:—accept my thanks, for your
kind attention and acceptable present’;
And believe me, sincerely yours, &c.
H. NORWICH.
London , 45, Wimpole Street,
Feb. 26th, 1813.


Dear Sir,
Accept my thanks for your kind and obliging present; which is this moment
arrived. I shall not have time to read the Sermon, which you are so good as to favour
me with, for a day or two; but I feel unwilling to postpone my answer to your letter
even for a single hour, as you talk of leaving Thorndon so soon. Inclosed is an appli-
cation to Dr. Owen, you are at perfect liberty to read, what I have said.
With respect to Mr. Howes, he is certainly entitled to no lenity from you; but
to angry disputes between Ministers of the Gospel of peace, it appears to me, that the
elegant observation of Terence, is almost always justly applicable.—
“ Si ego dignus li§,c contrimeliS. sum ;
“ Maxima at tu indignus, qui facias:”—
Adieu! Believe me,
Sincerely Yours,
Norwich, September, H. NORWICH
\m, 1813.
\
FINIS.
Printed by E. Hewlett,
10, Frith street, Soho.
; » X
